URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Saeid Saedlounia [2013] NSWMT 13 (21 June 2013)
This decision has been amended. Please see the end of the decision for a list
of the amendments.
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Saeid Saedlounia
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 13
Hearing Date(s):
29, 30 April and 1 May 2013
Decision Date:
21 June 2013
Levy SC DCJ
Dr J Davidson
See paragraphs 141 - 142 for orders.
Catchwords:
MEDICAL TRIBUNAL - breaches of practice and visa conditions by overseas
medical graduate - whether unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct - protective orders to include deterrence - practice
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) 86a, s 139B, s 139E, s 146C
Medical Practice
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
[1992] HCA 18
(1992) 173 CLR 626
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1977) 41 NSWLR 630
HCCC v Maendel [2013] NSWMT 3
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 353
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
[2012] NSWCA 80
Pillai v Messiter [No.2]
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
Re Dr Than Le [2001] NSWMT, 20 September
Saville v HCCC
(2006) NSWCA 298
Texts Cited:
Corpus Juris Secundum, Vol 58, (1948)
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Dr Saeid Saedlounia
(Respondent)
Representation
Ms C Spruce (Applicant)
Mr M Lynch (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Solicitor for Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR
Table of Contents
The proceedings
The practitioner
Framework for the complaints
Procedural course of the hearing
[15] - [17]
[18] - [24]
Dr Saedlounia's explanations
[25] - [40]
Legislation
[41] - [42]
Principles from decided cases
[43] - [50]
Principles relevant to consideration of the facts
[51] - [57]
Submissions of the parties
[58] - [60]
Determination of Complaint 1
[61] - [63]
Determination of Complaint 2
[64] - [89]
Determination of Complaint 3
[90] - [117]
Need for protective orders
[118] - [139]
Protective orders
Practice conditions
The proceedings
Tribunal has been convened to inquire into three inter-related disciplinary
complaints brought by the Health Complaints Commission
["HCCC"l against Dr Saeid
Saedlounia, now a fully registered general practitioner. The Further Amended
Notice of Complaint relied
upon by the HCCC was tendered as Exhibit "A". It
alleged that at times when Dr Saedlounia, an overseas medical graduate, held
conditional
registration that enabled him to work in identified areas of need,
pursuant to a visa granted to him for that purpose, he breached
those conditions
and engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct,
within the respective meanings of
s 139B and s 139E of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
86a ["National
The practitioner
Saedlounia was born in 1977, in Esfahan, Iran. He is 35 years of age. He arrived
in Australia in 2005 from Iran, where he had obtained
his primary qualifications
in medicine in 2000. Before his conditional registration in NSW, and between
2005 and 2007, he had worked
as an assistant in nursing, and as a pool attendant
at an aged care facility, as was permitted by the tourist visa he held at that
time. In 2011 he obtained full registration as a general practitioner. In that
year he became a permanent resident in Australia.
He became an Australian
citizen in 2013.
complaints before the Tribunal relate to conduct by Dr Saedlounia which he now
acknowledges to have involved historical breaches
of the conditions that had
been placed on his practising rights between 2007 and 2009. At those times, he
was registered conditionally,
and he was restricted to working within defined
levels of supervision in two identified areas of need in the community in
with his visa conditions, which was the customary basis upon which
overseas medical graduates, whose overseas qualifications were
not recognised in
Australia, could obtain employment in this country pending a determination of
full recognition of the their professional
qualifications.
Saedlounia's registration history is as follows:
(1) Between 1 March 2007 and 31 March 2009, Dr Saedlounia was granted
conditional registration to work as a general practitioner
under supervision at
the Wellington Aboriginal Corporation Health Service. In that time, between 15
November 2007 and 31 March 2008,
as a consequence of a change in the
availability of supervision, that conditional registration was varied to include
the position
of Visiting Medical Officer at Wellington District
(2) Between 1 April 2008 and 23 May 2009, Dr Saedlounia's authorisation to work
at the Wellington Aboriginal Corporation Health Service
and the Wellington
District Hospital, continued with some variation to his supervision
arrangements;
(3) Between 23 May 2009 and 23 July 2009, Dr Saedlounia's registration was
withdrawn. This appeared to have been due to difficulties
in securing the
required level of supervision in the area to which he had been
(4) Between 24 July 2009 and 23 November 2009, Dr Saedlounia was conditionally
registered in the category Public Interest - Standard
Pathway under s 7(1 )(G)
of the now repealed
Medical Practice Act
. This obliged him to work
at both the Manly and the Royal North Shore Hospitals, in the field of addiction
(5) Between 23 November 2009 to 1 December 2009, Dr Saedlounia was not
registered in NSW because he had resigned his employment as
the work he had
obtained at North Shore Hospital was not authorised by the terms of his
(6) From 1 December 2009, Dr Saedlounia was granted limited registration until
22 December 2011, conditional upon him working in
an area of need in Wodonga, in
(7) After 1 July 2010, by operation of law, Dr Saedlounia became registered
under the provisions of the new
National Law
governing health care
practitioners;
(8) From 22 December 2011 until the present time, Dr Saedlounia has had full
registration as a general practitioner.
4 January 2010 and 4 January 2012, Dr Saedlounia worked as a general
practitioner at the Elmwood Medical Centre in Wodonga,
in Victoria. Since 2
February 2012, he has been employed as a general practitioner at the Rouse Hill
Medical Centre from Sundays
to Thursdays, working shifts between 1.00pm and
Framework of the complaints
1 and 2 allege unsatisfactory professional conduct. Complaint 3 alleges that the
effect of Complaints 1 and 2 amounts to
professional
misconduct.
particulars of the complaints of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
professional misconduct alleged against Dr Saedlounia
must be viewed in light of
the imposed obligatory practice conditions which limited the rights of Dr
Saedlounia to practise medicine.
Those conditions had their origin in the nature
of successive issue of 457 Visas the Australian Government had granted to Dr
over a period of time. Those visas were as follows:
(a) On 21 May 2007, a Temporary Business (Long Stay) Standard Business
Sponsorship Visa (Subclass 457) was granted with an attached
Condition 8107
identifying Dr Saedlounia's sponsor as the Wellington Aboriginal Health Service.
That visa enabled him to work as
a general practitioner and it prohibited him
from ceasing to work with that sponsor as well as prohibiting him from taking up
elsewhere during the currency of the visa restrictions;
(b) On 8 October 2009, a Temporary Business (Long Stay) Standard Business
Sponsorship Visa (Subclass 457) was granted with validity
until 19 October 2010.
That visa had an attached Condition 8107 identifying Dr Saedlounia's sponsor as
the Northern Sydney and Central
Coast Area Health Service. That visa enabled him
to work in the category of a psychiatrist, which was a registrar's
order for Dr Saedlounia to pursue work in the positions identified in his visas,
he was required to, and in fact obtained from
the regulatory authority, the
Medical Board of NSW ["the Board"], conditional registration as a medical
practitioner. From 1 July
2010, the regulatory successor of the Board has been
the Medical Council of Australia ["the Council"], following the
coming into effect on that date.
statement was tendered from the Medical Director of the Council confirming that
Dr Saedlounia's qualifications from Iran were not
recognised qualifications. To
enable him to work in an area of need the former Board exercised its discretion
to extend conditional
registration to him. That statement of the Medical
Director, which was not challenged, set out the basis, need and justification
for a strictly applied and suitable supervisory, support and training regime for
conditional registrants to provide assurance to
the regulatory authority that
conditional registrants practised safely, and did not place the public at risk:
Exhibit "D".
detail of the practice conditions the Board imposed on Dr Saedlounia are not the
subject of any dispute. Those details are included
to these reasons.
unsatisfactory professional conduct alleged against Dr Saedlounia can be briefly
summarised as comprising:
(a) Working as a locum general medical practitioner for Carrington Centennial
Care providing services at Grassmere Terrace Aged Care
Facility on 8 occasions
between 26 September 2009 and 14 November 2009: (
Part of Complaint
(b) Working as a Visiting Medical Officer at Wellington District Hospital on
some 62 identified occasions between 1 December 2007
and 2 April 2008, during
which time he either practised or purported to practise medicine at Wellington
District Hospital: (
Part of Complaint 2
(c) Failure to comply with his 457 Visa between 27 July and 7 August 2009, by
working at the Herbert Street Clinic of the North Sydney
Drug and Alcohol
Service as a Senior Resident Medical Officer: (
Part of Complaint
(d) Providing a curriculum vitae or professional resume to YourWorld Recruitment
agency that was false and misleading as to his work
experience, by which he
claimed he had worked for Worksafe Medics as an Occupational Medical
Practitioner (Casual), when he had not
been employed in that capacity: (
of Complaint 2
particulars of the allegation levelled at Dr Saedlounia that he engaged in
professional misconduct, which is the subject of Complaint
3, are the same as
the allegations particularised for Complaints 1 and 2, but under this complaint,
it was alleged that the pattern
of conduct in question was of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of Dr Saedlounia's
registration
as a medical practitioner.
factual substance of the complaints relied upon by the HCCC came to light in
November 2009 when the supervising psychiatrist,
in charge of the Herbert Street
Clinic of the North Sydney Drug and Alcohol Service, Dr Dore, became aware that
Dr Saedlounia had
been working in breach of his visa conditions, following
which, the authorities were necessarily notified of that fact.
those events, and in accordance with the duty required of her as Dr Saedlounia's
nominated supervisor, Dr Dore wrote to the Board
enclosing an 8 page summary of
her concerns that had arisen during Dr Saedlounia's employment at the Herbert
Street Clinic. That
summary includes a description of the sequence of events by
which Dr Saedlounia's unauthorised employment came to light. In October
some results of blood tests that had been ordered in his name had arrived at the
Herbert Street Clinic relating to persons
who were not patients of that Clinic.
This led to Dr Dore investigating Dr Saedlounia's terms and conditions,
including his visa
status. In her letter of 20 November 2009, Dr Dore also
notified the Board of Dr Saedlounia's resignation from the Northern Sydney
and Alcohol Service. In view of the way the HCCC has framed its complaints, it
is not necessary to analyse or consider the details
that are set out in Dr
Dore's letter and her attached summary.
Procedural course of the hearing
the underlying facts were ultimately not in dispute, the parties agreed that in
this case, it was convenient for them to proceed
without the need for a
two-stage hearing:
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA
, at [202] to [205].
agreement also had the expedient effect of avoiding the need to delve deeply
into the voluminous and complicated Commonwealth
regulatory regime that
surrounds the granting of 457 Visas that enabled overseas trained medical
graduates to work under supervision
in a declared area of need.
substance of the three complaints raised by the HCCC will be considered after
the agreed facts, the relevant legislation and the
principles applicable to
those facts have been identified.
statement of agreed facts replicated in the
reasons includes an outline of the regulatory framework for the conditional
registration of overseas trained medical graduates
who have been granted 457
Visas. Also set out in the
is the undisputed sequence of
events that Dr Saedlounia now concedes justifies findings of unsatisfactory
professional conduct on
his part. In essence, that conduct comprised three
first element
is the breach by Dr Saedlounia of the original 457 Visa
granted to him on 21 May 2007, which was stated to be in force until 8 October
2009. Those breaches occurred when Dr Saedlounia carried out professional work
in a number of different unauthorised establishments,
notwithstanding that the
visa that had been granted to him required that he restrict his work solely to
the Wellington Aboriginal
Corporation Health Service.
unauthorised establishments concerning that first element were the Wellington
District Hospital, where Dr Saedlounia carried out
professional medical work,
Worksafe Medics, where his work was described as a "
casual clinical support
" performing the duties described at paragraph [23] of the statement
of agreed facts, the Herbert St Clinic of the Northern Sydney
Drug and Alcohol
Service, where he worked as a Senior Resident Medical Officer, and with an
agency called Carrington Centennial Care,
through which his services were
provided as a locum general practitioner to the Grassmere Terrace Aged Care
second element
is the breach of the second 457 Visa granted to Dr
Saedlounia on 8 October 2009. The effect of that second visa was to provide Dr
Saedlounia with the required authorisation to work as a psychiatry registrar
with the Northern Sydney and Central Coast Area Health
Service. The conditions
of that visa were breached by Dr Saedlounia in that he undertook further work as
a locum general practitioner
at the Grassmere Terrace Aged Care Facility in
contravention of his visa.
third element
concerned inaccuracies in the representations made by Dr
Saedlounia in a curriculum vitae or professional resume that he had provided
YourWorld Recruitment, a medical employment agency. The inaccurate
representation within that document was in the form of a statement
that he had
worked for Worksafe Medics as an "Occupational Medical Practitioner (Casual)"
when in fact this was not so, as he had
only been enlisted to work as a support
person to the medical practitioner who operated that company.
Dr Saedlounia has conceded that the particulars of his visa breaches are
factually correct, he disputes that those breaches
amount to improper or
unethical conduct in the practise of medicine, for example, when he was working
in the capacity of a clinical
support person. He has also raised a question as
to whether the inclusion of misleading information in his curriculum vitae could
be properly characterised as unethical, even though it does relate to the
practise of medicine.
from raising arguments on those matters, Dr Saedlounia concedes that the other
agreed facts amount to unsatisfactory professional
conduct on his part. The
Tribunal is required to consider whether these factual matters also amount to
professional misconduct on
the part of Dr Saedlounia, who has denied that
characterisation, and has sought to portray those breaches as being of a more
character, due to claimed inadvertence on his part.
Dr Saedlounia's explanations
response to the complaints, Dr Saedlounia provided a statement dated 31 January
2013, as well as a supplementary statement dated
23 April 2013. In the course of
his oral evidence, he also gave some explanations for the conduct in question.
Those matters are
reviewed in the paragraphs that follow.
his statement dated 31 January 2013, Dr Saedlounia admitted the particulars of
Complaint 1, and admitted that he had contravened
the conditions of his
registration by working as a locum general practitioner for Carrington
Centennial Care at the Grassmere Aged
Care Facility on the dates alleged in that
complaint. His explanation for that breach was that he was under the impression
visa at the time allowed him to work for that establishment, and he
said he did not realise he was in breach of his visa: statement
paragraphs [17]
- [18], [23]. In his supplementary statement dated 23 April 2013, Dr Saedlounia
reiterated his earlier concession
concerning Complaint 1 and provided the
further explanation that at the time, he had relied upon the proprietor of
YourWorld Recruitment
to satisfy himself that the job in which he had been
placed, was appropriate in light of the Board's conditions. Dr Saedlounia now
acknowledges that it was in fact his own responsibility to ensure the Board's
requirements were satisfied in that regard.
his statement dated 31 January 2013, Dr Saedlounia also admitted the terms and
conditions of the visas that had been issued to
him on 21 May 2007, 8 August
2009 and 8 October 2009. It was implicit within that statement, that Dr
Saedlounia conceded that he
was in breach of his visa conditions prior to 14
September 2009, at which time the conditions applying to 457 Visas became more
in allowing the holders of such visas to work for multiple
his statement dated 31 January 2013, Dr Saedlounia claimed that he had
interpreted his registration conditions that stated that
work in any other employment than the employment specified in his conditions of
registration as not amounting to a prohibition at
that time: statement paragraph
[25]. That explanation was the subject of challenge in
cross-examination.
Saedlounia's statement dated 31 January 2013 went on to address the 5
particulars that comprised Complaint 2: statement paragraphs
to Particular 1 of Complaint 2, Dr Saedlounia conceded that whilst employed at
the Wellington Aboriginal Corporation Health Service
he had carried out on-call
sessional work at the Wellington District Hospital. He claimed that he assumed
the Medical Director of
the Hospital would have checked his visa before
approaching him to do that work. In his supplementary statement dated 23 April
Dr Saedlounia reiterated his earlier concession on this particular, and
that the breach amounted to improper or unethical conduct
in the practise of
medicine. By way of further explanation, Dr Saedlounia stated that he had been
encouraged by the CEO of the Corporation
to work at the Wellington District
Hospital so that he could continue his care of Aboriginal patients who may be
admitted to that
Hospital. He said he now accepted that at the time it would
have been wiser for him to have first sought the approval of the Department
Immigration before commencing to work at that Hospital.
to Particular 2 of Complaint 2, Dr Saedlounia conceded that he had worked for
Worksafe Medics on the dates set out in the complaint,
but he claimed his role
was to accompany a nurse employed by that company to different worksites to
conduct simple assessments, such as audiometry, spirometry, and other
haemodynamic observations which did not necessarily need to
be performed by a
registered health practitioner
". In his supplementary statement dated 23
April 2013, Dr Saedlounia admitted the facts alleged against him, but argued
that the work
that he had undertaken for Worksafe Medics was only as a clinical
support person, and not as a medical practitioner. Dr Saedlounia
stated that
whilst in that employment he had not held himself out as being a medical
practitioner.
to Particular 3 of Complaint 2, Dr Saedlounia conceded that between 27 July 2009
and 7 August 2009, he failed to comply with his
visa conditions by working at
the Herbert St Clinic of the North Sydney Drug and Alcohol Service as a Senior
Resident Medical Officer
until there was a visa problem. He claimed he "
not previously aware that there was any problem
" with his visa. He claimed
that as he had not been paid for that work (as a result of the discovery that
his visa did not authorise
that work) this did not constitute work that amounted
to a breach of any relevant condition. That evidence has to be read in
conjunction
with his oral evidence, where he conceded that during that time at
the Herbert St Clinic, he had provided his services at that Clinic
expectation that he would be paid accordingly. In his supplementary statement
dated 23 April 2013, Dr Saedlounia contested
the proposition that during his 11
days working at the Herbert St Clinic, that employment amounted to
unsatisfactory professional
conduct in breach of his visa. That contest was
based upon the proposition that he had worked without being
to Particular 4 of Complaint 2, Dr Saedlounia conceded that between 26 September
2009 and 14 November 2009, on the dates set out
in the complaint, he failed to
comply with the conditions of his visa in that he worked for Carrington
Centennial Care as a locum
general practitioner providing services at the
Grassmere Terrace Aged Care Facility. By way of explanation, he reiterated his
interpretation
of the employment restrictions on his visa, namely "
", as not constituting a prohibition from pursuing that employment. He
expressed embarrassment and remorse over that conduct. In his
supplementary
statement dated 23 April 2013, Dr Saedlounia clarified this earlier admission,
but he excluded from that admission
the dates 26 September and 3 October 2009.
He did so on the basis of his understanding, that after 14 September 2009, his
visa conditions
became more flexible, and allowed for multiple employers,
including at Carrington Centennial Care. He subsequently conceded that
have read his visa conditions more carefully, and did not believe his conduct
was unethical or improper, or to be unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
to Particular 5 of Complaint 2, Dr Saedlounia conceded that although he had
provided a curriculum vitae to YourWorld Recruitment
in September 2009, in which
he represented that he had been employed by Worksafe Medics as an "Occupational
Medical Practitioner
(Casual)" when he had not been so employed, and had
represented that he had held the position of "Psychiatry Registrar" at Royal
North Shore Hospital from July 2009 when he had not been so employed, he
admitted the factual basis of the allegations in the complaint.
With regard to
those Worksafe representations he stated "
I deeply regret the
misunderstanding that this description would cause
". He also stated that the
representation was inappropriate, and did not accurately describe his position
at that establishment. In
his oral evidence on this subject, Dr Saedlounia
characterised the misleading inclusion of Occupational Medical Practitioner
in his curriculum vitae as simply being a typographic error, and he
claimed the prefatory word "Assistant" had been omitted: T32.35
the time he prepared his 31 January 2013 statement, he deferred making any
comment about the representation in his curriculum vitae
that he was a
Psychiatry Registrar at the Royal North Shore Hospital from July 2009 until he
saw documents from that Hospital.
his supplementary statement dated 23 April 2013, at paragraph [11], Dr
Saedlounia stated:
"11. In answer to particular 5,1 admit the facts alleged but did not intend
to deliberately mislead anyone by the references to "Occupational
Practitioner" and "Psychiatric Registrar". The first entry should have stated
"Occupational Medical Practitioner Assistant".
The advertisement that I saw on
Seek.com to the Herbert Street Clinic position was, as I recall, described as
"Registrar/Senior Resident
Medical Officer" in ether Addiction Medicine or
Psychiatry even though I was only employed under the supervision of Dr Dore, a
Psychiatrist.
I believed that my sponsor, the NSCCAHS, had communicated with the
Immigration authorities which led to that description. I note
that in tab 57 the
Immigration Department referred to my job as a Psychiatry Officer/Medical
summary, in his statements, Dr Saedlounia conceded that the conduct he has
admitted in relation to Complaint 1 is capable of amounting
to unsatisfactory
professional conduct. He made the same concession with respect to Complaint 2,
except for Particulars 2 and 3,
which concerned whether he worked or had
purported to have worked as a medical practitioner for Worksafe Medics, and
whether he had
" at the Herbert St Clinic because he had not been
paid for his attendance there.
his oral evidence concerning the breaches of his visa and practice conditions,
Dr Saedlounia stated that he was sorry for such
breaches, which he maintained
were not deliberate breaches. He sought to explain those matters by asserting
his failure to pay proper
attention to those conditions, and his failure to read
them and check them: T32.7; T41.14. He also agreed that in the circumstances,
responsible person acting responsibly would not have made the assumptions he had
made about his visa conditions, and instead would
have taken steps to check
whether the conditions covered the employment he was contemplating: T91.42 -
his oral evidence, on numerous occasions, when his practice conditions were
drawn to his attention in context, he reiterated that
he was sorry for those
breaches of the conditions that had been imposed upon him by the Board. When
questioned about a possible interpretation
of his evidence that his expressions
of remorse could be seen as glib, superficial or insincere, at T95.22 - T95.27,
"A. Firstly, all doctors believe in honesty. When we say that we are sorry,
that means really we are. So being in the position of
treating patients and
taking the responsibility of having their problems confidential. I've been in
many tested occasions. When I
say sorry, I really mean that, and my future
actions will prove that I am really sorry about that. I am really sorry. I
really feel
embarrassed of being in this position whilst I could treat
explanations by Dr Saedlounia will be considered in the course of determining
the outcome of the respective complaints.
Legislation
unsatisfactory professional conduct
is broadly defined in the
legislation and it is not only confined to clinical conduct: s 139B of the
National Law
. Relevant to the context of these proceedings, it also
includes contravention of a condition to which a practitioner's registration
subject: s 139B(1)(c), and other improper or unethical conduct relating to the
practice or purported practice of medicine: s 139B(1)(l)
professional misconduct
is defined as comprising unsatisfactory
professional conduct that is of a sufficiently serious nature to justify
suspension of the
practitioner's registration, or one or more instances of
unsatisfactory professional conduct, when considered together, amount to
of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner's registration: s 139E of the
National Law
Principles from decided cases
considering whether or not the complaints of unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct have been made out,
the Tribunal has been mindful of
the gravity of such allegations, and has therefore approached the evaluation of
the evidence on
the basis that for proof of such allegations, persuasion to a
high degree of comfortable satisfaction is required on the balance
probabilities:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
A reference in these reasons to the Tribunal being satisfied on a particular
matter of fact or conclusion, should be read as being
a state of satisfaction or
proof to that standard.
Impropriety
of conduct should be interpreted as meaning that the conduct in question must be
objectively shown to have been in breach
of the standards that would be expected
of a person in the position of reasonable persons with the knowledge and duties,
authority of, in the context of these proceedings, a medical
practitioner in the circumstances:
[1992] HCA 18
(1992) 173 CLR
there is no comprehensive exploration within the caselaw as to when
unsatisfactory professional conduct can amount to professional
misconduct, the
concept is provided for within the terms of s 139E of the
National Law
which must be given a purposive interpretation.
determining whether the conduct in question amounts to professional misconduct,
a deliberate departure from, or indifference to,
accepted standards of practice
can qualify as professional misconduct:
Pillai v Messiter [No.2]
16 NSWLR 197
, at page 200.
determining whether or not the unsatisfactory professional conduct in question
can amount to professional misconduct, there is
no prohibition within s 139E for
considering whether a pattern of unsatisfactory professional conduct can amount
to professional
misconduct, as was submitted by the HCCC in this case. Such an
approach would be consistent with a purposive approach to the
legislation.
is a well-established principle that conditions of medical registration must be
scrupulously observed:
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
Re Dr Than Le
[2001] NSWMT, 20 September 2001, at
formulating protective orders, the Tribunal is required to not only consider the
object of protection of the public, but to recognise
that object also includes
deterring the practitioner, and other practitioners, from either repeating the
misconduct or leaving it
open to temptation to act in a manner that falls short
of the required high standards of professional persons in positions of trust
confidence:
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
, per Giles
JA, at page 471B.
application of the foregoing principles does not first require a finding of
dishonesty on the part of the practitioner. Recklessness
is a sufficiently
serious consideration to justify invoking sanctions to protect the public:
[2012] NSWCA 80
Principles relevant to consideration of the facts
HCCC submitted that the subject matter of the complaints involve an important
matter of principle, identified as being the necessity
for overseas trained
medical practitioners, whose qualifications are not recognised in Australia, to
strictly comply with the regulatory
regime that permits them to undertake
professional work in Australia whilst going through the process of further
supervision, training
and qualification that will ultimately permit practice
unconditionally with full registration. That principle is indisputable. The
identified two relevant aspects of that regulatory regime.
an overseas trained medical practitioner has to obtain a visa that permits work
as a medical practitioner. The general pathway by
which this occurs is to obtain
what is known as a 457 Visa issued by the Australian Government. The mechanism
for obtaining such
a visa is for an employer willing to employ the practitioner
to agree to be a sponsor and offer the visa applicant a position as
practitioner. A 457 Visa is then granted specific to that employer who then
agrees to supervise the practitioner whilst
performing work in the approved
, a person wishing to practise medicine in those
circumstances must also obtain registration from the authority responsible for
registration of medical practitioners, in this instance, the Board, or its
successor in title, the Council.
Dr Saedlounia arrived in Australia in 2005, he was not entitled to full
registration because the Board did not recognise his
qualifications from Iran.
However, in 2007, the Board determined that he was entitled to limited
registration subject to specified
conditions. The purpose of imposing those
conditions was to ensure that Dr Saedlounia was appropriately supervised at all
times whilst
working in a medical capacity.
a medical practitioner applies for the right to undertake professional work in a
particular position at a particular institution,
the Board undertakes a process
of carefully formulating its requirements for conditions to ensure that the
necessary level of supervision
is identified and imposed in the interest of
safety of the public.
Dr Saedlounia's situation, as in any other similar situation, the Board did so
by taking into account the situation of the proposed
employers, the supervision
available at the particular establishments where the employment would be
available, who would actually
provide the supervision, the nature of the work
that was intended to be performed by the conditional registrant, and the level
risk involved in those circumstances. Only then is conditional registration,
on identified terms, offered to an overseas trained
medical practitioner, as was
the case with Dr Saedlounia.
is self-evident that if a conditional registrant commences to work in a
professional environment other than the one that was assessed
for suitability
and made the subject of conditions, an hiatus occurs in the devised mechanism
for safeguarding the protection of
the public. The hiatus is constituted by the
unauthorised employment situation where the Board's conditions and supervision
requirements
are absent. That is a matter of critical importance to the
protection of the public.
is also of critical importance that conditional registrants in the position of
Dr Saedlounia at all relevant times, comply with
all aspects of the regulatory
regime that governs the right to work as a medical practitioner in Australia.
Questions concerning
the extent, if any, of harm that might have been caused by
breaches of these conditions of governance are irrelevant, or at best,
to the paramount need to protect the health and safety of the public: s 3A of
National Law
Submissions of the parties
the background of the above principles, none of which involved controversy, the
HCCC submitted that whilst Dr Saedlounia's
breach of his visa conditions might,
on a superficial analysis, seem to be minor when viewed in isolation, however,
when viewed in
an overall context, they indicate a pattern of conduct in which
Dr Saedlounia has shown disregard for the rules and regulations that
his right to work as a medical practitioner in Australia. It was submitted that
this pattern of conduct amounted to professional
misconduct in this case. The
HCCC submitted that this is a matter of critical importance and that such
conduct ought not be condoned
by the Tribunal in its deliberation on the matter.
HCCC also submitted that in this case, a very important issue of deterrence
arises for consideration in the framing of the protective
Dr Saedlounia conceded that the conduct in question amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct, he contested the submitted
conclusion that his conduct
amounted to professional misconduct. In the paragraphs that follow, the above
submissions and the latter
contention will be considered in relation to the
respective complaints, and in the light of the explanations that Dr Saedlounia
in respect of his actions.
Determination of Complaint 1 - unsatisfactory professional conduct
1 particularised a single element of alleged unsatisfactory conduct concerning
Dr Saedlounia's practise of medicine. This
concerned his conduct, on 8 occasions
between 26 September and 14 November 2009, when he provided locum general
practitioner services
for Carrington Centennial Care at the Grassmere Terrace
Aged Care Facility. This activity was in contravention of the conditions
registration, which required that he work as a Senior Resident Medical Officer
in the field of Addiction Medicine at two specified
clinics at Manly Hospital
and at Royal North Shore Hospital.
his supplementary statement dated 23 April 2013, at paragraph [3], Dr Saedlounia
has admitted the conduct in question, and he has
admitted that conduct amounts
to unsatisfactory professional conduct. The Tribunal is satisfied to the
required standard of proof
that those admissions were appropriately made, and
finds that Dr Saedlounia engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct as
particularised
in Complaint 1.
Tribunal is also satisfied that the conduct concerning Complaint 1 merits the
making of protective orders. Those orders will be
considered in light of the
overall findings of the Tribunal concerning Complaint 2 and Complaint
Determination of Complaint 2 - unsatisfactory professional conduct
2 particularised five elements of alleged unsatisfactory professional conduct on
the part of Dr Saedlounia whilst engaging
in the practise, or the purported
practise, of medicine. Those elements comprised:
(a) Dr Saedlounia's work at the Wellington District
(b) Dr Saedlounia's work at Worksafe Medics;
(c) Dr Saedlounia's work at the Herbert Street Clinic for the Northern Sydney
Drug and Alcohol Service;
(d) Dr Saedlounia's work for Carrington Centennial Services at the Grassmere
Terrace Aged Care Facility;
(e) Dr Saedlounia's provision of a false and misleading curriculum vitae to Your
World Recruitment agency.
Saedlounia has admitted the particularised conduct occurred as alleged in the
particulars of Complaint 2, but he has sought to
downplay the significance of
some of that conduct insofar as alleged unsatisfactory professional conduct is
concerned. It is therefore
necessary for the Tribunal to record its findings on
each of the five identified elements.
Work at the Wellington Hospital
to element (a) above, or Particular 1 of Complaint 2, and as summarised at
paragraph [30] above, Dr Saedlounia ultimately conceded
that by working at
Wellington District Hospital as a General Practitioner/Visiting Medical Officer
on the 62 particularised occasions
between 1 December 2007 and 26 March 2008,
when the conditions of his registration required him to work for his sponsor,
the Wellington
Corporation Aboriginal Health Service, in contravention of his
457 Visa, and his practice conditions. Dr Saedlounia conceded that
breaches amounted to improper or unethical conduct by him in the practise of
is not a relevant answer to such breaches, for Dr Saedlounia to say that he had
been encouraged to work at Wellington Hospital
by the CEO of the Wellington
Corporation Aboriginal Health Service. In this regard, of predominant relevance,
is Dr Saedlounia's
concession that it would have been wiser for him to check
with the authorities before embarking on his sessional work at the Wellington
District Hospital.
Tribunal is of the view that such a course ought to have been obvious to Dr
Saedlounia at all relevant times on a plain understanding
of the terms of his
visa and his conditional registration. In oral evidence Dr Saedlounia
acknowledged that his approach to his visa
and practice conditions was that he
had not read them or checked them, as a responsible person acting responsibly
should have done
in the circumstances. In that regard the Tribunal is satisfied
to the required standard of proof, based on Dr Saedlounia's own admission,
he wilfully allowed himself to be blinded to the details of his visa and
practice conditions. This is a recognised phenomenon
that sometimes occurs in
the case of persons otherwise of capacity, who act irrationally, and contrary to
their normal standards:
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
at p 469F, per Giles JA.
of checking his visa and practice conditions, Dr Saedlounia failed to do so, and
made incorrect and unwarranted assumptions
practising rights.
those circumstances, the Tribunal is of the view that such conduct involved a
degree of carelessness on the part of Dr Saedlounia
that amounts to
recklessness:
, at [67]. As a result, the Board's devised
mechanism for the protection of the public was placed at risk, because Dr
Saedlounia was
practising without the level of supervision the Board had
required in his circumstances on grounds of public safety.
Tribunal regards these breaches as being of a serious character, and accordingly
finds that the element of the particulars of
Complaint 2 concerning unauthorised
practice at the Wellington District Hospital demonstrate proof to the required
standard, of unsatisfactory
professional conduct on the part of Dr Saedlounia.
Work at Worksafe Medics
to element (b) above, or Particular 2 of Complaint 2, as summarised at paragraph
[31] above, Dr Saedlounia sought to downplay the
significance of the work he had
carried out at Worksafe Medics between 26 May 2008 and 28 January 2009. Whilst
that work was characterised
both by him and by the proprietor of that company,
Dr Michael Shenouda, as comprising the position of a "
clinical support
", the evidence, including the evidence of Dr Shenouda, did not
entirely support Dr Saedlounia's claim of having been a clinical support
in the described circumstances.
Shenouda described the work as comprising carrying out spirometry and audiology
tests, assisting patients to fill out questionnaires
and consent forms. Dr
Shenouda also stated that there had been "
a few occasions where
Saedlounia]
did work that could be interpreted as the work of a Medical
Practitioner, but this was done under my supervision and for training
": Exhibit "F".
Shenouda further explained that Dr Saedlounia "
was certainly not permitted to
perform any skin checks, but perhaps for training purposes
Tribunal is of the firm view that the above tasks as described by Dr Shenouda
were tasks that should ordinarily be seen to be
tasks carried out in the
practise, or the purported practise, of medicine. It is difficult to see how
inspecting the skin of workers
for bruising and needle marks did not constitute
the use or exercise of knowledge, skill, judgment and experience in the course
medical practice, so as to constitute the practise or purported practise of
medicine. Furthermore, it is difficult to see how Dr
Saedlounia accompanying a
practice nurse to work sites to assess employees at those sites in the manner
described, properly constituted
supervision and training under Dr Shenouda, as
has been asserted.
Tribunal considers Dr Saedlounia's evidence that he had not introduced himself
as a medical practitioner when carrying out the
work required of him by Worksafe
Medics was a misguided explanation, and lacked insight into the real question of
how his involvement
in those activities may have appeared to the lay persons or
patients whom he was assessing on behalf of his employer. The Tribunal
this to be a matter of some significance.
light of Dr Shenouda's unchallenged evidence on the subject matter and content
of Dr Saedlounia's work at Worksafe Medics, the
Tribunal does not accept Dr
Saedlounia's evidence that he did not carry out tasks in the practise or
purported practise of medicine
for Worksafe Medics. Instead the Tribunal accepts
Dr Shenouda's account cited in Exhibit "F", as cited above, as being more likely
to be correct, save for uncertainties over the level of supervision, which was
in any event, not authorised by the Board.
conclusion is a matter of some significance, as Dr Shenouda's company was not a
designated area of need for the purposes of Dr
Saedlounia's visa conditions, and
neither the Australian Government nor the Board had authorised Dr Shenouda to
provide Dr Saedlounia
with supervision or training of any kind, nor did the
Board authorise Dr Saedlounia to carry out the described activities and
assessments
involving patients who were being examined or assessed by Worksafe
Tribunal therefore concludes and finds that Dr Saedlounia's work at Worksafe
Medics was in contravention of the requirements of
his visa and also in
contravention of his conditional registration with the Board. As such, the
Tribunal is satisfied to the required
standard, that these events demonstrate
unsatisfactory professional conduct on the part of Dr Saedlounia. In that
regard, the Tribunal
notes with concern that whilst Dr Saedlounia was working
for Worksafe Medics, the protection of the public, which is usually an assumed
matter that is provided for through the normal processes of accreditation and
registration, was absent insofar as his contact with
patients was
Work at the Herbert Street Clinic
to element (c) above, or Particular 3 of Complaint 2, as summarised at paragraph
[32] above, Dr Saedlounia admitted to being in
breach of his visa conditions
between 27 July and 7 August 2009, by working as a Senior Resident Medical
Officer at the Herbert Street
Clinic of the North Sydney Drug and Alcohol
Service, notwithstanding that his visa conditions did not permit this
employment.
Tribunal has considered Dr Saedlounia's contention that those circumstances did
not constitute a relevant breach of conditions
because he had not been paid for
the work in question. The Tribunal rejects that argument in view of Dr
Saedlounia's concession that
he performed the work in question with the
expectation that he would be paid. It is not to the point that the reason he was
for that work was because the nominated employer had discovered it was
not permitted by law to pay him as his visa did not allow
that work to be
undertaken by him. In the view of the Tribunal, because of Dr Saedlounia's
expectation of payment, the distinction
sought to be made by him is artificial,
and does not operate as an exceptional circumstance.
those circumstances, the Tribunal finds that it is satisfied to the required
standard of proof, that in pursuing the particularised
employment at the Herbert
Street Clinic of the North Sydney Drug and Alcohol Service, Dr Saedlounia
engaged in unsatisfactory professional
Work with Carrington / Grassmere Aged Care Facility
to element (d) above, or Particular 4 of Complaint 2, as summarised at paragraph
[33] above, although Dr Saedlounia conceded that
he had worked with Carrington
Centennial Care as a locum providing general practitioner services to the
Grassmere Terrace Aged Care
Facility, and that this work was in breach of visa
conditions until 14 September 2009, he seeks to avoid a conclusion that such
constituted unethical, improper or unsatisfactory professional conduct
because at the time he interpreted the words "
", as included in
his visa, as not constituting a prohibition on him carrying out work in addition
to the work that he was conditionally
authorised to pursue.
Tribunal does not accept the submission to that effect made on behalf of Dr
Saedlounia. The Tribunal sees this element of Dr Saedlounia's
conduct as being
in a similar category to element (a) or Particular 1 of Complaint 2 above, in
that Dr Saedlounia had been careless
or reckless concerning his obligation to
ensure that he scrupulously complied with any applicable conditions placed on
his practice.
those circumstances, the Tribunal is satisfied to the required standard, that in
respect of his employment which provided services
at the Grassmere Terrace Aged
Care Facility, Dr Saedlounia had engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Misleading Curriculum Vitae
to element (e) above, or Particular 5 of Complaint 2, as summarised at
paragraphs [34] - [36] above, the curriculum vitae that
Dr Saedlounia provided
to the YourWorld medical employment agency was plainly misleading in its
content. That conclusion is compelling
because, as he must have known, he had
not worked in the position of an Occupational Medicine Physician (Casual) for
Worksafe Medics,
as was represented in the document.
Tribunal does not accept Dr Saedlounia's explanation that this was a simple
typographical error that had left out the prefatory
description of Assistant in
describing that position. That explanation was not included in any of Dr
Saedlounia's statements prepared
for these proceedings. It appeared for the
first time in his oral evidence at the hearing. The Tribunal considers the
answer to be
glib and opportunistic. Similarly, the Tribunal does not accept Dr
Saedlounia's portrayal of the circumstances of the misleading
and incorrect
description of his work experience with Worksafe Medics as a
misunderstanding
curriculum vitae in question was very obviously framed in order to enhance Dr
Saedlounia's prospects of obtaining employment.
It contained false and
misleading particulars of his experience in medical practice, and this was known
to Dr Saedlounia. The Tribunal
is satisfied to the required standard, that in
proffering his curriculum vitae with such misleading content, Dr Saedlounia's
amounted to improper and unethical conduct related to the practise or
purported practise of medicine. The Tribunal therefore finds
it is satisfied to
the required standard of proof in respect of this fifth element of Complaint 2,
that Dr Saedlounia engaged in
unsatisfactory professional
Conclusion on Complaint 2
Tribunal has found all elements of the unsatisfactory professional conduct in
the practise or purported practise of medicine,
as alleged against Dr
Saedlounia, to have been proven to the required standard of proof. The question
then arises as to whether the
identified conduct should be seen as a pattern of
unsatisfactory professional conduct. This is a matter to be determined in
of Complaint 3.
Determination of Complaint 3 - Whether professional misconduct
3 alleges that Dr Saedlounia had engaged in professional misconduct by reason of
his admitted conduct that is the subject
matter of Complaints 1 and 2.
HCCC submitted that those matters, and the required findings of unsatisfactory
professional conduct concerning those matters,
which the Tribunal has in fact
made in the preceding paragraphs, demonstrated a pattern of unsatisfactory
conduct which justifies
the conclusion that Dr Saedlounia had engaged in
professional misconduct within the meaning of the test propounded within s 139E
National Law
contrast, on behalf of Dr Saedlounia it was submitted that in the circumstances
none of the conduct amounted to justification for
a finding of professional
misconduct. For support, that submission drew upon reasoning within a recent and
differently constituted
Medical Tribunal in which a finding of professional
misconduct was not made:
HCCC v Maendel
[2013] NSWMT 3. That decision
will therefore be considered for applicability to the present
assessing whether professional misconduct has been demonstrated, the two limbs
of the test propounded in s 139E must be analysed
and applied to the
circumstances under consideration. In this case, the focus for the analysis is
whether a relevant pattern of unsatisfactory
conduct has been demonstrated. That
analysis must be guided by applicable authority, as well as observing
appropriate and respectful
comity with the approach taken in other Medical
Tribunal decisions in analogous cases.
First limb - s 139E(a) of the National Law
the circumstances of this case, the Tribunal is of the opinion that of
themselves, the individual findings of unsatisfactory professional
concerning Complaints 1 and 2, when viewed alone, are not of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation
of Dr Saedlounia's
practising rights: s 139E(a) of the
National Law
conclusion does not end the consideration of the matter because these matters
cannot be viewed in isolation from each other.
Second limb - s 139E(b) of the National Law
HCCC submitted, in accordance with the second limb of s 139E, that when all of
the instances of unsatisfactory professional conduct
(which the Tribunal has
found to have been the case in its consideration of Complaints 1 and 2) are
considered together, in aggregate,
they amount to conduct of a sufficiently
serious nature that justifies suspension or cancellation of Dr Saedlounia's
registration:
s 139E(b) of the
National Law
behalf of Dr Saedlounia it was argued that there should be no such finding in
this case because the subject matter of the complaints
were of an insufficiently
serious nature to justify a finding of professional misconduct.
pivotal foci of the consideration under s 139E(b) are
aggregation of the instances of unsatisfactory professional conduct, and
, the seriousness of the nature of those
undertaking the required analysis, the Tribunal has taken care to keep separate
from the threshold consideration, matters that
may serve to mitigate the
consequences of Dr Saedlounia's conduct. Those matters of mitigation are more
relevant to the separate
consideration of the need for, and the nature and
extent of, any required consequential protective orders.
the centre of the findings concerning the instances of Dr Saedlounia's
unsatisfactory professional conduct, is his admitted failure
to take the
necessary time and care to read and consider the implications of his visa and
practice conditions to ensure that he would
scrupulously comply with those
conditions. The Tribunal has concluded that this was to the point of wilfully
blinding himself to
that knowledge, not on just one occasion, but serially.
failures occurred on each of the occasions on which there was a potential for a
conflict to arise between Dr Saedlounia's own
interests in securing employment,
and the public interest, being the need to protect the public by strictly and
scrupulously complying
with the requirements of his visa, and the practice
conditions imposed upon him by the Board.
Tribunal is of the opinion that these failures, when taken together, are of a
very serious nature, and demonstrate that Dr Saedlounia
had a lack of insight
into the need for him to act scrupulously with regard to his conditions of
practice in order to ensure that
the public was protected. The Tribunal
considers that,
prima facie
, and subject to analysing Dr Saedlounia's
responses and submissions, these failures appear to be of a sufficiently serious
to justify suspension or cancellation of Dr Saedlounia's
registration.
addition to the foregoing
prima facie
conclusions, Dr Saedlounia's
actions in taking up unauthorised employment outside the terms of his visa and
practising conditions,
on more than just one or two occasions, namely, with
Wellington District Hospital, the Grassmere Terrace Aged Care Facility, Worksafe
Medics and The Herbert St Clinic, add confirmatory weight to that
impression of seriousness. Even more weight is added to that
impression from the circumstances in which Dr Saedlounia
misrepresented the nature of his medical work experience in a misleading
description of his employment history in his curriculum vitae.
the opinion of the Tribunal, at a
prima facie
level, these matters, when
aggregated, represent compelling reasons for concluding that Dr Saedlounia has
engaged in a pattern of
unsatisfactory professional conduct that is of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify the suspension or cancellation of his
rights: s 139E(b) of the
National Law
view of that compelling
prima facie
analysis, it is necessary to examine
the reasons in support of a contrary view, as was submitted on behalf of Dr
Saedlounia. In addition
to the matters raised by Dr Saedlounia and considered in
the course of addressing the subject matter of Complaints 1 and 2, the following
factors were said to contra-indicate a finding of professional misconduct in
it was submitted that Dr Saedlounia's conduct should not be seen as involving
recklessness, given his relative inexperience
of the legal and medical systems
in Australia, also considering the issue of language. That submission sought to
categorise the conduct
of Dr Saedlounia as involving repeated acts of
carelessness rather than recklessness. The Tribunal does not accept that
submission.
In the context of this case such a distinction amounts to nothing
more than semantics. Dr Saedlounia had a good grasp of the language.
undertaken courses in English. The overarching consideration was his obligation
to acquire an understanding of the conditions
that applied to his practice and
to scrupulously observe them. He did not do so. The Tribunal considers that
degree of repeated carelessness
over time involved a reckless attitude towards
his responsibility to scrupulously comply with the conditions to which he was
Prakash v HCCC
it was submitted that the lack of caution in Dr Saedlounia's conduct was not
deliberate. The Tribunal does not accept this
as being a relevant factor to be
considered, especially given the finding that Dr Saedlounia, by his admitted
conduct in not reading
or seeking out a proper understanding of the conditions
of his visa as they applied to him, wilfully blinded himself to the breaches
the conditions to which his practice was subject. The Tribunal is of the view
that this level of indifference requires a finding
of professional misconduct:
Pillai v Messiter [No.2],
at page 200.
it was submitted that a breach of visa conditions was an unusual basis upon
which to base a complaint of professional misconduct.
Whilst that may be so, the
Tribunal does not accept that argument as a barrier to such a finding, and notes
that the visa conditions
underpinned Dr Saedlounia's right to practice
conditionally. He could not have worked or trained without those visa conditions
place. The Tribunal considers that a breach of visa conditions in those
circumstances is properly part of the overall fabric and
pattern of the conduct
that needs to be considered in evaluating whether there was professional
misconduct:
Pillai v Messiter [No.2],
at page 200.
it was submitted that no harm has been shown to have occurred to any patient as
a result of the matters raised in the complaints.
The Tribunal does not see this
as a relevant factor. It was entirely fortuitous that no patient came to harm.
The relevant criterion
on this issue is that the safety checks, balances and
supervision requirements imposed by the Board were not met in the course of
Saedlounia's conduct. This created circumstances where, on multiple occasions,
the public were not appropriately protected by
the conditions the Board had
imposed on Dr Saedlounia.
seeking to avoid a finding of professional misconduct, Dr Saedlounia relied upon
the manner in which professional misconduct was
assessed in
[2013] NSWMT 3, which involved an accumulated course of events
which, by majority in those proceedings, at [78], was held not to
professional misconduct.
Tribunal does not accept that the aggregated circumstances of Dr Saedlounia's
unsatisfactory professional conduct are comparable
to the basal facts in
. In that case, at [64], it was found that the practitioner had
made an initial wrong decision to treat his mother, and then took
on a number of
subsequent roles, some of which were based on family considerations and the
assumed wishes of the patient, following
which he was then subjected to a number
of stressors that probably dominated his thought process and impeded his
capacity to divert
from the wrong clinical course he had initially chosen.
contrast to the facts in
HCCC v Maendel
, Dr Saedlounia's unsatisfactory
professional conduct was based on entirely different considerations that in
large part emanated from
his decision not to read the conditions to which his
practice was subject. This led to a cascading series of breaches of those
over the course of an extended period of time between 2007 and 2009.
This occurred in a variety of work settings on numerous occasions,
comprising just one sentinel error of judgment involving one patient, as was the
HCCC v Maendel
those reasons, this Tribunal considers that the decision in
HCCC v Maendel
is distinguishable from the present case, and offers no applicable analogy
that requires a consideration and accommodation for comity
of approach to the
assessment of what amounts to professional misconduct.
assessment of whether professional misconduct has occurred, and whether the
conduct in question is caught by the terms contemplated
by the statutory
definition of s 139E of the
National Law
must be based upon a recognition
that each case must be determined according to its unique features. Whether
misconduct has occurred
is to be determined from the nature of the conduct in
question, as was highlighted in
HCCC v Maendel
, at [67], citing Kirby P
(as his Honour then was), in
Pillai v Messiter
(1989) 16 NSWLR
, at page 200, which in turn cited the reference to Corpus Juris Secundum,
vol 58, (1948) at 818.
the foregoing considerations, the Tribunal is persuaded, that the
impressions already identified, should be confirmed as the findings of
the Tribunal. Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied to the
required standard of
proof, that Dr Saedlounia's pattern of unsatisfactory professional conduct, when
considered together, is of
a sufficiently serious nature that satisfies the test
for justifying a finding of professional misconduct: s 139E(b) of the
National Law
Tribunal therefore makes the finding that Dr Saedlounia has engaged in
professional misconduct as alleged in the particulars of
said, it does not necessarily follow that suspension or cancellation of
registration is the inevitable consequence of such a
Consideration of the need for protective orders
preceding findings of the Tribunal against Dr Saedlounia on each of the
respective complaints makes it necessary to consider the
need to impose
protective orders in the circumstances.
behalf of Dr Saedlounia, it was submitted time has overtaken the events in
question, in that since those events, he has gained
the required recognition of
his qualifications, and he has satisfied the requirements of the examiners for
Fellowship of the Royal
Australian College of General Practitioners. It was
argued that in such circumstances, the need for protective orders takes on a
diminished importance in this case.
the reasons that follow, the Tribunal does not accept the validity or the
substance of that submission.
addition to satisfying the required theoretical and clinical acumen thresholds
as necessary preconditions for the grant of a licence
to practise medicine,
practitioners so licensed are required to conduct themselves with the high
standards of personal and professional
probity expected of members of an
honourable profession. Those expectations must necessarily be seen as extending
to the requirement
of scrupulously observing conditions of practice: s
the Australian Government initially granted, and from time to time varied, Dr
Saedlounia's 457 Visa, it did so in order to enable
him to work in limited
circumstances under the conditions imposed by the Board, whilst at the same
time, and in the public interest,
satisfy an unfulfilled area of community need
in medical practice. That need was accommodated by extending practising
to Dr Saedlounia and at the same time requiring him to limit his
practice to the defined conditions. In that way, his visa conditions
conditional registration were linked conditions.
from time to time, the Board placed conditions on Dr Saedlounia's right to
practice, this also had the effect of limiting his
right to practice until an
appropriate period of time was considered to have elapsed for the Board and its
successor the Council,
to be satisfied that Dr Saedlounia should be granted the
privilege of having full rights of practice after completing a specified
of further training and practice under supervision.
two separate sets of conditions were not designed to be in any way punitive to
Dr Saedlounia. The conditions were entirely protective
of the public and they
were in the public interest. The sole purpose of those conditions was to provide
a mechanism whereby public
confidence could be satisfied that whilst Dr
Saedlounia was proceeding to fulfil the requirements of full registration,
professional
work did not pose a needless risk to the safety of members of the
public with whom he would come into contact when providing medical
is against that background that the admitted and found breaches of applicable
conditions must be viewed. Also relevant to the consideration
of the relative
seriousness of the breaches of Dr Saedlounia's conditions of practice, is the
element of the public interest in ensuring
that conduct that falls short of the
required standards of probity for fitness to practice is appropriately dealt
with, censured
and not condoned:
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
that formulation, there is a strong need to deter the likelihood of further
lapses in standards, both insofar as the individual
practitioner is concerned,
and at the same time signal to practitioners in similar circumstances of
conditional practising rights,
that a failure to observe important conditions of
registration will not be condoned, especially where, as a result, the public has
been placed at potential risk due to non-compliance with justifiably imposed
conditions of practice.
the circumstances particularised in the respective complaints, the Tribunal is
comfortably satisfied that Dr Saedlounia has flouted
his conditions of practice.
The Tribunal considers that the explanations proffered by Dr Saedlounia for his
failure to abide by his
conditions of practice were glib, and aimed at
downplaying the significance of those breaches. When Dr Saedlounia's
explanations
were explored, even after making due allowance for the possibility
that there may have been cultural factors that could have influenced
explanations, the Tribunal nevertheless does not regard the proffered
explanations to be exculpatory.
determining the appropriate protective orders, the following factors are
relevant to the consideration:
(a) The seriousness of the misconduct;
(b) The admissions made by the practitioner;
(c) The expressed contrition and the responsibility taken by the
practitioner;
(d) The risk of re-offending;
(e) The need for deterrence.
to (a) above, in this case, the misconduct was of a very serious character
because when Dr Saedlounia effectively blinded himself
to his conditions of
practice, this resulted in a serious and repeated compromise of patient safety
due to his unsupervised practise
or purported practise of medicine. It is
irrelevant that no episodes of consequential harm have been
identified.
to (b) above, the admissions made by Dr Saedlounia were guarded and were clearly
aimed at avoidance of the disciplinary consequences
to (c) above, Dr Saedlounia's expressions of contrition and remorse were guarded
and glib. He sought to avoid the consequences
of his conduct by claiming his
breaches were due to inadvertence and misunderstandings, and a selective
misinterpretation of what
his conditions permitted him to do by way of
professional work. The Tribunal considers that those explanations by Dr
Saedlounia indicated
he had difficulty in facing up to the consequences of his
to (d) above, Dr Saedlounia gave assurances that he would not re-offend. He did
so in the following terms:
"Q. ... [W]hat steps do you think would be necessary to take to ensure that
you have a proper understanding of any applicable conditions?
A. Your Honour, you are in the position to answer that, but if you're asking
me to answer it is to monitor and observe me to see I'm
following the
instructions.
Q. The question arises because you said that it's your intention to
legitimately and diligently obey conditions, but the prerequisite
to that state
of mind is the acquisition of an understanding of what the conditions require
and so my question is, how would you
go about ensuring your understanding is
A. So I read the condition or conditions, if it is clear for me I obey them
directly, if there is any issues needs clarification I
will ask the expert
person or persons or authorities and I will definitely understand what the
concerns are and I will follow the
instructions subsequently."
Tribunal is of the view that such assurances need to be tested by a significant
period of supervision and mentoring in order that
the Council can have
confidence that those assurances are likely to be met in the future,
notwithstanding that since the conduct
complained of, Dr Saedlounia has
satisfied the examiners of the Royal Australian College of General
Practitioners, and has been enlisted
as an occasional examiner himself. We
consider that such supervision and mentoring is the appropriate means by which
to ensure that
the past episodes of wilful blindness to the requirements of
conditions on his practice will not recur, and so that the required
standards of his profession, will be met.
to (e) above, in view of Dr Saedlounia's past failures to comply with
conditions, including his selective failure to read important
details affecting
his right to practice, the Tribunal is of the view that a strong signal of
deterrence is required to protect the
public and to maintain the required high
professional standards:
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
, at page 471A-B;
[2012] NSWCA 80
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
at page 637D-E;
Saville v HCCC
(2006) NSWCA 298
is against that background that appropriate protective orders must be framed.
The Tribunal emphasises that in framing the protective
orders, apart from a
fine, they are not intended to be punitive, although they may be seen as having
that effect. The position with
regard to a fine in this case is that it is
required as a deterrence, and not as a punishment, although it might be seen
differently
Tribunal has concluded that Dr Saedlounia should be censured for the found
breaches of professional standards. The Tribunal has
determined that the
appropriate censure should be for the practitioner to be publicly reprimanded in
these reasons.
Tribunal has also concluded that a fine should be imposed on the practitioner as
a strong signal of deterrence. Such deterrence
serves a twofold purpose. First,
it is intended to operate as a deterrence to the practitioner to ensure there is
no repetition of
an attitude of indifference, carelessness or recklessness with
regard to regulatory requirements and any lapse in required standards
professional conduct. Secondly, it is intended to deter other persons with
conditions on their practising rights and on their
conditional visas from
disregarding the need for protection of the public in the practice of medicine
by ignoring or flouting conditions
aimed at ensuring the protection of the
public by adherence to the high standards of personal probity and conduct
expected of registered
medical practitioners. The Tribunal is of the view that
the amount of the fine should be a significant deterrent, and has determined
that the appropriate amount under s 146B of the
National Law
, should be
50 penalty units, which under s 17 of the
Crimes Sentencing Procedure Act
1999, is equivalent to the sum of $5,500.
Tribunal is also of the view that at his own expense, the practitioner should,
within 12 months of today's date, complete a recognised
course on medical
ethics, and that he should for the next 2 years, have the benefit of a
professional mentor and a separate professional
supervisor to provide him with
the opportunity to consolidate and reinforce adherence to ethical standards of
practice. The Tribunal
recognises that these conditions are onerous, but
considers they are nonetheless necessary in light of past breaches to ensure
to proper standards of practice. Scope will be incorporated within the
protective orders for variations of these orders by the Council
Council consider they are no longer necessary for the protection of the public.
Tribunal is also of the view that to ensure safety of the public, in light of
the events that are the subject of these complaints,
and unless the Council
otherwise directs, the practitioner should be required, for the next 5 years
from today's date, to provide
the Council with copies of any professional
curriculum vitae he provides to any person, and that he also provides any future
with a copy of these reasons of the Tribunal.
Tribunal makes the following findings:
(1) The practitioner is found to have engaged in unsatisfactory professional
conduct as alleged in Complaints 1 and 2;
(2) The practitioner is found to have engaged in professional misconduct as
alleged in Complaint 3.
Protective orders
Tribunal makes the following protective orders:
(1) The practitioner is reprimanded;
(2) The practitioner is fined the sum of $5,500 to be paid to the Council on or
before the expiry of 90 days from the date of these
(3) The practitioner is to pay the applicant's costs of these
proceedings.
(4) For a period of 2 years from 21 June 2013, the practitioner's registration
permitting him to engage in the practice of medicine
is to be subject to
conditions in the form that immediately follows.
Practice Conditions
practice conditions referred to in sub-paragraph [4] of paragraph [141] above
are as follows:
(1) The practitioner is to complete at his own expense the course on Medical
Ethics conducted in distance mode by the Department of
General Practice, Monash
University, Victoria:
(a) The course must be completed within twelve months of the date of the
Medical Tribunal decision;
(b) The practitioner must provide evidence of enrolment in the course within
six months of the date of the Medical Tribunal decision;
(c) Upon completion of the course the practitioner is to provide documentary
evidence to the Medical Council that he has satisfactorily
completed the
(2) Within 14 days of receipt of the Medical Tribunal decision the
practitioner is to provide for approval by the NSW Medical Council
the name and
professional address of a registered practitioner who has agreed to act as his
professional mentor. The nature and frequency
of contact with the mentor is to
be determined by the mentor in accordance with the NSW Medical Council's
Guidelines for mentors.
The mentor is to be provided with a copy of Policy PCH
10 and a copy of this Medical Tribunal decision and the relevant orders:
(a) He is to authorise the mentor to report, in an approved format, to the
NSW Medical Council every three months about the fact of
the NSW Medical Council if there is any concern about his professional conduct
or personal wellbeing;
(b) He is to authorise the mentor to notify the NSW Medical Council of any
failure to attend, termination of the mentoring relationship
against the advice
of the mentor, or any other matter the mentor considers appropriate;
(c) He will meet with the mentor for an initial period of 12 months from the
date of the first consultation and thereafter for such
period as the NSW Medical
Council may determine / authorises the mentor to notify the NSW Medical Council
when of the view that professional
mentoring is no longer required;
(d) In the event that the approved mentor is no longer willing or able to
continue as mentor, the practitioner is to nominate another
mentor for approval
by the NSW Medical Board within 28 days of the cessation of the original mentor
relationship;
(e) The practitioner is to be responsible for any costs associated with the
mentoring process.
(3) The practitioner is to nominate a supervisor within the next 28 days to
be approved by the NSW Medical Council, to monitor and
review his clinical
practice and compliance with (Practice) Conditions in accordance with Level 3
Supervision as contained in the
NSW Medical Council's Guidelines for Supervision
(Policy PCH 7.4). The supervisor is to be provided with a copy of the NSW
Board's Policy PCH 7.4 and a copy of this Medical Tribunal decision. The
practitioner is to be responsible for all costs associated
with the supervision
arrangement. The practitioner is to ensure that:
(a) He and the supervisor meet on a fortnightly basis for at least one hour,
the first meeting to occur within one month of being
advised by the NSW Medical
Board that his nominated supervisor has been approved.
(b) At each meeting they address any relevant ethical issues, compliance with
practice conditions, and any other matter relevant to
the practitioner's
(c) At each meeting, the supervisor completes a record of matters discussed
at the meeting in a format prescribed or approved by the
NSW Medical
(d) The supervisor forwards to the NSW Medical Council, on a monthly basis a
Supervision Report in a format prescribed or approved
by the NSW Medical
(e) The supervisor is authorised to inform the NSW Medical Council
immediately if there is any concern in relation to the practitioner's
with the supervision requirements, compliance with other conditions of
registration, clinical performance, health or if
the supervisor relationship
(f) In the event that the approved supervisor is no longer willing or able to
provide the supervision required, details of a replacement
supervisor are
forwarded for approval by the NSW Medical Council within 21 days of the
cessation of the original supervisory relationship.
(g) The practitioner is to be responsible for any costs associated with the
supervision process.
(4) Unless otherwise directed by the Council, the practitioner is to provide
to the Council a copy of any professional Curriculum
Vitae he provides to any
person in the next 5 years.
(5) Unless otherwise directed by the Council, during the next 5 years, the
practitioner is to provide a copy of this Tribunal Decision
to all of his future
employers, supervisors and mentors.
Review body for NSW and interstate review of conditions
(6) These conditions may be altered, varied or removed by the Medical Council
of New South Wales and the Medical Council is the appropriate
review body for
the purposes of Division 8 of Part 8 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
(7) If the practitioner seeks to change or remove any of the conditions
imposed as a result of the Tribunal's orders when his principal
practice is anywhere in Australia other than in New South Wales, sections 125 to
127 inclusive of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
apply, so that a review of these conditions can be conducted by the Medical
Board of Australia.
Statement of Agreed Facts
(Typographical errors as in the original)
1. In 2000, Dr Saedlounia obtained a Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of
Surgery from the Islamic Azad University (Tehran, Iran). In
2002, he obtained a
Doctorate in medicine from the same university.
2. He migrated to Australia in 2005.
3. Between 19 May 2005 and 21 May 2007 Dr Saedlounia was entitled to remain
and work in Australia pursuant to a work and holiday visa.
First registration as a medical practitioner
4. Prior to 1 July 2010, the former NSW Medical Board ("the Board")
administered the
Medical Practice Act 1992
(the "repealed Act") and was
responsible for the registration and co-regulation of medical practitioners in
New South Wales (co-regulation
with the Health Care Complaints Commission).
5. The Board had the responsibility to ensure medical practitioners are fit
to practise medicine and that they maintain proper standards
of conduct and
competence.
6. Pursuant to s 4 of the repealed Act, a person was entitled to be
registered as a medical practitioner if he or she had "recognised
qualifications" (as defined in the repealed Act) and had successfully completed
a period of internship or supervised training
as required by the Board.
7. A Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery and a Doctorate in Medicine
from the Islamic Azad University (Tehran, Iran) (the qualification
obtained by
Dr Saedlounia in 2000 and 2002 respectively) were not a "recognised medical
qualification" for the purposes of the repealed
8. Pursuant to s 7 of the repealed Act, the Board had a discretion to grant
conditional registration in certain circumstances to persons
who were entitled
to general registration under s 4.
9. A person could be registered under s 7(1)D at the discretion of the Board
for the purpose of enabling an unmet area of need to
be met if the Board was
satisfied that the person had suitable qualifications and experience to practise
medicine in that area of
10. A person could be registered under s 7(1)G at the discretion of the Board
on a temporary basis if the Board was satisfied that
it was in the public
interest to do so.
11. Overseas trained doctors who did not qualify for general registration
under s 4 of the repealed Act, could be granted limited
and conditional
registration under s 7 of the repealed Act. This allowed overseas trained
doctors registered under s7 to provide
medical services under supervision.
12. On 1 March 2007 Dr Seadlounia was registered as a medical practitioner in
NSW under s 7(1)D of the repealed Act as a Conditional
Area of Need Registrant,
with the registration limited to medical practice under supervision at the
Wellington Aboriginal Corporation
Health Service. Additional condition 2
required that "Dr Saedlounia should have some contact with Wellington and Dubbo
Base Hospitals.
This is an introduction to hospital and specialist staff, and
being show the facilities the hospital offers. It would not need to
be a medical
training or assessment exercise".
First grant of a 457 visa
13. At all relevant times, Australian employers have been able to sponsor
overseas doctors to work in Australia for up to 4 years
on a Temporary Business
(Long Stay) - Standard Business Sponsorship Visa ("457 visa").
14. 457 visas are the usual pathway to permanent residency for doctors who do
not yet hold full medical registration in Australia.
Overseas trained doctors
can commence a period of supervised practice and formal assessment in Australia
by working under a 457 visa
to meet the requirements for full medical
registration.
15. On 21 May 2007 Dr Saedlounia was granted a 457 visa, with: Sponsor listed
as Wellington Aboriginal Corporation Health Service;
Primary Visa Holder
Occupation listed as General Practitioner; and Location/Postcode of proposed
employment listed as the postcode
for Wellington, NSW ("the original 457 visa").
The original 457 visa was in effect until 8 October 2009.
16. At the time of grant of the original 457 visa, all 457 visas were subject
to condition 8107, which then provided that the visa
holder must not:
(a) If the visa was granted to enable the holder to be employed in
i. cease to be employed by the employer in relation to which the visa was
granted; or
ii. work in a position or occupation inconsistent with the position or
occupation in relation to which the visa was granted; or
iii. engage in work for another person or on the holder's own account while
undertaking the employment in relation to which the visa
was granted.
Changes to registration and work at Wellington District Hospital
17. In October 2007, Dr Saedlounia's registration as a medical practitioner
was modified by the Board to include the position of Visiting
Medical Officer at
the Wellington District Hospital.
18. Between 1 December 2007 and 2 April 2008, as well as working for the
Wellington Aboriginal Health Corporation, Dr Saedlounia worked
for Wellington
District Hospital as General Practitioner Visiting Medical Officer on:
1, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 20, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 December 2007;
1, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 22, 25, 26, , 29, 30, 31 January 2008;
1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19, 21, 26, 27, 29 February
1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 25, 26 March 2008;
1, 2 April 2008.
19. This was in breach of condition 8107 of his original 457 visa. It was not
in breach of his registration by the Board.
20. On 23 May 2008, the Board withdrew Dr Saedlounia's registration as a
medical practitioner following advice by the Wellington Aboriginal
Corporation
Health Service that it was no longer to provide appropriate supervision due to a
lack of staff.
21. Between 23 May 2008 and 29 July, Dr Saedlounia was not registered as a
medical practitioner.
Work at Worksafe Medics
22. Between 26 May 2008 and 28 January 2009, Dr Saedlounia worked for
Worksafe Medics as a casual clinical support person on:
(a) 26 May 2008;
(b) 2, 16, 23, 30 June 2008;
(c) 7, 17, 29 July 2008;
(d) 8 August 2008;
(e) 1, 23 September 2008;
(f) 2 October 2008;
(g) 21 November 2008;
(h) 12 December 2008;
(i) 28 January 2009.
23. The duties he was required to perform included spirometry, audiometry
testing, urine and drug screening and requesting patients
to answer a standard
questionnaire related to their medical and alcohol/drug history.
24. None of the work that Dr Saedlounia was employed to perform for Worksafe
Medics required him to be a medical practitioner.
25. Dr Saedlounia's employment by Worksafe Medics was in breach of condition
8107 of his original 457 visa, which required that he
work only as a General
Practitioner at Wellington Aboriginal Corporation Health Service.
Second registration as a medical practitioner
26. On 29 July 2009, Dr Saedlounia was granted public interest category
registration as a medical practitioner by the Board valid
until 24 July 2010
subject to the following conditions:
"To work under supervision in position/s approved by the Board;
(a) Position: SENIOR RESIDENT MEDICAL OFFICER
(b) Field: ADDICTION MEDICINE
(c) Location: SYDNEY ROAD CLINIC MANLY, HERBERT STREET CLINIC ROYAL NORTH
SHORE HOSPITAL, MANLY HOSPITAL
May not undertake any work as a medical practitioner outside the approve
position/s.
To demonstrate satisfactory performance in accordance with the Board's
requirements.
Must provide the Board with supervision reports each quarter - 24th
October2009, 24th January 2010, 24th April 2010 & 24th July
Work at Herbert St Clinic
27. From 27 July 2009 to 7 August 2009,Dr Seadlounia worked as a Senior
Resident Medical Officer at the Herbert St Clinic of the Northern
Sydney Drug
and Alcohol service, supervised by Dr Dore. This was in breach of condition 1807
of his original 457 visa.
28. On 8 August 2009, Dr Saedlounia was stood down from his position at the
Herbert St Clinic because he was informed by Dr Dore that
his visa did not
permit him to work there.
29. On 8 August 2009 Dr Saedlounia lodged an application for a new 457
30. Dr Saedlounia received no income for the work undertaken by him at
Herbert St Clinic in that period.
Work at Grassmere Terrace
31. In about early August 2009, Dr Saedlounia provided his curriculum vitae
to Yourworld Recruitment agency. A copy of the curricumlum
vitae is at tab 22.
It describes his position at Worksafe Medics as "Occupational Medical
Practitioner (Casual)". It is inaccurate
as he was not working there as a
medical practitioner but as a support person/assistant to Dr Shenouda, a
registered medical practitioner.
32. On 14 September 2009, legislative amendments to condition 8107 allowed
medical practitioners on a 457 visa to have "flexible working
arrangements".
Since this date, doctors holding a subclass 457 visa must still work in their
nominated occupation but they can work
for employers other than their sponsor or
an associated entity of their sponsor without the need for futher
application.
33. The effect of this change was that from 14 September 2009, under his
original 457 visa, Dr Saedlounia was authorized to work for
employers other than
Wellington Aboriginal Corporation Health Service, but only as a General
Practitioner.
34. In late September 2009, YourWorld Recruitment placed Dr Saedlounia in a
position at Grasmere Terrace Aged Care Facility, working
as a locum general
practitioner.
35. Between 26 September 2009 and 14 November 2009 Dr Saedlounia worked for
Carrington Centennial Care as a locum general practitioner,
providing services
at Grasmere Terrace Aged Care Facility on:
a. 26 September 2009
b. 3,10, 18, 24, 31 October 2009
c. 7, 14 November 2009.
36. This was in breach of the conditions of his registration with the Board
as such a position had not been approved by the Medical
Grant of a new 457 visa
37. On 8 October 2009 Dr Saedlounia was granted a new 457 visa, with
condition 1807 (as amended on 14 September 2009) imposed with:
Sponsor listed as
Northern Sydney and Central Coast Area Health Service; Primary Visa Holder
Occupation listed as Psychiatry Registrar
and Location/Postcode of proposed
employment listed as 2059 ("the new 457 visa").
38. The effect of the grant of the new 457 visa was that Dr Saedlounia was
authorized to work as a Psychiatry registrar only. Dr Saedlounia
contravened the
conditions of his new 457 visa by working as a General Practitioner at Grasmere
Terrace Aged Care Facility (see paragraph
35 above) for the period between 9
October and 14 November, but not for the period between 14 September 2009 - 8
October 2009.
39. On 9 October 2009 Dr Saedlounia forwarded to Dr Dore at the Royal North
Shore Hosptial by email a confirmation from the Immigration
Office that Dr
Saedlounia had been granted the new 457 visa and setting out the terms and
conditions of that visa.
40. On 9 November 2009, Dr Saedlounia was reinstated to his position at the
Herbert Street Clinic, supervised by Dr Dore.
41. On 17 and 20 November 2009, Dr Dore wrote to the Board complaining, inter
alia, that Dr Saedlounia appeared to have worked as
a medical practitioner at
another facility during the period he was stood down from the Herbert St
42. On 20 November 2009 Dr Saedlounia resigned from his position at the
Herbert St Clinic.
43. On 23 November 2009, the Board withdrew Dr Seadlounia's registration as a
medical practitioner because it had received notification
from Dr Dore that Dr
Saedlounia had resigned from his position at the Herbert St Clinic and that, had
he not done so, Dr Dore would
have withdrawn as his supervisor.
Subsequent registration as a medical practitioner
44. On 1 December 2009 Dr Saedlounia was granted limited registration as a
medical practitioner in Victoria, to practice as a General
Practitioner in an
Area of Need at the Elmwood Medical Centre in Wodonga, Victoria, under the
supervision of Dr Thant Syn and Dr
L Moran, having applied for that registration
in about October 2009. This limited registration expired on 22 December
45. On 1 July 2010 the National Law came into effect.
46. From 22 December 2011 to current, Dr Saedlounia has been registered as a
specialist General Practitioner with no conditions, practicing
medical practice at Rouse Hill, NSW, having been admitted as a Fellow of the
RACGP in June 2011.
47. On 26 March 2013, Dr Saedlounia acquired Australian citizenship.
48. No proceedings have been initiated against Dr Saedlounia by the
Department of Immigration and Citizenship in respect of any alleged
16 Jul 2013
Name of solicitor for applicant
Paragraphs: Representation
16 Jul 2013
Slip Rule correction to paragraph [137]
Paragraphs: 137
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (278 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter