URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2019/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HORKY, Oscar Joseph [2019] NSWMPSC 2 (16 April 2019)
H17/9301 : DD18/66002
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE INQUIRY
Constituted under Part 8 of
the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
to hold an Inquiry into a Complaint in relation
Dr Oscar Joseph
MED0001358547
Date/s of Inquiry:
13 &14 December 2018
Committee members:
A/Professor Diane Robinson,
Legal Chair
Dr Anthony Geraghty
James Opperman
Ms Jennifer Houen
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Mr Feneil Shah, Legal Officer
Appearance for Dr Oscar Joseph Horky:
Mr Aitken of counsel, instructed by Patricia Marinovic from HWL
Written Submissions:
Date of decision:
25 January 2019
16 April 2019
The Committee made findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
determined to reprimand Dr Horky and impose conditions on his
registration.
Publication of decision:
Refer to page 23 of this decision for details of non-publication
directions.
REASONS FOR DECISION
THE COMPLAINT
August 2015 Patient A made a complaint to the Health Care Complaints Commission
(the Commission) in relation to the care and treatment
Dr Horky provided to her
at Shoalhaven District Hospital in July 2015.
9 November 2017 the Commission made a formal complaint alleging that Dr Horky is
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
That Complaint is now being
prosecuted before this Professional Standards Committee.
summary, the Complaint alleges that Dr Horky’s management of Patient A was
inappropriate, as he failed to undertake appropriate
investigations after
assessing Patient A and prior to performing surgery on her. It is also alleged
that his surgical decision making
and prescribing of Methotrexate for Patient A
was inappropriate.
Complaint contains several Particulars and is set out in full in Annexure A to
this decision.
LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is defined in section 139B of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law NSW
(National Law (NSW)), as, amongst other things,
conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
by the practitioner in the practice of the practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience.
139B of the National Law (NSW) and other relevant legislative provisions are set
out in Annexure B to this decision.
STANDARD OF
Commission bears the onus of establishing that Dr Horky is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
standard of proof required to establish the Complaint is the civil standard so
the Committee must be reasonably satisfied on the
balance of probabilities of
the matters alleged against Dr Horky. Given the seriousness of the allegations
and the nature of their
consequences, the Committee needs to be comfortably
satisfied that the Complaints have been established on the Briginshaw principles
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336).
PRELIMINARY MATTERS
Commission sought leave to amend the Complaint and leave was
Committee considered the documents provided by the parties. The Commission
provided one volume of documents tabbed 1 to 31. Dr
Horky provided one volume of
documents tabbed 1 to 4.
Horky made several admissions in relation to the factual aspects of the
Non-publication order
non-publication direction was made preventing disclosure of the name, address
and any information which might identify the patient
referred to as Patient A in
the Complaint.
following people gave evidence to the Committee:
Dr Horky, the
Dr Pesce, expert
witness for the Respondent
Dr Giltrap,
expert witness for the Commission
expert witness for the Respondent
issues to be determined by this Committee are:
if any, of the Particulars of the Complaint are proven to the comfortable
satisfaction of the Committee.
the proven conduct overall amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct. The
Committee can look at all the conduct found
proven either separately or
cumulatively when making a determination as to whether the conduct amounts to
unsatisfactory professional
Duncan v Medical Disciplinary Committee
[1986] NZCA 465
[1986] 1 NZLR 513
at 545, 546 and 547)
such a finding is made the Committee must decide whether orders or directions
made pursuant to Part 8 Division 3 Sub-division 3
of the National Law are
appropriate.
Dr Oscar Horky
Horky graduated in MBBS from the University of Sydney in 1966. He was a
Registrar and Senior Registrar in Obstetrics and Gynaecology
(O&G) at the
Royal Hospital for Women in Sydney and after a period of training in France
worked in 1973 as a Senior Registrar
in O&G at the Dudley Road Hospital,
Birmingham, UK.
Dr Horky returned to Australia in 1974 he commenced private practice in O&G.
He was a visiting Obstetrician and Gynaecologist
at a number of hospitals in
Sydney. He became a Fellow of the Royal Australian College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists in 1978
and a Fellow of the Royal Australian and New Zealand
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists in 2001.
2004 Dr Horky has worked as an obstetrician and gynaecologist in a number of
locum positions around Australia, including NSW,
Queensland, Western Australia,
Northern Territory and Tasmania, and also in Fiji. On 20 July 2015 Dr Horky was
the locum O&G
consultant at Shoalhaven District Hospital.
present Dr Horky is working as a consultant gynaecologist at Specialist Clinics
of Australia at Barangaroo. Dr Horky also works
as a gynaecologist one day per
week at the Wollongong Family Planning clinic and one day a month in Griffith
where he is involved
in a uro-gynaecology clinic.
17 July 2015 Patient A, a 22 year old Aboriginal woman, had a pregnancy test,
which was positive. On the same day she had an ultrasound.
ultrasound performed on 17 July 2015 reported the following:
: a small gestational sac is identified
eccentrically positioned within the uterine fundus. Both a yolk sac and fetal
pole are identified.
The fetal pole measures 5 mm in length and is in keeping
with a gestational age of 6 weeks and 2 days and consistent with an EDD
06/03/2016. Fetal heart rate was recorded at 122 beats minute.
The myometrium adjacent to approximately half the circumference of the sac
measures 5-6 mm in diameter. On the final image is there
a suggestion of an
interstitial line sign which increases the suspicion for an interstitial ectopic
pregnancy. There is no evidence
of peri-sac haemorrhage. No adnexal pathology is
There is suspicion for an interstitial ectopic
pregnancy in the right cornu. An otherwise normal but eccentrically located
may have a similar appearance. The uterus did not appear sub septate
but this is a further cause for eccentrically located pregnancy.
contractions can also give this appearance but the sac position was unchanged
throughout the scan.
Specialist obstetric referral is recommended.”
20 July Patient A was telephoned by a midwife from her medical centre and
advised to attend the local hospital. She was told the
ultrasound results showed
that the baby may be “half in the uterus and half in the tube” and
to be on the safe side she
should have it checked out, as she had previously had
an ectopic pregnancy. Patient A’s left fallopian tube had been removed
a result of the past ectopic pregnancy.
20 July 2015 Patient A presented to the Emergency Department at Shoalhaven
District Hospital. She was assessed and treated by Dr
Horky decided to operate on Patient A and performed a hysteroscopy, followed by
a laparotomy, during which Patient A’s remaining
fallopian tube was
removed. He also performed dilatation and curettage. In addition, Patient A was
prescribed Methotrexate on 21
A was rendered infertile as a result of the surgery. She has also expressed
considerable distress about the loss of a possibly
Expert Evidence
three expert witnesses are specialist obstetricians and gynaecologists. On the
first day of the hearing Dr Pesce and Dr Giltrap
gave evidence concurrently.
They were joined by Dr Cooper during the afternoon.
Pesce and Dr Cooper have practised primarily in urban settings, while Dr Giltrap
has practised as a rural obstetrician and gynaecologist
since 1985. They are
experienced in the use of ultrasound in early pregnancy and have experience
dealing with interstitial pregnancy.
None of the expert witnesses has
significant experience working in a locum capacity.
COMPLAINT – EVIDENCE
Complaint deals with a number of clinical issues and alleges Dr Horky was guilty
of unsatisfactory professional conduct in his
management and treatment of
Particular 1
1 deals with Dr Horky’s failure to arrange a repeat ultrasound after
assessing Patient A on 20 July 2105. It alleges:
The practitioner assessed Patient A at the hospital on 20 July 2015 at
1200 hours after she had obtained a vaginal ultrasound report
on 17 July 2015.
The practitioner failed to arrange a repeat vaginal ultrasound on Patient A as
part of or following his assessment
of Patient A in circumstances where:
vaginal ultrasound report dated 17 July 2015 stated there was a suspicion of an
interstitial pregnancy but ;
vaginal ultrasound report dated 17 July 2015 indicated that Patient A may have
an intra-uterine pregnancy;
growth at about 6 weeks gestation meant there could be significant changes in
the appearance of an vaginal ultrasound following
the 17 July 2015
ultrasound;
further vaginal ultrasound report could assist to detect and diagnose an
intra-uterine pregnancy;
further vaginal ultrasound could assist to define the location of the pregnancy
prior to making any decisions concerning surgery;
vaginal ultrasound service was available onsite at the hospital on 20 July 2015
up to 1230 hours and thereafter could be called
in to the hospital.
Dr Horky’s evidence
Horky admits Particulars 1(a) to 1(e). He states that he was concerned about
the patient’s report of severe pain, similar
to the pain she experienced
during the previous ectopic pregnancy. He states that he was concerned about the
risk of rupture and
possible severe haemorrhage if Patient A was left untreated.
“With the benefit of hindsight I should have requested an urgent
ultrasound for the patient and if I had seen the patient at
a large tertiary
hospital it would have been my usual practice to do so. Alternatively I should
have referred the patient
to a tertiary centre for specialist scanning
and treatment.”
Horky denies Particular 1(f). An email from the Illawarra Shoalhaven Local
Health District to the Commission dated 13 September
2017 relevantly
“As at 20 July 2015, Shoalhaven District Memorial Hospital had the
following access to ultrasounds on site:-
1) Monday to Friday between 08:30 hours to 12:30 hours onsite ultrasound
service available.
2) Monday to Friday between 12:30 hours to 17:00 hours the sonographer is
offsite but will return if called for an urgent case, but
there is no formal
on-call system in place for these hours.
3) Monday to Friday 17:00 hours to 08:30 hours the following morning there
is a sonographer on-call to perform an emergency ultrasound
Dr Horky states he was informed by an Emergency Department (ED) doctor at
Shoalhaven Hospital that there were no ultrasound
facilities available.
his oral evidence Dr Horky said he had worked as a locum at Shoalhaven District
Hospital three or four times over the 12 month
period preceding his treatment of
Patient A. He said he had not previously referred patients for ultrasound and
was not familiar
with the available facilities. He said he had lived in the
local area since 2001 but was not familiar with the ultrasound facilities
outside the hospital.
Horky did acknowledge that as the obstetrician and gynaecologist on duty it was
his responsibility to be aware of the available
facilities.
Horky told the Committee that he made an enquiry about an ultrasound on 20 July
2015. He said he asked the chief ED doctor to call
the radiologist ‘to get
the pictures’ and also asked for an in-house ultrasound, which he was told
was not available
until the next day.
his letter to the Commission on 8 December 2015 Dr Horky stated, “I did
not think that a repeat ultrasound would change my
major decision to proceed to
surgery.” The letter from Dr Horky’s lawyers to the Commission dated
3 June 2016 states,
“Dr Horky did not order a repeat ultrasound as he did
not consider that Patient A’s pregnancy would have changed position
her ultrasound on 17 July 2015 and he believed that a hysteroscopy was necessary
to exclude a uterine pregnancy.”
letter to the Commission from Dr Horky’s lawyers dated 21 March 2017
acknowledges that Dr Horky should have requested an
ultrasound and states
“it is not known whether an urgent ultrasound could have been performed on
Patient A if Dr Horky had
requested one.”
asked about his earlier correspondence with the Commission in which no mention
is made of his enquiries with the chief ED doctor,
Dr Horky replied that he
didn’t expect to be questioned in detail about this matter, he did not
think it was relevant and did
not write everything down. When asked if he had
told his lawyers about the enquiry, he gave inconsistent evidence stating first
he did discuss this with his lawyers, but also stating that he could not
recall such a discussion.
Expert evidence
Giltrap, Dr Pesce and Dr Cooper agreed that the ultrasound performed on 17 July
2015 was ambiguous. Dr Giltrap was of the view
that it reported a uterine
pregnancy that was eccentrically positioned, but he agreed there was a need for
clarification once the
suspicion of an interstitial pregnancy was raised. Dr
Pesce stated that the there was doubt about the position of the pregnancy and
would approach the ultrasound report with a high degree of suspicion.
light of the ambiguity, it was also agreed that there was a need to perform
another ultrasound on Patient A. Dr Cooper said it
was preferable to obtain
another ultrasound and Dr Pesce told the Committee that Dr Horky made a mistake
in not arranging a repeat
ultrasound.
Giltrap stated that Dr Horky’s failure to arrange a repeat ultrasound on
20 July 2015 was significantly below the appropriate
Cooper stated,
“His performance is below what would be
reasonably expected although I believe there are mitigating circumstances. I do
believe his departure from the standard was significantly below that
standard. I do not believe his decision-making was clinically
inappropriate. A
reasonable standard would be to have repeated the ultrasound
examination.”
his written report dated 7 October 2018 Dr Pesce put forward a view similar to
Dr Cooper. However, in his oral evidence Dr Pesce
stated that if Dr Horky did
not consider or enquire about an ultrasound then his conduct is significantly
below the appropriate standard.
Pesce and Dr Giltrap agreed that when a practitioner is working as a locum it is
his responsibility to make enquiries to inform
himself of the available
services. Dr Giltrap stated that based on his experience in rural practice it
could be expected that a
good ultrasound service would be available at
Shoalhaven District Hospital.
into account Dr Horky’s admissions and the other available evidence, the
Committee is comfortably satisfied that the
factual matters alleged in
Particular 1 are proven.
Horky acknowledges that he should have performed a repeat ultrasound after
assessing Patient A at 12 noon on 20 July 2015. He acknowledges
that a repeat
ultrasound could assist in the diagnosis of an intrauterine pregnancy and in
determining the exact location of Patient
A’s pregnancy.
Horky did not organise an ultrasound and Dr Giltrap’s view is that his
failure to do so was significantly below the appropriate
standard. Dr Cooper
criticises Dr Horky’s conduct as below what would be reasonably expected,
but considers there may be mitigating
factors in Patient A’s presentation.
Dr Pesce’s assessment focuses on whether on not Dr Horky enquired about
and attempted
to arrange an ultrasound.
Horky’s evidence about such an attempt is inconsistent. His letters
written in December 2015, June 2016 and March 2017 do
not refer to a
conversation with an ED doctor enquiring about an ultrasound. In fact they
explain why Dr Horky did not consider an
ultrasound to be needed.
Commission submits that Dr Horky is not a witness of good credit and reliability
and in relation to this issue the Committee accepts
that submission. There is no
evidence in the clinical record to support Dr Horky’s contention that he
enquired about an ultrasound
on the 20 July 2015. His oral evidence at the
hearing is not consistent with his earlier written statements.
his assertion that he did not expect to be questioned in detail about this
matter is difficult to accept given that Dr Horky
was aware that his failure to
repeat the ultrasound was a key aspect of Patient A’s complaint and his
previous appearance before
another Professional Standards Committee in January
2005 would have acquainted him with the complaint process.
Committee does not accept that Dr Horky made attempts to organise a repeat
ultrasound for Patient A. Even if he had spoken once
to an ED doctor, he made no
further inquiries of either the ED staff or the radiology service. The Committee
concurs with the opinions
expressed by Dr Giltrap and Dr Pesce and is
comfortably satisfied that Dr Horky’s conduct in relation to Particular 1
constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
2 deals with the failure to perform a repeat ultrasound prior to Patient
A’s surgery. It alleges:
The practitioner failed to perform a repeat vaginal ultrasound on Patient
A before performing surgery on Patient A on 20 July 2015
in the following
circumstances:
circumstances outlined in particular 1(a) – (f);
A was not shocked;
A was not at urgent risk such that surgery, including dilation and curettage and
a left salpingectomy, needed to be undertaken
without definitive and relatively
quick diagnostic tests such as vaginal ultrasound;
practitioner intended instead to perform a hysteroscopy including to exclude
possible intra-uterine pregnancy in circumstances
where a gestational sac
located within the corneal or interstitial region of the uterus may not be
demonstrated at hysteroscopy
Horky’s evidence
Horky accepts Particular 2 (a) to the extent he accepted Particular 1(a) –
(f). He accepts Particular 2 (b) as he agrees
Patient A was not shocked but
states that she was in severe pain.
his statement dated 16 October 2018 Dr Horky denies 2 (c). He states that based
on the patient’s clinical presentation, especially
the pain she was
experiencing, he formed the view that he should not wait to perform surgery.
in his oral evidence Dr Horky acknowledged that the surgery was not urgent. He
described it as an elective decision. He
said he was reassured by the fact that
the patient’s abdomen was soft, but he felt that her pain was a very
important consideration.
Dr Horky stated that he took a history of the
patient’s pain but did not record it in his notes. He said she wanted the
to deal with the pain.
Horky’s notes in relation to Patient A at midday on 20 July 2015
Presented to emergency with abdominal pain
ultrasound - suggestive of corneal pregnancy
Pain is becoming worse - controlled with IV morphine
General condition stable
abdomen soft
past history ruptured ectopic with salpingectomy.
Horky saw Patient A again at 3 pm. He said he spent the intervening time dealing
with other patients and researching interstitial
pregnancy. At 3 pm he made the
decision to proceed to surgery without a further examination.
relation to Particular 2(d), Dr Horky told the Committee he considered Patient A
might have a uterine pregnancy or an interstitial
pregnancy. In the absence of
an ultrasound he decided to perform a hysteroscopy as a diagnostic tool to
exclude a possible intrauterine
relation to the urgency of the surgery, the expert witnesses discussed Patient
A’s clinical indications. Her abdomen was
soft. She was not in shock. Her
vital signs were stable. Dr Giltrap said that Patient A’s clinical
condition indicated she
was pregnant and had undiagnosed pain, which needed to
be investigated. Dr Pesce explained when an ectopic pregnancy results in pain.
He said Patient A was in pain but otherwise stable and so it was important to
perform another ultrasound to get more information.
Pesce and Dr Giltrap also agreed that if the radiologist had a high degree of
suspicion of an ectopic interstitial pregnancy, then
it is likely an immediate
referral to hospital on 17 July 2015 would have occurred.
A reported pain at a significant level and her pain had been treated with
morphine. Dr Pesce stated that a history of ongoing
pain would give rise to
concern about the chance of another ectopic pregnancy. However it was agreed
that pain is a subjective matter
and is not in itself diagnostic of an ectopic
Cooper told the Committee the fact that Patient A had previously had an ectopic
pregnancy increased her risk of having another
ectopic pregnancy. Dr Pesce and
Dr Giltrap agreed. However Dr Cooper stated an ectopic pregnancy does not
increase the risk of having
an interstitial pregnancy. Dr Cooper stated that
the risk of rupture of an interstitial pregnancy at 6 weeks is not high.
generally arise later with interstitial pregnancy, after 8 weeks or
sometimes after 12 weeks gestation.
Cooper said there was no emergency in Patient A’s case. She was not
haemodynamically compromised, there was time to get further
information and
accordingly there was no need for immediate surgery. Dr Cooper stated that even
if Patient A had an interstitial
pregnancy that would not necessarily mean there
was an immediate need to operate.
Cooper criticised Dr Horky’s conduct, in proceeding to surgery without a
repeat ultrasound, as below what would be reasonably
expected, but considered
there may have been mitigating factors in Patient A’s clinical
presentation.
Pesce proffered a similar view in his written report, but in oral evidence
acknowledged that Dr Horky had three hours, between
12 noon and 3 pm, to attempt
to organise an ultrasound and if he did not make such an attempt, then his
conduct is significantly
below the appropriate standard.
Giltrap’s view is that there was no urgent need to perform surgery and Dr
Horky’s decision to undertake surgery without
having further definitive
diagnostic tests performed was significantly below the expected standard.
relation to Particular 2 (d) and Dr Horky’s decision to perform a
hysteroscopy, both Dr Pesce and Dr Giltrap stated that
an ultrasound, rather
than hysteroscopy, is the standard way to assess for uterine
Cooper also said that hysteroscopy is not the frontline investigation in these
circumstances. He considered laparoscopy to be more
appropriate. However he said
that while hysteroscopy wasn’t a common or accepted procedure in the
circumstances, it didn’t
cause any problems for Patient A. It was not
completely inappropriate, but it did not help in Patient A’s case.
Giltrap stated that it is very unusual to perform a hysteroscopy in the first
trimester. The risk of miscarriage is significant
and this would need to be
discussed with the patient. Dr Pesce stated that hysteroscopy is not usually
undertaken for a uterine pregnancy,
but was not strongly critical given there
was a suspicion of an ectopic pregnancy and no ultrasound to provide further
information.
Horky has made significant admissions in relation to Particular 2 and the
Committee is satisfied that the factual matters alleged
in that Particular are
Committee is also comfortably satisfied that Dr Horky’s failure to
organise a repeat vaginal ultrasound for Patient A prior
to undertaking surgery
is significantly below the appropriate standard.
was no urgent need for surgery for Patient A. She was haemodynamically stable
and not in shock. She was in pain and the exact
location of her pregnancy was
unclear. A repeat ultrasound should have been undertaken to provide more
information about the pregnancy
and assess the cause of her pain. There was
ample time to make arrangements for such an ultrasound, but there is no evidence
Dr Horky attempted to do so.
Horky says his decision to operate was based on Patient A’s pain, however
there is no evidence to show that he took a proper
history of her pain or
investigated it causes.
relatively rarity of interstitial pregnancy and the fact that Dr Horky had never
dealt with such a problem before, would require
him to perform as comprehensive
an assessment as possible. He said he consulted some textbooks, but didn’t
who may have had greater experience. As the
patient’s condition was stable and the best evidence is that an
interstitial pregnancy
is unlikely to rupture at such an early gestation, he had
time to undertake a more thorough investigation and to consult more widely.
patient may have been in a difficult emotional state, but Dr Horky is a very
experienced doctor and should have been able to
take such factors into
Commission submits that it was not reasonable for Dr Horky to proceed to surgery
based only on the ultrasound report dated 17
July 2015. It is also submitted
that there was no emergency which would have prevented a further ultrasound
being performed. Having
considered the evidence of all three experts, the
Committee accepts this submission.
Committee considers that Dr Horky’s conduct in this regard constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 3
“The practitioner exercised inappropriate surgical decision making
concerning Patient A’s surgery on 20 July 2015 in that:
practitioner intended on performing dilation and curettage in circumstances
where an intra-uterine pregnancy was shown on the
17 July 2015
ultrasound;
practitioner failed to first perform a laparoscopy before performing a
laparotomy and/or dilatation and curettage;
practitioner removed Patient A’s remaining fallopian tube in circumstances
where the practitioner did not excise an obvious
ectopic pregnancy in or near
the fallopian tube
practitioner failed to detect and/or diagnose an intra-uterine
Dr Horky’s evidence
relation to Particular 3 (a) Dr Horky does not consider that an intrauterine
pregnancy was confirmed by the ultrasound on 17 July
2015 or detected at
hysteroscopy. He says he performed the dilatation and curettage (D&C) to
remove the decidual lining of the
uterus, which can cause prolonged bleeding
after treatment of an ectopic pregnancy.
relation to Particular 3 (b) Dr Horky admits that he did not perform a
laparoscopy before performing the laparotomy. He said that
he was more
comfortable performing the laparotomy and he believed it was appropriate, as it
would exclude possible risks associated
with laparoscopy, including the
possibility of hitting a blood vessel.
his oral evidence Dr Horky said that Patient A had had pelvic inflammatory
disease in the past and so he was concerned about adhesions.
He acknowledged he
had not mentioned pelvic inflammatory disease previously, as ‘it was only
important for him to know about
relation to Particular 3 (c) Dr Horky acknowledges that he did remove Patient
A’s fallopian tube. His Operation Report states,
“No blood in abdomen
Small pregnancy at isthmus
left tube and pregnancy removed
cornual area explored and oversewn
minor troublesome bleeding - haemostasis secured”
cross-examination it was suggested to Dr Horky that his surgical decision making
was premised on an assumption that Patient A had
an ectopic pregnancy and that
he had failed to fully consider the possibility of a uterine pregnancy. Dr
Horky’s evidence was
somewhat unclear. He initially asserted that he did
consider the possibility of a uterine pregnancy and that he discussed this with
Patient A. He acknowledged that his clinical notes do not reflect this thinking
or such a discussion. He was also unable to explain
why his discussion or
consideration of a uterine pregnancy is not mentioned in any of his earlier
written correspondence with the
Commission.
Horky was asked about his letter to the Commission dated 8 December 2015 in
which he said, ”Prior to my intervention I clearly
explained to her that
there was no chance of the pregnancy continuing to term.” He stated that
this statement was not correct
and had been written without due consideration.
He acknowledged that he had not corrected this error in later
correspondence.
later evidence Dr Horky indicated that his view was that Patient A had a
non-viable interstitial pregnancy. Given the suggestion
in the ultrasound report
and the level of Patient A’s pain, he considered she did not have a normal
uterine pregnancy.
relation to Particular 3 (d) Dr Horky admits he failed to detect and/or diagnose
an intra-uterine pregnancy.
Particular 3 (a)
Giltrap, Dr Pesce and Dr Cooper agreed that the ultrasound performed on 17 July
2015 was ambiguous. Dr Giltrap’s view was
that it reported a uterine
pregnancy that was eccentrically positioned, but he agreed that it also
indicated the suspicion of an
interstitial pregnancy.
Giltrap’s opinion was that the hysteroscopy did not show an empty uterus
and material consistent with a uterine pregnancy
may be visible. Dr Pesce was
unable to come to a view based on the images from the
hysteroscopy.
Pesce and Dr Giltrap do not consider a D&C to be appropriate if there is the
possibility of a uterine pregnancy. Dr Pesce stated
that if a patient has had an
ectopic pregnancy removed then it is not uncommon to perform a D&C to
minimise bleeding.
Particular 3 (b)
Pesce and Dr Giltrap agreed that usual practice would be to perform a
laparoscopy prior to going to a laparotomy. Dr Pesce said
a laparoscopy would
allow better visualisation of the uterus, unless they were a great many
adhesions. Dr Giltrap agreed that a laparoscope
allowed for better
visualisation. He also considered that the risk of adhesions to be low and that
they could be dealt with laparoscopically,
if necessary.
Cooper stated that laparoscopy would be the usual approach and that laparotomy
was not a first-line treatment. He agreed that ectopic
pregnancy was not usually
associated with adhesions, but he was not critical of Dr Horky performing a
laparotomy. He said that it
depends on the surgeon’s skill and the
available equipment.
Particular 3 (c)
Giltrap told the Committee that the operation report refers to the removal of an
ectopic pregnancy but the histopathology report,
received after the operation,
indicated that Patient A did not have a ectopic
Particular 3 (d)
the experts agree and Dr Horky accepts that he failed to detect and diagnose an
intrauterine pregnancy. Dr Cooper considers this
was not below the relevant
standard, but Dr Giltrap is strongly critical and states that this failure was
significantly below the
appropriate
on Dr Horky’s admissions and the available evidence, the Committee finds
the factual matters alleged in Particular 3 proven.
3 deals with Dr Horky’s surgical decision making. The Commission submits
that Dr Horky intended on performing a D&C
for Patient A in circumstances
where ultrasound evidence indicated only a suspicion of an interstitial
pregnancy and otherwise referred
to an intrauterine pregnancy of eccentric
location. Whichever way the ultrasound is considered, ambiguity about the
location of the
pregnancy remained, which meant that the possibility of an
intrauterine pregnancy remained and in his evidence Dr Horky stated he
cognisant of such a possibility.
of the expert witnesses could conclude, on the evidence of the pictures taken at
hysteroscopy, that Dr Horky had conclusively
excluded an intrauterine pregnancy,
but he nevertheless proceeded to D&C. It would appear that his reasoning,
based on his presumptive
diagnosis, was that the D&C would reduce the
uterine lining thickness and as a result reduce post-operative vaginal bleeding.
any event, Dr Horky intended to perform a D&C on Patient A without the site
of the pregnancy being clearly identified. The
Committee accepts the expert
evidence that a D&C is not appropriate in these
circumstances.
the experts are in agreement that a laparoscopy would usually be performed
before a laparotomy in Patient A’s circumstances,
they are not strongly
critical of Dr Horky’s approach, although his justification for
laparotomy, based on the possibility
of adhesions, was not endorsed by the
experts. The Committee accepts this position.
is of more concern is that during the surgical procedure Dr Horky considered he
had removed an ectopic pregnancy that in fact
did not exist. He also failed to
detect and diagnose an intrauterine pregnancy. The Commission submits that Dr
Horky demonstrated
poor surgical decision-making, care and judgement in that he
removed Patient A’s fallopian tube without excising an obvious
pregnancy. In other words he caused her to lose her fallopian tube without any
Committee accepts this submission and considers that Dr Horky’s conduct,
as described in Particulars 3 (a), (c) and (d),
constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 4
4 relates to inappropriate prescribing and alleges:
“The practitioner inappropriately ordered Methotrexate for Patient A
on 21 July 2015 hours in the following circumstances:
practitioner had inadequate evidence of an interstitial pregnancy before
ordering the Methotrexate;
practitioner did not wait for the post-operative histopathology report before
ordering the methotrexate or in the alternative
failed to have proper regard to
the results of the histopathology report dated 20 July
practitioner did not first perform a vaginal ultrasound to determine if there
was an interstitial pregnancy rather than an intrauterine
pregnancy or to
otherwise determine Patient A’s post-operative pregnancy
Dr Horky’s evidence
Horky denies Particular 4 (a). He states that he was not certain that an
interstitial pregnancy had been fully removed and so
he requested Methotrexate
to destroy any remaining placental tissue.
4 (b) is denied and is no longer pressed by the Commission.
Horky admits the factual aspects of Particular 4 (c) and accepts that with the
benefit of hindsight he should have performed an
ultrasound.
Expert evidence
Giltrap and Dr Pesce agreed that the information available to Dr Horky provided
no objective evidence of an interstitial pregnancy
for Patient A.
Pesce said that usually Methotrexate would only be prescribed if there was
concern about the possibility of pregnancy tissue being
missed or remaining
after a procedure. He agreed that the report of the operation did not refer to
this concern.
Giltrap stated that he could not understand why Methotrexate was prescribed. He
said that the tube and the pregnancy had been removed.
If there was doubt about
that and the histopathology report was not yet available then an ultrasound
could be performed to see if
it revealed any remaining pregnancy. Other
investigations, such as serial HCGs, would also be helpful.
Cooper said he would investigate further prior to prescribing Methotrexate.
Whether Patient A had an ectopic or interstitial pregnancy
would usually be very
obvious and it would be better to get an ultrasound for more information before
using Methotrexate.
on Dr Horky’s admissions and the available evidence, the Committee finds
the factual matters alleged in Particular 4 (a)
Committee accepts the evidence of the expert witnesses and considers that Dr
Horky’s conduct in relation to Particular 4
constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 5
The practitioner’s overall management of Patient A was inappropriate
in the following circumstances:
or more of particulars 1 to 4 above;
management of Patient A lead to or materially contributed to her being
sterilised by having her only fallopian tube excised and/or
having a viable
intrauterine pregnancy terminated.
is no dispute that Patient A was rendered infertile after the procedure
performed by Dr Horky as her remaining fallopian tube
was removed.
is also no dispute that an intrauterine pregnancy was
terminated.
letter from Dr Horky’s lawyers to the Commission dated 21 March 2017
“Dr Horky was undertaking a locum placement at the Hospital when he
was asked to see Patient A. Dr Horky had not encountered
a cornual pregnancy
previously. Dr Horky endeavoured at all times to provide Patient A with the
highest standard of care, having
regard to the risk of severe haemorrhage if her
suspected interstitial pregnancy ruptured. With the benefit of hindsight Dr
says that he should have requested an urgent ultrasound for Patient A
before proceeding to hysteroscopy.”
Committee is satisfied that the factual matters alleged in Particular 5 are
Horky's overall management is significantly below that expected of a senior
obstetrician and gynaecologist. He failed to take an
adequate history or perform
a thorough examination of Patient A. It appears he made a presumptive diagnosis
of interstitial pregnancy
based on an equivocal ultrasound report, without
seeking confirmatory evidence of this diagnosis by obtaining a further
ultrasound,
when this facility was available. He did not make adequate attempts
to determine the availability of an ultrasound service. As a
senior doctor
with his extensive experience, including experience as a rural locum, he should
not have accepted at face value that
there was no ultrasound available.
the basis of this unproven diagnosis he undertook a number of surgical
procedures that failed to locate the pregnancy and which
resulted in the loss of
the pregnancy and the loss of Patient A's fertility. His prescribing of
Methotrexate was cavalier and ill
the difficult circumstances in which Dr Horky found himself, in a short term
locum, without junior staff and faced with a
difficult clinical situation of
which he had no prior experience, his conduct in relation to Patient A was
rushed and poorly considered
and for a practitioner of his experience would
constitute unsatisfactory professional conduct.
6 relates to Dr Horky’s knowledge and judgement as a specialist
obstetrician and gynaecologist. It alleges:
The practitioner expressed the view in a letter through his solicitors
dated 3 June 2016 and by letter dated 21 March 2017 that he
believed Patient A
had expelled a partial interstitial pregnancy following his operation on 20 July
2015 which subsequently attached
into the uterine cavity as an explanation for
the finding of a viable pregnancy by ultrasound on 22 July 2015. The
practitioner’s
view was inappropriate in the following
circumstances:
practitioner lacked adequate evidence or scientific basis for his expressed
results of the ultrasound report of 17 July 2015;
histopathology report of 20 July 2015;
results of the 22 July 2015 ultrasound;
records of the patient’s operation and hospital admission at The Royal
Women’s Hospital including the ultrasound report
and operation reports of
24 July 2015.
Dr Horky’s evidence
his written statement dated 16 October 2018 Dr Horky states,
The suggestion that a pregnancy could pass from the cornu to the
uterine cavity was a hypothesis used to explain my failure to detect
intrauterine pregnancy at hysteroscopy and my failure to remove a corneal
pregnancy. It was not a statement of fact and I accept
that it was not based on
scientific reasoning. This comment was made following receipt of Patient
A’s complaint at which time
I was distressed and found it hard to believe
the allegation that I may have failed to detect a pregnancy. On reflection and
further review of the medical literature, I accept that my hypothesis
was incorrect.”
Expert evidence
Giltrap states there is no historical evidence that it is possible to expel an
interstitial pregnancy which would then attach into
the uterine cavity. He says
“this is pure conjecture and I believe this conjecture below the standard
that one would expect
from a fellow of our college. I am strongly critical of
this as a response.”
Pesce states,
“There is no literature I can find which describes such a successful
reimplantation of a dislodged ectopic pregnancy. It is
my opinion that Dr Horky
will be unable to produce any evidence to support his view..... In my opinion Dr
Horky’s explanation
is not a reasonable explanation for a specialist
obstetrician and gynaecologist, and reflects an understanding below the standard
expected. If, upon reflection Dr Horky continues to hold that view then in my
opinion it reflects a departure significantly below
the standard
Cooper states,
“Dr Horky’s assessment represents a failure to understand the
physiology of pregnancy ......his assessment is below what
would be reasonably
expected. His departure from the standard was significantly below that standard
although I do not believe strong
criticism is
warranted.”
on Dr Horky’s admission the Committee is satisfied that the factual
matters alleged in Particular 6 are proven.
Cooper states that Dr Horky’s assessment represents a failure to
understand of the physiology of pregnancy and is significantly
reasonably expected standard. Dr Pesce states that Dr Horky’s explanation
is not a reasonable one for a specialist
obstetrician and gynaecologist and if
he continues to hold this view, it represents a significant departure from the
expected standard.
Dr Giltrap is similarly strongly critical of Dr
Horky’s comments.
Committee accepts the evidence of the expert witnesses that Dr Horky’s
knowledge and judgement, as described in Particular
6, is significantly below
the standard expected of a specialist obstetrician and gynaecologist. The
Committee notes Dr Pesce comments
and also notes that while Dr Horky
acknowledged the deficiencies in his view in his statement dated 16 October
2018, he maintained
that view for some period of time as evidenced in
correspondence dated June 2016 and March 2017.
Committee is comfortably satisfied that Dr Horky’s conduct as described in
Particular 6 constitutes unsatisfactory professional
Which, if any, of the Particulars of the Complaint
are proven to the comfortable satisfaction of the Committee?
Horky has admitted many of the factual matters alleged in the Particulars. The
Commission no longer presses Particular 4 (b).
on Dr Horky’s admissions and the available evidence, the Committee finds
all of the Particulars, excluding Particular
4(b), to be
Does the proven conduct amount to unsatisfactory
professional conduct?
is agreement amongst the expert witnesses that many aspects of Dr Horky’s
conduct in relation to the treatment and management
of Patient A was below a
reasonable standard. The expert witnesses were not in complete agreement about
the extent to which Dr Horky’s
conduct falls below that standard.
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is conduct which is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of
an equivalent level of training or
experience.
Horky has been a medical practitioner for over 50 years, a specialist
obstetrician and gynaecologist for 45 years and he has performed
locum work for
the last 14 years. He is a senior member of the profession and his conduct
should be evaluated accordingly.
Committee consists of not only a legal chairperson and a lay member, but two
specialist obstetricians and gynaecologists. As an
expert peer review body, the
Committee is able to bring its own knowledge and expertise to a consideration of
the evidence of Dr
Horky and the views and opinions expressed by the expert
of the Commission’s submissions have been referred to above. In essence,
the Commission submits that “Dr Horky
aggressively pursued surgery and did
not act in the patient’s best interests.”
Horky ‘s submissions emphasise that while there may be agreement about his
professional conduct falling below the relevant
standard, the question in these
proceedings is whether his conduct is significantly below that standard. It is
submitted that once
the initial error was made about the nature and location of
Patient A’s pregnancy, the ongoing management based on that error
reasonable. “Once it was concluded by Dr Horky that what he was doing with
was likely an interstitial pregnancy, the management
decisions then subsequently
made, make sense.” For this reason his conduct can be understood as below,
but not significantly
below standard.
Horky also cautions against ‘hindsight bias’ and notes that the
Committee’s decision must relate to an evaluation
of his conduct and
decision making at the time he assessed and treated Patient A.
Committee’s view of Dr Horky’s overall management of Patient A has
been set out in relation to Particular 5 above.
Dr Horky made an incomplete
assessment of Patient A. The ultrasound performed on Patient A on 17 July 2015
was ambiguous and when
she was initially assessed by Dr Horky the nature and
location of her pregnancy remained unclear. He did not perform a repeat
either after assessing Patient A or prior to performing surgery on
her. He failed to do so despite the fact that ultrasound was available
had time to arrange one, prior to what he described as elective rather than
urgent surgery.
Committee does not accept that Dr Horky’s initial errors mitigate the
inadequacies in his later surgical decision-making.
He performed a hysteroscopy
to detect or exclude an intrauterine pregnancy and believes that he excluded a
normally nidated pregnancy
although this is not clearly demonstrated on the
intraoperative photographs. He performed a dilatation and curette when the site
of the pregnancy was unclear. He performed a laparotomy as a diagnostic
procedure when a laparoscopy would have been the accepted
practice, although his
reasons for doing so are not unreasonable. He then removed Patient A’s
remaining tube convinced that
the pregnancy was in the isthmus of the tube (when
this possibility had not been suggested on the ultrasound) and unnecessarily
a wedge resection of the uterine cornua to remove the interstitial
part of the tube.
prescribed Methotrexate, again without undertaking appropriate investigations
and he made assertions about the pregnancy moving
from the patient’s tube
and relocating and reattaching in her uterus.
investigations were incomplete, his management plan was inappropriate and
Patient A lost her pregnancy and was rendered infertile.
these reasons and the reasons explained above, the Committee is satisfied that
Dr Horky’s conduct, as set out in Particulars
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 amounts
to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
What orders, if any,
should be made pursuant to the National Law?
considerations
is well established that the jurisdiction exercised by a Professional Standards
Committee is protective, not punitive. Disciplinary
proceedings are intended to
maintain proper professional standards, primarily for the protection of the
public but also for the protection
of the profession. The Committee has a role
in maintaining public confidence in the profession, and maintaining the
reputation of
the profession and orders of the Committee may operate to have a
general deterrent effect for other members of the profession.
relation to the relevant protective orders to be made, the Committee notes that
the powers available to it in this regard are set
out in section 146 (B) of the
National Law which provides as follows:
A Committee may do
one or more of the following:
or reprimand the practitioner;
that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s practising of the
practitioner’s profession, it considers appropriate
be imposed on the
practitioner’s registration;
that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric treatment or
counselling;
that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by the Committee;
that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice at the times,
in the way and to the persons specified by the
that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the management of the
practitioner’s practice, from the persons
specified by the
Additional evidence
Horky stated that after receiving the complaint from Patient A he stopped
performing abdominal surgery and stopped working as a
locum. He stated that his
intention is never to perform surgery or work as a locum again.
present Dr Horky is working as a consultant gynaecologist at Specialist Clinics
of Australia at Barangaroo. He works there one
day a week. He said he performs
procedures to tighten post-birth vaginas and also treat stress incontinence.
Horky also works as a gynaecologist one day per week at the Wollongong Family
Planning clinic and one day a month in Griffith where
he is involved in a
uro-gynaecology clinic. He stated that all his current work is gynaecological in
Dr Horky said he does perform minor surgical procedures, such as the insertion
of IUDs. Some patients at Barangaroo need minor surgical
procedures such as
excising scar tissue and re-suturing. He also occasionally performs terminations
at the Wollongong clinic.
Horky has no plans to retire at present and he wishes to continue with his
current practice arrangements.
Horky was asked about an earlier Professional Standards Committee, in 2005,
after which he was cautioned to keep more accurate
and fulsome medical records.
He acknowledged he had been cautioned in relation to his clinical notes, and
that he had not been careful
or cautious when making notes in relation to
Horky told the Committee that he was shocked when he received the complaint. He
said he felt devastated that he did not diagnose
the uterine pregnancy and that
he had failed to arrange the ultrasound. When asked why he felt he had made
these mistakes, he said
he didn’t realise an ultrasound could be done and
he was unduly impressed by Patient A’s pain and worried that she might
have a catastrophic bleed.
also felt that in making the complaint, Patient A was influenced by her family,
especially the mother, and possibly for cultural
reasons. He said she did not
express any dissatisfaction when he last saw
Submissions
Commission submits that Dr Horky has not acknowledged that his conduct was
significantly below the appropriate standard. He has
attempted to minimise his
conduct and reconstruct his evidence and has failed to demonstrate insight into
his unsatisfactory conduct
and the distress he created for Patient A.
Commission has proposed that Dr Horky be reprimanded and that a number of
conditions be imposed on his registration.
of the proposed conditions relate to Dr Horky’s employment. It is proposed
that he not work as a locum practitioner; that
he not work as the only
obstetrician/gynaecologist in a hospital or day surgery; that he not perform any
major gynaecological surgery
and that before performing minor gynaecological
surgery on a pregnant patient, he consult with another specialist obstetrician
gynaecologist.
Horky acknowledges that a reprimand would be appropriate if his conduct is found
to constitute unsatisfactory professional conduct.
raises is no objection to the proposal that he not work as a locum practitioner,
but submits that the other proposed employment
conditions are unnecessarily
restrictive and may unfairly limit the work he is able to
is also proposed that a number of information sharing conditions be imposed on
Dr Horky’s registration so that the Medical
Council is informed of the
facilities where he is working and when any change to the nature or place of his
practice occurs. Dr Horky
does not oppose these
conditions.
Committee accepts the Commission’s submission that Dr Horky aggressively
pursued surgery and did not act in the patient’s
best interests. For no
justifiable reason he made an incomplete assessment of Patient A. He did not
give due consideration to the
possibility that she may have an intrauterine
pregnancy. Dr Horky’s clinical judgment was flawed, as was his surgical
making. He performed a hysteroscopy and a laparotomy, neither of which
reflect accepted practice. More importantly, he removed Patient
remaining fallopian tube without any benefit to her and failed to diagnose or
detect an existing intrauterine pregnancy.
He also inappropriately prescribed
Methotrexate without suitable investigation.
Committee considers that Dr Horky was not frank and open in his evidence to the
Committee. Nor has he been able to recognise the
full extent of his
responsibility for the ill judged nature and unfortunate outcome of Patient
A’s management and treatment.
Committee considers it appropriate in all these circumstances to reprimand Dr
Horky in the strongest possible terms.
Committee also considers it appropriate to place conditions on Dr Horky’s
registration. The conditions are designed to protect
the public and to maintain
public confidence in the standards of the profession. The practice conditions
will prevent Dr Horky from
working as a locum practitioner or working alone as
an obstetrician/gynaecologist.
Horky has told the Committee that he no longer undertakes any obstetric work and
his practice is now entirely gynaecological.
The practice conditions do not
prevent Dr Horky from undertaking minor gynaecological procedures, but he should
not undertake major
gynaecological surgery, including major abdominal surgery.
Nor should he perform laparoscopic surgery or surgical termination of
Committee considers that this Complaint demonstrates significant deficiencies in
Dr Horky’s professional, clinical and interpersonal
management of
pregnancy and he should no longer perform any surgical procedures on pregnant
conditions, including the audit condition, are imposed to enable appropriate
monitoring of the imposed conditions. The restrictions
described above be
imposed on his practice from the time of issuing of this decision and any
facility in which he is to practice
surgery should be informed of these
restriction and the limits to his scope of
DETERMINATION AND ORDERS
Dr Horky is hereby reprimanded in the strongest possible
Employment conditions
obtain Medical Council of NSW approval prior to changing the nature or place of
his practice.
practitioner is not to work as a locum practitioner.
practitioner must not be the only specialist obstetrician/gynaecologist onsite
in a hospital or day surgery at any time.
practitioner is not to perform any major gynaecological surgery (as defined by
RANZCOG guidelines). Nor is he to perform any laparoscopic
surgery, or surgical
termination of pregnancy.
7 days of the end of each calendar month, he is to provide the Medical Council
of NSW with a record of all surgery undertaken
in the last month. The record
must include the following:
date and time of each surgery;
item number;
patient's name;
nature of the surgical procedure;
place of the surgical procedure;
complications arising as a result of the procedure (and specifically advising of
any unplanned return to theatre and/or any post-operative
infection).
practitioner is not to perform any gynaecological surgery on a pregnant patient
or a patient who is likely to be pregnant, including
termination of pregnancy.
submit to an audit of his medical practice, by a random selection of his medical
records by a person or persons nominated by the
Medical Council of NSW
audit is to be held within 6 months from 16 April 2019 and subsequently as
required by the Council.
auditor(s) is to assess his compliance with good medical record keeping
standards and legislative requirements and compliance
with conditions
authorise the auditor(s) to provide the Council with a report on their
meet all costs associated with the audit(s) and any subsequent
7 days of 16 April 2019 the practitioner is to forward to the Medical Council of
NSW the details of all facilities where he
has admitting or visiting rights
including the name, address and contact details.
7 days of 16 April 2019 and again within 7 days of a change in the nature or
place of his practice, he is to provide a copy
of this decision and the full
conditions to: Medical Director, Director of Clinical Services, Principal of
practice, or his supervisor
or if none of the foregoing are available, any other
responsible senior medical practitioner in any place that he works as a medical
practitioner.
authorise and consent to any exchange of information between the Medical Council
of NSW and the Department of Human Services (Medicare
Australia) for the purpose
of monitoring compliance with these conditions.
REVIEW RIGHTS
Dr Horky has the right to appeal this decision to the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal.
An appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of the date of
these written reasons.
Dr Horky also has the right to seek a review by the Medical Council of NSW of
the Committee’s order to impose conditions. Should
principal place of practice be anywhere other than NSW at the time of seeking a
review of conditions, Dr Horky may
make an application for review to the
National Board.
NON-PUBLICATION ORDER
The non-publication order made on 19 October
2018 in respect of Patient A continues so that the name and address of that
this written statement of decision is not to be
DISTRIBUTION OF DECISION
A copy of this
written statement of decision will be provided to Dr Horky, the Commission, the
National Board and the complainant.
A/Prof Diane
Chairperson
16 April 2019
COMPLAINT HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW
The Health Care Complaints Commission of Level 13, 323
Castlereagh Street, Sydney, NSW, having consulted with the Medical Council
New South Wales in accordance with
sections 39(2)
and 9013(3) of the
Health Care
Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) ('the National Law');
HEREBY COMPLAINS
Dr Oscar Jose Horky of P0 Box 609 KIAMA NSW 2533, being a
medical practitioner registered under the National Law ("the
practitioner"),
Is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under section 13913(1)(a) of the National Law in that the
practitioner has:
in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of medicine is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
Each of the particulars of Complaint One
justifies a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct. In the alternative,
or more of the particulars are taken together, a finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct is justified concerning the overall
gynecological care and management by the practitioner of Patient A on 20 to 22
Background to Complaint
The practitioner
obtained his MBBS in 1966. In 1978 he was awarded Fellowship of the Royal
Australian College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists.
On 20 July 2015
the practitioner was the on−call Obstetrics and Gynaecology Consultant at
Shoalhaven District Memorial Hospital
(the hospital) and he was working as a
locum at the hospital.
PARTICULARS
practitioner assessed Patient A at the hospital on 20 July 2015 at 1200 hours
after she had obtained a vaginal ultrasound report
on 17 July 2015. The
practitioner failed to perform or arrange to be performed a repeat vaginal
ultrasound on Patient A following
his assessment of Patient A in circumstances
vaginal ultrasound report dated 17 July 2015 stated there was a suspicion of an
interstitial pregnancy but;
vaginal ultrasound report dated 17 July 2015 indicated that Patient A may have
an intra−uterine pregnancy;
growth at about 6 weeks gestation meant there could be significant changes in
the appearance of an vaginal ultrasound following
the 17 July 2015 ultrasound;
further vaginal ultrasound report could assist to detect and diagnose an
intra−uterine pregnancy;
further vaginal ultrasound could assist to define the location of the pregnancy
prior to making any decisions concerning surgery;
vaginal ultrasound service was available onsite at the hospital on 20 July 2015
up to 1230 hours and thereafter could be called
practitioner failed to perform a repeat vaginal ultrasound on Patient A before
performing surgery on Patient A on 20 July 2015
in the following
circumstances:
circumstances outlined in particular 1(a) − (f);
A was not shocked;
A was not at urgent risk such that surgery, including dilation and curettage and
a left salpingectomy, needed to be undertaken
without definitive and relatively
quick diagnostic tests which were available such as vaginal ultrasound;
practitioner intended instead to perform a hysterectomy including to exclude
possible intra−uterine pregnancy in circumstances
where a gestational sac
located within the corneal or interstitial region of the uterus may not be
demonstrated at hysterectomy.
practitioner exercised inappropriate surgical decision making concerning Patient
A's surgery on 20 July 2015 in that:
practitioner intended on performing dilation and curettage in circumstances
where an intra−uterine pregnancy was shown on
the 17 July 2015 ultrasound;
practitioner failed to first perform a laparoscopy before performing a
laparotomy and/or dilatation and curettage;
A removed Patient A's remaining fallopian tube in circumstances where the
practitioner did not excise an obvious ectopic pregnancy
in or near the
fallopian tube.
practitioner inappropriately ordered Methotrexate for Patient A on 21 July 2015
hours in the following circumstances:
practitioner had inadequate evidence of an interstitial pregnancy before
ordering the Methotrexate;
practitioner did not wait for the post−operative histopathology report
before ordering the methotrexate or in the alternative
failed to have proper
regard to the results of the histopathology report dated 20 July 2015;
practitioner did not first perform a vaginal ultrasound to determine if there
was an interstitial pregnancy rather than an intra
uterine pregnancy or to
otherwise determine Patient A's post−operative pregnancy
practitioner's overall management of Patient A was inappropriate in the
following circumstances:
or more of particulars 1 to 4 above;
management of Patient A lead to or materially contributed to her being
sterilised by having her only fallopian tube excised and/or
having a viable
intrauterine pregnancy terminated.
practitioner expressed the view in a letter through his solicitors dated 3 June
2016 that he believed Patient A had expelled a
partial interstitial pregnancy
following his operation on 20 July 2015 which subsequently attached into the
uterine cavity as an
explanation for the finding of a viable pregnancy by
ultrasound on 22 July 2015. The practitioner's view was inappropriate in the
following circumstances:
practitioner lacked adequate evidence or scientific basis for his expressed
results of the ultrasound report of 17 July 2015;
histopathology report of 20 July 2015;
results of the 22 July 2015 ultrasound;
records of the patient's operation and hospital admission at The Royal Women's
Hospital including the ultrasound report and operation
reports of 24 July
139B Meaning of “unsatisfactory professional conduct” of
registered health practitioner generally [NSW]
"Unsatisfactory
professional conduct"
of a registered health practitioner includes each of
the following-
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of
the practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
(b) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
provision of this Law, or the regulations under this Law
or under the NSW
regulations, whether or not the practitioner has been prosecuted for or
convicted of an offence in respect of the
contravention.
(c) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of-
(i) a condition to which the practitioner’s registration is subject;
(ii) an undertaking given to a National Board.
(d) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
decision or order made by a Committee or the Tribunal in
relation to the
practitioner.
(e) A contravention by the practitioner of
section 34A(4)
Care Complaints Act
(f) Accepting from a health service provider (or from another person on
behalf of the health service provider) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or
reward for-
(i) referring another person to the health service provider; or
(ii) recommending another person use any health service provided by the
health service provider or consult with the health service
provider in relation
to a health matter.
(g) Accepting from a person who supplies a health product (or from another
person on behalf of the supplier) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or
reward for recommending that another person use the health product, but does not
include accepting a benefit that
consists of ordinary retail conduct.
(h) Offering or giving a person a benefit as inducement, consideration or
reward for the person-
(i) referring another person to the registered health practitioner; or
(ii) recommending to another person that the person use a health service
provided by the practitioner or consult the practitioner
in relation to a health
(i) Referring a person to, or recommending that a person use or consult-
(i) another health service provider; or
(ii) a health service; or
(iii) a health product;
if the practitioner has a pecuniary interest in giving that referral or
recommendation, unless the practitioner discloses the nature
of the interest to
the person before or at the time of giving the referral or recommendation.
(j) Engaging in overservicing.
(k) Permitting an assistant employed by the practitioner (in connection with
the practitioner’s professional practice) who is
not a registered health
practitioner to attend, treat or perform operations on patients in respect of
matters requiring professional
discretion or skill.
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(i), a registered health
practitioner has a
"pecuniary interest"
in giving a referral or
recommendation-
(a) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
which the referral or recommendation relates is a public
company and the
practitioner holds 5% or more of the issued share capital of the company; or
(b) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
which the referral or recommendation relates is a private
company and the
practitioner has any interest in the company; or
(c) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
whom the referral or recommendation relates is a natural
person who is a partner
of the practitioner; or
(d) in any circumstances prescribed by the NSW regulations.
(3) For avoidance of doubt, a reference in this section to a referral or
recommendation that is given to a person includes a referral
or recommendation
that is given to more than one person or to persons of a particular
(4) In this section-
means money,
property or anything else of value.
"recommend"
a health product
includes supply or prescribe the health product.
includes sell.
146B General powers to caution,
reprimand, counsel etc [NSW]
(1) A Committee may do one or more of
the following in relation to a relevant health practitioner the subject of a
complaint referred
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b) direct that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s
practising of the practitioner’s profession, it considers
appropriate be
imposed on the practitioner’s registration;
(c) order that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric
treatment or counselling (including, but not limited to, psychological
counselling);
(d) order that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by
the Committee;
(e) order that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice
at the times, in the way and to the persons specified
by the Committee;
(f) order that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner’s practice, from the
persons specified by
the Committee.
(2) If the relevant health practitioner is not registered, a direction
may still be given under this section but has effect only so
as to require the
conditions concerned to be imposed when the health practitioner is
registered.
(3) If a Committee acting under this section makes an order
or directs that any condition be imposed on a health practitioner’s
registration, the Committee may order that a contravention of the order or
condition will result in the health practitioner’s
registration in the
health profession being cancelled.
(4) The order or condition concerned
"critical compliance order or condition"
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (0.982 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter