URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v King [2013] NSWMT 9 (6 February 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v King
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 9
Decision Date:
06 February 2013
Murrell SC DCJ
Dr C Berglund
Dr E Kertesz
1. Registration cancelled.
2. The practitioner may not apply for
review for 12 months.
3. The Tribunal should undertake any review.
practitioner is to pay the HCCC's costs.
5. Order 1 is to take effect in 28
Catchwords:
Protective orders to be made following finding of professional misconduct -
digital penetration- lack of insight- remorse- chaperone
condition - maintenance
of public confidence.
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law 2009 (NSW), s 149A, s
Cases Cited:
HCCC v King [2011] NSWMT 5
King v HCCC
[2011] NSWCA 353
Litchfield (1997) 41 NSWLR
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
Parajuli [2010] NSWMT 3
HCCC v Holmes [2010] NSWMT19
Richter v Walton
[1993] NSWCA 233
Health Care Complaints Commission v Wingate
[2007] NSWCA
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission
Dr Victor King
Representation
Ms K Eastman SC (HCCC)
Dr J Renwick SC (King)
- Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission
Wyatt Attorneys (King)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
The names of the patients and the partner of patient D are not to be
Tribunal is to determine what orders should be made in consequence of its
finding that Dr King, a registered medical practitioner,
(the practitioner) is
guilty of professional misconduct. Under s149A of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law
2009 (NSW) (the
National Law
) the Tribunal
has power to impose conditions on the practitioner's registration. Under s
149C(1)(b) of the
National Law
, the Tribunal may suspend the
practitioner's registration for a specified period or cancel the practitioner's
registration.
Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC) complained that, in the course of his
general practice at the Chinatown Medical Centre
between October 2007 and April
2008, the practitioner engaged in inappropriate intimate conduct with patients
B, C and D, inappropriately
managed patient C's wrist condition, and kept
inadequate records in relation to patients B and C.
May 2011, the Tribunal made the following findings:
56 The established particulars of complaint show that, over a period of seven
months from October 2007 to April 2008, the practitioner
inappropriate sexual conduct towards three young female patients. The behaviour
included inappropriate questioning about
the patients' sexual behaviour,
stroking the arm of patient C in an intimate way and offering to perform pap
smears. The most serious
misconduct involved the practitioner moving his finger
in and out of the vaginas of two patients. Apart from sexual impropriety,
practitioner demonstrated a low level of competence in relation to treatment of
patient C's right wrist injury, and kept inadequate
records in relation to
patients B and C.
57 Each of the particulars of complaint that the Tribunal finds established
constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct either
because it demonstrates
conduct significantly below a reasonable standard (section 36(1)(a)) or, in the
case of medical record keeping,
it involves a contravention of the Act or
regulations (section 36 (1) (b)).
58 In relation to patients B and D , each of the occasions of clinically
unjustified digital penetration amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct
of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension: s 37
Medical Practice
. Conduct of this nature is a grave departure from proper
standards. It involves a serious abuse of trust and breach of
practitioner/patient
boundaries. In this case, the conduct involved a violation
of patients who were particularly vulnerable because of their youth and
inexperience.
59 When all aspects of unsatisfactory professional conduct are considered,
they demonstrate professional misconduct that is both serious
multifaceted,
61 The practitioner continues to deny the most serious departures (those
involving sexual impropriety). He has demonstrated neither
insight nor remorse,
and has advanced no evidence that he has addressed the underlying problems.
62 As to odd behaviour such as asking patient B to hold the speculum and
suggesting that patient D's boyfriend wear gloves for digital
sex, the Tribunal
is unclear whether the behaviour was motivated by a desire for sexual
gratification or was the result of simple
ignorance. However, the combination of
odd behaviour, inappropriate sexual questioning and the two episodes of digital
penetration
causes considerable disquiet to the Tribunal.
reaching these findings, the Tribunal found that the practitioner was an
unreliable witness who gave the evidence that he thought
would best assist his
case: at [3]. The Tribunal was unimpressed by the practitioner's thinly
disguised attempts to taint the character
of his former patients: at
Tribunal directed that the practitioner be deregistered and ordered that there
be no application for review for a period of 18
practitioner appealed. On 22 November 2011, the Court of Appeal determined that,
in relation to the penalty of deregistration,
the practitioner had been denied
procedural fairness. The Court held that the Tribunal should have followed a two
stage procedure,
first publishing its findings on the issue of misconduct, and
then giving the parties an opportunity to adduce evidence in relation
appropriate consequential orders: per Handley AJA at [202] - [205], McColl JA
agreeing, Macfarlan JA not deciding. The Court
of Appeal set aside the
consequential orders of the Tribunal and remitted the matter to the Tribunal to
determine what consequential
orders should be made.
5 May 2011 and January 2012, the practitioner did not practice. Since January
2012, he has practised at Ashfield and Botany
medical centres. In accordance
with a condition that he is not to consult with female patients unless a
chaperone is present, the
practitioner has consulted only with male
Proceedings in November 2012
the matter resumed before the Tribunal on 14 November 2012, the practitioner
gave evidence that, since January 2012, he has accepted
the Tribunal's adverse
findings. He is no longer "in denial". He accepts that he acted inappropriately
towards three female patients,
and he accepts that his actions included
inappropriate sexual conduct with clinically unjustified digital penetration. He
his conduct. He has undertaken an ethics program through the St James
Ethics Centre. His current professional colleagues know of
the restraints upon
his practice and facilitate him seeing only male patients. He has a good working
relationship with his colleagues,
who respect him as a practitioner. His
colleagues (particularly his unofficial mentor, Dr Helena Berenson, and the
practice co -
director, Dr Elaine Hoang) provide helpful advice and support in
relation to communication skills and clinical matters. He has improved
record - keeping. He spends more time on record - making. He gives greater
attention to the development of patient management
plans. He has suffered grave
financial loss.
date, the practitioner has been unable to explain his inappropriate sexual
conduct (Exhibit 3, paragraph 6). He denies that the
conduct was sexually
motivated. In attempting to explain his conduct, the practitioner referred to
the fatigue associated with working
long hours, to deficient communication
skills, "clumsy" actions and making an "error of judgement". With the benefit of
he considers that he used to succumb to patient "wants" (rather than
addressing their "needs"). He used to confuse "sympathy" and
"empathy". He fell
into a "circle of anxiety".
Bruce Westmore, a psychiatrist whom the practitioner consulted on a medico-legal
basis, confirmed that the practitioner is distressed,
ashamed and embarrassed.
He gave evidence that the practitioner appears to be compliant and willing to
seek advice and accept practice
conditions. In Dr Westmore's opinion, the shame
and embarrassment associated with the proceedings, their impact on the
practitioner's
reputation, the fact that the practitioner has initiated
treatment by a psychiatrist, and the reduction in the practitioner's work
mean that the risk of recidivism is minimised. Dr Westmore agreed that the
practitioner's response to the complaints (inferentially,
his inability to
confront them) is probably influenced by cultural factors associated with the
practitioner's Malaysian background.
Westmore was concerned that the practitioner's insight into his conduct is
limited, albeit increasing. Dr Westmore was also concerned
that the practitioner
has limited insight into the impact of his conduct on the patients and fails to
appreciate the power imbalance
between a practitioner and his patients. Further,
the practitioner lacks insight into any conscious or unconscious sexual
of the conduct. It was Dr Westmore's opinion that the practitioner
required psychiatric counselling in relation to the "sexual component"
misconduct.
Dr Westmore's suggestion, the practitioner made an appointment with Dr O'Dea, a
specialist psychiatrist, for the purpose of addressing
the sexual component of
the practitioner's conduct. When the matter resumed before the Tribunal in
November 2012, the practitioner
had attended only one consultation with Dr
O'Dea. The practitioner was prepared to pursue treatment with Dr
heard evidence in November 2012, the Tribunal wished to ascertain the outcome of
psychiatric intervention. The Tribunal adjourned
the proceedings to 7 February
2013. The Tribunal directed that the practitioner serve any psychiatric report
by 24 December 2012
and any updating report by 25 January 2013. The HCCC was
directed to serve any draft conditions by 4 February 2013.
Evidence of Treating Psychiatrist
the resumed hearing on 7 February 2013, the practitioner tendered reports of Dr
O'Dea dated 3 January and 6 February 2013. Since
14 November 2012, the
practitioner has consulted Dr O'Dea on eight occasions.
his first report, Dr O'Dea stated:
27. I have not diagnosed Dr King
as suffering from a major psychiatric illness ...
28. In addition, I have not diagnosed him as suffering from a sexual disorder
29. However, at least some components of the complaints made by the female
patients, and the findings of the New South Wales Medical
Tribunal in relation
to the complaints, may point to at least specific problems with professional
sexual boundaries and may also
point to the potential for more specific
psychosexual problems.
30. I have agreed with Dr King to explore in a psychotherapeutic forum the
potential implications of these complaints for his sexuality
in general and his
management of professional sexual boundaries in particular ...
31. A significant component of the psychiatric treatment program will be to
endeavour to develop risk management strategies designed
to enable Dr King to
continue to practice medicine in a manner that would not place patients at undue
risk. The nature and adequacy
of such a risk management program will be
dependent on Dr King's progress through our treatment program that is currently
his second report, Dr O'Dea emphasised that he was reporting in the capacity of
a current treating psychiatrist. He noted that
the practitioner continued to
deny the potential for a sexual element to his conduct. Dr O'Dea expressed the
following opinions:
9. As above, Dr King has yet to demonstrate
significant progress over the past three sessions in addressing any potential
sexual element
to the complaints.
10. In my experience, it is not unusual that the potential imposition of
external sanctions inevitably complicates the process of
acknowledging and
addressing potential sexual problems in patients in similar circumstances to Dr
11. As such, it is difficult at this stage to explore and develop further
meaningful specific risk management strategies in relation
to the potential and
considered sexual element of Dr King's conduct in relation to the
complaints.
Dr O'Dea stated that he was prepared to continue psychiatric treatment.
Submissions
HCCC submitted that the Tribunal should cancel the practitioner's registration.
The Commission argued that it is essential that
a medical practitioner has
insight into the way in which his or her conduct may impact upon the
practitioner's patients. The practitioner
started from a "very low base" in
relation to level of insight and had far to go before the Tribunal could be
satisfied that he posed
no risk to patients. Until May 2012, the practitioner
had vigorously challenged the most serious aspects of the complaint. Inter
he remained of the view that "patient misunderstanding" (or his failure to
clearly communicate) had contributed to the patient
allegations.
HCCC submitted that it was inappropriate to impose a condition requiring ongoing
psychiatric treatment as part of a final order
because a condition that requires
a practitioner to submit to psychiatric assessment indicates that the Tribunal
has misgivings about
the practitioner's future behaviour:
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
HCCC submitted that the Tribunal should not impose conditions that, in effect,
restricted the practitioner to the treatment of
male patients only. The HCCC
submitted that a general practitioner should be competent and able to safely
practise with respect to
all patients, whether they are children or elderly
persons, and whether they are male or female. Further, the practitioner had
misconducted
himself in connection with routine procedures that a general
practitioner encounters when treating female patients in the course
general practice.
practitioner submitted that the Tribunal could order deregistration only if it
found that he was permanently unfit to practice,
and there was no evidence to
that effect.
submitted that, since May 2011, he had changed significantly. He now accepts the
Tribunal's findings. He is remorseful. He has
attempted to address relevant
issues by undertaking an ethics course and consulting with colleagues. He works
from 9 am to 5 pm and
is no longer fatigued. He is willing to comply with the
current restrictions on his practice (including the chaperone condition)
accept a mentor.
practitioner emphasised that the Tribunal had made no positive finding that he
had engaged in conduct for the purpose of sexual
gratification.
practitioner is willing to accept a registration condition that he be chaperoned
during consultations with women patients, a condition
that he continue
psychiatric treatment until his treating psychiatrist considered that he no
longer required treatment, and a condition
that he obtain a
Considerations
determining the appropriate consequential orders, the paramount consideration is
the protection of the health and safety of the
public: s 3A of the
Tribunal rejects the practitioner's submission that it may order deregistration
only if it finds that the practitioner is permanently
unfit to practise. The
health and safety of the public can only be protected if the Tribunal's decision
addresses current unfitness,
rather than limiting its consideration to permanent
there is a finding of professional misconduct, the Tribunal has a wide
discretion in relation to disposition of the complaint.
The circumstances of the
particular case will determine the appropriate disposition:
Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
per Basten JA at [67].
of the public is associated with the protection
of the profession:
. The protection of the health and safety of the public
encompasses a range of considerations. First, there may be a need to protect
public against further misconduct by a practitioner. Second, there is a need for
general deterrence. Third, the high professional
standards of the profession
must be reinforced and transgressions must be denounced. Fourth, public
confidence in the profession
must be maintained. Fifth, it may be desirable to
make available to the public any special skills possessed by a practitioner. It
may be that the circumstances of a particular matter require the Tribunal to
give greater weight to some of these considerations,
or to consider other
matters bearing on the health and safety of the public.
Re Dr Parajuli
[2010] NSW MT3, the Tribunal found that inappropriate
sexual conduct by a practitioner towards a patient constituted professional
misconduct. The Tribunal was concerned that the practitioner lacked complete
insight into the impact of his conduct on the patient
and found that the lack of
full insight meant that there was some risk of future patient/practitioner
boundary transgression: at
[35]. The considerations of reinforcing high
professional standards, denouncing transgressions, general deterrence and the
maintenance
of public confidence in the profession caused the Tribunal to direct
that the practitioner be deregistered and that there be no application
review for a period of six months.
at 639, the Court determined that a condition requiring that a
practitioner submit to psychiatric assessment was inappropriate in
a final order
because the condition suggested that the Tribunal had misgivings about the
practitioner's future behaviour and the
condition did nothing to protect the
public. It is true that in
HCCC v Holmes
[2010] NSWMT19 the Tribunal
merely suspended the practitioner from practising for a period of 12 months and
directed that he continue
to see his treating psychiatrist. However, in that
case, the Tribunal noted that there was an unusual combination of circumstances.
From the outset, the practitioner had acknowledged the misconduct. The Tribunal
concluded that, having had many consultations with
his treating psychiatrist,
the practitioner understood the gravity of his misconduct and was unlikely to
relation to whether it is appropriate to permit a practitioner to practise
subject to a female chaperone condition, in
at 639 the Court
referred with approval (albeit obiter) to the dissenting judgment of Priestley
Richter v Walton
[1993] NSWCA 233
, to the effect that the need to
impose such a condition of itself demonstrated unfitness to practise medicine.
However, that observation
is best seen as a response to the particular
circumstances under consideration. In the leading judgment
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Wingate
[2007] NSWCA 326
, Basten JA observed:
62 In relation to
care must be taken, as
the Commission recognised in its written submissions, in deriving a principle of
over-general application from
the circumstances of a particular case. It might
be argued from
that a condition should only be imposed to
provide necessary protection to the patients of a practitioner, but that if such
a condition
is reasonably necessary, the practitioner must lack a precondition
to entitlement to continued practice and accordingly the need
to impose the
condition demonstrates unfitness to practice. Clearly that reasoning is, when
stated at that level of generality, fallacious.
Conditions may be imposed in
varying circumstances and for various purposes. The circumstances and purposes
will always be important,
in part because of the need for the Tribunal to be
satisfied that the condition will be effective. In the present case, the
practitioner
had committed no misconduct of a 'hands-on' kind; there had been no
inappropriate conduct of a sexual kind with any patient or indeed
non-patient.
Basten JA went on to emphasise that, in each case, it is necessary to
consider all relevant circumstances, including the nature of
the practitioner's
practice and the degree of real risk of inappropriate conduct.
The Tribunal's Determination
May 2011, the Tribunal observed that the practitioner had demonstrated neither
insight nor remorse, and had advanced no evidence
that he had addressed the
underlying problems. Indeed, it was unclear to the Tribunal whether the
behaviour was motivated by a desire
for sexual gratification or was the result
of simple ignorance.
practitioner is now remorseful. However, there has been little progress in
relation to the gaining of insight. The underlying
problems have not yet been
identified, let alone addressed. Dr O'Dea hopes to employ psychotherapy
techniques with the goal of developing
risk management strategies "in relation
to the potential and considered sexual element of Dr King's conduct".
Unfortunately, to date,
there has been no significant progress.
imposition of an indefinite chaperone condition may well protect individual
women patients against further misconduct by the practitioner.
However, public
confidence in the profession would be seriously undermined if the Tribunal
permitted the practitioner to continue
practising despite the fact that he has
little insight and the reasons for the misconduct remain unknown. The digital
penetration
was sexual assault. In this case, the particulars of complaint were
not confined to digital penetration. Considerations of general
deterrence, the
maintenance of high professional standards, and the maintenance of public
confidence convince the Tribunal that the
only appropriate order is cancellation
of registration.
medical members of the Tribunal consider that the minimum period of
psychotherapy that will be required is 12 months. Psychotherapy
successful, assisting the practitioner to gain insight into his misconduct and
enabling the development of risk management
strategies. A minimum period of
deregistration of 12 months is adequate to address the considerations of general
deterrence, maintenance
of professional standards and public
confidence.
1. The practitioner's registration is cancelled.
2. The practitioner may not apply for review for 12 months.
3. The Tribunal should undertake any review.
4. The practitioner is to pay the HCCC's costs
5. Order 1 is to take effect in 28 days.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (150 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter