URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/434.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v Wrigley Metal Roofing Co Pty Ltd [2025] NSWDC 434 (29 October 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v Wrigley Metal Roofing Co Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 434
Hearing Date(s):
16 October 2025
Date of Orders:
29 October 2025
Decision Date:
29 October 2025
Russell SC DCJ
(1) Wrigley Metal Roofing Co Pty Ltd is
(2) The appropriate fine is $300,000 but that
will be reduced by 25% to reflect the early plea of
(3) Order Wrigley Metal Roofing Co Pty Ltd to pay a
fine of $225,000.
(4) Order pursuant to
Section 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) that 50% of the fine is to be paid to the
prosecutor.
(5) Order Wrigley Metal Roofing Co Pty Ltd to
pay the prosecutor’s costs agreed in the amount of $23,000.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW – prosecution – work health and safety –
duty of persons undertaking business – risk of death
SENTENCE – objective seriousness – mitigating
factors – aggravating factors – plea of guilty – general
deterrence – specific deterrence – capacity to pay appropriate
COSTS – prosecution costs
fall from height – slip while climbing down the outside of scaffold
– inadequate risk assessment –
unprotected edges – no
site-specific SWMS – failure to provide adequate supervision, training and
instruction –
failure to verify components of scaffold were correctly
installed and remained in place – unsafe entry to roof – access
roof without appropriate safety measures in place
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2017
(NSW), cll 78, 79, 291
Cases Cited:
Baumer v R [1988] HCA 67; (1988) 166 CLR 51
Bulga Underground Operations
Pty Limited v Nash
[2016] NSWCCA 37
; (2016) 93 NSWLR 338
[2011] NSWCCA
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
NSWIRComm 71
; (2000) 49 NSWLR 610
Mahdi Jahandideh v The Queen
[2014] NSWCCA
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
(2011) 244 CLR 120
Nash v Silver
City Drilling (NSW) Pty Limited; Attorney General for NSW v Silver City Drilling
(NSW) Pty Limited [2017] NSWCCA 96
R v McNaughton
[2006] NSWCCA 242
66 NSWLR 566
R v Wilkinson (No. 5)
[2009] NSWSC 432
Unity Pty Limited v
SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
Veen v The Queen (No. 2)
[1988] HCA 14
164 CLR 465
Texts Cited:
SafeWork NSW, Code of Practice - Managing the Risk of Falls, August
SafeWork Australia, Safe Work on Roofs Information Sheet, January
SafeWork Australia, Guide to Scaffold Inspection and Maintenance, July
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Wrigley Metal Roofing Co Pty Ltd
(Defendant)
Representation:
A Mykkeltvedt (Prosecutor)
Solicitors:
Department of
Customer Service (Prosecutor)
File Number(s):
2024/235552
Metal Roofing Co Pty Ltd (Wrigley) was engaged as a subcontractor to carry out
roof and cladding works at residential premises.
On 25 July 2022 Mr Angus
Hoskins was severely injured when he slipped and fell approximately 3.8 metres
to the concrete below while
climbing down the outside of a scaffold.
has pleaded guilty to an offence that as a person who had a work health and
safety duty pursuant to
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(the WHS Act) it failed to comply with that duty and thereby exposed Mr Hoskins
to a risk of death or serious injury contrary
to s 32 of the WHS Act.
maximum penalty for the offence is a fine of $1,860,843.
entered a plea of guilty to an Amended Summons on 18 November 2024. On 30 April
2025 Wrigley was placed into liquidation.
The liquidator was aware of the
hearing and indicated that he did not wish to participate. A firm of solicitors
was then acting for
Wrigley. Wrigley has not filed or served any evidence. A
director, Mr Joshua Wrigley, attended the hearing by AVL. He played no part
the proceedings, apart from observing the sentence hearing.
risk described in par 18 of Annexure A of the Amended Summons is as follows:
“The risk was the risk to workers, in particular Mr Hoskins, suffering
death or serious injury as a result of falling from
height while he was
undertaking work in the area of scaffolding and an unprotected edge.”
Reasonably Practicable Measures
19 of Annexure A to the Amended Summons pleads particulars of the
defendant’s failure to comply with the duty under
s 19(1) of the WHS Act
as follows:
“The defendant failed to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the
health and safety of workers, in particular Mr Hoskins,
was not put at risk, in
that it failed to take one or more of the following measures, each of which is
alleged to have been reasonably
practicable, to eliminate, or alternatively
minimise, if it was not reasonably practicable, the risk:
a. Undertake an adequate risk assessment for the works that identified the risk
of a fall from unprotected edges, assessed the risk
and determined the most
effective control measures to manage the risk, including:
i. Assessing the scaffold and whether it was safe;
ii. Checking if edge protection was in place at all heights that would be
accessed by workers;
b. Develop, implement and enforce a site-specific SWMS for the work that
identified the hazard of unprotected edges and described
the measures to be
implemented to manage the hazard, including in relation to the maintenance of
the scaffolding in place.
c. Provide adequate information, training and instruction to workers about the
hazard of working at heights and the measures to be
implemented to guard against
it in accordance with the SWMS;
d. Provide and maintain appropriate levels of supervision of workers at the
site, including, but not limited to:
i. Verifying that workers have read and understood relevant SWMS and
procedures;
ii. Verifying that workers were complying with the identified safe systems of
work at the site;
e. Verify that the components of the scaffold, in particular handrails,
mid-rails, transoms, and toe-boards were correctly installed
and remained in
f. Ensure that workers used only safe methods of access to roof/s at the
g. Ensure that workers did not access roof areas unless appropriate safety
measures, such as edge protection, were in place at those
h. Implement adequate supervision, training and enforcement practices in
relation to workers performing work on and from the scaffold
to ensure work was
not undertaken using the scaffold unless all components were correctly
installed, and the scaffold was safe to
prosecutor presented a Statement of Facts (PX 1, Tab 2) and this material is
summarised below.
Customconstruction
Pty Ltd (Customconstruction) conducted a business of residential construction
work, and engaged subcontractors,
including Wrigley and its employees, to work
on the site located at Avalon Beach, NSW (the site).
scope of the residential works was the renovation of the existing dwelling and
the addition of an extension.
Customconstruction
was the principal contractor for the project at the site.
or around February 2022, Wrigley was engaged by Customconstruction to undertake
re­sheeting and cladding work at the site.
4 May 2022 Webster Workplace Solutions Pty Ltd (Webster)
was engaged by
Customconstruction to install perimeter scaffolding with one internal ladder
access for the two levels, at the back
of the site, and provided a handover
certificate noting that any components of scaffolding were not to be removed or
altered without
engaging a licensed scaffolder.
The works at the
works at the site consisted of two sections. The first was the existing dwelling
which required the re-sheeting of the roof as
well as renovations. The second
section was an extension of the existing dwelling. This was to be constructed on
a concrete slab
with a corrugated metal roof and timber clad walls.
of the scope of works required the installation of the awning to the existing
dwelling, adjacent to the scaffold. Customconstruction
removed a portion of the
top of the scaffold to install the awning and installed a handrail on this top
portion of the scaffold.
to the placement of the scaffold, a further section of the scaffold was removed
by Customconstruction to access the cladding and
to install the final portion of
cladding and a Heka hood (a bracketless awning system). A licensed scaffolder
was not engaged to
amend or alter the scaffold.
the week prior to 25 July 2022, a plank had been placed on the top level of the
scaffolding extending onto the rooves of the existing
dwelling and the
extension. The plank measured 4.01m long, 230mm wide, and 45mm deep.
plank was used by workers to move from the scaffold to the roof area between the
existing dwelling and the extension.
plank was positioned approximately 3.8 metres above the ground below. It was not
secured to the roof or the scaffold and did not
have edge protection.
at 25 July 2022, there was no toe-board, intermediate railing or top railing at
the edge of the scaffold in the area of the plank.
was no edge protection on the roof where the plank was located between the
existing dwelling and the extension.
Steven Koutouzis was a supervisor at the site. Mr Samuel Pollnow was the sole
director and secretary of Customconstruction. Mr
Koutouzis and Mr Pollnow
oversaw all the works in the weeks leading up to the
The incident
25 July 2022 around 7am, workers from Wrigley and Customconstruction arrived on
workers discussed the works that were to be undertaken that morning and made
observations that the roof was wet or dewy.
Hoskins, an apprentice roof sheeter and trainee supervisor employed by Wrigley,
traversed the plank extending from the scaffold
to the adjoining roof to assess
the work that needed to be done.
Mr Hoskins returned from the roof, he climbed down the outside of the scaffold.
While he was climbing down, he slipped and fell
approximately 3.8 metres to the
concrete below.
Hoskins suffered serious head injuries including cerebral haematomas, skull and
facial fractures, bilateral pneumothoraces and
contusions.
Legal obligations and guidance materials
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2017
(NSW) (WHS Regulation) provided
that duty holders must manage the safety risks associated with a fall, including
on an elevated workplace
from which a person could fall.
79 of the WHS Regulation set out the specific requirements to minimise the risk
of a fall. Clause 79(3) set out a hierarchy
of controls for providing adequate
protection against the risk of a fall. A duty holder provided adequate
protection against the
risk of a fall if it maintained a safe system of work,
including by:
“(a) Providing a fall prevention device if it is reasonably practicable to
(b) If it is not reasonably practicable to provide a fall prevention device,
providing a work positioning system, or
(c) If it is not reasonably practicable to comply with either paragraph (a) or
(b), providing a fall arrest system, so far as is
reasonably practicable.”
prevention devices” includes edge protection: cl 79(5) WHS
Regulation.
work carried out by Customconstruction and Wrigley was “high risk
construction work” within the meaning of cl 291
of the WHS Regulation. As
such, the duty holders were required to prepare a Safe Work Method Statement
(SWMS) for the work that specified
hazards relating to the high-risk
construction work and risks to health and safety associated with those hazards;
described the measures
to be implemented to control the risks; and described how
the control measures are to be implemented, monitored and reviewed: cl
WHS Regulation.
to the incident SafeWork NSW (SafeWork) had published the
Managing the Risk
of Falls Code of Practice
, August 2019 (the Code). The Code was published
and available to Customconstruction and Wrigley prior to the incident. The Code
(1) The WHS Regulation required duty holders to work through the hierarchy of
controls to choose the control that most effectively
eliminates or minimises the
risk in the circumstances. This may involve a single control measure or a
combination of two or more
different controls.
(2) A fall prevention device (for example, a secure fence, edge protection, work
platform or cover) must be used to provide and maintain
a safe system of work
where persons are working near and around holes, penetrations and openings
through which a person could fall,
if it is reasonably practicable to do so.
(3) Guardrails may be used to provide effective fall prevention around openings
in floor and roof structures.
(4) Fall arrest systems, such as individual fall arrest systems (including
harnesses), are intended to safely stop a worker falling
an uncontrolled
distance and reduce the impact of the fall. These systems must only be used if
it is not reasonably practicable to
use a fall prevention device or work
positioning system or if these higher-level controls might not be fully
effective in preventing
a fall on their own.
to the incident SafeWork Australia had published the
Safe Work on Roofs
Information Sheet
, January 2016. The Information Sheet was published and was
available to Customconstruction and Wrigley prior to the incident. The
Information Sheet relevantly provided:
(1) Falls from height are the major cause of death and injury when working on
(2) Hazards to consider in managing fall risks include unprotected edges,
skylights, holes and vents and trip hazards.
(3) Workers such as electricians, plumbers, pest control operators, and
installers of roof aerials, solar panels and air-conditioning
systems, can trip
and fall on roofs, through roofs, through openings or while accessing or exiting
roof areas.
(4) Falls from even low heights can leave workers with permanent and
debilitating injuries such as fractures, spinal cord injuries,
concussion and
brain damage. The risk of serious injury or death from a fall increases
significantly as working heights increase.
(5) The risk of falls must be managed using the most effective control measures
that are reasonably practicable, in accordance with
the hierarchy of
(6) Protection must be provided if there is a risk of falling through the roof
and work is being done on the top of the roof. Control
measures to prevent
injury from work roofs include using barriers such as guard rails or covers that
are secured and labelled with
to the incident, SafeWork Australia had published the
Guide to Scaffold
Inspection and Maintenance
, July 2014. The Guide was published and available
to Customconstruction and Wrigley prior to the incident. The Guide relevantly
“(a) The scaffold and its supporting structure must be inspected by a
competent person:
(i) Before the scaffold is used after repairs;
(ii) At least every 30 days.”
Systems of work prior to the incident
work required to be undertaken on the site was “high risk construction
work” within the meaning of the WHS Regulation
because it involved a risk
of a person falling more than two metres in height.
the day of the incident, Customconstruction held on-site meetings with workers
(including with Wrigley workers) during which the
fact that the roof was dewy
and might be slippery was discussed.
the time of the incident, neither Customconstruction nor Wrigley had a
documented SWMS for the work at the site.
Customconstruction
had a general SWMS which identified the risk of physical injury and death from
persons falling from heights. Workers
at the site, including Mr Hoskins, had not
been trained in that general SWMS.
the time of the incident, neither Customconstruction nor Wrigley had documented
site-specific policies or procedures regarding
working at heights.
Hoskins stated that he does not recall receiving any information, training or
instruction in relation to the use of the scaffold
at the site.
to the incident, workers accessed the roof either by accessing the existing
house and then climbing out onto the roof of the
extension or by climbing the
scaffold and using the plank to get onto the roof.
Customconstruction nor Wrigley had a system in place for the regular assessment
of the of the condition of the scaffold to
ensure that no components were
Customconstruction nor Wrigley prevented workers from walking on the plank or
accessing the scaffold, which had missing components.
Experienced
tradesmen, Mr Koutouzis and Mr Pollnow, were supervisors on
Steps taken after the incident
the incident SafeWork issued prohibition and improvement notices to
Customconstruction in relation to the risk that gave rise
to the incident.
Customconstruction
took the following steps after the incident:
(1) Developed a formal work health and safety plan for the site.
(2) Prepared a site-specific SWMS and obtained SWMSs from subcontractors.
(3) Arranged for employees to attend working at heights training.
(4) Undertook an audit of safe work practices.
(5) Held formal induction processes for all staff and subcontractors and
documented the meetings.
(6) Ensured that tampering with scaffolding was strictly prohibited.
(7) Implemented a safety rail system on the second storey of the site.
(8) Removed the plank between the scaffold and the roof.
(9) Organised for a qualified scaffolder to rectify the scaffold.
took the following steps after the incident:
(1) Conducted risk assessments and prepared a site-specific SWMS for every
(2) Developed and improved upon SWMSs noting:
(a) that all workers were required to be inducted before commencement of work;
(b) scaffold was to be erected by a licensed scaffolder;
(c) workers should not alter or modify the scaffold;
(d) edge protection was to be certified by a competent person;
(e) use scaffold and ladder for access to roof; and
(f) the use of harnesses when working near unprotected edges.
Evidence for the Defendant
was no evidence for the defendant.
Consideration
have had regard to the objects in s 3 of the WHS Act
and the purposes of
sentencing set out in
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) (CSP Act).
Objective Seriousness of the Offence
proportionality principle requires that a sentence should neither exceed nor be
less than the gravity of the crime having regard
to the objective circumstances:
Veen v The Queen (No. 2)
[1988] HCA 14
; (1988) 164 CLR 465 at 472, 485-6,
490-1 and 496. At common law, the term “objective circumstances” was
used to describe
the circumstances of the crime. The gravity of the offence was
assessed by reference to its objective seriousness:
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
task requires the court to consider where in the range of conduct covered by the
offence the conduct of the offender falls:
[1988] HCA 67;
(1988) 166 CLR 51 at 57. This assessment will generally indicate the appropriate
range of sentences available which
will reflect the objective seriousness of the
offence committed, and set the limits within which a sentence proportional to
the criminality
of the offender will lie:
[2011] NSWCCA 176
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
(2011) 244 CLR 120
Court said:
“The objective seriousness of an offence is to be assessed without
reference to matters personal to a particular offender or
class of offenders. It
is to be determined wholly by reference to the nature of the offending.”
sentencing judge should take into account not only the conduct which actually
constitutes the crime, but also such of the surrounding
circumstances as are
directly related to that crime and are properly regarded as circumstances of
aggravation or mitigation:
R v Wilkinson
[2009] NSWSC 432
existence of a reasonably foreseeable risk to safety that is likely to result in
serious injury or death is a factor relative
to the gravity of the offence:
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
NSWIRComm 71
; (2000) 49 NSWLR 610 at
. The question of foreseeability of the
risk is to be determined objectively.
court must identify all the factors that are relevant to the sentence, discuss
their significance and then make a value judgment
as to what is the appropriate
sentence given all the factors of the case:
. This approach to
sentencing, known as the “instinctive synthesis” approach, involves
the making of a global judgment
without any attempt to state precisely how any
given factor has influenced the judgment.
Court of Criminal Appeal has examined the sentencing process with regard to the
WHS Act in the matter of
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Limited
Attorney General for NSW v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Limited
NSWCCA 96. Justice Basten at [34], under the heading “Assessment of
Risk” said:
“The sentencing judge commenced his consideration with the proposition
that ‘greater culpability attaches to the failure
to guard against an
event the occurrence of which is probable rather than an event the occurrence of
which is extremely unlikely’.
However the truth of that proposition
depends upon other considerations including (a) the potential consequences of
the risk, which
may be mild or catastrophic, (b) the availability of steps
to lessen, minimise or remove the risk, and (c) whether such steps are
complex and burdensome or only mildly inconvenient. Relative culpability depends
on assessment of all those factors.”
at [42] his Honour continued:
“The culpability of the Respondent is not necessarily to be determined by
the remoteness of the risk occurring, nor by a step‑by‑step
assessment of the various elements. Culpability will turn upon an overall
evaluation of various factors, which may pull in different
directions.
Culpability in this case is reasonably high because, even if the [event] which
occurred might not be expected to occur
often, the seriousness of the
foreseeable resultant harm is extreme and the steps to be taken to avoid it,
which were not even assessed,
were straightforward and involved only minor
inconvenience and little, if any, costs.”
[53] his Honour dealt with the proper approach to considering the objective
seriousness of offences under the WHS Act, saying:
“It is important to note that the risk to be assessed is not the risk of
the consequence, to the extent that a worker is in
fact injured, but is the risk
arising from the failure to take reasonably practicable steps to avoid the
injury occurring. To discount
the seriousness of the risk by reference to the
unlikelihood of injury resulting is apt to lead to error. The conduct in
is the failure to respond to a risk of injury, conduct which will be
more serious, the more serious the potential injuries, whether
or not they are
likely to materialize. The objective seriousness of the conduct will also be
affected by the ease with which mitigating
steps could have been taken.”
findings about the defendant’s level of culpability are based upon the
(1) Wrigley ought to have foreseen the risk. In any event, Wrigley should have
known of the risk by reason of the guidance material.
(2) There was a significant likelihood of the risk occurring.
(3) The potential consequences of the risk were death or serious injury.
(4) There were steps available to eliminate or minimise the risk.
(5) These was no great burden or inconvenience for those steps to be
implemented.
(6) The harm done to Mr Hoskins was very serious.
(7) The maximum penalty for the offence is a fine of $1,860,843, which reflects
the legislature’s view of the seriousness of
the offence.
find that the level of culpability of Wrigley is in the mid
penalty imposed in relation to this offence must provide for general deterrence.
Employers must take the obligations imposed by
the WHS Act very seriously. The
community is entitled to expect that both small and large employers will comply
with safety requirements.
General deterrence is a significant factor when safety
obligations are breached:
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Limited v Nash
[2016] NSWCCA 37
; (2016) 93 NSWLR 338 at
deterrence has no relevance. Wrigley is in liquidation and is no longer
conducting a roofing business.
Aggravating Factors
injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by the offence was substantial: s
21A(2)(g) CSP Act.
Mitigating Factors
has no previous convictions: s 21A(3)(e) CSP Act.
entered a plea of guilty: s 21A(3)(k) CSP Act. The court must take into account
the fact that the offender has pleaded guilty,
when the offender pleaded guilty,
and the circumstances in which the offender indicated an intention to plead
guilty: s 22(1) CSP
Act. It is appropriate to give Wrigley a 25% discount for an
early plea.
Capacity to Pay a Fine
am required to have regard to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) before
imposing a fine. Where an offender seeks to have a fine reduced on the basis of
a limited capacity to pay, it bears
the evidentiary onus of convincing the court
that it should exercise its discretion to limit the amount of the fine. The
capacity to pay is relevant but not decisive:
Jahandideh v The Queen
[2014] NSWCCA 178
. A substantial fine may
still be warranted as a result of the seriousness of the offence and the need
for general deterrence.
Unity Pty Limited v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
the Court of
Criminal Appeal said:
“First, and more generally, questions of specific deterrence should take
into account the size and scope of the operations
of the defendant; a fine which
may be crippling to a small business may have virtually no impact on the
financial operations of a
large corporation. The maximum penalty for the offence
is undoubtedly set having regard to such a factor. Secondly, the Court is
required to have regard to ‘the means’ of the defendant, pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
was no submission about capacity to pay, so this issue does not
will be an order that the defendant is to pay the prosecutor’s
orders are:
(1) Wrigley Metal Roofing Co Pty Ltd is convicted.
(2) The appropriate fine is $300,000 but that will be reduced by 25% to reflect
the early plea of guilty.
(3) Order Wrigley Metal Roofing Co Pty Ltd to pay a fine of $225,000.
(4) Order pursuant to
Section 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) that 50%
of the fine is to be paid to the prosecutor.
(5) Order Wrigley Metal Roofing Co Pty Ltd to pay the prosecutor’s costs
agreed in the amount of $23,000.
04 November 2025 - Order (5) in Coversheet and last page of Judgment to
include: costs "agreed in the amount of $23,000."
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (282 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter