URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCHT/2009/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION v HARPER [2009] NSWCHT 1 (18 February 2009)
CHIROPRACTORS ACT 2001
CHIROPRACTORS TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
MATTER NUMBER: CH1/2008
REGISTRATION NUMBER: CP 0018370
JONATHAN HARPER
REASONS FOR
(REGARDING FINDINGS RE COMPLAINTS AND
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Harper
[2009] NSWCHT 1
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Mr Gregory Farmer (of Counsel), instructed by Mr Stephen Cox,
Solicitor, Health Care Complaints Commission.
Mr Jonathan Harper
(Respondent) represented by Mr Gary Gregg (of
Counsel), instructed by Mr Don Grant, Solicitor, Guild Legal.
FILE NUMBER: CH1/2008
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne Muller (Deputy Chairperson)
Ms Jacqueline Milne (Lay Member)
Mr Edwin Devereaux AM (Chiropractor Member)
Mr Warwick Bateman OAM (Chiropractor Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 11 and 12 December 2008
DATE OF DECISION: 18 February 2008 (Re Particulars of Complaints: 8 December
2008 see HCCC v Harper
[2008] NSWCHT 1)
FINDINGS (in summary): Professional misconduct – failure to maintain
proper records - false HICAPS claims - reprimand –
suspension from
register - conditions on practice.
CATCHWORDS: Chiropractor - unsatisfactory professional conduct –
professional misconduct – not of good character –
HICAPS claims
– record keeping - services not provided.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Chiropractors Act
schedule 5 – clause 6.
CASES CITED:
HCCC v Harper
[2008] NSWCHT 1
Commonwealth of Australia & Anor
[2009] HCA 3.
REASONS FOR DECISION
(REGARDING FINDINGS
RE COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS)
Introduction
Chiropractors Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened at the Health Professionals
Registration Boards (HPRB) Tribunal Hearing Room in
Sydney on 11 and 12 December
2008 to continue an Inquiry in to a complaint made by Karen Mobbs, Director of
Proceedings, Health Care
Complaints Commission (the HCCC), dated 25 November
2007 in relation to a registered chiropractor (the Respondent). The Tribunal
previously convened on 12, 13, 14, 15 and 21 August 2008 and by Reasons for
Decision dated 8 December 2008 made findings that
Particulars of Complaint (a)
to (s) inclusive were proven. That decision is cited as HCCC v Harper
and it should be read in conjunction with this
This Reasons for Decision
document deals with the ‘evidence’ and submissions made by the
parties regarding findings with
respect to the Complaints and the appropriate
orders to be made as a consequence of the Tribunal’s findings with respect
the Particulars of Complaint.
The Complaint set out below
is as amended (see HCCC v Harper
[2009] NSWCHT 1
at paragraph 6 as to the
circumstances of the amendment) and the Particulars not found proven by the
Tribunal have been struck through.
The Respondent did not give
evidence in this phase of the Inquiry. The Respondent tendered a folder of
documents (as per index in
schedule A hereto) and written submissions
supplemented by oral submissions. Part of the oral submissions could be
described as ‘evidence
from the bar table’, (albeit a statement of
the Respondent read by counsel), particularly the evidence regarding the
Respondent’s
interaction with the St James Ethics Centre. The HCCC also
provided a written outline of submissions which was supplemented by oral
submissions.
The Complaint
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct within the meaning of
of the Act in that the
chiropractor has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill
or judgement possessed, or
care exercised, by the chiropractor in the practice
of chiropractic is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
chiropractor of an equivalent level of training or experience,
has been guilty of improper or unethical conduct in the course of the
practice of chiropractic.
Complaint Two
Has been guilty professional misconduct within the meaning of
the Act in that the chiropractor has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that
the knowledge, skill or judgement possessed, or
care exercised, by the
chiropractor in the practice of chiropractic is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a
chiropractor of an equivalent level of training or
experience,
has been guilty of improper or unethical conduct in the course of the
practice of chiropractic.
Complaint Three
Is not of good character.
Particulars of Complaints One, Two and Three
Between 11 April 2003 and 14
November 2003 the chiropractor made 36 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to Mrs A by Paul Ray, a registered
physiotherapist.
The claims made were false
because Mr Ray did not in fact provide those
Between 11 April 2003 and 2
September 2003 the chiropractor made 40 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to Master B by Paul Ray, a registered
physiotherapist.
The claims made were false because Mr Ray did not in fact
provide those services.
Between 11 April 2003 and 14
November 2003 the chiropractor made 38 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to Master C by Paul Ray, a registered
physiotherapist.
The claims were false because Mr Ray did not in fact provide
those services.
Between 11 April 2003 and 30
September 2005 the chiropractor made 38 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment for [the Respondent] by Paul Ray, a registered
physiotherapist. The claims made were false because Mr Ray did not in fact
provide the services on the dates claimed by the
chiropractor.
Between 17 August 2005 and 30
September 2005 the chiropractor made 16 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to Mrs A by Voula Partsas, a registered
physiotherapist. The claims made were false because Ms Partsas did not in fact
provide those services.
Between 2 September 2003 and
30 September 2005 the chiropractor made 12 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at
his chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to Master B by Voula Partsas, a registered
physiotherapist. The claims made were false because Ms Patsas did not in fact
provide those services.
Between 2 September 2003 and
30 September 2005 the chiropractor made 12 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at
his chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to Master C by Voula Partsas, a registered
physiotherapist. The claims made were false because Ms Patsas did not in fact
provide those services.
Between 13 August 2005 and 30
September 2005 the chiropractor made 17 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for physiotherapy treatment to [the Respondent] by Voula Partsas, a
registered physiotherapist. The claims made were false because Ms Patsas did
not in fact provide those services.
Between 5 January 2000 and 11
February 2005 the chiropractor made 44 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for chiropractic treatment for Mrs A by Mr Royse, a registered
chiropractor.
38 of the claims were false because Mr Royse only provided six
Between 5 January 2000 and 7
January 2002 the chiropractor made 44 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his chiropractic
practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for chiropractic treatment for Master B by Mr Royse, a registered
chiropractor.
38 of the claims were false because Mr Royse only provided six
Between 5 January 2000 and 19
February 2001 the chiropractor made 21 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his
chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for chiropractic treatment for [the Respondent] by Mr Royse, a registered
chiropractor. Six of the claims were false because Mr Royse only provided
fifteen services.
Between 2 January 2002 and 13
April 2005 the chiropractor made 68 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at his chiropractic
practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for chiropractic treatment for [the Respondent] by Mr Royse, a registered
chiropractor
at the Gymea practice. The claims were false because Mr Royse did
not provide the services and was not employed at the practice
during this
Between 19 January 2000 and
30 September 2005 the chiropractor made 141 claims through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at
his chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea for chiropractic treatment for himself. The claims made were
Between 1 January 2000 and 25
March 2006 the chiropractor failed to create and maintain records of his
chiropractic treatment of Mrs
Between 1 January 2000 and 25
March 2006 the chiropractor failed to create and maintain records of his
chiropractic treatment of Master
Between 6 November 2002 and
25 March 2006 the chiropractor failed to create and maintain records of his
chiropractic treatment of
Between 19 January 2000 and 5
September 2005 the chiropractor did falsely claim through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at
his chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59 - 61 Gymea Bay
Road, Gymea that he had provided chiropractic services to Mrs A which he had
in fact provided.
Between 19 January 2000 and 5
September 2005 the chiropractor did falsely claim through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at
his chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59 - 61 Gymea Bay
Road, Gymea that he had provided chiropractic services to Master B which he
not in fact provided.
Between 6 November 2002 and 5
September 2005 the chiropractor did falsely claim through the HICAPS electronic
claiming terminal at
his chiropractic practice at Shop 3, 59 - 61 Gymea Bay
Road, Gymea that he had provided chiropractic services to Master C which he
not in fact provided.
1 January 2000 and 1 October 2005 the chiropractor did provide chiropractic
services to Mrs A which were excessive in number
and/or such as to amount to
overservicing.
1 January 2000 and 1 October 2005 the chiropractor did provide chiropractic
services to Master B which were excessive in number
and/or such as to amount to
overservicing.
6 November 2002 and 1 October 2005 the chiropractor did provide chiropractic
services to Master C which were excessive in
number and/or such as to amount to
overservicing.
Suppression Orders
6. The Deputy Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in relation
to the names of members of his family noted in the
Complaint in accordance with
Schedule 5 Clause 6 of the Act. See Annexure C hereto. Any information that may
identify them is not
to be published.
7. With respect to the Particulars admitted by the Respondent and those found
proven by the Tribunal the Respondent admitted that
his conduct amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of the Act. The
Respondent indicated at the commencement
of this stage of the Inquiry that
findings of professional misconduct and ‘not of good character’ were
The further documents in
evidence are set out in Annexure ‘A’
9. No witnesses gave evidence during this phase of the Inquiry.
The further evidence before the Tribunal
10. A number of documents regarding the Respondent’s continuing education
and his correction of an error in the records of
COCA were provided by the
Respondent. The records provided indicated that he had recently undertaken
continuing education, including
training with WorkCover and ‘ICS
11. The Respondent provided identical statements signed by seven different
people said to be staff members at the Respondent’s
two practices wherein
they confirm they have read the ‘HICAPS Terminal Operations Guide’,
that they understand the HICAPS
process, that they will abide by the
‘terms and conditions’ of its use and agreed that they will contact
HICAPS in the
event of they required any advice.
12. The Respondent put before the Tribunal many testimonials. The testimonials
talk of the Respondent in positive terms. Further
details of these testimonials
are adequately covered in the commentary below on the submissions of the
13. A letter dated 16 September 2008 from the Chiropractors Association of
Australia confirms that the Respondent had been accepted
as a member and noting
the ‘honesty’ of the Respondent in advising of ‘the
complaint’.
14. The Respondent provided the Tribunal with copies of documents said to have
been provided to Mrs A that detail exercises relevant
to the alleviation of the
problems she suffered.
Submissions made by the HCCC regarding the
HCCC submitted, in summary, that the conduct of the Respondent as found proven,
constitutes professional misconduct and establishes
that the Respondent is not
of good character.
16. Paragraphs 3 to 24 read as follows:
Based upon the
admissions made by Mr Harper and the findings made by the Tribunal, it is
submitted that the Tribunal will find Mr
Harper’s conduct was
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct; and,
establishes that he is not of good character.
The facts reveal that the
respondent made false claims through the HICAPS electronic claiming terminal at
his chiropractic practice
in Gymea. Pursuant to a contract with HCF the
respondent agreed to be responsible for the claims submitted through the system.
no doubt, trusted in the respondent to act honestly in his dealings with
HCF. The respondent breached that trust.
The false claims included
claims for services said to have been provided by other health practitioners
working at his practice and
false claims for services which he claimed he had
provided. Each of the false claims asserted treatment to members of his family.
The salient features of the
respondent’s misconduct are: the false claims were made over a period of
approximately 6 years;
the misconduct of the respondent only stopped as a result
of the intervention of investigators from HCF; the number of false claims
by the respondent exceeded 1,100; claims were made for different services for
which the Harper family members had HCF cover;
the money obtained as a result of
the false claims is in excess of $27,000; and the respondent has failed to fully
accept responsibility
for his conduct.
Conduct of this type by
health professionals was considered by the Court of Appeal in
(unreported) NSWCCA 29 July 1981 wherein the Court
i. “The appellant’s fraudulent abuse of the system was limited in
time and extent, but it stopped only upon discovery
and was quite inconsistent
with and involved a repudiation of her responsibility as a medical practitioner.
Medical benefits schemes
depend upon the integrity of medical practitioners.
Without that integrity, the schemes must fail or become a burden on the
Moreover, it is critical that members of the medical profession
should be aware of the need for an importance of that integrity.
The conviction
of the appellant for 27 offences involving fraudulent intent necessarily
involved her having adopted a fraudulent
course which contradicted this most
basic and obvious
requirement.”
The sentiments expressed
adopted and applied ever since. It has been repeatedly held that such conduct
amounts to professional misconduct. The
concern about such conduct has been
held to apply to other health professionals. See:
Patel v NSW Medical Board
(unreported) NSWCA 18 November 1982; JP Rolleston, 23 February 1987, NSW
Medical Tribunal; Verma v McGregor (unreported) NSWCA 10
February 1989; P H
Corbett, 27 June 1990, NSW Medical Tribunal; Dr K V Prakash, 31 July 1992,
Medical Tribunal;
Bannister v Walton
(1993) 30 NSWLR 699
at 705-711; C
Tsioutis, 11 April 1996, NSW Medical Tribunal; R Bernard, 3 November 2000, NSW
Medical Tribunal; M Gad, 19 October
2001, NSW Medical Tribunal;
[2007] NSWPYT 1.
The Dental Board has ordered
the de-registration of dentists found to have engaged in such conduct. See, for
(7 June 2002);
(1995); and,
It is submitted that these
authorities make it plain that health professionals who deliberately defraud
systems designed to facilitate
the remuneration of practitioners for services
rendered should expect to be de-registered.
There are cases where
de-registration has not been ordered as a result of such conduct. They include
, referred to above, and “Re Dr S Douaihy” 1992
[2004] NSWMT 6.
was suspended, rather than de-registered, but
that case is distinguishable because of fewer false claims having been made by
and his conduct and actions subsequent to detection. The decision in
is also distinguishable on its facts.
Having regard to the
objective seriousness of these matters, it is submitted by the complainant that
the respondent should be de-registered.
There is no doubt that it is to his
credit that he admitted to some of the false claims. However, it is to be noted
that the respondent
denied any wrong doing in relation to the matters
particularised at paragraphs (q), (r) and (s). These particulars relate to more
than half of the total number of fraudulent claims. In addition, as noted in
the Tribunal’s findings, the respondent put forward
different versions of
events at different times. His evidence to the Tribunal about the events
surrounding these claims has been
rejected. His actions have resulted in him
losing his credibility and brought dishonour to the profession. Taking each of
matters into account, it is submitted that the respondent should be
deregistered.
It is submitted that the
Tribunal will also find that the respondent lacks the necessary character to
remain registered as a chiropractor.
The relevant authorities regarding
character include:
Ex parte Tziniolis
Practitioners’ Act
(1966) SR NSW 448
McBride v Walton
(unreported) NSWCA 15 July 1994, at 21-26, per Kirby P, and 59-73 per Powell JA;
NSW Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
HCCC v Dr R
, NSW Medical Tribunal, 5 April 2007 at
A guide to the issues
surrounding this issue of character is provided by the judgment of Powell J in
McBride v Walton,
at pp 61-2, wherein his Honour
“To determine whether a finding of
proven misconduct should be followed by a consequential finding that the
practitioner is
not of good character, in the context of fitness to practise
medicine, one must consider:
(a) whether the misconduct can be satisfactorily explained as an error of
judgment, rather than a defect of character;
(b) the intrinsic seriousness of the misconduct qua fitness to practice
(c) whether the misconduct should be viewed as an isolated episode and hence
atypical or uncharacteristic of the practitioner’s
normal qualities of
(d) the motivation which may have given rise to the proven episode of
misconduct; and,
(e) the underlying qualities of character shown by previous and other
misconduct; and
whether the practitioner’s conduct post the proven episode of
misconduct demonstrates that public and professional confidence
may be reposed
in him to uphold and observe the high standards of moral rectitude required of a
medical practitioner.”.
Again, the complainant
submits that those considerations are relevant to the case of a chiropractor who
has been found to have made
such a number of false claims over a period of
nearly six years. Subject to any further evidence on behalf of the respondent,
is submitted that the Tribunal will make findings adverse to the respondent
on those issues.
It is submitted that the
Tribunal has, in essence, found that the respondent is a dishonest person. His
dishonesty relates to both
the conduct which resulted in this complaint to the
Tribunal and the manner in which he conducted himself once the concerns
the claims were raised with him.
Dr Suman Sood
[2006] NSW MT 1
[279]-[283], the Medical Tribunal, having found that Dr Sood was
a dishonest person, made reference to a number of cases dealing
with dishonesty.
In particular, the decision in
Medical Practitioners Board of Victoria v
[1999] VSCA 215
, wherein Buchanan JA said, at
i. “Medical Practitioners occupy a position of considerable trust, and it
is in the public interest that they should merit
that trust. Accordingly, it is
to be expected that medical practitioners will be scrupulously honest in their
dealings with patients,
with other doctors and those in related professions such
as nurses, radiologists and technicians and support staff and
government departments with which they deal in the course of their
.”. (emphasis
It is submitted that such
reasoning is applicable to chiropractors who, like doctors, deal with people in
related professions, government
officers and insurers in order to obtain payment
for services provided.
, the Tribunal
also referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in
McBride v Walton
where Handley JA (at p6) had observed that “parliament has made a
legislative judgment that persons who are not of good character
should not be
registered. Medicine was to be an “honourable, as well as skilled and
learned profession”. Parliament
has made the same legislative judgment in
relation to those who practise chiropractic. In
, the Tribunal
concluded that because they had found that Dr Sood was dishonest, they were
persuaded that she was not of good character.
Subject to any further
information that the respondent chooses to put before the Tribunal, it is the
respondent’s submissions
that when one has regard to the facts involved in
this case, and the practitioner’s response to those matters, that the
will be left with no doubt that the respondent is not of good
Accordingly, it is submitted
that the Tribunal will find that the respondent lacks the necessary character to
be registered as a chiropractor.
In all the circumstances of
this case, the complainant submits that the respondent should be de-registered.
Further, it is submitted
that the respondent should be prohibited from practising in other health-related
The complainant also submits
pursuant to s111 and Schedule 5 of the Act that the respondent should pay the
complainant’s costs.
17. The oral submission of the HCCC added the following points in support of a
finding of professional misconduct (Complaint Two):
• The Respondent provides no explanation for his denial of Particulars
(n), (o) and (p) which the Tribunal found proven. Further
it is incumbent on a
professional person to account for their false conduct
• The false claims were made with respect to family members who would be
unlikely to contradict the position of the Respondent
if approached by any
investigators, a factor that distinguishes the Respondent’s conduct from
that of Mr Margiotta.
18. With respect to the complaint regarding good character (Complaint Three) the
HCCC added in oral submissions:
• One of the essential elements of good character is the capacity to act
honourably and the Respondent repeated dishonest conduct
on over 1100
• The Tribunal found the Respondent had made false claims for treatment to
family members contrary to the Respondent’s
assertion that the services
had in fact been provided.
• It is a consideration of the Respondent’s conduct as at the time
of the Inquiry that is relevant to the determination
of the Complaint.
• In determining the question of character, the Tribunal considers whether
the misconduct can be satisfactorily explained as
an error of judgement rather
than a defect of character. Given the length of time the false claims were made
by the Respondent it
would not be rational to conclude that the behaviour could
be explained as an error of judgment.
• Further, the pattern of false claims indicate a considered pattern of
making claims up to relevant limit for one type of
treatment before switching to
claims for another type of service cannot be seen as a mere error of
• This is not a matter where the conduct can be considered as isolated,
atypical or uncharacteristic.
• No explanation or motivation is provided to the Tribunal.
• There is no assertion that the Respondent has engaged in misconduct with
respect to other aspects of his practice.
• There is nothing before the tribunal regarding any steps the Respondent
has taken to understand why he misconducted himself
in the manner he did. Course
undertaken by the Respondent since this conduct came to light have focused on
practical matters rather
than anything that may assist him to gain insight into
his conduct or attempting to prevent this conduct in the
Further, the HCCC submitted
that the written references tendered on behalf of the Respondent not only
predate the decision of tribunal
with respect to the Particulars and have made
the report on the basis of what was reported to them by the Respondent rather
having read the Complaint document for themselves and none of the referees
appear to be aware that the Respondent had admitted to
having made 500 false
20. The HCCC submitted that the letters signed by the various members of staff
of the Respondent’s practice regarding their
adherence to the correct
HICAPS operation is of little assistance to the Tribunal as the conduct
particularised (and proven) involves
the actions of the Respondent not problems
with his staff. At T10.17-21 (11.12.08) the HCCC submitted:
It seems plain that the problem is with Mr Harper and Mr Harper alone
and again, as I say, there is nothing put before the tribunal
to explain what
caused these false claims to be made and what he is going to do about it in the
future. The problem, as I say, is
not with the staff it is with the boss,
21. The HCCC submission noted that the last false claim was made in 2006 and
that a decision regarding character must be made by
the tribunal as at the
current time. There is nothing in the conduct of the Respondent that
‘...would instil in the tribunal
any confidence that he has understood the
nature of his offending and taken positive steps to correct it’
(T10.32-34, 11.12.08).
22. The HCCC continues with respect to this issue and notes the
Respondent’s initial claim that the false claims were a result
‘operator error’ and then in August 2008 he gave sworn evidence that
the that all treatments claimed had in fact been
provided. This evidence was
rejected by the Tribunal in finding Particulars (n), (o) an (p) proven.
23. The HCCC submitted that the Tribunal ‘...would have real concerns as
to whether or not he is currently of good character’.
It was submitted
that the Respondent does not have ‘..that quality of honour about his
conduct or about himself and it would
follow that the Tribunal could be
comfortably satisfied that he is, at this time, not of good character’.
24. The HCCC submitted that the Tribunal ought make the orders indicated above
and added that there should be an additional order
that the Respondent is not
entitled to apply for registration for a period of three years.
25. Further, the HCCC submitted that the Tribunal was able to be comfortably
satisfied that a prohibition order and costs order should
The Respondent’s Submissions regarding the Complaints
26. The Respondent provided a detailed written submission to the Tribunal
27. These submissions were supplemented by extensive oral submissions, which as
noted above, contained material best characterised
as ‘evidence from the
bar table’. However a more detailed account of the circumstances of the
evidence is required.
28. Mr Gregg read a statement made by the Respondent to the Tribunal. The
rationale for this course was explained by Mr Gregg as
follows (T12.8-27,
May I put it this way, I am more articulate than Mr Harper. That is the
first point. He is very uncomfortable and very ashamed
is not confident of giving the evidence in a properly coherent way. I have
taken the view and advised him
that it is helpful for you to have what has come
from his heart and that is why I wanted him to provide me with the written
instructions
that he has. They are not my words that I propose to read to you
they are his and I ask you to accept that and, in the circumstances
as you would
have observed, Deputy Chairperson, he is sitting behind me in this tribunal room
and I can tell you he endorses what
I am about to tell you. I would submit to
you that you should receive it in that fashion and that you are entitled to
place weight
Mr Farmer has demonstrated a desire to cross-examine Mr Harper about
these matters in detail previously and on advice that I gave
he declined to
answer questions but I do not believe I need to spell out for an experienced
tribunal such as this why that advice
was given. I do not believe I need to
spell out to this tribunal why he took that advice and those matters may also be
to whether he gives further that goes to these matters that I want to
put to you. What I do not want to happen - let me speak plainly
Mr Farmer to have an opportunity to cross-examine
In summary, the Respondent
submitted he was in a ‘double-jeopardy’ situation.
The Respondent made the
following submission (T12.48-14.32, 11.12.08 - as read by Mr
I have been asked to respond to accusation of incorrect billing activity through
the HICAPS terminal in the period between January
2000 and September 2005. In
this time frame I owned and operated Symbionics (?) Pty Ltd trading as Jonathan
Harper Chiropractor
at shop 3, Gymea Arcade, 59-61 Gymea Bay Road,
Gymea. I had worked for two chiropractic clinics before this and had gained
knowledge in regards to effective and safe provision of chiropractic
treatment. At that age of 28 I commenced my Gymea practice
full of confidence
in my abilities to run a professional business helping my patients achieve a
better status in their health.
I believed in my abilities as a chiropractor and had believed that I would be
able to learn quickly how to manage my first business.
In regards to my opinion
of my business management skills it became clear to me that I was somewhat
myopic. I believed at this
that the way to become popular within my community
was to provide a good level of service and to discount my fee and to provide
to clients. This proved to be very bad practise as eventually patients
became well and many times inadvertently forgot or ignored
their overdue
accounts. We have many accounts that were unpaid, some for years; many are
still unpaid to this day. These totalled
many thousands of dollars, money I
needed to pay staff and outgoings.
I did not feel it proper to use a debt collection service as it seemed to me to
be a counterproductive move to my goals of being
well liked and a well-respected
chiropractor. My fees remained unchanged for most of the period between 2000
and 2005. There were
many fee categories for discounts such as child, student,
pensioner, et cetera. In fact most of the patients in the early days were
on some form of discount. The fee discounting and the practise of providing
accounts, that in some cases were never paid, led to
significant financial
insecurity.
Both my cousins were successful chiropractors. It was a fear of mine that I
could not live up to their success and standing in the
community. I believe
that I have a very strong fear of failure and it was this fear that led to a
significant departure in my attitudes
and belief systems. The transactions
listed A to M are indeed falsely claimed. I want to accept full responsibility
for this occurrence.
Again, I took these actions because I could not face my
wife, my family and the community as a failure in business. It seems now
insignificant but for me, at the time, failure in your profession seemed one of
the worst things that could happen to a man.
I believe that I am a person of good character. I have no criminal record. I
have never been in trouble with the law or indeed
have I ever been in trouble
with my registration board at all before this event. In the past I have been a
strong member of my church
and I dedicate all my spare time to the proper
raising of my children. Despite my beliefs I have made a significant departure
my belief systems that I am ashamed of. I have received counselling from
the St James Ethics Centre and through this I have placed
myself in the
shoes of those I have affected.
I feel significant shame, sorrow and humiliation as I open up my thoughts to the
disgrace I have brought on my family, my staff and
associates, the wonderful
practise of chiropractic and the thought of the harm I may have caused to my
chiropractic colleagues who
have worked diligently to battle labels of quackery
and purveyors of unscientific dogma for over 100 years. I also feel for
and their staff who must have found it very difficult to make a formal
complaint about one of their providers. Not least do I fear
for the change of
belief of the patients in my care and their opinion of their chiropractor that I
am sure put significant levels
of trust in their chiropractor as an important
provider of health care in their lives.
It has become apparent to me through all this that I am not supposed to be just
another brick in the wall of the health care. I
am supposed to be an upstanding
member of my community both professionally and socially. My actions in this
regard do not support
how I believe I am supposed to conduct myself. I add that
my operations of my clinic in a financial sense have significantly improved
partly through networking with many other chiropractors, which I had never done
until 2006, and partly through learning how to accept
an appropriate fee for my
service at the time of service.
I am proud of my patients, staff, associates and my business. I hope to instil
a belief in them that I am someone they can admire.
My financial wellbeing is
secure now as opposed to my position between 2000 and 2005. My children have
achieved school age and
my wife has returned to the workforce and has been
fortunate enough to become a director in her family's successful business. I
believe I represent a zero chance of
re-offending."
The Respondent’s
submission in the above paragraph was expanded in some regards including:
• With respect to the reference to ‘member of my community’,
the Respondent is a strong member of his church and
as a teenager he ran on a
voluntary basis a ‘children’s club’ during school holidays. He
undertook this service
partly because of his concern that children be raised
‘in the proper way’ and his dedication to this ideal has added
the level of shame he is now experiencing with respect to the false claims.
• Financial problems were suffered by the Respondent asa result of the
cost of setting up his own practice, purchasing a house
(in 2001/2002) and the
birth of his second child. His wife was no longer working and the lack of this
income created ’stringent
financial pressure’. Cash flow in the
business became an issue because he had a high percentage of patients who did
their accounts. The Respondent then acted against his better judgment
and made the false claims. The Respondent was no longer under
financial strains as his wife has now returned to work and will be working
full-time and is a director of a family business
which is reasonably successful.
The Respondent has anticipated that he will not be working as a chiropractor for
a period and he
will care for the children and possibly take some part-time
work. As noted below, at the conclusion of the Inquiry the Respondent
undertaking to the tribunal to cease practising as a chiropractor from that
• The Respondent is passionate about chiropractic, having always wanted to
be a chiropractor and coming from a culture of chiropractic.
His cousins are
chiropractors. He wants his sons to be chiropractors. Mr Harper significantly
derives his sense of self in identifying
as a chiropractor.
• He sought the assistance of the St James Ethics Centre to his benefit.
The words he wrote (reproduced above) are indicative
of a person with insight.
32. With respect to the matter of HCCC v Margiotta (a decision relied upon by
the HCCC), the Respondent submitted that the current
case was not materially
different with respect to the amount of money obtained (approximately $20,000 in
Margiotta and $27,000 in
the current matter) but that the conduct of the
Respondent (Mr Harper) subsequent to detection should warrant a more favourable
The testimonials provided by the Respondent referred to the subject
matter of the Complaint whereas those before the Tribunal in
the matter of
Margiotta indicated that they were not only unaware of the Tribunal proceedings
but also unaware of the criminal convictions.
Further, the Tribunal had remarked
in Margiotta that it had not observed any insight nor experienced any public
shame because he
had concealed his actions from public scrutiny. Another
distinguishing feature was the fact that the conduct in Margiotta related
monies being obtained from two different entities over two different periods of
time which raises ‘an extra element
of deliberateness’. Further, Mr
Margiotta allowed his professional memberships and the like lapse rather than
informing the
relevant organisation of his conviction. Mr Margiotta had not
suffered any ‘public shame’ as a result of his conduct
as he had not
disclosed it. Further, Mr Margiotta had informed the probation and parole
service officer who prepared a pre-sentence
report that he was not under
financial pressure, rather he had seen ‘others getting away with it’
. The Respondent submitted
that this would indicate a higher degree of moral
culpability in the conduct of Mr Margiotta which is not reflected in the conduct
of the Respondent. A significant distinguishing feature, it was submitted, was
the lack of coming to terms with his conduct demonstrated
by Mr Margiotta. The
Tribunal was also invited to distinguish the conduct of Mr Margiotta with
respect to his failure to prevent
misleading evidence going before the Local
Court from the conduct of the Respondent in this matter. Another matter of
was the distinction between the lack of independent material before
the Tribunal noted in the matter of Margiotta as opposed to the
material before
the current Tribunal (details of which are set out in detail below).
It was submitted on behalf
of the Respondent, with the greatest of respect, that the finding made by the
Tribunal regarding the credit
of the Respondent was harsh. The Respondent
submitted that the finding was based upon two matters. At T15.13-17 these
matters were
described as (with clarification
First of all, the letters that he wrote, 2 February 2006
, "To whom it may concern" which was clearly directed to HCF and the
second, 14 August 2006
[exhibit 22]
, to the HCCC which was part of
his response and the second category is Dr Ajam's letter to "Re motor
vehicle accident" which forms
The Respondent submitted
that the first two documents which indicated mistakes or administrative errors
were written at a time the
Respondent lacked insight and was in denial. The
submission went on as follows:
He was clearly, and I would submit you would accept, embarrassed and overwhelmed
by the situation he found himself in. The tribunal's
judgment notes those
matters in paras 19 and 20 and at 21 also notes that the second letter also
dealt with the question of record
keeping and he clearly said in the
14 August 2006 letter, "I have commenced four more patients files with
records for my family members
at my practice." That was correct. He had.
He was less than candid I acknowledge in that he did not point out that it was
re the motor vehicle accident but it was not actively
misleading, I would
submit, but the important submission that I make about this material is that it
was not repeated thereafter.
The fact that he was in denial at the time in
August 2006 and the blaming administrative errors, or mistakes in the billing
procedures,
was not something he adhered to.
Respondent submitted that there had been no repeat of the claims of mistake or
clerical issue from that time, being post August
2006. There can be no
suggestion (as is made in paragraph 16 of the HCCC submission) that any
dishonesty continued after that time,
although it was conceded that would be a
‘fair observation’ up to August 2006 (T34.28, 11.12.08). The
Respondent notes
that there was admission with respect to Particulars (a) to (m)
inclusive that related to the making of false claims and that the
Tribunal had
found against the Respondent with respect to (n), (o) and (p). The Respondent
was entitled to not make admission with
respect to those later particulars and
to have the matter tested before the Tribunal and the finding of the Tribunal
against him
does not make him of bad character.
The actions of the
Respondent subsequent to the findings of the Tribunal indicate that the
Respondent has developed insight and accepted
responsibility for his
The Respondent’s
submissions regarding the letter of Dr Ajam. The Respondent recalled that this
letter formed part of the original
clinical notes regarding Mrs A called for by
the Tribunal during the first phase of the Inquiry but after Mrs A had given her
The Respondent notes there ‘...was no application by
Mr Farmer and there was no request by the tribunal that Mrs Harper
so that matters adverse to her credit said to arise from that material
called for by the tribunal might be put to her’. It
was submitted, with
respect, that it appears the inconsistency between a passage in the letter from
Dr Ajam and the evidence of the
Respondent and Mrs A was relied upon by the
Tribunal when deciding not to accept the evidence of the Respondent and Mrs A.
The Respondent
submitted that such a finding should not lead the tribunal to a
finding of not of good character. The submissions continued (T17.15-23,
GREGG: One of the problems with Dr Ajam's letter, he is apparently
Indian by birth as high (sic) name might suggest, which would
also suggest
English is probably not his first language.
FARMER: Where does that come from?
GREGG: It is coming from the bar table.
FARMER: Fair dinkum.
The submission then went on
to deal with other circumstances that relate to mitigation.
• The Tribunal was informed that the Respondent had initiated contact with
the HCF and had reached settlement with them regarding
reimbursement. The terms
of the settlement are confidential. The Respondent had not waited for the
Tribunal’s decision in
this matter; rather he had taken this step because
he was of the view that it was the ‘proper and appropriate thing’
do. This indicates the Respondent is a ‘decent honest man’ who has
acted on his own conscience.
• The Respondent has been and is a preferred provider of three other
health funds (i.e. other than
The Respondent’s
submission also detailed the relevance of the bundle of documents that came into
evidence (exhibit R19).
In exhibit R19(a) the
Respondent points to the correspondence between himself and COCA regarding his
identification of an error in
the records held by COCA regarding his continuing
education, in his favour, and to his honesty in advising them of the error (to
his detriment).
At T21.37-42 it was
submitted that the letter written by the Respondent together with the balance of
exhibit 19 indicate the following:
He is not weaselling out of what he has done. He accepts what he has done. He
is ashamed of what he has done. He blames nobody
else but himself and he humbly
and contritely asks you to accept that apology to the tribunal and the
profession and he feels that
he has brought shame upon himself and shame upon
the profession and that does indicate insight...
Respondent submitted documentation regarding his attendance at a WorkCover
course and his accreditation in that regard (exhibit
In exhibit 19(c) there are
statements signed by various staff of the Respondent’s practices regarding
their understanding of
the operation of HICAPS.
Exhibit 19(d) contains a
number of testimonials. The Respondent submitted that it would be
‘splitting hairs’ if the Tribunal
were to place less weight on them
because they referred to allegations made against the Respondent rather than
admitted wrongdoings.
Further the Tribunal should look at the question of
character on the basis that the Respondent had been of good character up to five
or six years ago when this behaviour commenced. The Tribunal received further
details with respect to each of the testimonials provided.
The Respondent submitted
that the Tribunal is entitled to and should take into consideration the
testimonials provided. The following
submission was made on behalf of the
Respondent with respect to the testimonials (T22.17-25.13 and 25.48-27.18,
Mr Coates, the first of them, says he is astounded at the nature of the
allegations, that he has known him for over 15 years, throughout
and as a professional, known him to be of upstanding character for over
15 years and that goes to the before and after
submission that I am making.
And Mr Coates one might have thought would know something about character
because he had been five years
as a serving police officer and says he had
always considered Jon to be an honest and trustworthy member of the community
sees these allegations as totally out of character as he knows him. And
he voices the opinion that Mr Harper, as a registered practitioner,
respected spokesperson on chiropractic in the community.
You then have a reference from Ms Jovic who again was aware of the
proceedings before this tribunal and specifically that treatments
performed and that he failed to keep records. As it would appear, she is some
sort of marketing consultant to chiropractic
practitioners and deals with over
50 chiropractors and she says from her knowledge of Mr Harper she has
always found him to be upfront,
honest, straight to the point and determined to
run a professional and busy office, takes pride in his skills as a good
chiropractor
and she had received verbal compliments from a number of his
patients about him.
Mr John Doherty is a chiropractor at Caringbah and he knows Mr Harper.
He knew that this statement was to be provided to you as set
out in the first
paragraph, so he is aware of the nature of the proceedings. As set out in
para 2, he has known Mr Harper for three
years, introduced by another
chiropractor, Len Madar, who we will come to a bit later. Mr Doherty is
set up on view as a competitor
of Mr Harper, not very far to drive from
Gymea to Caringbah, anybody that lived in the Sutherland Shire could easily do
it is clear from Mr Doherty's testimonial that Mr Harper,
rather than treating Mr Doherty as a competitor, was in his words very
supportive and generous with his time and knowledge, which clearly as a new
practitioner to the area he appreciated. He says:
"Over the last three years I have a number of dealings with Mr Harper both
on a professional and business level. At all times I
have found him to be
honest, sincere and passionate about chiropractic. I was very surprised when I
heard that a professional complaint
had been brought against Mr Harper as
this appears out of character to the person I know and have had dealings
On a community level he believes him to be a responsible family man who spends
most of his free time with his family. That is relevant
to his recent conduct
and his character today and again, I submit, that Mr Doherty is somebody
that the tribunal - his opinion which
he was aware was being provided to you is
something that you could place weight upon.
The next testimonial is from Kendra Greer who is also a chiropractor. She has
worked with Mr Harper since November 2007. She states
that she is
providing this document as a character reference specifically for him for the
purposes of the proceedings before this
tribunal and as a chiropractor she would
be particularly careful and mindful of the importance of that. She says she has
aware of the allegations that he claimed for treatments that were not
provided and failed to keep clinical records.
"Having dealt with him for nine months
in business she says he is compassionate and kind, he never instructed or
encouraged her to
perform her duties in a dishonest way and has shown himself to
be a man of integrity when I have consulted him regarding business
That is a significant matter. That goes to his character today. It goes to his
character post August 2006. She has certainly never
witnessed this type of
behaviour that the allegations involved. She believes he is extremely dedicated
to his profession as well
as to his family and she offers that to you.
Then admittedly there is one from the home stable, as it were, Mr Harper's
father-in-law who you might expect would be well disposed
towards him or maybe
not, in-law sometimes are not, but in any event Mr Williams importantly
says he is aware of the allegations
and he states his interest. He doesn't just
pass himself off as a businessman he declares that he has got an interest with
his daughter
being married to Mr Harper. He states that Nicole is a
director of one of his companies and you will see from what he says in
3, supports the submission I made before about the culture, the
chiropractic culture of both Mr Harper's family and the family that
married into, his wife's family, the Williams's. He says, "I thank the day that
Jonathan became a chiropractor as myself
and my entire family believe in
chiropractic care."
Importantly, Mr Farmer's criticism such that it is falls flat in the face
of the last paragraph of Mr Williams's testimonial. He
says, "Jonathan is
a gentleman of high standing in my eyes that has devoted his full working life
to chiropractic. I understand
that Jonathan has admitted to certain wrongdoing
in connection with charges made for chiropractic care." That is an important
He has admitted it to his father-in-law. "From my close relationship
with him I am able to say that such conduct is totally out
of character to the
man I have known for 18 years." That is important. It goes to before and
after the 2000 to 2006 conduct and
yet despite that he says, "I retain full
confident in him and also confident that such behaviour was an aberration
unlikely to be
Then if you could skip Dr Ajam, which is next in the bundle, I will come
is a chiropractor, and
again significant weight should be placed upon Mr Madar's testimonial as a
chiropractor to this tribunal.
Again clearly from para 1 he is aware of
the nature of the complaints and he is aware that this letter may be provided to
He has been a practising chiropractor for 28 years and he has known
Mr Harper since Easter 2002, i.e., before the conduct complained
during it and afterwards.
He declares a professional and personal friendship and he remains in close
as a locum with different
methods of practise in different practices and different standards of record
keeping but says in his tenure
as a locum for Mr Harper all patients,
importantly, all patients had complete history and examination notes and
complete treatment
notes. That is a very significant matter. It goes to his
fitness to practise chiropractic and the way he dealt with his patients
tribunal should not transpose the transgressions that he made with respect to
his wife and two children and equate that
failure to keep adequate records with
the way he dealt with his patients.
Mr Madar describes the standard of practise in all areas at
Mr Harper's practice as high. This description would apply in particular
to record keeping and there is perhaps some insight here from Mr Madar, it
does not absolve Mr Harper but it is helpful to have the
insight about what
would appear to be fairly common practise amongst chiropractors. He says:
"It is my assertion that failure to
keep records of immediate family members is common practise among many
practitioners in the chiropractic
profession. I know many chiropractors that
provide casual manipulations to family members without keeping clinical records.
action is probably rendered out of familiarity with the family member. I
have never witnessed conduct by Jonathan that could lead
me to an opinion
otherwise."
And again it does not absolve him from his failure to keep adequate records for
his wife and children but perhaps it is something
that could be seen at the
lower end of the scale of culpability when viewed against the opinion of
Mr Madar who it is clear has worked
as a locum in many chiropractic
practices and one who you would assume was in the position of having made the
observations that he
has made available to this tribunal. He says he believes
he is in a good position to comment on Mr Harper's character. You would
accept that. He would not say that to you otherwise. He says he knows Jonathan
to be of high moral fibre and fine character and
that he is a good natured
fellow with a kind and caring personality which is a good fit for the practise
of chiropractic. "I have
never witnessed conduct by Jonathan that would lead me
to an opinion otherwise."
The next para I emphasise is very significant, "I know through regular
conversation with Jonathan that he is disappointed in himself,"
i.e., he has
admitted the wrongdoing to Mr Madar and he has discussed it with him.
Mr Madar goes on to say, "However I also believe
he has developed insight
into his conduct and I am positive that such conduct would never be repeated."
That is a significant matter
that you can place weight upon. Mr Madar,
with his own reputation and his own registration, would not mislead this
tribunal. He
says, and it might be something that the tribunal might consider
is worthy of consideration in formulating further orders, "If it
is required I
would be happy to act as a mentor for Jonathan," and that might be something, as
I say, is worthy of consideration.
Could I then still at tab 4 of your bundle go towards the end to the
testimonial from Paul Molino, who is a chiropractor, he was
also made aware of
the allegations and, as he states in the third paragraph, understands that this
letter may be provided to you,
members of the tribunal. He states that he has
known Mr Harper since March 2007, has intimate knowledge of Mr Harper
and his ethical
and moral standards and there sets out the business arrangement
and the practising arrangement. He comments favourably upon Mr Harper's
note taking as being thorough and complete and voices the opinion that the
standard of practise at both clinics in a business and
a professional sense is
of the highest standard he has experienced working for an employer. And that is
not an insignificant matter.
The next paragraph is also significant. He states that he has witnessed no
activities of a business or professional sense in his
dealings with
Mr Harper or his staff that would lead to any form of concern. He voices
the opinion that he finds Mr Harper to be
of extremely good character, who
provides a professional service equal to and above the level of care he has
experienced working
with numerous other employers, ie, chiropractors. He then
says he wants to take the time to make the point that Jonathan Harper
clinic that requires us as chiropractors to share patient treatment therefore he
is privy to the clinical notes Mr Harper
prepares and maintains for the
patients we share. "I have never witnessed patients' files that are
non-existent, incomplete or unsatisfactory,"
and that is a matter of
significance too.
He believes that the patient files kept at both places are contemporaneous and
reflect thorough and well-educated thought processes
in a clinical picture of
each and every patient. He says he has worked for seven chiropractors as a
locum. One is entitled to assume
he means seven different chiropractors or
seven different practices and approximately half of those required transactions
to be placed
through a HICAPS terminal or receipting processes under the
chiropractor on leave as opposed to making arrangements with HICAPS to
proper HIC number. "To Jonathan's credit his standard was that this sort of
practise is unacceptable and the requisite
process for registration of a locum
chiropractor was followed properly." That is a significant matter, with
He has observed let's call it shoddiness, let's call it unprofessional conduct,
in relation to accreditation with HICAPS of locums
at other practices, three or
four other practices, and it is obviously a simple matter just to keep using the
billing number of a
chiropractor who has gone on leave but Mr Harper, as he
points out, found that unacceptable and had the locum registered and properly
accredited. You can safely infer that Mr Harper does have some insight and
his insight is not just - he is not just paying lip service
to his insight for
the purposes of this tribunal. He has changed. He has, one hesitates to say
but if it is possible, benefited
from this process - it is demonstrated by that.
It is demonstrated by his dealings with the CAA, how he informed them of these
proceedings
before the tribunal. It is demonstrated by his correction of the
accreditation hours with COCA. This is a person who is, I submit,
The remaining testimonials are from Ms Sarah Hunt, it is a half page
testimonial dated 1 December. She is a law student. A student
you would repose some confidence in to express her views candidly and honestly
and she says in her final paragraph:
"Having worked for Mr Harper as a law student I understand completely the
importance of integrity and honesty in a relationship of
care and in my time
working for and with Mr Harper he has shown nothing to suggest a disregard
for this. He runs his business with
professional efficiency and takes the
greatest of care with his patients and their records."
And again she in the second paragraph says, "He put measures in place to ensure
that all individuals working within his clinics are
well aware of how to operate
correctly the HICAPS terminal."
And then lastly was the one I skipped over which was Dr Ajam. I do not
think I need to pay special attention to that. You have
no doubt read it. He
is supportive of Mr Harper. He is supportive of chiropractic in general
and he reposes trust in Mr Harper,
which no doubt has been accumulated over
the period of time dealing with him.
The Respondent submitted
that the financial arrangements he had put in place mean that he is not
suffering from the financial pressures
that brought him to make the false claims
and is relevant to the prospect of his
re-offending.
The Respondent submitted
that when consideration is made by the Tribunal of the remarks made by Powell JA
in the matter of McBride
v Walton that a favourable view would be formed
regarding the Respondent’s conduct ‘post the proven episode of
misconduct’
to demonstrate ‘that public and professional confidence
may be reposed in him to uphold and observe the high standards of moral
rectitude required of a
[chiropractor]
It was submitted by the
Respondent that once he overcame denial of the issue post August 2006 the
Respondent has once again acted
with good character as he had done prior to
January 2000. The conduct of the Respondent should be regarded as an aberration
to observe (T34.43-35.11, 11.12.08):
It is sometimes said in the criminal courts, but it is not less relevant here,
that a person lives a life and builds up a stock of
good character. You do not
just look at the period in time during which they fell from grace. It is
appropriate and it is a proper
consideration in sentencing - you are not
sentencing - but it is proper to the considerations that are bearing upon the
mind as to what consequential orders you might make that you look at
his whole life and he has led a decent life. He is a person
of good character
before these events, he was involved in his church; he was doing community work.
He is obviously a good father.
He dotes on his wife and children. His
colleagues speak highly of him. His employees speak highly of him.
He has done the right thing since August 2006. He is ashamed but he is not
hiding it. He has had to deal with it. He has had to
come to terms with it and
I submit that you would have some confidence that he has come to terms with it
in a way that does him some
credit and that in a period of his greatest need,
which is now, that he could call upon that stock of good character that has
accumulated
over the whole of his life and that you should weigh up the conduct
in the period in question against the whole of his life and what
The Respondent submitted
that an appropriate period of suspension for the Respondent would be six months,
this being the period of
time that set by the Tribunal in the matter of
Margiotta. This submission was supported by the following summary of the
distinctions
between this matter and that of Margiotta
(T35.13-23,11.12.08):
I respectfully submit, for the reasons I have gone into in some detail, this is
a better case than Margiotta, better in the sense
of more favourable in all the
circumstances that are relevant to the consequential orders you need to make and
that you are considering
of more benefit to Mr Harper. The particular
circumstances in Mr Margiotta, lack of insight, greater risk of
re-offending, maintaining
against the weight of the evidence at defence that was
doomed to fail, all those matters are quite significant distinguishing
The Respondent indicated
through his Counsel that he accepted the decision of the Tribunal with respect
to the conduct particularised
in (n), (o) and (p) for the purpose of this
The Respondent indicated
opposition to the HCCC application for costs. In support of this submission the
Respondent noted (T35.26-32,
...the issues at the hearing were limited. The tribunal's time was not wasted
running defences that were doomed to fail. The tribunal
was given notice
beforehand that there would be no contest as to particulars A to M.
The hearing was run efficiently, with respect,
and confined to the matters that
were in contest and he was entitled to contest N, O and P, in my submission, you
would not entertain
the costs order that Mr Farmer seeks.
Respondent did not submit that there were any special circumstances in this
matter and that an ordinary costs order following
the event would be
appropriate.
Submissions in reply made by
the HCCC regarding the Complaint
The HCCC submitted that
little weight if any can be accorded to the statement of the Respondent read out
to the Tribunal by Counsel
for the Respondent in the circumstances were the
Respondent was present and ‘...has refused to say anything about what
the false claims to be made’.
In relation to the reliance
on the matter of Margiotta by the Respondent the HCCC submitted that it was not
open for them to distinguish
it in the manner detailed as the circumstances were
different in a fundamental regard. In Margiotta, the Respondent admitted the
Particulars and to professional misconduct and it was for the Tribunal to be
satisfied whether he was a person of good character.
In this matter the
Respondent was disputing some of the Particulars which have been found against
him by the Tribunal. The HCCC submission
continued (T36.44-37.10, 11.12.08):
My learned friend says that it was a limited defence and one that was not doomed
to fail. That may be so but it has failed and my
learned friend does not deal
with the consequences of the failure, that is, that the tribunal has rejected
Mr Harper's sworn evidence
that the services said to have been provided to
his wife and children were provided. That was his defence, "I provided those
treatments.
Each and every one of them were required and provided," and the
tribunal has simply not accepted him in that regard. It flows from
that that my
learned friend's submission that his conduct post August 2006 has been exemplary
simply cannot stand.
In light of the tribunal's finding he has been found to be someone who is not
truthful and not truthful in his dealings with the
tribunal. It is a matter of
some concern and viewed as such by tribunals of this kind when the practitioner
does not appear before
them and display candour in relation to the conduct,
which is the subject of the complaints, and frankly Mr Harper has not shown
the candour that would be expected of an honourable member of the
profession.
The HCCC submitted that the
lack of testimonial evidence in Margiotta was explained by his inability to
overcome his shame. With respect
to the submission that the period of time of
the offending being similar, the HCCC submitted that the offending of Mr
Margiotta was
limited to a period of about 29 months spread over four years.
With respect to the Respondent the pattern of offending was
over a period of six
The HCCC submitted that
‘...whilst it is a useful decision in terms of considering matters of this
kind it is not sufficiently
similar, in my submission, for my learned friend to
assert that what resulted so far as protective orders were concerned for
Mr Margiotta
should apply here..
The HCCC submitted that the
Respondent’s position that all of the treatments covered by Particulars
(n), (o) and (p) had in
fact been provided was ‘fantastic’ and as it
had been maintained up until the findings of the Tribunal conflicts with
submission that the Respondent accepts responsibility for his actions and has
the requisite insight into his misconduct.
The HCCC submitted that a
finding of bad character is founded on a combination of factors.
The HCCC refuted the
Respondent’s submission regarding the Tribunal’s reliance on the
contrasting evidence between the
evidence of the Respondent and Mrs A with the
contents of the letter from Dr Ajam. The HCCC point to the content of paragraph
of the Tribunal’s decision with respect to the Particulars which
176. Even without regard to the contents of the report of Dr Ajam, the
Tribunal could not accept in the context of the evidence in
this matter that all
treatments as particularised in Particulars (q), (r) and (s) had in fact been
The HCCC made further
submissions on the lack of foundation of the Respondent’s (respectful)
criticism regarding the Tribunal’s
use of the report of Dr Ajam which do
not need to be reproduced here as the contents of paragraph 176 should be
sufficient to deal
appropriately with this
As to the submission in
mitigation regarding the Respondent being the preferred provider for three
health insurance funds, the Tribunal
has nothing before it apart from the
statement made from the bar table nor is there anything regarding the knowledge
of these funds
regarding the subject matter of the Particulars found proven by
the tribunal.
With respect to the
submissions made by the Respondent on the question of character, it was
submitted by the HCCC that the position
of the Respondent was not as strong as
that of Mr Margiotta. Mr Margiotta had undertaken work on a voluntary
The references provided by
the Respondent speak mainly of the Respondent’s reputation rather than his
character and it is unclear
exactly what the authors knew of the
Respondent’s conduct, in particular that there were 1100 false claim made
over a period
of six years. The HCCC submitted it was for the Respondent to
clarify exactly what the knowledge of authors was with to this matter.
references speak of the Complaint being in relation to the claims being made for
chiropractic treatment without reference to
the claims for physiotherapy
treatment and also cut across the initial assertion of the Respondent that he
did perform the services.
The submission
from the bar table made by the Respondent regarding financial difficulties
suffered was addressed by the HCCC. The
HCCC submitted that it was difficult to
see how an amount as modest as $6-700 per month would relieve the financial
Findings in relation to the Complaints
Complaints One and
Tribunal is of the view that record keeping is an essential element of any
professional persons practice. It is fundamental and
elementary. There is no
basis upon which the Tribunal could find that keeping of no records in a health
professionals practice is
appropriate. This is supported by the reference in
paragraph 5 of the Chiropractors Code of Professional Conduct which requires
the notes be kept securely.
Although in a different
context (Health
Insurance Act 1973
(Cth)), comments made by French CJ and Gummow
J, in a recent decision of the High Court of Australia, Wong v Commonwealth of
[2009] HCA 3
regarding record keeping are of assistance. In
paragraph 63 their Honours make the following
The keeping of adequate and contemporaneous records of the rendering or the
initiation of services provided by the practitioner is,
as the place of
within the definition of “inappropriate practice” indicates, apt to
assist the Committees in reaching their reasonable
conclusion as to unacceptable
conduct for
The judgment continues in
paragraph 64 to talk of there being both written and unwritten rules of a
profession that should be adhered
to by professionals of good repute and
competence. There should never again be a suggestion that the keeping of records
essential part of chiropractic
The Respondent’s
evidence on the issue of record keeping was indeed misleading and in the view of
the Tribunal damaged his credibility.
Further his evidence regarding the keeping
of records only for the purpose of supporting a potential civil claim reinforces
the conclusion
that the Respondent was aware of his responsibility to keep
records. The keeping of records would have provided some degree of support
the Respondent’s assertion that all treatments recorded in the HICAPS
documentation did in fact occur.
The failure of the
Respondent to make appropriate records regarding the treatment of Mrs A, Master
B and Master C (Particulars (n),
(o) and (p)) is in the view of the Tribunal
unsatisfactory professional conduct. This conduct is in the view of the Tribunal
by the conduct of the Respondent in keeping notes for a specific
purpose only and only just falls short of conduct that would justify
the removal
of the Respondent’s name from the Register.
The balance of the
Particulars can be divided into two categories. Those dealing with claims made
for treatment said to have been
provided by other health care practitioners
(Particulars (a) to (l)) and those dealing with claims for treatment said to
provided by the Respondent (including services to himself –
Particulars (m), (q), (r) and (s)).
The Tribunal takes into
account the admissions of the Respondent regarding the services claimed to have
been provided by other health
care practitioners and those said to have been
provided by him to himself.
It is troubling to the
Tribunal however that the Respondent was willing to involve other health care
professionals, particularly those
in his employ, as part of this scheme to
obtain payments through the HICAPS system.
How the Respondent thought
he could maintain or verify claims for chiropractic treatment to himself is
quite incredible. It is hardly
surprising that this appears to have been the
trigger for scrutiny of HCF.
The Respondent also made
claims for a large number of services to members of his family that the Tribunal
has found he did not provide.
The conduct of the
Respondent with respect to the making of claims for services that were not in
fact provided amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct of such a
sufficiently serious nature to justify the removal of the Respondent’s
name from the Register.
A finding of professional misconduct is therefore made
and Complaint Two is established. The Respondent demonstrated a lack of
and knowledge by his conduct. The conduct is found by the Tribunal to
be unethical and improper.
The Tribunal has taken care
to consider the Respondent’s character as at the time of the Inquiry. In
this matter, the relevant
time to consider the Respondent’s character is
as at December 2008. This position is well settled law and the Tribunal will
lengthen this Reasons document by recounting the law.
There is no doubt that at
the time the Respondent was making the false claims he was not of good character
for the purpose of the
The Respondent’s
conduct since that time has shown a number of redeeming trends. Although not
immediate, the Respondent made
admission regarding certain Particulars. He has
co-operated with the disciplinary process and attended before the Tribunal.
are still some features of his conduct that raise concern. The Tribunal
appreciates that the Respondent faced (and may still do so)
legal proceedings in
other jurisdictions relating to his conduct. This is not a case of double
jeopardy as submitted by the Respondent
but is an explanation of the position he
took with respect to the giving of evidence.
The Respondent has taken
steps to settle his position with HCF and has taken what can only be seen as a
preliminary step in the exploration
of the ethics (or rather lack there of) of
the conduct he engaged in.
On balance, the Tribunal is
not comfortably satisfied that the Respondent lacks the good character required
by the Act. His character
has certainly been tarnished by his conduct as has the
reputation of the profession. It is only his previous good character and his
subsequent conduct that allows the Tribunal to dismiss Complaint Three. It was
however quite proper for the HCCC to make this complaint
and there will be no
consequential reduction in the costs awarded
Appropriate Protective
Chiropractors, like all
health care professionals are placed in positions of trust in many respects.
They are not only trusted to
provide the best possible care to patients, but are
also entrusted with privileges such as the right charge for services. If there
is a loss of faith in health care professionals to be honest in their dealings
there is a risk that they will lose the privileges
that have been accorded to
them. Professional privileges must be guarded by all members of a profession.
This Tribunal is concerned
with the protection of the public, the protection of
the reputation of the profession as well as the maintenance of public confidence
in the profession. The conduct of the Respondent has the potential to damage the
reputation of the profession as well as the confidence
reposed in the profession
by the public. It is appropriate that the orders made by this Tribunal address
the objects of the protective
nature of this jurisdiction.
The Tribunal does not have
any concerns regarding the clinical competence of the Respondent. The Respondent
has done no harm to any
patient. If it were otherwise the Tribunal would proceed
without further consideration to make an order that the Respondent’s
be removed from the Register.
In deciding on the
appropriate orders to make in this matter the Tribunal is mindful not to be
punitive. Once again this is a well
settled principle of the law which does not
require detailed enunciation in this document.
The Tribunal is of the view
that the reputation of the profession, the confidence reposed in the profession
by the public and the
safety of the public can be appropriately protected by the
imposition of a period of suspension of the Respondent from practice and
imposition of conditions upon his practice
thereafter.
The Respondent, somewhat
insightfully, voluntarily suspended himself from the Register on 12 December
2008. The Tribunal considers
that the Respondent requires a period of six months
to fully reflect upon his conduct before a suspension could be lifted. The
therefore will order that the Respondent is to be suspended for a
period of six months but will backdate the suspension to 12 December
Once the suspension has
elapsed (12 June 2008), the Respondent’s name will no longer be suspended
from the Register but he will
not be permitted to work as a chiropractor unless
or until he has complies with various requirements as detailed in the Orders
These conditions relate to
the establishing of a mentor relationship with a suitably qualified and
experienced chiropractor and the
commitment to undertaking an appropriate course
of study with respect to ethics. Once these matters are in place, the Respondent
may commencing working as a chiropractor with conditions on his practice.
Given the quantity of the
offending behaviour and the period of time over which it occurred the Tribunal
is of the view that it is
appropriate that the conditions regarding mentoring
should remain in place for a minimum period of two years. As the Tribunal plays
no further role in this matter once the orders are entered, the Tribunal relies
upon the expertise of the Board to decide, in accordance
with the issues and
concerns raised in this matter, when the Respondent no longer requires the
formal mentoring provided for herein
and the condition may then be lifted. This
may be at the elapse of the minimum two year period or some considerable time
The mentor approved by the
Board should be an experienced practitioner of good standing in the profession.
It would not be appropriate
for the Board to approve one of the practitioners
who provided a testimonial for the Respondent in this Inquiry, nor should they
be a friend or member of the family of the Respondent.
The Tribunal is of the view
that the Respondent will benefit from a more structured course of instruction
regarding ethical conduct.
The counselling he received from the St James Ethic
Centre appears to have been of some benefit to the Respondent. While the work
this organisation is admirable, it is the view of the Tribunal that the
Respondent is in need of more substantial instruction
and guidance through the
area of professional ethics to remedy the defects in his conduct. A more
structured course will assist the
Respondent in gaining insight into the nature
of consequences of his misconduct and will no doubt assist in ensuring there
no future recurrence of this behaviour. To this end the Tribunal makes
Orders below relating to the successful completion of an approved
ethics. The course should involve at least 80 hours of face to face and guided
study over a period of approximately one
semester. There must be an
appropriately qualified supervisor for the course, an appropriate syllabus and
at least one major essay
as an assessment.
The Registry will provide
some guidance as to the parameters and possible providers of an appropriate
course. Upon receipt of written
confirmation of the Respondent’s
successful completion of this course the Board may remove this condition on
There will be costs
associated with compliance with the Orders made herein. The Respondent is to
bear these costs. The HCCC has substantially
established the Complaint before
the Tribunal. There are no special or exceptional circumstances submitted by the
Respondent that
would allow the Tribunal to make anything other than the usual
‘costs follow the event’ order.
Section 53 Orders
92. The Tribunal hereby orders:
1. The Respondent is hereby reprimanded (see Annexure B
2. The Respondent’s Registration is suspended for a period of six calendar
months commencing from 12 December 2008.
3. After the period of suspension has lapsed, the Respondent will be entitled to
work as a chiropractor provided he has:
a. Written to the Board proposing the name of a registered chiropractor to act
as his mentor for its approval.
b. Received written confirmation from the Board of a suitable mentor for his
practice (Approved Mentor).
c. Provided written confirmation to the Board that he has undertaken an initial
meeting with the Approved Mentor and agreed on a
plan for the mentoring
(Mentoring Plan). The Respondent is to forward a copy of the Mentoring Plan to
the Board along with a copy
of the written authority and direction to the
Approved Mentor to provide reports to the Board on a third monthly basis.
d. Written to the Board seeking approval from the Board for a course on study
focused on ethics, and received written confirmation
of the Board’s
4. The Respondent’s practice is to be mentored by the Approved Mentor for
a minimum period of two years. The Respondent is
to provide the Board with
written confirmation from the Approved Mentor that they have been authorised and
directed to inform the
Board of any issues of concern they have identified in
the Respondent’s practices. The Respondent is to request, authorise
direct the Approved Mentor to provide to the Board a report every three months
on the Respondent’s practices.
5. The Respondent is to provide written reports to the Board on a third monthly
basis reporting on all aspects of his practice and
the progress he is making
with the Approved Mentor and the ethics course (if same is not at the time
satisfactorily completed).
6. The Respondent is to provide the Board with written confirmation of the
satisfactory completion of the Approved Ethic Course within
a period of 18
months of the date hereof. If the Respondent fails to provide this documentation
the Board will consider that the
Respondent is in breach of an Order of the
Tribunal and act accordingly.
7. The Respondent is to provide a copy of the major essay undertaken as part of
the Approved Ethics Course to the Board.
8. After a period of two years, the Respondent may apply to the Board to remove
the condition requiring mentoring of his practice.
9. If at any time the Respondent works as an employee or contractor he is to
advise the relevant person in authority of any of the
conditions that may be at
that time remaining on his practice. If the Respondent enters a professional
partnership with another health
care professional he is to advise them of the
conditions on his practice.
10. The Respondent is to meet all costs associated with compliance with these
11. The Respondent is to pay the HCCC costs as agreed or assessed. If the
parties cannot agree on the costs the parties have leave
to apply for the
Tribunal to reconvene for the purpose of determining
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for Decision
(with respect to Particulars) document is to be forwarded by the Registry
1) The Respondent and his legal advisers;
2) The HCCC and its
legal advisers;
4) The Board; and
5) In accordance with
statutory requirements.
Dated: 2009
__________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Jacqueline Milne
___________________
Edwin Devereaux AM
___________________
Warwick Bateman OAM
Annexure A – Schedule of documents in
Annexure B - Reprimand
Annexure C – Schedule of names
HCCC V Harper
OF DOCUMENTS IN EVIDENCE
DOCUMENTS TENDERED BY THE RESPONDENT ON SUBMISSIONS
R15. Original Chiropractic and Osteopathic College of Australia documents
entitled ‘Rehabilitation of the spine’, ‘Management
musculoskeletal pain’ and Victorian WorkCover Authority document dated 8-9
October 2005.
R16. Original Clinical notes of Mrs A including notes made up to date of
R17. Original Clinical notes of Master B including notes made up to date of
R18. Original Clinical notes of Master C including notes made up to date of
R19. Folder of documents as
Chiropractic
and Osteopathic College of Australia Distance Education courses and
NSW WorkCover workbook and
Documents signed by staff
Testimonials
One Wseminar and attendance record
Improvement Excercises
DOCUMENTS TENDERED BY THE HCCC ON SUBMISSIONS
No documents were tendered by the Health Care Complaints Commission during
this stage of the Inquiry.
HCCC V Harper
JONATHAN ANDREW HARPER
Jonathan Harper, you have been found guilty of professional misconduct. The
Tribunal finds that you showed serious errors of judgement
and knowledge in
relation to your responsibilities as a registered chiropractor. This behaviour
was both unethical and improper.
You are reprimanded by this Tribunal
for bringing the reputation of the profession in to disrepute. Your conduct also
had the potential
to damage the level of confidence and trust place in the
profession by the public and organisations such as health insurance providers.
Abuse of the privileges associated with registration by even one member of a
profession may lead to loss of those privileges and
cannot be condoned.
The Tribunal has considered the steps you have taken to remediate the
consequences of your actions. These factors do not in any way
excuse your
behaviour but have allowed the Tribunal to consider the placing of conditions on
your practice as an alternative to deregistration.
Conditions are
placed on your practice to assist you to develop the judgement and knowledge
required to maintain appropriate professional
practises at all times. The course
in ethics and the mentoring have the potential to assist you in recognising and
avoiding unethical
and improper behaviour in the future.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (372 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter