URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Malcolm Hughes [2013] NSWMT 15 (28 August 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Malcolm Hughes
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 15
Hearing Date(s):
26/08/2013 - 28/08/2013
Decision Date:
28 August 2013
Elkaim SC DCJ
Dr P Truskett
Dr E Tompsett
Complaints 1 and 3 dismissed. Complaint 2 established in respect of
Particular 1.
Catchwords:
Competence of surgery, standard of record keeping
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
Medical Practice
Regulation 2008
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Dr Malcolm Hughes
(Respondent)
Representation
C P O'Donnell (Applicant)
P M Strickland SC (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Suppression order re the name of Patient A
Suppression order re the
name of Dr X
Tribunal has heard three complaints brought by the Health Care Complaints
Commission ("HCCC") against Dr Malcolm Hughes ("the
respondent").
1 alleges "
unsatisfactory professional conduct
" within the meaning of
Section 139B(1)(a) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) (the "National Law"). The complaint arises from tendon repair surgery
carried out by the respondent at the Broken Hill Base
Hospital on 6 February
2 also alleges "
unsatisfactory professional conduct
" arising from the
above surgery but is concerned with the record of the surgery including an
allegation of unethical conduct in the
manner that the record came to be
3 is based on the same particulars as Complaints 1 and 2 but alleges
professional misconduct"
within the meaning of Section 139E of the
National Law.
origin of the complaints is a letter from a Mr Stuart Riley dated 17 February
2011 (Exhibit A, Tab 2).
HCCC relied on an expert report from A/Prof Kleinman in support of its
of the complaints were denied. The respondent said the surgery was competently
performed and the record of it was fair and accurate.
He did concede the record
was lacking in some detail, but not so as to establish the
respondent relied on his own expert, Dr Long, who, in summary, made the
following points:
(a) On the description of the surgery given by the respondent, the actions of
the respondent were appropriate. Dr Long would have
used different sutures, but
that was not a matter of significance.
(b) Premature active movement on the patient's part may have disrupted the
(c) It was not unknown for evidence of a previous tendon repair to be absent on
a subsequent repair.
(d) The operation report of 6 February 2010 was
unsatisfactory.
approaching these allegations the Tribunal was mindful that, firstly the onus
was on the HCCC to prove the complaints and, secondly
that although the standard
of proof is on the balance of probabilities it should nevertheless apply the
standard set out in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
respondent was born in 1948. He obtained his MBBS in 1972 from the University of
New South Wales. He became a Fellow of the Royal
Australasian College of
Surgeons in 1981. His working background is set out in his CV and also in the
introduction to his statement
dated 15 December 2012 (Exhibit 1).
respondent can be described as a very experienced general surgeon who appears to
have concentrated on colorectal and endoscopic
surgery. At the present time the
respondent operates from private rooms in Blacktown and Castle Hill and has a
position as a general
surgeon at Minchinbury Community Hospital. He is on the
Medical Advisory Committee of this hospital. He does a fair amount of locum
at Gladstone Hospital in Queensland.
suffered from a period of depression from about 2002 which led to some time off
and then the imposition of conditions on his continuing
practice. The conditions
were removed in 2006.
at February 2010 the respondent's experience with tendon repair was limited.
Such surgery was normally undertaken by orthopaedic
and plastic surgeons;
however, he did perform tendon repairs
"infrequently"
when working in the
country. He states that he was however
"familiar with the technique required
to perform a tendon repair"
. He estimated he had performed 10 to 20 tendon
repairs through his consultant career, but none in the year before the subject
The subject surgery and discussion
respondent was performing a locum at Broken Hill Base Hospital from 1 February
to 8 February 2010. The patient upon whom the surgery
was performed is referred
to in the complaints as Patient A. The same description will be given to him in
this judgment.
A arrived at the hospital by ambulance at about 1.50am on 6 February 2010. He
had either fallen through or stepped through
a window. He may have been drinking
alcohol and smoking marijuana. He had some lacerations to his right arm but his
most significant
injury was to his right leg. Patient A was then 16 years of
Surgical Registrar on duty was Dr X. At that time Dr X had been in the surgical
training programme for only three weeks. He had
no experience with tendon
repair. A decision was made that Patient A required surgery. He was prepared for
surgery at about midday
on the day of his admission. An anaesthetic was
administered by Dr Rigg-Smith and surgery commenced at about 12.40pm.
nature of the procedure then performed is at the core of the complaints.
According to the HCCC a proper tendon repair was never
performed. The repair
envisaged was the joining together of the two ends of three severed tendons.
These tendons were most likely
the tibialis anterior and two of the extensor
digitorum longus tendons (see Exhibit 4). The former is much larger than the
to Dr X the proximal (closest to the body) end of the tendons were attached to
some loose tissue (fascia) on the dorsum
(top) of the right foot. They were
never attached, as they should have been, to the distal (furthest from the body)
ends of the tendons.
to the respondent the two ends of the respective tendons were attached using a
procedure known as the Kessler Technique.
He describes this technique in
paragraph 5 of his statement (Exhibit 1).
the surgery an operation report was written by Dr X. Dr X says the report was
and dictated to him by the respondent (Exhibit A, Tab 9,
paragraph 35). The respondent says the report is fundamentally accurate.
use of the word "
" was misleading. It is clear from both the
statement, and confirmed by Dr X in his oral evidence, that his intention was to
that while the description of the record was inaccurate, that was not
necessarily the opinion of the respondent. This is consistent
with Dr X's
evidence that the respondent told him that the stitching to the muscle would
create the same functional outcome as if it was tendon
question is not whether attachment to the fascia was an effective means of
tendon repair. The respondent simply says he did not
do this. It is agreed by
all concerned that the alleged procedure would not be effective. The question is
rather whether the respondent
joined the opposing ends of the tendons or whether
he joined one end to the loose fascia.
use of sutures is independently confirmed in the nurse's report in Exhibit A
(Tab 17A, page 34).
refers to needles with an attached
A was discharged on 8 February 2010. He returned on 15 February for review when
a clinical assessment indicated functional
deficiencies.
discharge and re-admission Dr X spoke to Dr Wilkinson, his head of department,
and said he had concerns about the operation.
Dr Wilkinson had been absent when
the operation was performed.
an examination by Dr Wilkinson on 15 February, Patient A was sent to the Royal
Adelaide Hospital. Further surgery was performed
on 19 February 2010 by Dr
Fassina, assisted by Dr Silveria. The operation note, written by the latter
doctor, includes this sentence:
"No evidence of tendon repair"
sentence just quoted is prima facie inconsistent with the respondent having
carried out a tendon repair some 13 days earlier.
Resolution of this apparent
inconsistency has been fundamental to the Tribunal's decision.
HCCC relied heavily on the comment in the Adelaide Hospital notes that no
evidence of tendon repair had been found. This, it was
submitted, plainly
corroborated the HCCC's case that a tendon repair had not previously taken
place. The prime evidence of tendon
repair that one would have expected to have
found on the reopening of the wound was the sutures that would have been used in
first operation. None were found. This fact, however, is also the
respondent's strongest point.
to the respondent, and in particular his expert Dr Long, and as mentioned above,
it is possible for sutures not to be found
when a wound is reopened. The HCCC
said this was not possible because the sutures would not have dissolved within
the 13 days between
operations. The difficulty is that if that were the case
then why did Dr Fassina not at least find evidence of the sutures attached
the proximal ends of the tendons. On Dr X's evidence these sutures were
unquestionably put in place.
X was the principal witness for the HCCC. He was extensively and closely
cross-examined. The cross-examination was unquestionably
fair but nevertheless
rigorous. In the opinion of the Tribunal Dr X was a very impressive witness. The
Tribunal noted that there
were a number of questions in respect of which he
could not recall the answers. Often this is a sign of, at least, an unsure or
witness. The Tribunal does not reach any such conclusion in respect
of Dr X. The matters that he could not recall were often conversations
events, which were at the periphery of the core facts. As far as the actual
operation was concerned, Dr X was certain.
is some conflict between Dr X's evidence and that of Dr Rigg-Smith as to the
respondent chatting to the anaesthetist and perhaps
being distracted. The
Tribunal does not think this conflict is significant and is of the view that the
trainee surgeon's perception
may well have been influenced by the difficulty
that he was having with the procedure.
Rigg-Smith forcefully, and with a degree of unnecessary professional outrage,
rejected any suggestion of impropriety during the
operation. He had known the
respondent as an acquaintance and had some professional dealings with him over a
number of years. He
had no clear recollection of the procedure. His evidence was
effectively a statement that if something untoward had occurred he would
recalled it.
Dr Rigg-Smith was perhaps a little too strident in his rejection of any fault
occurring in his presence, the Tribunal is
not in a position to reject his
evidence. The Tribunal also notes that on the favourable impression it formed of
Dr X that any protestations
by Dr X would have been made in a quiet and
respectful fashion and not likely to have attracted the attention of Dr
Rigg-Smith.
Rigg-Smith made no observations of the wound and his evidence is ultimately of
little assistance to the Tribunal.
important point in relation to Dr X's credit was that no credible explanation
was given for his, on the respondent's case, invention
of this version against
the respondent. In one instance it was put to Dr X that his evidence was false.
The closest that the respondent
came to providing some sort of motive was as a
diversion to Dr X being found responsible for the incomplete record of the
The Tribunal does not understand how such a motive would lead him to
falsify the details of the operation.
in saying that the respondent dictated the operation report to him Dr X made the
point that he did not think that the respondent
believed that the operation had
not been properly done. Dr X obviously saw himself as a very junior doctor in
the presence of, and
hoping to learn from, an experienced general surgeon. This
attitude even emerged in his oral evidence when he said,
"... I remember
asking Dr Hughes to scrub in, which he very kindly did, and then
Fassina gave evidence via videolink from Adelaide. He has a good deal of
experience with tendon surgery. He said that when exploring
the wound he was not
specifically looking for suture material, rather he was trying to identify the
reason for the apparently failed
previous tendon repair. He did not find any
sutures. He said it was possible that there had been sutures present but not
rejected the possibility that sutures were found but not recorded. He
also rejected the possibility that sutures had been lost within
various tissues.
He did not reject, but gave little credence to the possibility that the sutures
(Vicryl) would have dissolved after
a period of 13 days.
Dr Fassina gave evidence the question arose as to the possibility that the
missing sutures may have been 'hidden' in the sheaths
surrounding the damaged
tendons. Because this possibility had not been put to Dr Fassina he gave further
evidence by telephone. When
this possibility was put to him he accepted it as a
remote possibility.
giving his telephone evidence Dr Fassina was adamant:
"There was no evidence
of any other suture material. There was no evidence that the tendons had been
opposed. There was no evidence
of there being damage to the ends of the tendons
that may indicate that the suture material had pulled out of the tendon. You
there was no evidence of the tendons being repaired."
Tribunal has no reason to doubt the veracity of Dr Fassina's observations but
remained with the problem arising from the undisputed
evidence that sutures had
been attached to the proximal ends of the severed tendons.
Kleinman provided the HCCC's expert report (Exhibit A, Tabs 18 - 22). He also,
during his oral evidence, made available the
manufacturer's estimates of the
period that it would take for sutures to be absorbed following insertion. It is
clear from these
statistics, in Exhibit B, that Vicryl would not be expected to
dissolve within 13 days.
Kleinman said, in relation to sutures on the proximal ends of the tendons:
If it were in the tendon you would expect to see it on the end of the
Kleinman shared the Tribunal's difficulty in relation to the missing sutures. He
"Q. Could the first lot have disappeared?
A. It couldn't - it's too soon for them to dissolve at 13 days, they
wouldn't have disappeared. If the tendon had retracted and the
suture torn out,
because apparently the registrar's note was that he'd stitched the tendon to the
deep fascia and the muscle would
contract, could have pulled out, but then the
surgeon in, Dr Fassina saw no evidence of suture material, there was no evidence
the ..(not transcribable).. had been repaired, so I'm not quite sure what
that means. It doesn't say there was a deep tendon, and
doesn't say - it just
says there was no evidence of repair, and I have been thinking about it a lot
and I'm very confused."
respondent gave evidence in a generally confident and straightforward manner. He
recounted his version of events to the extent
that his recollection permitted.
He was adamant that he had joined the tendons and that he had not attached any
of the tendons to
the fascia.
described an arguably patronising approach to his supervision of Dr X, at one
stage stating that he had initially allowed Dr X
to continue in the procedure in
order, in effect, to test his mettle.
Hughes said that it was an operation that he knew he would always have to do
himself. This was because of Dr X's known inexperience.
were inconsistencies in Dr Hughes' evidence but none that would lead the
Tribunal to the conclusion that he was dishonest or
would inescapably lead to a
conclusion that he had not attempted a tendon repair as he alleged.
Hughes described the operation as he would have performed it stating that in the
order of 25cm of suture would have been used for
the repair of the three severed
tendons. He had no explanation for Dr Fassina not finding any evidence of tendon
repair but this
did not deflect him from his insistence that he had carried out
the repairs.
respondent was equally insistent that he had not attached the proximal ends of
the tendons to the fascia. He said such a procedure
would have been
Conclusions
strength of the HCCC's case lies in the observations of Dr Fassina that there
was no evidence of previous tendon repair. Basic
to this evidence was the
absence of any sutures. Had the contest been between absolutely no repair and a
repair as described by the
respondent, then the Tribunal would have had
difficulty in rejecting Dr Fassina's observations.
has been said before in this judgment the division of versions was not, however,
so stark. It was complicated by the accepted evidence
that at least one end of
the tendons had been sutured. The otherwise very powerful effect of the evidence
derived from the absence
of any sutures being found in the second operation was
significantly watered down by the acceptance that sutures were attached to
proximal ends of the tendons and should have been found. On this basis, and
bearing in mind the onus of proof, in particular
as applied on the
standard, the Tribunal could not reject the possibility that
there had been a repair of the tendons as described by the respondent.
to the mystery of the disappearing sutures, the evidence of Dr Long was
important. He gave evidence of his experience with sutures
that, admittedly
inexplicably, had disappeared as soon as five or seven days after an operation.
Dr Long was not shaken in cross-examination.
In fairness no attempt was made to
discredit his opinion and the Tribunal could not reject it.
thus being an explanation for the absence of sutures when the wound was reopened
the Tribunal could not conclude that no sutures
had been inserted and in
particular that the sutures had only been attached as described by Dr X.
Ultimately the contest came down
to the observations of Dr X against the
respondent's evidence of what he had done. Because the Tribunal could not reject
the respondent's
evidence as, in plain terms, false, it was bound to reach the
conclusion stated above.
raises the apparent inconsistency between the Tribunal's acceptance of Dr X's
evidence in the face of a conclusion that it could
not be satisfied that the
respondent had not sutured both ends of the severed tendons.
Tribunal's explanation of this inconsistency is two-fold.
(a) The onus always remained on the HCCC to prove its case and absent a positive
finding of dishonesty on the respondent's part (which
the Tribunal could not
make) together with the explanation for the absence of sutures provided by Dr
Long, that onus had simply not
(b) The Tribunal considers it possible that while absolutely honest, Dr X may
have been mistaken in his observations. It is to be
recalled that Dr X, in
February 2010, was very inexperienced, had no previous experience with a tendon
repair and may therefore have
misinterpreted what he took to be an attachment of
the tendons to the fascia. The Tribunal notes that Dr Long said an attachment
described by Dr X was "
not reasonably possible
." He did say it could be
done but would be "
a strange sort of exercise.
summary, the view of the Tribunal is that notwithstanding its general acceptance
of Dr X's credibility, it could not be satisfied
standard that the evidence of Dr Fassina about an absence of any indication of
tendon repair was sufficient to establish that fact
and discharge the onus on
relation to the breakdown of the repair the Tribunal cannot conclude what caused
the mishap. In particular, the Tribunal could
not be satisfied that the mere
fact of the failure could be seen as proof that no proper repair had been done
in the first place.
In this regard, however, the Tribunal wishes to make it
clear that there is absolutely no evidence that any action by Dr X may have
contributed to the failure of the repair.
result of the Tribunal's findings is that Complaint 1 must fail.
relation to Complaint 2, Dr Long was critical of the operation report. The
respondent accepted the criticism. He also accepted
that even though the report
was written by Dr X, he bore full responsibility for its contents. In the view
of the Tribunal, accepting
that the operation was as described by the
respondent, the report was manifestly inadequate.
Tribunal is satisfied that Particular 1 of Complaint 2 has been established.
This is derived from the respondent's own evidence
together with that of Dr
Long. The Tribunal is satisfied that the absence of detail of the identity of
the tendons that were repaired
amounts to a breach of Clause 4(4)(b) of Schedule
Medical Practice Regulation 2008
respondent submitted that the description given in the operation report was
sufficient to fall within the required obligation
to describe the
the treatment"
. The respondent submitted that
required only
a description of the inherent characteristics of the operation which was met by
use of the phrase
"repair of extensor tendons"
. Having regard to the
number of tendons that are present in the lower leg and foot (Exhibit 4) the
Tribunal is of the view that the
nature of the operation must extend to the
identification of the specific tendons that were treated. Although not the
discussion, the Tribunal notes that the operation report does not
even refer to the tendons being in a leg (let alone left or right),
to, for example, the hand. The very rough sketch is the only possible reference
finding results in an automatic conclusion of unsatisfactory professional
conduct pursuant to Section 139B(1)(b) of the National
of the conclusion reached as to Complaint 1 the second particular of Complaint 2
must be rejected.
Tribunal is therefore satisfied that Complaint 2 has been established but only
to the extent of the contravention of the
Medical Practice Regulation
relation to Complaint 3 the finding in Complaint 2 alone could not be regarded
as professional misconduct under Section 139E of
the National Law. The HCCC
conceded this point. As Complaint 1 has not been established Complaint 3 must
Tribunal asked the parties to obtain instructions on the consequence of the
findings as made having regard to the respondent's
entitlement to a separate
hearing on protective orders. The Tribunal indicated that its preliminary view
was that on the establishment
of only Complaint 2 (and only Particular 1) that
the appropriate protective order would be a reprimand.
view was based on the Tribunal's endeavour to ensure an appropriate order for
the protection of the public and of the medical
profession was made but also
taking into account that the respondent had given evidence that since the
operation he had been involved
in the upgrading of standards of medical records,
in particular in Queensland and had also reviewed his approach to his own
parties indicated that the imposition of a reprimand alone would not be
contested. Accordingly, the Tribunal makes the following
(1) Complaints 1 and 3 are dismissed.
(2) Complaint 2 is established but only in respect of Particular 1, as amended.
(3) The respondent is reprimanded.
Tribunal will hear the parties on costs.
order made: Each party to pay its own costs of the
proceedings.)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (183 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter