URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2010/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC V SMITH,DCL [2010] NSWPHT 3 (8 December 2010)
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
CITATION: DCL SMITH
[2010] NSWPHT 3
INQUIRY INTO A COMPLAINT
AGAINST A PHARMACIST
Complainant
NSW Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC)
Douglas Charles Leslie SMITH
Tribunal Members
Nick O’Neill (Deputy Chairperson)
Christopher Piggott (Pharmacist Member)
Russell Benda (Pharmacist
Siew Liew (Lay Member)
Dates and place of Hearing
19 and 20 October 2010,
Date of Order and Reasons for Decision
8 December 2010
Representation
Complainant - Peteris Ginters, barrister, instructed
by Faye Westwood, HCCC Respondent – Julia Lonergan, barrister, instructed
by Don Grant (19 Oct) with Paul Baker (20 Oct), GuildLawyers
Pharmacist - Professional misconduct - Unsatisfactory professional conduct -
Conviction of an offence the circumstances of which render
the pharmacist unfit
in the public interest to be registered as a pharmacist - suspension.
Legislation cited
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Code Act 1995
Pharmacy Practise Act 2006
(NSW) ss 25, 36 and 37(1) ;
Poisons Regulation 1994
(NSW), clauses 26 and 28.
Cases cited
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
[2005] NSWCA 153
[2009] NSWPHT 1
[1989] NSWCA 218
Desai v Rodgers
(Unreported, NSW Court of
Appeal, 27 July 1981);
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
79 SASR 545
Wilks v Medical Board of South Australia
Katsogiannis
[1993] NSWPB 1
Katsogiannis v Dean
[1998] NSWPB 2
[2000] NSWPB 1
[2001] NSWDC 1
[2002] NSWPB 2
REASONS FOR DECISION
Smith is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct;
Tribunal was not comfortably satisfied that Mr Smith was currently unfit in the
public interest to be registered as a pharmacist
as a result of his conviction
of offences in New South Wales. Consequently it dismissed complaint three in
this matter.
Smith is reprimanded severely in terms of the reprimand set out in Attachment A
to these reasons for decision;
Smith’s registration as a pharmacist is suspended for a period of six
months. The suspension of Mr Smith’s registration
is to commence on the
) day after the date of this order;
Smith’s registration as a pharmacist, once it has been revived following
the conclusion of his suspension referred to above,
is to be subject to the
condition that all the pharmaceutical benefits claims made in relation to any
pharmacy in which he has a
pecuniary interest, or which he intends to lodge,
are, for a period of one year, to be inspected, at Mr Smith’s expense, by
a pharmacist approved by the Pharmacy Council of New South Wales (the Council)
at times to be nominated by the Council prior to the
lodgment of those claims
with Medicare Australia;
Smith is to pay the costs of the HCCC as agreed, or if agreement cannot be
reached, either party may have the matter re-listed
for assessment by the
names of any patients or customers of any pharmacy in which Mr Smith has an
ownership interest in this matter are suppressed from
publication except for
within any part of the Attachment B to these reasons for decision that are
provided to the parties to this
matter. That Attachment is suppressed from
publication in any medium to anyone other than the parties to this matter and
their legal
The Complaint
HCCC’s Complainant in this matter, dated 30 March 2010, set out three
complaints to be heard and determined by the Tribunal
by way of inquiry. The
first complaint was that Mr Smith was guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct while complaint two was
that Mr Smith was guilty of professional
misconduct. Both these complaints made essentially the same allegations against
namely that:
(a) he engaged
in conduct that demonstrated that the judgment he possessed (complaint two added
knowledge and skill), or the care
he exercised, in the practice of pharmacy was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist of an
level of training or experience, and/or
(b) he engaged
in improper and/or unethical conduct in the course of the practice of
complaints had the same particulars. These particulars were:
17 December 2008 at the District Court at Sydney the pharmacist was convicted of
one (1) count of obtaining a financial advantage
by deception, contrary to
s.134.2 (1) of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
20 July 2004 and 22 October 2006 the pharmacist signed and submitted thirteen
(13) Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme Claims to
Medicare Australia which attached
prescriptions for medications which had not been supplied to the patients named,
in order to receive
financial payments under the Pharmaceutical Benefits
20 July 2004 and 22 October 2006 the pharmacist knowingly submitted ninety eight
(98) false and/or fraudulently altered prescriptions
to Medicare Australia with
the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme Claims referred to in particular 2 above.
The third complaint was that Mr Smith had been
convicted of offences the circumstances of which rendered him unfit in the
public interest
to practise pharmacy. This complaint had the following
particular:
On 17 December 2008 at the District Court at Sydney the pharmacist was
convicted of one (1) count of obtaining a financial advantage
by deception
contrary to s 134.2 (1) of the Criminal Code 1995.
The onus and standard of proof
the Tribunal noted in
considering the complaints before it, the Tribunal needs to be satisfied to the
standard set out in
Briginshaw v
Briginshaw.
must be comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the
complaints are proved before it may proceed to make any
orders in relation to
the pharmacist the subject of the proceedings. When determining whether it is
comfortably satisfied, the Tribunal
must have regard to the serious nature of
the allegations and the consequences of finding them proved. The
Tribunal’s comfortable
satisfaction cannot be produced by “inexact
proofs, indefinite testimony or indirect references”.
onus or obligation to provide the material proving the allegations made against
a pharmacist lies with the HCCC.
HCCC’s job was made easier in this case because Mr Smith admitted the
particulars to complaints one and two and also that
he was guilty of both
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct. While these
admissions also assisted the Tribunal
in making its findings in this matter, it
still had, after taking into account both the evidence and Mr Smith’s
admissions,
to be comfortably satisfied that complaints one and two were
relation to complaint three, Mr Smith admitted that on 17 December 2008 he had
been convicted of one count of obtaining a financial
advantage by deception. He
did not admit to their consequences. However, he did not admit that, because of
the circumstances of that
offence, he was unfit, in the public interest, to be
registered as a pharmacist. Consequently, the Tribunal had to decide whether
not it was comfortably satisfied that complaint three was
The sources of the evidence
Ginters, on behalf of the HCCC, tendered a folder of evidence. The documents in
that folder were marked Complainant’s Exhibits
1-52 respectively. Ms
Lonergan, on behalf of Mr Smith, tendered a folder of evidence. The documents in
that folder, together with
other documents that Ms Lonergan tendered during the
hearing, were marked Respondent’s Exhibits 1-20 respectively. These
are listed in the attachment to these reasons for decision.
Smith gave oral evidence to the Tribunal.
The evidence
Smith was first registered as a pharmacist in New South Wales on 31 October
1991. In 1991 and 1992, he worked one day a week each
in community pharmacies in
Brookvale and Chatswood, and from 1992 for two years at a community pharmacy in
Port Kembla. He worked
every Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday at Port Kembla. Mr
Smith was a locum chemist at all three pharmacies dispensing prescriptions
not doing any pharmacy administration.
was unclear from the evidence before the Tribunal when Mr Smith became the owner
of the Thirroul Pharmacy, but he was the owner
in 1995 and 1997. He was the sole
pharmacist there most of the time but occasionally had locum pharmacists work
two occasions in January 1996, Mr Smith placed two plastic bags containing
scheduled poisons and restricted substances and other
medication in a garbage
bin outside the rear of his Thirroul pharmacy in an area accessible to the
public from a car park. Tragically,
a woman and a man removed the bags and both
consumed a quantity and mixture of medication together with alcohol.
Subsequently, the
woman was found dead and the man unconscious. Mr Smith was
charged with, finally admitted to and was convicted of four offences related
disposing of quantities of poisons and restricted substances in a manner likely
to constitute a risk to the public, contrary to
Poisons Regulation
(NSW). The offences occurred on 20 January 1996 and between 21 and 25
January 1996. Mr Smith was convicted of them in February 1997.
those convictions, the then Pharmacy Board’s Professional Standards
Committee (the PSC) dealt with two complaints,
one alleging unsatisfactory
professional conduct the other professional misconduct, arising from the
convictions. In its reasons
for decision dated 14 October 1998, the PSC found Mr
Smith guilty of professional misconduct because of those offences which
demonstrated
that he lacked knowledge, experience, skill, judgment and care in
the practice of pharmacy.
While the PSC could not make any direct connection between the woman’s
death and the disposal of the medication, it nevertheless
concluded that Mr
Smith’s actions as a pharmacist posed a serious risk to the public. This
was the reason why it found him
guilty of professional misconduct and of having
been convicted of offences under the
Poisons Regulation 1994
PSC cautioned and reprimanded Mr Smith and ordered him to implement and develop
a staff training and quality assurance
programme within three months. Mr Smith
was also required to complete, within six months, a course of study approved by
Board and to prepare a paper on the dangers of the misuse of
prescribed and other scheduled medications by young people.
making those orders the PSC stated:
The Committee views
seriously the pharmacist's breaches of the
Poisons Regulations
damaging effect that this incident may have had on the level of public trust in
pharmacists generally. Pharmacists hold the
privileged position of having the
custody of drugs in the community and, in return, the public has a right to
expect that pharmacists
will exercise this privilege in a responsible and
professional way. The public needs to be confident that there is no reason for
its trust in the pharmacy profession to be undermined by actions such as that of
the respondent in this particular case.
PSC then placed on record its concern about certain aspects of Mr Smith's
evidence, in particular his wavering contrition and
his evident concern at the
degree of media interest in the case. It then continued:
positive side, the Committee has given due weight to the co-operation given by
Mr Smith to the investigating police and also,
as already noted, to the fact
that he now has in place, procedures to reduce to a minimum, the risk to the
public in the disposal
of unwanted medications, poisons and restricted
substances. The Committee is mindful of the pharmacist's relative inexperience,
the fact that the pharmacy known as
Thirroul Pharmacy
had been, at
the time, only recently acquired by him. The Committee believes that a
suspension from practice is not justified in
this particular case, but accepts
the submission of the complainant's counsel that Mr Smith and the public would
benefit from orders
which would serve to reinforce his professional obligations
in the area of safe disposal of medications.
his evidence to the Tribunal Mr Smith stated that in the “first couple of
years of practice” in his own pharmacy he
did not put in place a system to
manage “owing prescriptions”, that is situations in which he
dispensed medications available
only on prescription when the patient/customer
did not have a prescription but promised to provide it subsequent to receiving
medication.
to owing prescriptions, Mr Smith noted that; “The main ones would probably
be blood pressure and antidepressants and would
also include diabetic
medication”.
Smith was then questioned as follows:
Q. After the first couple
of years of practice did you think about maybe putting in place a system to
manage [owing] scripts?
Q. How could you be confident that the patients were in fact doing what was
needed and bringing in the owing scripts?
A. To be honest, I had no idea.
The only way I was gauging whether or not the patients were bringing in the
scripts was what was
coming up on my computer screen when we were dispensing to
that particular patient.
Q. And would the screen just bring up the particular drug, or would it bring
up the whole combination of medications they were having
if, for example, they
were having other medications?
A. It would bring up everything they had had
for the last year.
Q. How could you be confident that they were doing what you asked?
Q. When did you become aware that you were building up owing scripts?
It was by accident. I was investigating the possible purchase of a pharmacy in
the eastern suburbs of Sydney.
Q. What year was that?
A. I think it was towards the middle or end of
2003 and in amongst the due diligence paperwork was a report on the owing
prescriptions
situation at that particular pharmacy. I had never seen a report
Q. What did the report look like in terms of length?
A. It was basically
a one page report that showed the total number of prescriptions dispensed at
this pharmacy, and it had a breakdown
of the different types of prescriptions,
were they general, repatriation, concessional or Department of Veterans Affairs.
very bottom it had a list stating the number of owing
prescriptions.
Q. Did it have dates on the document, dates of
dispensing?
Q. What did you understand the document to signify?
A. I understood that
document to signify that using your computer you could actually ascertain the
state of the owing prescription
situation in a particular pharmacy.
Q. Had you thought about that before in relation to your own pharmacy?
2003 a few weeks after he saw this report Mr Smith contacted the software
supplier of his dispensary system and asked them how
to obtain such a report and
to see if he could obtain a more detailed report about who owed what from when.
The computerized information
he could access went back to 2000 and, on his best
estimate, he believed there were 400 outstanding “owing
prescriptions”.
Smith accepted his counsel’s suggestion that this reflected poorly on him
as a businessman and a pharmacist. He acknowledged
that the situation got so bad
because he didn't have enough time to do all the duties he should have been
doing and that the administration
of the owing scripts was one of the duties
that he just didn't do.
asked by his counsel what he did to try to recoup the 400 owing scripts, Mr
Smith said:
400 owing scripts represents a monumental amount of
work to try to overcome. It meant virtually using one member of staff to start
the process, not on a full-time basis, but as soon as they were freed up from
dispensing or doing whatever they were doing, they
became the person responsible
for initially trying to find phone numbers.
Smith was then asked how he went about dealing with the owing scripts. The
questioning and his answers are set out below as they
represent his explanation
of what led him to begin to defraud the Commonwealth and thus the community it
represents. His evidence
is also a cautionary tale about the problems that arise
if owing scripts are not dealt with promptly:
I didn't contact
the doctors originally because I felt that the onus was on the patient. They
are the ones that I had given the medication
to. They are the ones who I had
the understanding that they were going to return the [prescription], so the
contract, so to speak,
was between me and them, so I just focussed on the
Q. Did you instruct your staff to do certain things and what did you
instruct them to do?
A. We got out the phone book and we started finding 400
phone numbers.
Q. Did you take part in that process as well?
A. Occasionally.
Q. Was that process successful? Were you able to get phone numbers for all
the people on the list?
A. We got probably a third of them from the phone
book. We probably got a fair - probably got another 50 or so from the internet,
more up-to-date phone numbers, and the rest we had no contact numbers for, or
the contact numbers had changed.
Q. And then what did you do, or what did you instruct your staff to
A. Then we were able to actually produce letters from the dispensary
software and we started a mail out to the address of the patient
that we had in
our computer records.
Q. Did that result in the coughing up of any
scripts that you remember, or a number of scripts?
A. It did, but it also provided a few more problems, or problems that we
became aware of, that addresses had changed but the patient
who ultimately
received the drug hadn't been the person that had requested the drug, for
example, in the instance where it might
be a spouse requesting a drug for the
partner because the partner was too sick or was looking after the kids or
something. The person
that we sent the actual reminder to had no knowledge that
they were actually owing the prescription, so we had to start afresh for
Q. And what else, if anything, did you try to do to try to recoup these
A. At the time we were dealing with one of the hospitals, that we
were providing a delivery service to one of their newly formed
rehabilitation
wings. The problem with that was there was a large turnover because it was a
training hospital.
Q. A large turnover?
A. Of doctors. They were on a rotational basis.
They would rotate between all of the Wollongong hospitals so we would receive a
medication chart for a particular patient requesting a particular medication and
we would send a prescription owing slip back to
them requesting that medication,
but sometimes that doctor was no longer there or that doctor didn't have the
authority to write
the prescription that was needed to fill that script.
Q. So what other ways did you try to recover?
A. We actually started in
the local area doing door knocking, since we had an address, so actually while
my staff were out on deliveries
we would actually get them to go to the house
and knock on the door and ask if the person was there and try to explain what
Q. What about following up with local doctors? Did you try that as a way of
getting some of the scripts that were missing?
Q. How did that go?
A. Some of the doctors were very helpful and they
wrote the prescription out. Other doctors really didn't want to help and were
very uncomfortable writing scripts for patients that they may not see any more,
or for patients that had changed medication, or the
patients that had changed
Q. Why did you dispense medications to people on those owed prescriptions?
Why did you personally do that?
A. Because I was trying to look after them.
I was trying to look after their condition. These were people that I felt were
need and they came to me for help and I wanted to help them. I did
so as responsibly as I could.
Q. What else did you do to try to recoup the scripts, anything else?
The problem was that sometimes you had to try to get to the actual person that
the script was for and that person sometimes was
not able to help, or they were
unwilling to help because the passage of time is a major hindrance. Generally
along with the timing,
since the length of prescription of that item, the more
difficult it was to get a prescription from that patient.
Q. Did you give up on doing it, I am going to call it, the legitimate way at
some point and why?
A. There comes a time when you have exhausted all of the
available means to you to get the prescription that you need to cover the
of that prescription and at that point in time you start considering other means
available to you.
questioning of Mr Smith then turned to his decision to begin his criminal
behaviour and his frame of mind at the time. It went
Q. So when did you come up with the idea that has lead
to all this trouble that you are in?
A. It must have been probably three or
four months after I had looked at this first report, because once we made
patient, and there was probably a toing and froing with that
patient for two or three months, trying to ascertain whether they would
get you the script, so as we worked through our list then we would turn to
whatever means we could. As we worked through
that list, on average it was
probably three or four months per patient that we were trying to come up with a
result to get a script.
Q. Are you able to say now what the process in your mind was that lead you
to the idea that you could recover them which has lead
to the problems that you
are in now? What possessed you?
A. My mind was in a different sphere. I
was addicted to my work. I loved my work and I was just buried under it. I
hated the fact
that this was just another administrative task. I felt that
those patients had betrayed me in a sense and I suggested to those patients
couldn't or wouldn't get me a prescription, I asked them to send me a
prescription, whatever prescription they had, to help
me recover the cost of
what I had given them at the time of the owing prescription. A lot of patients
did help me. A lot of patients
sent me scripts that were out of date, or a lot
of patients sent me scripts that they had received when they were under
and then they were no longer entitled to a concession, and they were
reluctant to pay the difference themselves between what I could
claim and the
co-pay they paid at the time. They didn't want to pay the gap, so to speak.
Q. Before we go into the details of the way you perpetrated the fraud, and
there is no nice way to put it, what do you think now
of the way you were
looking at yourself and your business then?
A. I have totally changed the
way I do things, the way I administer my business: my time spent in the
dispensary versus the time
spent doing book keeping and the administrative
Q. I am just going to stop you there. That's more what you do now but,
judging yourself with what you know now about how you thought
in 2004, what do you think about the pharmacist in 2004 doing what he did?
That pharmacist came up with a very dumb idea. That pharmacist has been through
hell and paid a very heavy price for a very, very
ill-conceived idea.
Q. Was it all your idea?
A. Yes. That pharmacist had no sense of
balance to their life. That pharmacist was getting themselves upset over rather
amounts in terms of the prescriptions and their value. That pharmacist
was neglecting his family and neglecting his wife and neglecting
his position in
the household.
Q. Did you know at the time you committed those frauds that it was
Q. And did you know it was a betrayal of your role as a pharmacist to be
doing that, the trusted role you had within the community?
Q. Why did you do it?
A. I did it because I had very little perspective
in terms of what was right and what was wrong. I was living in a world which
consisted of work, consisted of me being in charge of my shop, consisted of
me making the decisions albeit very bad decisions. I
didn't feel as though I
was answerable to anybody, that I could make these judgment calls and I wasn't
answerable. I felt that I
was owed those moneys. I had given the medications
to the patients. They hadn't sent a prescription back. Effectively I was out
of pocket. I felt that these moneys were legitimately owed to me, that I had
given up time spent with my family, time spent doing
things that I like to do
trying to help these people and I was repaid - well I wasn't repaid. I wasn't
repaid with the same courtesy
that I had shown them and I was hurt.
Q. What do you think about owing scripts now?
A. Owing scripts,
unfortunately owing scripts are still a necessary evil. They are a part of
pharmacy but the way they are managed
nowadays by me is completely different.
Nowadays I have a very open channel of communication with the local prescribers
and whenever
anybody requests an owing script the first thing I do at my
pharmacy is to contact the prescriber to get the okay with them.
Smith embarked on his scheme of fraud no later than 20 July 2004. He continued
until his pharmacy was visited by representatives
of what is now Medicare
Australia on 31 October 2006 to execute a search warrant and search his
pharmacy. It appears from the evidence
before the Tribunal that representatives
of Medicare Australia became concerned about PBS claims from Mr Smith’s
pharmacy in
Smith was very candid in his explanation to the Tribunal as to how he made his
fraudulent claims. He said:
To claim a prescription on the
Commonwealth, a claim needs to be submitted in a chronological order. It is
just not possible to just
have the fraudulent scripts in one claim unless you
have a claim of only 13 scripts. They have to be interspersed with the
scripts, just by the nature of the way the system works.
admitted how he forged the signatures of patients or their representatives in
the following terms:
Often I would not have any idea of what the
patient's signature looked like, in which case I would do some kind of squiggle.
the patients would leave me with a prescription and say "Doug, you
sign it" and I would just copy their signature and submit it in
Mr Smith also admitted that when he was contacting people about owing scripts,
he became aware that there were a number of outstanding
scripts held by people
and he simply asked them to send them in. He agreed that, because those scripts
that were in their possession
fell within certain date ranges, he had to slot
those scripts into the chronological range of documents that he forwarded to the
Commonwealth for payment.
Smith was then referred to a list of patients who had died for whom he had
submitted false claims for prescriptions after they
had died. He was then
questioned as follows:
Q. Were you aware of the fact that those
patients had died when you made the false claims?
A. Most of them, yes.
There were a couple that I didn't know had died. Let me be completely open.
The prescriptions that were
submitted after the date of their death, I didn't
know they had died. The prescriptions that were submitted on the date of their
death, I knew that they had died.
Q. I see, but in both cases they were, even if you didn't know that the
patient had died, you still knew at the time that it was
a false prescription
that you were relying upon, correct?
A. Yes. If I could just add to that
response, some of the prescriptions that I submitted on the date of the death,
or after the
date of their death, were genuinely owing prescriptions. Some were
in lieu of owing prescriptions, but of course after the death
of a patient you
are not going to get any new scripts written by doctors, so I just used what I
had available to me.
Q. To the extent that you had scripts for patients that had died, is that
because you had within the pharmacy repeat prescriptions
prescriptions that would otherwise have been used by those patients if they were
A. Some of those patients did leave their prescriptions with me, so I had
access to their prescriptions.
Q. Some of those that you would have had access to would have been documents
that you falsified and relied upon?
a result of the investigations carried out by officers of Medicare Australia, Mr
Smith was charged with one count of obtaining
a financial advantage by
deception, contrary to s 134.2 (1) of the
Criminal Code Act 1995
That charge however related to 13 false PBS claims containing 98 false
prescriptions that were never supplied. Mr Smith was
paid $5,200 he was not
entitled to in relation to those false claims.
26 November 2007, during the investigation, Mr Smith supplied a signed statement
to Medicare Australia in which he admitted that
he had committed a breach of the
law. By a cheque dated 7 November 2007, Mr Smith repaid $16,000 to Medicare
Australia. Medicare
Australia indicated that it would not be seeking any further
compensation for this specific offence.
14 August 2008, Mr Smith pleaded guilty to the offence and the prosecution
consented to the offence being dealt with summarily.
The matter came on for
sentencing before the Local Court 30 September 2008. Magistrate O’Shane
was satisfied that the offence
was proved but dismissed the information setting
out the charge in reliance on
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth). That
decision was appealed to the District Court and on 17 December 2008, Hosking DCJ
upheld the appeal, quashed Magistrate
O’Shane’s orders, convicted Mr
Smith of the offence and fined him $100.
a letter dated 2 July 2009, the Pharmacy Board referred the matter as a
complaint to the HCCC. After its investigation the HCCC
made its Complaint dated
30 March 2010 which was lodged with the Pharmacy Tribunal on the same day.
7 November 2007, the same day Mr Smith signed the cheque he sent to Medicare
Australia, Mr Smith signed a statement which was used
in the criminal
proceedings against him and in the proceedings before this Tribunal. In that
statement he confirmed that he committed
the breaches of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) that made up the charge against him. He stated that he made
no excuse “for what occurred” and he set out what he
described as
“an explanation of the background events giving rise to this conduct and
the thought processes in my mind during
the particular period”. He then
went on to describe how he discovered “that there were hundreds of
prescriptions, some
dating back several years, which were owed from a large
number of patients” and his “mindset at the time” that
essentially self-funded such supply and consequently was out of pocket. He then
described the process he went through to
recover what he was owed from the
owing scripts how he “foolishly determined to pursue a course which
involved committing
a fraud on the Commonwealth”.
Smith then stated that: “It was my sole intention to continue such conduct
until I had recovered an amount roughly equivalent
to the amount I felt I was
owed”. Mr Smith then went on to make comments that he repeated in this
oral evidence to the Tribunal.
He also stated that he recognized and appreciated
the privilege he held as a pharmacist and his responsibilities to the
Commonwealth
in relation to the PBS scheme. He then continued:
understand that my actions were totally inappropriate and that I abrogated my
legal and ethical responsibilities as a pharmacist.
I am acutely aware that I
let down the public, my peers and my family. I am embarrassed and ashamed of my
foolish actions and I sincerely
regret what I have done.
Smith then described how he calculated the sum of $16,000 that he paid to
Medicare Australia. He assumed that there were 400 owing
prescriptions worth
approximately $40 each which he said equated to $16,000, “at the upper
limit” and that he did not
honestly believe that his conduct involved
fraud to that extent. Nevertheless, he enclosed his cheque for that amount with
his statement.
cross-examination by Mr Ginters, Mr Smith accepted that his conduct was planned
and calculated, took place over an extended
period of time, and was not a one
off incident. He also accepted that his conduct was deceitful, illegal and
unethical and posed
a gross breach of trust. The questioning then continued as
Q. Could I put this proposition to you, but for the fact that
investigators from Medicare conducted an investigation into this matter,
would not have been your intention ever to repay the money that you obtained by
A. That's correct.
Q. Again, without being too crude, it was only because you were caught out
that you took it upon yourself to pay the $16,000 back
to Medicare?
Q. And if the investigation hadn't taken place, you would have been content
to keep the money that you obtained by the fraud?
The Tribunal’s consideration of the evidence
one and two
Ms Lonergan it was inevitable that a finding of professional misconduct would be
made by the Tribunal. It was her submission
the evidence presented by the HCCC
had sufficiently reached the standard of proof and the statutory definitions
concerning conduct
that a finding of professional misconduct had to be made.
However, she also noted that such a finding did not, of necessity, lead
Tribunal ordering suspension or deregistration.
is unarguable, as Ms Lonergan appropriately conceded that Mr Smith’s
conduct in defrauding the Commonwealth demonstrated
that the judgment he
possessed in the practice of pharmacy was significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a pharmacist
of an equivalent level of training or
experience. By doing what he did, Mr Smith engaged in improper and unethical
conduct in the
course of the practice of pharmacy.
Ginters presented to the Tribunal a number of cases in which defrauding the
Commonwealth in ways similar to the way Mr Smith did
so amounted to professional
misconduct resulting in either the deregistration or suspension of the health
practitioner.
considered these matters, the Tribunal was comfortably satisfied that Mr
Smith’s defrauding of the Commonwealth amounted
to professional misconduct
in the practice of pharmacy. Given the definition of professional misconduct, it
follows that the Tribunal
also found Mr Smith guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. Consequently, it found the subject-matter of complaints
two proved.
Complaint three
Tribunal had no doubt that Mr Smith was unfit in the public interest to practise
pharmacy when he was convicted of the indictable
offence by the District Court
17 December 2008, because of the circumstances of that offence. Those
circumstances included that the
offence covered 13 occasions when false claims
were made and a total of 93 false claims. Those circumstances also included the
that Mr Smith’s conduct, as he admitted, was planned and calculated,
took place over an extended period of time and was not
a one off incident. It
was also deceitful, illegal and unethical and posed a gross breach of trust.
complaint three to be proved, the Tribunal had to be satisfied that, at the time
of its hearing, Mr Smith was unfit in the
public interest to practise pharmacy.
The actual circumstances of the offence are centrally relevant to the
Tribunal’s consideration,
but Mr Smith’s contrition for what he had
done, his insight into that conduct and the steps that he has taken to avoid
of that conduct are all relevant considerations in the
Tribunal’s determination of the issue.
Smith gave evidence of the arrangements he now has in place to deal with owing
scripts – his sense of entitlement in relation
to them being what he
claimed to be the trigger for his fraudulent conduct. He also gave evidence
which Ms Lonergan submitted on
his behalf demonstrated contrition and insight on
Mr Smith’s part. Some of that evidence has been set out above; however Ms
Lonergan referred to the following evidence and submitted that it was; “a
good and articulate description of Mr Smith's understanding
of the trust
placed in pharmacists in a community” as well as evidence of contrition.
The evidence was as follows:
Q. You would agree with me, would
you not, that a fundamental part of being a pharmacist is being in a position
where members of
the community can have trust and confidence in you as a
pharmacist?
A. That's correct. They don't just let anyone become a
pharmacist. There is an implied trust in that position and it is important
the community to have trust in the administrators of the pharmaceutical benefits
scheme because it is a multi-billion dollar
instrument and I think the public
want to have trust in pharmacists, and I let them down.
Q. And because of the high volume of scripts that passed through the
pharmaceutical benefits scheme you would accept, would you not,
that the scheme
would simply become unworkable if it could not proceed on the basis of an
element of trust?
Q. It simply would not be possible to audit every single script that came
through to verify they are accurate?
A. That is correct.
Q. Integral to that is a trust that the claims submitted are bona fide, and
you breached that trust?
A. Yes, it is not something that I am proud of.
Q. I accept that?
A. And not something that I will repeat and I am very
ashamed of what I did and I'm just very sorry that I tarnished the reputation
good pharmacists by my actions, because a little bit of dirt sticks to the
profession when somebody does something like what I
did. The other pharmacists
didn't deserve that.
Q. You would accept then that your conduct speaks not only to you but to the
profession, or has the potential to impact on the profession
in general?
I think the public want to believe in pharmacists. I think that is shown time
and time again in their approval ratings, for want
of a better word. I think
nurses are on top and pharmacists come a close second. I think the public like
pharmacists and I think
at any opportunity there are certain elements within
society that would like to tarnish that reputation of pharmacists and I gave
them the ammunition to possibly do that and it is something that wasn't my
intention but was the result of my actions.
Lonergan also submitted that the Tribunal was entitled to take into account
Mr Smith's demeanour when he gave his evidence, including
the directness
and forthrightness with which he answered questions and to do this when
assessing whether he was telling the truth
and whether he had insight into his
behaviour and contrition for it.
Ginters made submissions to the Tribunal as to the matters it should take into
account in determining the question of current unfitness,
but did not submit to
the Tribunal that Mr Smith was in fact currently unfit. He did, at the
commencement of his submissions, seek
a finding that the Tribunal was,
comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities, that all three complaints
before it were
Tribunal appreciates that not all admissions of guilt necessarily show remorse
or that all statements of contrition necessarily
demonstrate that a person is
contrite. Similarly, not all claims that a person now has insight into their
behavior that was manifestly
criminal and unacceptable in a health professional
means that they do have insight. In this case Mr Smith gave evidence of the
he had taken to deal with owing prescriptions. He had also expressed
contrition and made statements and given evidence that was indicative
insight. In those circumstances the Tribunal could not be comfortably satisfied
that he was currently unfit in the public interest
to practise pharmacy.
Consequently, the Tribunal found complaint three not proved and dismissed
Protective orders
this case the Tribunal may make protective orders in relation only to complaints
one and two.
HCCC sought the following orders that:
(a) Mr Smith be
severely reprimanded;
Smith’s registration be suspended for between three and six months;
(c) Following
the conclusion of Mr Smith’s period of suspension, and for a period of one
year, a pharmacist nominated by the
Pharmacy Council of New South Wales, at
times nominated by the Council, inspect Mr Smith’s PBS claims, at Mr
Lonergan submitted on behalf of Mr Smith that there was no need to protect the
public from Mr Smith as his current conduct in his
practice as a pharmacist
did not pose risks to the public. Further, he had reformed the way that he
viewed his personal and ethical
obligations so that the Tribunal did not need to
suspend his registration for any period.
also submitted that it was entirely appropriate that there be a serious
reprimand and continued: “It is entirely appropriate
that that reprimand
be in writing and that Mr Smith has to take that reprimand and ensure that
it is considered seriously by him”.
Ms Lonergan also advised the Tribunal
that her client had “no issue” with the inspection condition
proposed by the HCCC.
it was suggested to Ms Lonergan that it was open to the Tribunal to consider
ordering that Mr Smith be subject of supervision
by another pharmacist for a
period, she responded that such a course would be more constructive for her
client than a period of suspension
but that a period of regular mentoring would
be even better. In relation to these matters Mr Ginters submitted that there
were difficulties
with mentoring regimes. However, he conceded that
“mentoring regimes are put in place in other disciplinary contexts”.
He concluded with the advice that the HCCC favoured a suspension order.
is clear from the decided cases the courts and tribunals who deal with
professional misconduct on the part of health professionals,
from the NSW Court
of Appeal down, take very seriously the defrauding of the governmental systems
that deliver medical and pharmaceutical
benefits to Australians through
mechanisms that rely on the integrity of health professionals for them to
operate as intended. This
is demonstrated by Clarke JA giving the judgment of
the NSW Court of Appeal in
upholding a decision of the NSW Medical Tribunal to remove the name of a doctor
from the register of medical practitioners. Clarke
JA referred to the earlier
Court of Appeal decision in
In that case the court, having noted that the evidence demonstrated
that the appellant was unlikely to repeat her previous misconduct
and that there
was impressive evidence from patients and other medical practitioners of her
competence and caring nature, went on
to say: “However, giving the
appellant full credit for the matters favourable to her, it is difficult to come
to any conclusion
other than that to which the Tribunal came. The
appellant’s fraudulent abuse of the system was limited in time and extent,
but it stopped only upon discovery, and was quite inconsistent with and involved
a repudiation of her responsibility as a medical
practitioner. Medical benefits
schemes depend upon the integrity of medical practitioners. Without that
integrity, the schemes must
fail or become a burden upon the community. Moreover
it is critical that members of the medical profession should be aware of the
need for and importance of that integrity. The conviction of the appellant for
twenty-seven offences involving fraudulent intent
necessarily involved her
having adopted a fraudulent course which contradicted this most basic and
obvious requirement.”
I have cited this passage because it seems to me to be entirely apposite to
the present case. The appellant engaged in systematic
fraud over a lengthy
period continuing until shortly prior to the discovery of his misconduct. It
seems to me that, giving full weight
to the factors in his favour, his
systematic abuse of his position and his failure to observe basic tenets of
integrity demonstrate
that the order made by the Tribunal was appropriate in all
the circumstances of this case.
I would make two further observations. In the first place I would regard an
order permitting the appellant to continue to practise
upon condition that he
undertook employment in a hospital as inappropriate in the circumstances of the
present case. Even if it be
accepted that the appellant is unlikely to
transgress again, the nature and gravity of his misconduct is such that the
public interest
is best served, in my opinion, by an order removing his name
from the Register.
1993 the then Pharmacy Board of NSW ordered that a pharmacist who defrauded the
Commonwealth of more than $190,000 over a period
of one year and seven months,
but which he repaid in full to the Commonwealth and who was sentenced to
imprisonment for two years
of which he was to serve a minimum of nine months, be
deregistered for professional
misconduct.
appeal, Graham DCJ of the District Court noted that the pharmacist’s
conduct was:
quite inconsistent with the appellant’s
responsibilities as a pharmacist and it clearly involved a repudiation of his
responsibility
in that professional role. Pharmaceutical benefit schemes clearly
depend for their integrity upon the integrity of pharmacists, just
benefit schemes depend upon the integrity of medical practitioners. Without that
integrity, schemes such as pharmaceutical
benefit schemes must fail or become a
burden upon the community. Members of the pharmacy profession must be aware that
a relationship not only with the person for whom they fill
prescriptions but also with the community, through the substantial degree
public funding which is involved in the practice of pharmacy. They have
obligations not only to the public purse and to the community
at large but
obligations of honesty and integrity in the conduct of the financial side of
their pharmacy practices, the fulfilment
of which is vital to the standing in
which members of that profession are held by the community. In other words,
pharmacists who
abuse the system financially not only bring the system into
disrepute and add to its expenses but, in doing so, they bring their
profession into disrepute in the eyes of members of the public. Confidence in
the profession of pharmacy is vital to its standing
in the community; it is
vital in the public interest.
DCJ also noted the responsibilities of those tribunals dealing with the
protective/discipline jurisdiction in relation to health
professionals. He
It is, moreover, essential that a disciplinary tribunal
such as the District Court dealing with a pharmacist should ensure that there
brought home to members of the pharmacy profession an awareness of the fact that
such misconduct by a practitioner will not be
tolerated. That is not to say that
this practitioner should be punished so as to encourage other practitioners but
it is to ensure
that such misconduct is recognised for the serious kind of
misconduct that it is.
DCJ also stated that:
It must be clear to pharmacists that, in
being permitted to make claims from bodies such as the Health Insurance
Commission (now Medicare
Australia), they are carrying out procedures which are
related to the practice of pharmacy and which carry with them not only
obligations
to obey the law but also obligations of ethics and propriety which
must be maintained in order to maintain the standing of, the good
name of, and
the public confidence in, the profession of which those pharmacists are
1998 the then Pharmacy Board of NSW severely reprimanded another pharmacist and
suspended him for three months and placed conditions
on his practise as a
pharmacist. The pharmacist’s appeal against these orders was
Gorgy submitted false claims under the PBS for more than 16 months and
fraudulently received almost
District Court sentenced him to imprisonment for two years of which he was to
serve a minimum of nine months, The Pharmacy Board
of NSW ordered that be
deregistered for professional misconduct, but on appeal the District Court took
into account the prison term
he had already served and replaced his
deregistration with a severe reprimand, suspension for one year and the right to
only on a limited basis. In the view of Williams DCJ these orders were
required for the protection of the public and the pharmacy
profession. After
noting that these orders would represent not only a serious financial imposition
on the pharmacist but also a significant
psychological setback for him, Williams
However, in all the circumstances, bearing in mind
the purpose of this legislation which is to protect the public both in regard
the practice of pharmacy and in regard to the maintenance of professional and
ethical standards, the appellant has not yet reached
the stage where allowing
him to continue to practice is unlikely to cause public or professional
disquiet. It is not as if the appellant
had built up a large store of
professionalism over many years and these matters were a temporary fall from
grace. In my view, the
protection of the public and the requirements of the
profession make it necessary that he not be allowed to practice for a period
time. Taking account of the sentence already received and served, that period in
my view is 12 months. Thereafter he should be
allowed to practice but only on a
Mr Smith has been in practice since the end of 1991, his convictions in 1997 and
his own evidence about his failure to deal
appropriately with owing
prescriptions over a period of years militate against the idea that he has had
built up a large store of
professionalism over many years. Also his well planned
and executed defrauding of the Commonwealth went on for more than two years
ended only when the inspectors from Medicare Australia intervened. This could
not be described as “a temporary fall from
2002 the Pharmacy Board of NSW dealt with pharmacist KJ Wilson who had, over a
period of 19 months lodged 19 false PBS claims to
what is now Medicare
Australia. He received $19,000 to which he was not entitled, but repaid that
amount. Nevertheless, he was charged
with offences in relation to which he
pleaded guilty. He was placed on a three year bond and also fined and placed
under the supervision
of the Probation and Parole Service. The Board found him
guilty of professional misconduct and considered it appropriate to reprimand
severely and to suspend him from practising pharmacy for 12 months. In its
reasons for decision, the Board noted that:
Disciplinary orders
are protective sanctions. They are not penal but rather they are protective. It
is the Board’s duty to
protect the public from pharmacists who have little
regard for their position of trust within the community and who indeed embark
upon these types of acts or any act for that matter which are criminal in
nature. It is particularly significant to the Board that
the Respondent, after
having entered a plea of guilty, and adhering to that plea, entered the witness
box and expressed little contrition
and acceptance of his criminality and his
Tribunal interpolates its awareness that Mr Smith pleaded guilty and advised the
Local Court in his statement dated 7 November
2007 that he “confirmed the
breaches of the
”. Also, Mr Smith admitted to the Tribunal that
his defrauding of the Commonwealth was professional misconduct and in no way
sought to give a contrary impression in his oral evidence to the Tribunal.
another 2002 case, the Pharmacy Board of NSW dealt with pharmacist GJ Simon who
had, over a four year period made false claims
to what is now Medicare Australia
and was paid $12,000 to which he was not entitled. Although he repaid that sum
he was convicted
of the relevant offences and sentenced to imprisonment for six
months. On appeal that sentence was reduced to six months periodic
The Board found him guilty of professional misconduct and severely reprimanded
him, suspended him from practice for
three months, fined him the maximum amount
allowable of $4,400 and ordered that he complete a course in ethics. His appeal
the severity of the Board’s orders was withdrawn. At the end of
its reasons for decision, the Board stated:
[T]he Board
considers that, in fulfilling its protective function, which includes not only
deterring the pharmacist in question from
re-offending, but also deterring
others who might be tempted to fall short of the high standards required of them
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408]
, a period of
suspension from practice is warranted in this
was Mr Ginters’ submission in proffering the cases referred to above to
the Tribunal that there is now in existence a body
of jurisprudence that has
been developed by the Court of Appeal and by the predecessor to this Tribunal,
namely the Pharmacy Board,
which demonstrates that the engaging in the
defrauding of the Commonwealth through the PBS scheme is conduct which is looked
seriously and is, without more, conduct which would satisfy the test of
professional misconduct. He also characterised the cases
circumstances” but acknowledged that none of them had precedential value
in relation the orders that the Tribunal
had to decide to make in this
thrust of Ms Lonergan’s submissions about these cases was that they could
be distinguished on the ground that none of the
pharmacists or other health
professionals involved showed insight or contrition while Mr Smith did in this
the cases referred to the Tribunal show, and they were not met by any other
cases showing the contrary proffered by Mr Smith’s
representatives, was,
as Mr Ginters submitted, that defrauding of the Commonwealth through the PBS
scheme is conduct which is looked
at most seriously. While there were factual
differences between all these cases, it was apparent to the Tribunal considered
all these cases demonstrated the central importance of that concept.
a consequence, and noting Mr Ginters submission, that the cases referred to were
not precedents in relation to the protective orders
to be imposed, the Tribunal
did not accept Ms Lonergan’s approach of distinguishing the cases,
particularly the Pharmacy Board
decisions, on the basis of different facts.
Manifestly each of the fraud cases coming before the health professions
tribunals are
based on different facts, some strengthening and some weakening
the seriousness of the fraudulence they exhibited. Mr Smith’s
case was no
different in that regard. The misconduct the Tribunal found Mr Smith guilty of
was that of defrauding the Commonwealth
through making 93 different false claims
under the PBS to Medicare Australia on 13 different occasions over a period of
two years and three months. Mr Smith admitted that he stopped his
fraud only when the Medicare inspectors arrived to execute their
and also that he had no intention to returning the money before he was caught.
Smith’s conviction for defrauding the Commonwealth was in fact his fifth
conviction of an offence of a criminal nature, all
of which offences he has
committed in the practice of pharmacy. This latest one being his most
Smith formally admitted his fraudulence a year after the Medicare Australia
inspectors visited his pharmacy. Since then he has
shown some contrition and
some insight into his actions, but he still continues to explain in full how he
got behind with his owing
scripts and chose a wrong path out of his problem.
For example, when asked what he thought about “the pharmacist in 2004
what he did”, namely himself in 2004, he replied; “That
pharmacist came up with a very dumb idea. That pharmacist has
been through hell
and paid a very heavy price for a very, very ill-conceived idea”. Even at
the hearing before the Tribunal
he was still talking about the pain caused by
him and the heavy price he had paid. He had still not got to the stage of
acknowledging,
without qualification, that he engaged in systematic and
substantial theft from the Commonwealth for more than two years, an enterprise
he did not stop until he was found out.
Tribunal notes also that while Mr Smith’s referees were aware of the
content of the HCCC’s Complaint against him,
they do not appear to be
aware of his previous convictions and of the previous finding of professional
misconduct made against him
by the Pharmacy Board of NSW in 1998. Also, as Mr
Ginters submitted to the Tribunal, many of the referees were attesting to his
good character overall, including during the more than two years when he was
surreptitiously using his position as a community pharmacist
to defraud the
Commonwealth.
Tribunal considered that the level of his professional misconduct was very
serious in itself justifying firm action on its part
to confirm what Graham DCJ
and others have had to say about the role of health professions tribunals. The
Tribunal also notes the
statement of Basten JA in
The purpose of any order made upon a finding that a
complaint has been proved, is said to be protective of the interests of the
at large, but more particularly patients or potential patients of the
practitioner concerned. However, the public interests include,
indirectly, the
standing of the medical profession and the maintenance of public confidence in
the high standards of medical practitioners.
There is also an element of
deterrence or, to put it more positively, encouragement to other practitioners
to recognise the importance
of complying with professional standards and the
risks of failing to do so. The powers of a Tribunal having two members of the
profession should, at least in relation to professional standards be
accorded a degree of flexibility which might not necessarily
be accorded to a
Tribunal differently
constituted.
Tribunal considered that the protective orders submitted to be sufficient by Ms
Lonergan were insufficient in this case and that
not only was it necessary to
reprimand Mr Smith severely but also to suspend him from practising pharmacy for
a period of six months.
This period was necessary to confirm the established
view about pharmacists defrauding the Commonwealth through the PBS and to
the seriousness of Mr Smith’s lengthy defalcation. The Tribunal
considered that suspension for six months sufficient for this
purpose as well as
the purpose referred to by Basten JA above. It was also sufficient and
appropriate for the purpose of confirming
to members of the public that they can
have confidence in the pharmacy profession that it will not tolerate defrauding
the PBS scheme
by its members. The Tribunal notes that a longer period of
suspension would attract the operation of s 25 of the
Pharmacy Practise Act
(NSW) and cause Mr Smith to have to divest himself of his pecuniary
interest in any pharmacy business in which he had such an interest.
Tribunal also considered it necessary for both the public and members of the
profession to have confidence that Mr Smith will
not again misuse his privilege
as a pharmacist to make claims on the PBS scheme, that once his registration as
a pharmacist had been
revived following the conclusion of his suspension
referred to above, his registration is to be subject to the condition that all
the pharmaceutical benefits claims made in relation to any pharmacy in which he
has a pecuniary interest, or which he intends to
lodge, are, for a period of one
year, to be inspected, at Mr Smith’s expense, by a pharmacist approved by
the Pharmacy Council
of New South Wales (the Council) at times to be nominated
by the Council prior to the lodgment of those claims with Medicare Australia.
Tribunal notes that in this case Mr Smith’s criminal offence was disposed
of, on appeal, by the imposition of a conviction
and a fine of $100. This brings
protective/disciplinary jurisdiction of
the health professions tribunals exist
for different purposes. As Doyle CJ, giving the judgment of the Full Court of
the Supreme
Court of South Australia and relying on substantial authority,
pointed out in
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
, the purpose of
protective/disciplinary proceedings is the protection of the public, and not
punishment for wrongdoing. Further,
that sometimes the protection of the public
will require the making of an order with a greater adverse effect on the
practitioner
than might be warranted if punishment alone were the relevant
consideration.
Because the abuse of a pharmacist’s privileged access to the PBS scheme
to defraud the Commonwealth is seen as such a serious
matter, the Tribunal,
following the well established course, made the protective orders that it
considered were required in the circumstances
of this case even though those
orders could be seen as having a greater adverse effect on Mr Smith than was
seen to be warranted
by the District Court in the exercise of its criminal
in this matter, for which it convicted and fined Mr Smith.
Tribunal made its orders accordingly. It also made the costs order and the
non-publication/suppression order referred to at the
commencement of these
reasons for decision. The suspension of Mr Smith’s registration is to
commence on the seventh (7
) day after these orders
are made. The rest of these orders have effect from the day they are made are
Dated: 8 December 2010
______________________
Nick O’Neill
Chairperson
______________________
Christopher Piggott
______________________
Russell Benda
Pharmacist Member
_____________________
ATTACHMENT A
Reprimand of Douglas Charles Leslie Smith
The Pharmacy Tribunal has found you guilty of professional misconduct. This
is the second time in your career that you have been found
professional misconduct by the senior body responsible for disciplinary matters
within the pharmacy profession. This time
your professional misconduct continued
over more than two years and three months. It involved a carefully planned and
cleverly executed
exercise of defrauding the Commonwealth of Australia by
abusing your access to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme conducted by Medicare
As a community pharmacist you have access to that Scheme in circumstances
which require you to act with complete integrity, on all
occasions you access
it, and make only those claims that you are entitled to make according to the
requirements of the Scheme. The
Australian community which contributes to the
Scheme through its taxes, and all the members of your profession expect you, and
their colleagues, to act honestly in this regard.
The seriousness of the fraud you indulged in until you were caught had been
emphasised time and again, before you commenced your fraud,
by the courts and by
the bodies responsible for disciplinary matters in the pharmacy profession.
Nevertheless, you embarked on a
process that you did not intend to stop and
which gave you considerable amounts of money that you did not intend to return,
not return until a year after you were caught.
Although you have returned all the money you believe you were not entitled
to, have expressed some contrition for your actions and
have demonstrated some
insight into their absolute unacceptability, and taken other appropriate
actions, this Tribunal considered
it necessary to impose the orders set out in
its reasons for decision.
While your suspension from practice as a pharmacist will cease six months
from the day it commences and the condition placed on your
registration will be
removed from your registration once the relevant time period has elapsed, the
fact of this reprimand will remain
on your registration.
Ss 37(1) and 36
Pharmacy Practise Act 2006
[1938] HCA 34
[1989] NSWCA 218
Katsogiannis
[1993] NSWPB 1
Katsogiannis v Dean
[1993] NSWDC 1
[1998] NSWPB 2
[2000] NSWPB 1
[2001] NSWDC 1
[2002] NSWPB
[1989] NSWCA
(Unreported, NSW Court of Appeal, 27 July
Katsogiannis
[1993] NSWPB
quotations from Graham DCJ are found in
Katsogiannis v Dean
[1993] NSWDC
[1998] NSWPB
[2000] NSWPB
[2001] NSWDC
[2002] NWSPB
[2002] NSWPB
[2001] SASC 169
79 SASR 545
[48]. See also
Wilks v Medical Board of South
[2010] SASC 287.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (308 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter