URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2010/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v DENE & DONNELLY (No:2) [2010] NSWPST 4 (8 July 2010)
This document was amended on 12 April 2011
at paragraph 645.
PSYCHOLOGISTS TRIBUNAL
OF NEW SOUTH
MATTER NUMBERS: Donnelly- PST 003/2008-
Dene - PST 004/2008- PS0095670
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 109
Psychologists Act 2001
IN THE MATTER OF
KERRI DENE & JAMES
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Dene & Donnelly (No 2)
[2010] NSWPST 4
PARTIES: Health Care Complaints Commission (NSW)
(Complainant)
represented by Ms K Stern, of Counsel, instructed by Ms F Westwood,
Solicitor, of the Health Care Complaints Commission.
(Respondent) represented by Mr M Ainsworth of Counsel,
instructed by Ms J Quinlivan (and Mr A Davey, Solicitor), Unsworth Legal.
James Donnelly
(Respondent) represented by Mr J Darams of Counsel,
noting his instructions from Eakin, McCaffery and Cox, Solicitors (not in
attendance).
FILE NUMBERS: PST 003/2008 & PST 004/2008
CORAM: Ms Joanne Muller (Chairperson)
Dr Liz Tong
(Psychologist Member)
Mr Chris Willcox (Psychologist
Ms Frances Taylor (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 15 – 19 June (inclusive), 17 & 18 August 2009
DATE OF DECISION: 8 July 2010
Re Dene: The Tribunal orders the name of the Respondent be
cancelled from the Register (if not already cancelled) at close of business
August 2010. Conditions apply in interim. The Respondent is not entitled to
reapply for registration for a minimum period of
3 years. Prohibition Order
made. Costs Order in favour of the HCCC (as set out in Orders).
Re Donnelly: The Tribunal orders the name of the Respondent be cancelled
from the Register at close of business on 6 August 2010.
Conditions apply in
interim. The Respondent is not entitled to reapply for registration for a
minimum period of 3 years. Tribunal
reserved on the question of Prohibition
Order. Costs Order in favour of the HCCC (as set out in Orders).
CATCHWORDS: psychology - concurrent hearing
of complaints - provisionally registered psychologist supervised by registered
psychologist
– unsatisfactory professional conduct – professional
misconduct - conduct substantially relates to circumstances arising
information provided by a client to one Respondent (being a provisionally
registered psychologist) under the supervision of
the other Respondent –
information regarding abuse of child – failure to/significant delay in
report to DoCS.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Psychologists Act 2001
, clause 6 of
schedule 5,
Health Registration Legislation Amendment Act 2004
(Schedule 1),
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act (No 2)(2004
) (Schedule
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Public Health Act 1991
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
section 27.
CASES CITED:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Polglaze v Veterinary Practitioners Board of NSW
[2009] NSWSC 347
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
Health Care Complaint Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported);
Duncan v Medical Practitioners Disciplinary Committee
(1986) 1 NZLR
New South Wales Crime Commission v Vuletic and ors
HCCC v Dene & Donnelly
[2009] PSTNSW 7.
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Note: Prohibition Orders re Dr Donnelly reserved)
Paragraph number (s)
Introduction 1
The Complaint – Ms Dene 8
The Complaint – Dr Donnelly 9
Appearances 10
Suppression Order 11
Witnesses 12
Documentation 13
Relevant Law
Background Information – Ms Dene 34
Dr Donnelly 38
To Complaint 45
Admissions 48
Evidence – General overview 49
Evidence – Ms Dene
Brief Overview – Documentary Evidence 50
Oral Evidence – Ms Dene 68
Other Documentary Evidence – Ms Dene 78
Ms Zandberg 85
Evidence – Dr Donnelly
Brief Overview – Documentary Evidence 108
Character Evidence 141
Oral Evidence – Dr Donnelly 144
Evidence - Clinical Notes – Psychology Clinic 150
Evidence of Dr Brechman-Toussaint 153
Other documentary evidence 205
Peer Review Evidence 210
Submissions – Ms Dene 322
Findings – Generally 419
Findings re Particulars – Ms Dene 450
Particular 1 455
Particular 2 466
Particular 3 467
Particular 4 470
Particular 5 474
Particular 6 491
Particular 7 492
Findings in relation to the Complaints – Ms Dene 494
Protective Orders – Generally 505
Protective Orders – Ms Dene 506
Submissions of Ms Dene re Suppression Order and Costs Order 514
Orders re Ms Dene 516
Submissions - Dr Donnelly 517
Tribunal’s findings regarding Particulars – Dr Donnelly
Particular 1 584
Particular 2 597
Particular 3 611
Particular 4 617 Particular 5 623
Particular 6 625
Particular 7 629
Particular 8 633
Findings Generally - Dr Donnelly 641
Findings in Relation to the Complaints – Dr
Donnelly 661
Protective Orders – Dr
Donnelly 663
General comment 664
Publication 665
Annexure A – Index of Exhibited Documents
Annexure B – Submissions of the HCCC – Dene
Annexure C – Submissions on behalf of Ms Dene
Annexure D – Submissions of the HCCC – Donnelly
Annexure E – Submissions on behalf of Dr Donnelly
Annexure F – Schedule of Names Suppressed (Not to be
Introduction
Tribunal convened on 15 June 2009 to conduct an Inquiry into complaints made by
Ms Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings, Health
Care Complaints Commission
(‘the HCCC’), regarding two psychologists. The Complaint regarding
Ms Dene is dated 24 June
2008 and regarding Dr Donnelly dated 26 June 2008. The
Inquiry continued over 7 hearing days. Written submissions were received
thereafter.
As at date of this Decision, the Tribunal is awaiting further
submissions in the matter of Dr Donnelly on one issue.
Respondents were both engaged, in one capacity or another, in the psychology
department, of a Regional University in New South
Wales (Regional University).
Complaints arise from a report made by letter dated 9 May 2006 (Dene Volume 1,
exhibit 3) from the Program Director of a New South
Wales Pre-Trial Diversion of
Offenders Program. This program is a legislatively based service offered by the
Department of Health
for people who have been charged with sexual offences
against their children or their partner’s children.
summary the Complaints raised concerns regarding the
‘...failure of
mandated reporters to report child sexual abuse’
respect to the actual interventions used in relation to the father of the child
identified and the child herself’
. The Complaint also raised issues
surrounding the appropriate supervision of provisionally registered
psychologists.
are significant areas of agreement between each of the Respondents with respect
to the factual matrix in this matter. It is
common ground that Mrs A was
referred to Dr Donnelly for assessment as she was suffering from Multiple
Sclerosis. During this assessment,
Mr A, the husband of Mrs A, was identified as
being in need of psychological support. In summary, the support was directed to
Mr A to deal with the stress of his wife’s illness and rapidly
declining condition, her residing in a nursing home and consequentially
responsibilities as a ‘sole’ parent to two young daughters, Miss B
and Miss C.
Dene was given the responsibility of the care of Mr A. During the therapy
session Mr A made various disclosures to Ms Dene regarding
his conduct with Miss
B (then about 10 years of age). Ultimately, Ms Dene made a report to DoCS and Mr
A made admissions of extensive
sexual abuse of Miss A (and others) over a long
period of time.
matter raises many ethical questions. The Tribunal notes that there are numerous
source documents that provide psychologists
with guidance regarding ethical
matters. Section 19 of the Act provides for a Code to be developed by the Board
and further provides
that the Code should be observed by all psychologists.
There have been several editions of this Code and all registered psychologists
are bound by this Code. Further, documents with more specific content such as
the Australian Psychological Society
‘Guidelines on Reporting Child
Abuse and Neglect, and Criminal Activity’
published in November 2001
(and reformatted in 2004 - Dene - volume 2, exhibit 2 pages 163 - 169) provide a
clear and comprehensive
picture of the obligations placed upon registered
psychologists.
THE COMPLAINT - MS DENE
HCCC allege that Ms Kerri Dene
being a person registered as a psychologist
under the Act:
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of s.25 of the Act, in that she has:
Demonstrated
that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the
psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of an equivalent level of training or experience and/or
in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or purported
practice of psychology.
Particulars of Complaint One
The psychologist gained conditional registration as
a psychologist on 2 April 2002 and gained full registration on 9 April 2005.
Between January 2003 and November 2004 Dr James Donnelly provided clinical
supervision to the psychologist. Between June 2003 and
August 2005 the
psychologist provided therapy to Mr A. The psychologist:
Mr A disclosed to the psychologist during a therapy session on 21 October
2003 that he had been touching his daughter Miss B
in an inappropriate manner
for the last few years:
properly or at all to understand the legal and professional obligations upon her
in cases of potential child abuse;
to make a report to the Department of Community Services of those disclosures as
required by
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
to take adequate steps to assess whether or not Miss B or her sister Miss C were
to appreciate the risk to Miss B and Miss C;
to take appropriate action to protect the safety and welfare of Miss B and Miss
contrary to B5 of the Board’s Code of Conduct, to communicate the fact of
Mr A’s disclosures to appropriate professionals
or organisations;
not voluntarily report the disclosures to the Department of Community
to provide treatment services to Mr A notwithstanding that this was beyond her
competence and experience;
to provide treatment services to Mr A notwithstanding that this raised issued
contrary to B3 of the Board’s Code of Conduct to refer, for more
specialised service, Mr A whose needs were beyond her
professional
competence.
Transgressed
professional boundaries by making inappropriate disclosures to Mr A about her
history of sexual abuse.
on or around November 2003, upon the occasion of making a referral to
Dr Brechman-Toussaint:
provide all relevant information to Dr Brechman-Toussaint in relation to the
risk of harm to Miss B and Miss C;
to reconsider the question of whether or not Miss B and Miss C were at risk;
make a report to the Department of Community Services of those disclosures as
required by
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
15 September 2004, involved Miss B in the therapeutic process that she was
undertaking with Mr A notwithstanding that this was:
her competence;
inappropriate
in the circumstances; and
any steps being taken to assess or to ensure Miss B’s welfare in relation
to this process.
further information as to the extent of the inappropriate touching by Mr A of
Miss B being disclosed to her by Mr A in September
properly or at all to understand the legal and professional obligations upon her
in cases of potential child abuse;
to make a report to the Department of Community Services of those disclosures as
required by
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
to take adequate steps to assess whether or not Miss B or her sister Miss C were
to appreciate the risk to Miss B and Miss C;
to take appropriate action to protect the safety and welfare of Miss B and Miss
contrary to B5 of the Board’s Code of Conduct to communicate the fact of
Mr A’s disclosures to appropriate professionals
or organisations;
not voluntarily report the disclosures to the Department of Community
to provide treatment services to Mr A notwithstanding that this was beyond her
competence and experience;
contrary to B3 of the Board’s Code of Conduct to refer, for more
specialised service, Mr A whose needs were beyond her
professional
competence.
around September 2004 - August 2005, delayed making a report to the Department
of Community Services.
not keep any appropriate and/or accurate clinical records in relation to the
psychological treatment provided to Mr A.
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within
the meaning of
of the Act, in that he has:
Demonstrated
that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the
psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of an equivalent level of training or experience and/or
in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or purported
practice of psychology.
Particulars of Complaint Two
As per Complaint One.
THE COMPLAINT - DR DONNELLY
HCCC allege that Dr James Donnelly
being a person registered as a
psychologist under the Act:
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
of the Act, in
that he has:
Demonstrated
that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the
psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of an equivalent level of training or experience and/or
in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or purported
practice of psychology.
Particulars of Complaint One
Between June 2003 and
November 2004 the psychologist provided therapy to Mr A and/or his daughter Miss
B himself and/or through his
supervision of Ms Kerri Dene, a provisionally
registered psychologist providing treatment services under his supervision. The
psychologist:
October 2003, upon becoming aware that Mr A had disclosed to Ms Dene during a
therapy session that he had been touching his daughter
Miss B in an
inappropriate manner for the last few years:
properly or at all to understand the legal and professional obligations upon him
in cases of potential child abuse;
to make a report to the Department of Community Services of those disclosures as
required by
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
not voluntarily report the disclosures to the Department of Community
to take adequate steps to assess whether or not Miss B or her sister Miss C were
to appreciate the risk to Miss B and Miss C;
to take appropriate action to protect the safety and welfare of the Miss B and
contrary to B5 of the Board’s Code of Conduct to communicate the fact of
Mr A’s disclosures to appropriate professionals
or organisations; and
or permitted Ms Dene (a trainee under the psychologist’s supervision) to
continue to provide treatment services to Mr
A notwithstanding that this was
beyond her competence and experience.
or permitted Ms Dene to continue to provide treatment services to Mr A
notwithstanding that she had disclosed her own past
history of sexual abuse to
on or around November 2003, upon the occasion of making a referral to
Dr Brechman-Toussaint:
provide all relevant information to Dr Brechman-Toussaint in relation to the
risk of harm to Miss B and Miss C;
to reconsider the question of whether or not Miss B and Miss C were at risk;
make a referral to the Department of Community Services.
15 September 2004, encouraged and/or permitted Ms Dene to involve Miss B in the
therapeutic process she was undertaking with Mr
A notwithstanding that this
her competence;
inappropriate
in the circumstances; and
any steps being taken to assess or to ensure Miss B’s welfare in relation
to this process.
to exercise appropriate supervision of Ms Dene in her treatment of Mr A.
to take steps to safeguard the welfare of Ms Dene in relation to her therapeutic
relationship with Mr A.
around January 2005 - August 2005, delayed making a report to the Department of
Community Services.
not keep any appropriate and/or accurate clinical records in relation to the
psychological treatment provided to Mr A.
or permitted Ms Dene to provide 42 sessions of therapy to Mr A as an
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of
professional misconduct within the meaning of
of the Act, in that he
Demonstrated
that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the
psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of an equivalent level of training or experience and/or
in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or purported
practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
As per Complaint One.
Appearances
per headnote.
Suppression Order
Tribunal made Orders, in accordance with Clause 6 of Schedule 5 of the Act, that
the names and any details that tend to identify
a number of people mentioned in
the evidence in this matter are not to be published. These included Mr A, and
his two daughters,
Miss B and Miss C. A schedule marked ‘F’
containing their identities will be attached only to the original Reasons for
Decision and the copies that are forwarded to the parties. This schedule should
not be reproduced if copies of the Reasons document
are made for any purpose
other than to provide it to an appeals court. The parties are directed to take
care to ensure that the schedule
is not copied. If the transcript of the
proceedings is legally provided to any entity, the Registry must ensure that it
is appropriately
de-identified in accordance with the annexed
addition to the two Respondents, the following people gave evidence: Dr Gary
Banks, Dr Margaret Brechman-Toussaint, Ms Carol Boland,
and Ms Nell
Documentation
HCCC tendered documents which came into evidence as Dene - Volume 1, exhibits 1-
16, Dene - Volume 2, exhibits 1 - 3, Dene &
Donnelly - Volume 3, exhibits 1-
5 and Donnelly – Volume 1, exhibits 1 - 13, Donnelly – Volume 2,
exhibits 1 and 2 as
itemised in annexure ‘A’ hereto. The Respondents
each tendered a folder of documents which came into evidence as exhibits.
exhibits relied upon by Ms Dene were marked as exhibits RA – RM and those
relied upon by Dr Donnelly as exhibits R1 to
Relevant Law
Standard of proof
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
the civil standard, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘reasonably
satisfied’ that the particulars
of the Complaint have been
established.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was) at 362–363 said:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood
of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the
answer to the question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable
satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
Polglaze v Veterinary Practitioners Board of NSW
[2009] NSWSC 347
the court confirmed that there is no third standard of proof i.e. one between
the civil standard and the criminal standard, rather,
because of the nature of
the matters in protective jurisdictions it was the quality and sufficiency of
the evidence that was required
to discharge the civil onus of proof.
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
25 of the Act is as follows:
Meaning of “unsatisfactory professional
For the purposes of this Act, "unsatisfactory professional conduct", in
relation to a registered psychologist, includes any of the
(a) any conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the psychologist in the practice
of psychology
is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training or experience,
(b) a contravention by the psychologist of a provision of this Act or the
regulations or of a condition of the psychologist’s
registration,
(c) a failure without reasonable excuse by the psychologist to comply with a
direction by the Board to provide information with respect
to a complaint under
this Part against the psychologist,
(d) a failure by the psychologist to comply with an order made or a direction
given by the Board or the Tribunal under this Act,
(d1) a contravention by the psychologist of
section 34A (4) (Power of Commission to obtain information, records and
evidence) of
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(e) any other improper or unethical conduct by a psychologist in the
course of the practice or purported practice of psychology.
definition of "unsatisfactory professional conduct" was amended by the
Registration Legislation Amendment Act 2004
(Schedule 1), which commenced on
1 March 2005. The amendment, in summary, added the reference to the standard
reasonably expected
of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training or
experience. The Particular of Complaint One relates to a period of time after
March 2005 and pursuant to the transitional provisions of the Statute Law
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act (No. 2) (Schedule 4),
the relevant law to be
applied by this Tribunal is that which was in force at the time these Complaints
were filed. The Complaint
currently before the Tribunal is dated 10 September
2007. Consequently, the definition of ‘unsatisfactory professional
applicable in these proceedings is the definition contained in
the current legislation.
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is found when the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that
the conduct made out demonstrates one
of the deficiencies or inadequacies that
are set out in section 25. The Complaint currently before the Tribunal alleges
conduct particularised amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of this section – specifically sub-section
Board published a Code of Conduct dated 1 May 1990. This was superseded by the
Code of Ethical Conduct dated 3 November 1997,
which in turn was superseded by
the Code dated 1 November 2004 (which was provided to all registered
psychologists in June 2005).
Australian Psychological Society (APS) also publish a Code of Ethics and other
topic specific documents. As mentioned above, the
APS published a document
‘Guidelines on Reporting Child Abuse and Neglect, and Criminal
Activity’ in 2001. The Tribunal
notes that the CV of Dr Donnelly (HCCC
Donnelly Volume One – exhibit 8 – page 24) records he has been a
member of the
APS College of Clinical Neuropsychologists since 2001. In exhibit
RA Ms Dene provides a copy of her CV. Ms Dene lists Associate Membership
APS in this CV. In a letter to the University dated 20 September 2005, Dr
Donnelly makes reference not only to the relevant
child protection legislation
(Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998)
but also to
the APS Code of Conduct and Reporting Guidelines.
Professional Misconduct
24 meaning of "professional misconduct":
For the purposes of this Act, "professional misconduct", in
relation to a registered psychologist, means unsatisfactory professional
of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
psychologist’s registration.
making the findings in relation to the Particulars and the Complaints the
Tribunal then needs to consider the appropriate Order(s)
to be made in the
circumstances.
dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege
trust placed in psychologists is analogous, to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the client to
disclose highly
personal and sensitive information to the psychologist in the course of
treatment. In a passage cited with approval
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638, Priestley JA said in
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993, unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give to their
doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a
patient places in a doctor is considerable. In
some cases, of which the present
seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost
absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such cases is
also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of
the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is one of the
reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations and are
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the public
characterising the conduct, the Tribunal has regard to the potential for harm of
the conduct rather then the actual harm that
eventuated.
this Tribunal and others exercising a similar jurisdiction in New South Wales
have always adopted the practice of considering
the particulars of complaint
separately or cumulatively when determining whether the conduct amounts to
unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct, the Tribunal
notes the comments made in a decision of the Court of Appeal in New Zealand,
Duncan v Medical Practitioners Disciplinary Committee
(1986) 1 NZLR 513
where at 546, Cooke P, Richardson, McMullin and Somers JJ said:
... a case is conceivable in which over a period a practitioner
manifests in a diversity of ways, some more serious than others, such
disregard of his professional responsibilities that, viewed as a whole, his
conduct can rightly be described as disgraceful
in a professional respect... we
can see nothing in the Act or in natural justice to prevent the Committee, after
investigating a
range of complaints, from regarding a comprehensive charge is
appropriate as well as separate ones. Indeed it might be against the
interest to deny the Committee any right to present an all-embracing charge. It
may be important that the appropriate professional
tribunal should be able to
look at the practitioner’s whole attitude to practice.
Prohibition Orders
prohibition order may be made by the Tribunal in accordance with section 53,
subsection (3A) (an amendment introduced into the Act
on 4 December 2006). This
sub-section states:
If the Tribunal makes an order under subsection
(2) in respect of a person and it is satisfied that the person poses a
substantial
risk to the health of members of the public, it may by order (a
“prohibition order”) do any one or more of the following:
(a) prohibit the person from providing health services or specified health
services for the period specified in the order or permanently,
(b) place such conditions as the Tribunal thinks appropriate on
the provision of health services or specified health services by the
the period specified in the order or permanently.
service is defined in
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
including the following services, whether provided as public or private
(a) medical, hospital and nursing services;
(b) dental services;
(c) mental health services;
(d) pharmaceutical services;
(e) ambulance services;
(f) community health services;
(g) health education services;
(h) welfare services necessary to implement any services referred to in
paragraphs (a) - (g);
(i) services provided by podiatrists, chiropractors, osteopaths,
optometrists, physiotherapists, psychologists and optical dispensers;
(j) services provided by dieticians, masseurs, naturopaths, acupuncturists,
occupational therapists, speech therapists, audiologists,
audiometrists and
radiographers;
(k) services provided in other alternative health care fields;
(k1) forensic pathology services; and
(l) a service prescribed by the
Health Care Complaints Regulation
a health service for the purposes of this the
Health Care Complaints Act
‘Substantial’
interpretation of the word ‘substantial’ has been considered in a
number of cases. In
New South Wales Crime Commission v Vuletic and Others
[2005] NSWSC 614
at paragraph 53, Johnson J gave the following summary of
relevant law:
The word “substantial” is a word which may vary in
its meaning depending upon the context in which it is used and the
matter in relation to which it is to be applied: Director of Public Prosecutions
[1998] NSWSC 16
(1998) 44 NSWLR 618
at 622. In Tillmanns Butcheries Pty Limited v
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union
[1979] FCA 85
(1979) 42 FLR 331
Deane J observed that the word “substantial” was not only
susceptible of ambiguity, but was a word calculated
to conceal a lack of
precision. In O’Brien Glass Industries Limited v Cool & Sons Pty
[1983] FCA 191
(1983) 77 FLR 441
, Fox J at 447 referred to Tillmanns Butcheries and
observed that, in selecting the word “substantial”:
“The legislature has chosen a word of intractably indefinite import
and much must be left to individual assessment.”
In Losurdo, it was said at 622 that the word
“substantial” is an ordinary English word and must be given its
meaning in the context in which it appears.
the purpose of
(3A) the Tribunal is of the view that
‘substantial’ requires something more than a bare risk but is less
stringent than
special, exceptional or unusual.
a prohibition order is made, and a de-registered practitioner provides a service
in contravention of the order the penalty imposed
section 10AK
Public Health Act 1991
is a maximum fine of $5,500.00 or 12 months
imprisonment or both.
Notification of Deregistration
de-registered health practitioner who is the subject of a prohibition order
must, before providing a health service to a person
ensure that notification is
made that the health practitioner was registered under a particular health
registration Act or corresponding
health registration legislation and that the
health practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation has been
or suspended. Notification must be made to:
person to whom the health practitioner intends to provide the health service or,
if that person is under 16 years of age or
under guardianship, a parent or
guardian of the person,
(b) if the health service is to be provided by the health practitioner as an
employee, the health practitioner’s employer.
Failure to do so is an offence under
section 10AK
Public Health
and carries a penalty of a fine of up to $5,500.00.
Advertising of Health Services
person must not advertise a health service that is to be provided by a
deregistered health practitioner unless the advertisement
specifies that the
health practitioner was registered under a particular health registration Act or
corresponding health registration
legislation and that the health
practitioner’s registration under that Act or legislation is cancelled or
A person must not advertise a health service that is to
be provided by a health practitioner who is subject to a prohibition order
unless the advertisement specifies that the health practitioner is subject to
Failure to comply with either of these requirements is an offence under
section 10AL
Public Health Act
and carries a penalty of a
fine of up to $5,500.00.
Background material
Background of Ms Dene
Respondent was born in 1957. After completing her Higher School Certificate in
1975 she undertook a Diploma in Teaching (Primary),
graduating in 1979. Ms Dene
taught for three years before taking leave for family reasons. Between 1989 and
1993 Ms Dene worked as
a teacher from time to time. Ms Dene commenced a Bachelor
of Psychology (with honours) at the regional University in 1993 and graduated
2000. During this same period Ms Dene also trained as a family mediator and
counsellor and worked in this area on a sessional
basis. In 2002 Ms Dene
commenced a post graduate degree in Clinical Psychology at the regional
University. She suspended this course
in 2005 and has not returned thereto.
at the University, Ms Dene completed two practica. A 44 day practicum supervised
by Dr Donnelly commencing in February 2003
and completed by about August or
September 2003; the other was supervised by both Dr Donnelly and Dr
Brechman-Toussaint. Ms Dene
stated that in approximately early 2005 she
destroyed the ‘detailed notes’ she made of the supervision sessions.
Dene was granted conditional registration as a psychologist (i.e. she was
provisionally registered) on 2 April 2002. Full Registration
was granted on 5
April 2005. As at the time of this Decision, the Tribunal understands that Ms
Dene’s application to re-new
her Registration is pending.
leaving the Regional University, Ms Dene spent a short time in private practice
before commencing work as a counsellor for Alzheimer’s
Australia (on a
contract basis, one day per week) from October 2006 until August 2008. In
January 2007 until the time of the Inquiry
Ms Dene has worked delivering
‘psychological services’ at the Coffs Harbour Women’s Health
Centre (CV attached
to exhibit RA). Ms Dene initially started working one day
per week and this has increased to two to three days a week. Ms Dene stated
she worked part time as she had found the involvement in this case to be
stressful and part time work was all she could manage.
Ms Dene gave oral
evidence that she had received supervision by telephone once a week from a
counsellor while undertaking this part-time
work. In her oral evidence Ms Dene
indicated that she had restricted her work to patient’s that did not
involve any allegations
of child sexual abuse. Ms Dene indicated that she
limited her practice to seeing women for ‘
grief, anxiety, depression
and carer stress’
(T102, 18/6/09).
Background of Dr Donnelly
Donnelly was born in 1955 in the United States. After working as a steelworker
he joined the United States Air Force in 1974 where
he remained for four years.
In 1977 he commenced part-time work as a nursing assistant, then as a health
educator. He undertook academic
studies and graduated from the University of
California at Irvine with a Bachelor of Science (with Research Honours) in 1986.
2000 he completed a Master of Science and a Doctorate in Clinical Psychology at
Vanderbilt University. Dr Donnelly’s statement
records that he completed
five clinical practica comprising approximately 4000 supervised hours of work.
Dr Donnelly’s evidence
is that he had clinical experience at major clinics
in the United States during his training.
Donnelly’s evidence is (see paragraphs 6 to 9 of the statement dated 11
June 2009) that he had considerable experience working
with sex offenders and
victims of sexual abuse and provided a certificate acknowledging his attendance
at a one day seminar at the
Carondelet Management Institute titled ‘
to help Adult and Child Survivors of Sexual Abuse’
from 3 December
1997 (exhibit R1). His first
to the concept of
reporting sexual abuse was when he was working on the university campus and
sexual abuse was prevalent among fraternities
and sororities. His subsequent
experience included the use of biofeedback as interventions for sex offenders
and clinical work with
children abused by family members or clergy once he
became a licensed Marriage, Child and Family Counsellor in Tennessee (in 1992).
2001 to 2006 Dr Donnelly worked as a Lecturer and Clinical Neuropsychologist at
the School of Psychology, Clinical Training program
at the Regional University.
Dr Donnelly taught ethics (including the application of mandatory reporting
requirements in relation
to children – page 2, exhibit R4).
a few months in the early part of 2005 Dr Donnelly took medical leave as a
result of ‘
high stress and depression related to conditions in the
and then from about September 2005 he took study leave. In
April 2006 he was appointed as Head of Psychology at the Sydney Children’s
Hospital at Randwick.
the time of the Inquiry Dr Donnelly had left the Sydney Children’s
Hospital and was working part time at another regional
University and was
attempting to establish a private practice on the one day a week he was not
working at the University.
Tribunal notes that Dr Donnelly maintains his Registration as at the date of
this Decision.
Background to the Complaint
Dene provided treatment to Mr A from June 2003 to August 2005. Dr Donnelly was
the supervisor of Ms Dene at least between January
2003 and November 2004,
including as her supervisor for her work with Mr A.
noted above, allegations regarding the conduct of the Respondents were received
by the Board by way of a letter dated 9 May 2006
from Mr Dale Tolliday, Program
Director, Cedar Cottage, NSW Pre-Trial Diversion of Offenders Program.
matter was referred to the HCCC for investigation in the usual course and the
Complaints were referred to the Tribunal. The Reasons
for Decision in relation
to the concurrent hearing of the Complaints is found at
HCCC v Dene &
[2009] PSTNSW 7.
the Directions Hearing held on 7 May 2009, Counsel for Ms Dene advised that she
admitted the substance of the conduct that led
to her coming before the Tribunal
but did not admit that the conduct amounted to unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional
misconduct. This was confirmed in the written
submissions dated 16 October 2009 made on behalf of Ms Dene. The Tribunal notes
a good deal of Ms Dene’s evidence did not sit with her making such
admissions as to the substance of the conduct, and that
the majority of the
Particulars were not ultimately admitted in Ms Dene’s final written
submissions.
Evidence – General Overview
large amount of evidence came before the Tribunal. The index (Annexure A) sets
out the documentary evidence. The transcript of the
oral evidence is lengthy
given the seven hearing days. A good deal of this evidence is contradictory.
While the entirety of the evidence
has been carefully considered, the Tribunal
does not consider a recount of the entirety of the evidence is required.
Evidence – Ms Dene
Brief Overview – Documentary Evidence Ms
15 September 2004, Ms Dene conducted a joint session with Mr A and Miss B. This
session is recorded in clinical notes made by Ms
Dene (Volume 2, exhibit 1 at
pages 29 and 30). This note records the following:
Session Goals:
1. To meet with [Miss B] and build some rapport with her
2. Use strength cards, and use these to prepare [Miss B] for the joint
3. Support [Miss B]
4. Contract with [Miss B] for future contact.
5. Confirm appointment with [Mr A] for Monday.
Behavioural Observations:
[Miss B] was dressed in her school uniform, and did not take her hat off
inside. She used her hat to cover her eyes or face when she
felt uncomfortable.
[Miss B] tried to avoid telling me she knew why she had come. She cried through
the session and curled up in
the chair, hiding her eyes. At the conclusion of
the session she was able to look at her father, and me briefly.
[Miss B] was outgoing and engaged in some eye contact with me. She was
able to talk about her strengths and love for horses in particular.
I told [Miss
B] I knew what her father had done. She hid behind her hat and did not want to
talk about it. When I indicated that
her father would join us to talk to her,
she said ‘no’. I spent some time letting her express her resistance
I talked to her about things hidden and about hiding away from things
that are painful. She cried. When [Mr A] came in he sat next
to her and stroked
her head and back. She appeared somewhat comforted by this, but did not uncurl
or make eye contact. [Mr A] apologised
to her, and told her he would not hurt
her again. After awhile, I talked to [Miss B] and told her about heroes, and
being scared
and about not wanting to face things. I talked to her about
strength, and about taking her time to make eye contact with her father.
talked about her strength coming through her eyes. We waited for some time.
[Miss B] changed positions in her chair, gradually
uncurled and made some brief
eye contact with her dad. I talked a little about feeling weird and normal; and
the sad and uncomfortable feelings; and about the benefits
of facing emotionally painful situations. I left [Miss B] and [Mr A] alone
she felt able to face the outside world again. When she came out of the room she
used her hat to avoid me.
I believe that [Miss B] took the first steps in healing the abuse today.
She did not want to and it was very uncomfortable and painful
for her. I was
pleased to see that she was able to regain her strength and in her own time make
did not expect her to understand the
significance of today. It will not be until she is older that it may make some
sense to her.
[Mr A] cried when he talked to [Miss B] about his regret for what he had
done. He was distressed by her distress. He was able to follow
my cue to be
silent and allow [Miss B] to set the pace of her regaining her composure.
The session allowed the expression of emotion in a real and unhurried way.
I recommended to [Mr A] that he and [Miss B] took their
time to settle and
adjust before returning to normal daily activities.
I was conscious that [Mr A] did not use specific language about touching
her inappropriately. I decided not to intervene, as I believed
that [Miss B] was
being confronted with very sensitive emotional material, and did not see any
benefit from increasing the intensity.
this point the Tribunal comments that this record indicates that Miss B did not
react in a positive fashion to this session, in
fact there are clear signs she
was extremely distressed by the intervention. There is nothing in the clinical
notes regarding the
psychological preparation of Miss B for the joint session
with her father, apart from a discussion regarding her ‘strengths
for horses in particular’. The Tribunal notes that at the time of this
interview Miss B was 10 years of age. Miss
B would have been a ‘vulnerable
person’ in many regards, particularly as she was prepubescent, had an
extremely ill parent
and had not been psychologically prepared for a session of
this nature. Even if the Tribunal only had regard to the record of the
which Miss B sat in the chair with her hat pulled over her eyes during the
session, the Tribunal would still be of the view
that this session was
inappropriate.
Tribunal notes that on 14 September 2004, Ms Dene met with Mr A and Miss C and
at the end of the session there was a discussion
regarding the meeting with Miss
B the following day. The notes record the following:
[Mr A] said he has not told [Miss B] yet that he has disclosed
to me. He will do so in the morning before they come. He reiterated
his goal to
be ‘real’ in the session.
is nothing in the note of 15 September 2004 that indicates Ms Dene ascertained
from Mr A whether or not he had actually informed
Miss B of the purpose of the
session. It is difficult to see how this document could be represented by Ms
Dene as recording anything
other than the issue of dealing with the sexual abuse
20 September 2004 Ms Dene records the following notes of her session with Mr
We talked for most of the session about his relationship with
[Miss B] and how he had begun transgressing her boundaries. It was the
and direct [Mr A] has been about this, which I see as I good sign, and
indicative of a growing strength of character. He
questioned his behaviour- much
like he was looking back at events that seemed to be part of a bad dream. He
pieced together an explanation
that seemed to assist him in that it identified
antecedents and maintaining factors. His alcoholism; wife’s diagnosis and
of MS; personality traits of enjoying the taboo; and early sexual
learning experiences were discussed in context.
His regret and shame were identified as possible barriers for him to
assist [Miss B].
2. Discuss need for me to see [Miss B] again to check how she is doing,
because of her deep emotional response (shame) during the
session I had with
11 October 2004, Ms Dene was again consulted by Mr A. With respect to the second
listed goal (from the earlier session) of
‘Discuss need for me to see
again to check how she is doing, because of her deep emotional
response (shame) during the session I had with her
’ Ms Dene recorded
the following:
This was discussed.
he had talked to
, and told her he should have been clearer in
his language with her about his commitment to not hurt her again.
told her he would not touch her inappropriately or sexually again
checked her understanding of both terms: which she reportedly grunted in
agreement indicating such). He said she told him that
she never wanted to see
that woman (me) again. I told
that I needed to think more about
and would seek to provide a different experience for her
(e.g. sandplay) during which time I would check how she was after our session.
(Emphasis added by Tribunal)
the notes taken for the same session with respect to the third stated goal,
Discus termination, including reporting responsibilities’
Ms Dene made the following notes:
This was discussed in a gentle manner as I
knew it would be difficult for [Mr A] to hear because of his concerns of
punitive consequences
from authorities. We discussed the importance of
documenting his disclosure, request for help, and attendance at treatment for
and [Miss B]. [Mr A] understood the rationale presented and said he
remained motivated to do the best to heal the situation he had
created. I asked
him about accessing internet child pornography. He denied this, and this is
believable to me as he has been honest
and forthright throughout our sessions
and of deciding
what further treatment/support [Mr A] needs for remaining
Dene made a ‘case review’ note on 28 September 2004 commencing with
the sentence
‘I want to record my thoughts about the ethical
difficulties in this case’.
The Tribunal notes from the contents of
this note and the contents of the file notes made for the next few sessions make
that this case review may have been commenced on 28 September 2004 but
was not completed until sometime later. The note records:
Client name:
[Mr A] (Mr)
September 28
I want to record my thoughts about the ethical difficulties in this case.
Oct 2003: [Mr A] disclosed that he had
touched his daughter [Miss B] inappropriately, about once a week (genital area)
a few years. He said he would lie with her when he put her to bed and
touch her until she pushed his hand away. He said he had stopped
ago, and had told her he was sorry and he would not do it again. [Mr A] asked
for help with this, I had supervision
immediately after session with Jim.
Reporting responsibilities were discussed. Child not considered at immediate
risk as father had
voluntary confessed and sought help. Father sole carer.
Daughter to be seen by experienced clinical psychologist.
Rationale to assist
father to maintain safe behaviours with daughter.
Assist daughter to develop
protective behaviours and have access to professional help.
(Emphasis added
by Tribunal)
Therapy with father weekly/fortnightly with focus on restraint firstly;
then changing distorted cognitions that had been accompanied
and maintained his
behaviour. Also, supportive therapy to decrease his stress and increase
December 2003: Daughter seen with sister by CP (MBT).
Last session, duration of previous sexual transgressions with daughter
much greater than previously advised. Since 4 years of age,
information, as pre-exists sexual relationship difficulties with wife. Father
more open with information. My concern- am
I missing something?
Today. Thinking about termination issues with father. Concern now exists -
low risk, but important to record past events as family
situation and past
history and termination of therapy combine resulting in assessment that there
exists a current risk of concern
for this young person- although low.
If, demands on father exceed resources.
If, he does not get adequate support.
If, he were to lose faith in his goal in being an honourable man.
If, his daughter did not use protective behaviours.
Daughters are not very open about family matters.
Concern about father’s feeling of betrayal in reporting- lose faith
in help seeking and goals. Stops being honest.
Concern about inappropriate intervention from outside agency. Could place
daughter at more risk if [Mr A] stops being honest, and
daughter does not
disclose as she is very loyal to dad.
Phone call to colleague working in child protection area 34/10/04
. Spoke about case without disclosing details.
Told him I was going to report. Asked if any advantage to the father for
him to do so.
He suggested that I let them know that:
It was a voluntary disclosure by the father as a request for help.
Courageous disclosure to a known mandated reporter
At time of disclosure, sexual abuse of daughter had ceased two weeks
beforehand.
Father has engaged in treatment since disclosure.
Father has been open and apparently honest throughout. Has reported
cessation of abuse since disclosure (Twelve months).
Father has agreed and facilitated getting help for daughter.
Daughter seen by clinical psychologist for 3 sessions (Dec 2003/Jan 2004).
Daughter did not disclose abuse. Girls given information
behaviours.
Joint session (daughter and father) with me September 2004. Daughter
distressed by this. Father apologised and made commitment not
to harm her again.
Younger sibling also seen clinical psychologist and me and did not
. Father denies any breach with her
Father agrees to need for continued monitoring and treatment.
Not sensible to cause more distress for daughter at this time. Counter
productive for her to see another psychologist at present.
daughter protective behaviours and contacts to report any further
FOR REPORT:
The situation is being managed and monitored.
Advise no intervention needed at present.
Advise counter productive for punitive intervention.
Low current risk for daughter and younger sibling.
outcome will be achieved in family staying together and father engaging in safe
and appropriate parental behaviours.
Ask for the allocated case-worker to contact me before any intervention
with family.
If I am not working with father, would need to let know of arrangements
made to transfer case, ensuring psych is fully briefed on
background.
(Emphasis added by Tribunal)
following matters arise from this ‘case review’:
Ms Dene confirms
that in the session on 21 October 2003 Mr A advised he touched Miss B in the
genital area about once a week and had
done so for
‘about a few
, and that it had ceased two weeks earlier.
Ms Dene had
considered that as the abuse had stopped and as Mr A had voluntarily confessed
and sought help that Miss B was not
‘at immediate risk’
Ms Dene records
that Miss B was to be seen by a clinical psychologist with a view to assisting
Miss B’s father to maintain
‘safe behaviours’
assist Miss B to develop protective behaviours and have access to professional
The initial
focus of therapy was to assist Mr A with
‘restraint’
this behaviour.
Ms Dene records
that Mr A had advised during the ‘last session’ that the
‘sexual transgressions’
had commenced when Miss B was 4 years
Ms Dene states
‘worrisome information, as pre-exists sexual relationship
difficulties with wife’
and rather than expressing concern for Miss B
states that she was concerned that she may be
. This statement is made in the context of her notes just
recording that Mr A had committed sexual transgressions upon his daughter
she was 4 years of age.
acknowledges concerns of a
‘current risk’
exist but rates it
The Tribunal
notes that that Ms Dene records that on 11 October 2004 she sought the
permission of Mr A to talk to a colleague about
the situation to ascertain the
best way to present this matter to DoCS. Ms Dene records on 25 October 2004 that
one of the goals
for the session was to discuss with Mr A the information she
had received regarding reporting the matter (exhibit 2.1, page 15).
Ms Dene had
sought advice from a
‘colleague working in child protection’
and the advice indicated that the voluntary disclosure by Mr A was a
‘Courageous disclosure to a known mandated reported.’
8 November 2004, Ms Dene’s notes record the
‘option for further
was discussed and that Mr A had decided to transfer to Miss
Dene’s private practice
‘rather than begin therapy someone new at
this stage.’
The note continues
‘Agreement to hold over
reporting until new arrangement had been established’
Tribunal notes that a session was due to take place on 22 November 2004.
However, it was cancelled without a record being made
of the reason therefore.
No record was made of following up this cancellation despite the goal for the
session having been recorded
as assisting Mr A to
‘care for himself,
his wife and daughters’
discharge summary signed by Ms Dene on 4 January 2005 (2.1, page 9) records on
page three that there had been a decision to report
the matter to DoCS
at the appropriate time
are no other clinical notes in evidence until the clinical note made by Ms Dene
on 28 June 2005. This note records Mr A consulted
her in her private practice
(exhibit 2.3 page 21). It notes that one of the presenting problems is
relapse prevention re: molestation of daughter (aged 4-9)
Under the heading ‘
Perceived obstacles’
, Ms Dene notes
punitive/unhelpful response from DoCS re reporting’
private practice file also contains a ‘DASS (42)’ form completed by
Mr A on the first day he attended Ms Dene’s
private practice that
indicates his depression/anxiety and stress levels were all within normal
limits. This is despite Ms Dene’s
report that Mr A’s presenting
problems included concerns about the reporting to DoCS and the consequences
Dene, by way of her letter dated 23 August 2006 to the HCCC, described a session
she had with Mr A not long after the disclosure
of 21 October 2003. Ms Dene
stated Mr A became angry because Ms Dene had informed Dr Donnelly of his
disclosure. Ms Dene states:
I interrupted the session to ascertain whether Dr Donnelly was
available to meet .with Mr A. Dr Donnelly returned to the
[name deleted]
consulting room with me and met with Mr A for a period of time which may have
been half an hour. I was present in the room, however
did not participate in the
discussion that ensued.
does not appear from this letter and the clinical notes that Dr Donnelly’s
presence during this session was a planned part
of the treatment of Mr A.
notes made by Ms Dene on 28 September 2004 (Dene exhibit volume 1, tab 16) at
page 91 (paragraph 6) she recorded:
Today. Thinking about termination issues with father. Concern
now exists – low risk, but important to record past events as
situation and past history and termination of therapy combine resulting in
assessment that there exists a current risk of
concern for this young person
– although low.
a statement made to investigators from JIRT (Joint investigative Response Team)
Ms Dene is recorded as having stated on 17 August
2005 (Donnelly volume 1
– exhibit 4 at page 5):
......that as she believed that the abuse had stopped, she did
not feel that the children where at ‘current’ risk of harm.
Ms Dene - Oral evidence
19 June 2009 Ms Dene gave evidence that Mr A had told her that when he gave his
daughter (Miss B) a massage his hand moved over
the pubic area (T 46). The
Tribunal has carefully considered all of her evidence. The Tribunal will not
summarise the entirety of
her evidence. Rather the Tribunal just notes some
matters and recounts other evidence in other sections of this document.
asked about an entry in her progress notes which stated
‘Inappropriate
once a week for a few years, a light massage including fondling the pubic
was a description of child sexual abuse, Ms Dene initially
If that description was what I knew, yes, it would have
However, in reply to the very next question Ms Dene describes
how she was
‘trying to understand whether it had become
giving her oral evidence Ms Dene when to great lengths to down played the
significance of her clinical notes. For instance,
she described the language she
used in the notes as being a
‘bleed-through of my own issues’
and that her record
‘Fondling of the pubic area’
‘a totally subjective, emotive, really poor terminology that I
later asked ‘
You were well aware all along that this was
Ms Dene again responded evasively and indirectly
‘It's my word that's - it's my subjectivity about it’
response to a question as to whether she
inappropriate sexual desires towards his daughter’
when she wrote in
her progress notes
‘Therapeutic interventions were also provided to
Mr A in relation to inappropriate desire, thoughts and
behaviour’,
Ms Dene replied
‘No, I didn't. They are poorly
written. Most inappropriate sexual thoughts he had were about young women in
their 20s. They're
the only inappropriate sexual thoughts I ever knew he
This stands in sharp contrast to her response to the disclosures
made by Mr A which triggered memories of her own childhood sexual
abuse. It also
is contradictory to many of the entries in the clinical notes such as
‘[Mr A] said that it was confusing for him to feel an attraction to
[Miss B] and requested help to maintain appropriate behaviours
giving evidence Ms Dene often appeared evasive and dismissive of her own notes,
for example, when asked about her reference
abusive behaviour’
in her notes she explained that this was her
‘subjective language’
rather than an accurate record of
letter to the HCCC from Dr Brechman-Toussaint dated 18 September 2006 (Volume 1,
exhibit 17(2), page 5) notes that Ms Dene continued
to see Mr A for
approximately 20 months after the initial disclosure was made. For 12 months of
this time Ms Dene was under the supervision
of Dr Donnelly. Ms Dene maintained
Dene makes contradictory statements regarding her
status. In the clinical notes Ms Dene made of the session
held on 28 September 2004 there is an acknowledgment that she considers
to be a mandated report when she states in her notes
voluntary disclosure by her father as a request for help. Courageous disclosure
to a known mandated reporter’
This is directly contradictory to her
other claims that she did not need to report because she was not a mandated
her session note made in the week prior (September 20, 2004) Ms Dene notes that
Mr A’s maintaining behaviours included
‘personality traits of
enjoying the taboo’
discussing with Ms Dene whether or not to make a report to DoCS Dr Donnelly
stated that they wondered if
‘maybe we just need to let DoCS know this
is a family that's not going to have support, not let them know that there was
history of massage behaviour but to let them know that this is a family
that's not going to have any support.’
Other documentary evidence – Ms Dene
number of references were provided to the Tribunal on behalf of Ms Dene. Ms
Louise Litchfield provided a reference dated 30 March
2009 (exhibit RG). After
training as a teacher, Ms Litchfield has worked for many years in the area of
Mediation. Ms Litchfield states
that she has known Ms Dene since 1994 when they
both worked for ‘Interrelate’ as mediators. Ms Litchfield reports
Ms Dene was always focused and thorough in her attention to details
regarding clinical and service delivery. The reference continued:
In particular it was at Kerri’s insistence that
Interrelate developed a model of individual Intake Interviews for separated
parents to take account of client safety in the event of undetected issues of
family violence. This represented a significant change
and extension of the
mediation service. Kerri developed a strong rationale based on her thorough
research to argue for and establish
this important clinical change to the
Interrelate mode.
In light of the nature of the current complaint that has been referred to
the Psychologists Tribunal, it is also worth noting that,
in her role as
Mediation Clinical Coordinator, Kerri was particularly concerned that mediators
develop a child focused approach to
practice. It is my opinion that Kerri Dene
was abreast with the emerging vangard of clinical opinion at that time and which
as a significant trend in the field of Child Focused Family Dispute
Resolution. The priority Kerri placed on the welfare and care
of children
caught up in family breakdown and separation influenced the mediators under her
supervision to be more mindful of the
complexity of separation issues and the
needs of vulnerable family members in each case.
Ms Litchfield holds Ms Dene in high regard and has found her to be a diligent,
intelligent person who has observed professional
and personal boundaries.
reference was obtained from Associate Professor Neil Marshall (exhibit RJ).
A/Prof Marshall currently holds an academic appointment
at the Regional
University, having been an academic at various universities for the last 30
years. A/Prof Marshall reports that he
first met Ms Dene at a meeting of the
Armidale Jung Society in 2002. A/Prof Marshall reports that he has become good
friends with
Ms Dene through their common interest in the work of Carl Jung and
in philosophy and psychology generally.
Marshall noted that Ms Dene had also been a doctoral candidate at the Regional
University. He observed that she demonstrated
‘a very high degree of
discipline and determination to complete her studies and become a practising
psychologist’
reference continues:
In the course of our discussions over the years I have been left
in no doubt about depth and extent of Kerri’s interactive skills.
have been many occasions when she has assisted me most effectively me (sic) with
a problem or concern. Indeed, I have met
few people in my life with the
empathic abilities, or perceptive qualities, that she possesses. I have also
been inspired by her
enthusiasm for her work, and her commitment to the welfare
of her clients.
In the time I have known her, Kerri has always behaved with the utmost
integrity in both her personal and professional life. I cannot
imagine that she
would knowingly breach ethical guidelines, or behave in any way that would
adversely impact on her clients or colleagues.
I would like to draw attention to one matter in particular in
Kerri’s statement that stood out for me as being critical -the
relationship between the doctoral student and her supervisor. The nature of
this relationship is often not well understood in the
extramural context.
Doctoral candidates spend three or four years researching and writing the thesis
under the guidance of a supervisor.
Given the specialist content of a thesis,
and the extensive supervision required, a close relationship usually develops
between the
student and the supervisor. This relationship necessarily involves
a very high degree of trust, and dependency on the part of the
student. In fact
the success or otherwise of the thesis may be closely geared to the quality of
the relationship. In such situations
the word of the supervisor often becomes
law and goes unquestioned by the student. From my reading of Kerri’s
statement, I
suspect that something along these lines may have occurred in this
Marshall noted that Ms Dene was still contributing to her local community by
writing a fortnightly women’s health column
in a local newspaper.
reference dated 30 March 2009 was provided by Ms Holmes (exhibit RI). Ms Holmes
first met Ms Dene in 1994 while she was completing
a Mediators course with
Interrelate. Ms Holmes states that Ms Dene was described as the ‘diamond
of the trainee team’
as she had been singled out as the person with the
highest potential. Ms Holmes worked with Ms Dene until 2001. While they worked
together Ms Holmes observed Ms Dene to be highly principled and to have a
professional approach to her work. Ms Dene took her responsibilities
read widely and encouraged all members of staff to engage in on going education.
Ms Holmes has the highest regard for
Ms Dene’s integrity.
Ms Zandberg’s report re examination of Ms Dene
Dene attended two sessions with Ms Zandberg, psychologist, for the purpose of a
report regarding Ms Dene to be prepared for the
Tribunal. Ms Zandberg also gave
evidence before the Tribunal.
Zandberg records in her report that in preparing the report she had regard to
‘information ... gathered from interviews, telephone conversations,
emailed information, Ms Dene’s legal affidavit and
impression.’
the heading
‘History of any childhood experiences suffered by Ms.
, Ms Zandberg records a history of Ms Dene having experienced
sexual abuse as a child and not reporting same until early 2003.
the heading ‘What were the ways in which Ms. Dene managed and dealt with
those experiences?’ Ms Sandberg records
‘withdrawal’,
‘hyper vigilance’, ‘feeling responsible’ and
the heading
‘In your view, had Ms. Dene adequately dealt with the
circumstances surrounding such an experience and if not, what ought to
occurred?’,
Ms Zandberg makes the following
The fact that Kerri grew up unable to talk to anyone
abuse, means that she would have started to experience a split
did not disclose to her parents and sisters what had happened to
her until she was in her thirties. .... her mother seemed unwilling
to hear and
validate what she was saying to her. The second time they spoke of it, Kerri
[her mother]
was unable to understand
I do not have information from Kerri on how she coped during the period in
her forties when she began to disclose to her family about
her childhood abuse.
In my opinion this would have been the time to seek out psychological treatment
and support. Since the incident
in 2003, Kerri states that she has explored many
avenues to help manage the legacies of her childhood trauma. I will describe
later in the report
this matter Ms Zandberg provided the following quote from Ms
As an adult I coped by having compartmentalized and
minimalised what had happened earlier in my life. I put it all away and believed
that I had got over it and it was not impacting on my life at all. I was just
habituated to the recurrent nightmares and believed
it was all in the past. I
did not have any of the overt ‘acting out’ symptoms that would have
raised the option of counselling
earlier. Rather I had the more insidious
internalizing symptoms of low self esteem and self worth and an
over-responsibility for
taking the blame when things happened to me.
commenting on the issue of whether Ms Dene was providing psychological treatment
beyond her competence, Ms Zandberg made the
Kerri was a student ... it would be assumed at this
point in her professional education, most psychological treatments would be
her competence”.
Whether or not this suggestion was appropriate depends largely on whether
Dr. Donnelly, a neuropsychologist, was within his area of
competency to
supervise Kerri in a non neurological case. ... The same can be said about the
sessions held with [Miss B]. With hindsight,
this course of action seems clearly
inappropriate and clinically dangerous. At the time, Donnelly was very confident
and persuasive
and Kerri was a student following her supervisor’s
instructions and believing his reassurances.
respect to the issue of the inappropriate self disclosure made during a session
with Client A, Ms Zandberg made the following
Kerri’s session with [Mr A] when told of his
abusive behaviour towards his daughter would have been somewhat like a waking
Kerri went straight to see Dr. Donnelly and “fell apart” in
his office. She told him of the disclosure and of her reaction
and the reason
It is my opinion that at this point, Donnelly should have allowed Kerri to
discontinue seeing [Mr A] and referred her for psychological
treatment and
support around her abuse issues Instead, Donnelly encouraged her to
Kerri states what convinced her was when he told her that because of her
history, she was in the best position to protect the daughters.
the issue of not reporting the incident of child abuse to DoCS, Ms Zandberg
‘On this issue, Kerri reflected back on all the
steps she took to insure that she was not included in the mandatory notifiers
group for DOCS. She relates that she reviewed the legislation and that she was:
1) provisionally registered, 2) a current student
[the Regional
University]
on placement at the uni, and under supervision, 3) She was not
working with children 4) She was unpaid.
Kerri reported she discussed her interpretations of the legislation with
both Dr Donnelly and Dr Brechman-Toussaint ... They both
agreed that she was not
require to report ... Why Dr. Donnelly didn’t notify DOCS as a mandatory
notifier, I do not know.’
respect to the clinical note for the session on 21 October 2003, Ms Zandberg
report notes Ms Dene indicated:
.... that on many occasions she thought she needed to write that
entry, but each time she would start feeling physically sick and
put it off.
When the time came to close the file and she could put it off no more, she
completed the entry for that session 14 months
after the event
the issue of not taking adequate steps to protect Mr A’s children, Ms
Zandberg recorded that Ms Dene stated that everything
she did and tried to do
was to help protect the children involved in this case. Ms Zandberg
As Kerri’s supervisor on this placement, it was
Donnelly’s responsibility to protect both the children of [Mr A]
protect Kerri. He failed in both these responsibilities.
respect to Ms Dene’s current approach to her work, Ms Zandberg
She is very cautious at work to keep away from the pitfalls that
she experienced at the university. She carefully screens and limits
the clients
she sees, and avoids all cases that may include either victims or perpetrators
of child sexual assault. She seems keenly
aware of her current psychological
limitations and actively seeks to reduce any extraneous stress on
asked to comment upon what had been the impact of the ‘legal
proceedings’, what the possible effects of the hearing
would be and what
the subsequent impact of the hearing may be on Ms Dene, Ms Zandberg made the
following comments:
catastrophic effect on Kerri’s life.
It has caused her to ... lose her trust in the practitioners and practice of
psychology.
shattered Ms. Dene’s personal and professional life.
She keeps up strong boundaries around her work there and no one knows of
this case against her or of the distress it causes her.
following is an extract from Ms Zandberg’s report:
At the time I assessed Ms Kerrie Dene, I felt she was suffering
from Post Traumatic Stress with associated symptoms of depression
and anxiety.
This was developed as the direct result of her original trauma which was
multiple sexual assaults as a child and teenager,
the re-triggering
trauma of the events in question, the subsequent case filed against her and her
efforts to defend herself against
the charges.
She took no independent action, except for the inappropriate disclosing
her own personal sexual abuse history to
, and her subsequent
avoidance around documenting the event in the file notes. Both of these actions
were, and are, professionally
irresponsible if the person guilty of them is a
fully educated and registered professional ... It is exactly this kind of event
university clinics and clinical supervision were set up to protect the
public from. And although the system was in place, the individuals
provide guidance, education, support and safety net to inexperienced interns,
let Kerri Dene down badly ... it is clear
that she was under extraordinary
stress (stress that Donnelly was fully aware of), which made her even more
dependent on him as her
supervisor.
Zandberg was asked further questions in relation to this issue by Counsel for
the HCCC (T67 - 70 – 18 June 2009) as follows:
you saw her in April 2009, you felt she was suffering from post-traumatic stress
with associated symptoms of depression and
Yes. ... The original trauma was the child sexual assaults of her childhood and
young teenage years. The retriggering trauma was
this event with CA and all
that has come from that, strung from that.
believe that there were psychological limitations that should have been picked
up by her supervision and by the university.
... when I suggested this to Kerri, she didn't agree. She - and I
think that's part of her personal inability because of her trauma
self-assess. It's part of the avoidance.
Since the incident in 2003, Kerri Dene has explored many avenues to help
manage the legacies of her childhood trauma.
it's your opinion that, notwithstanding exploring those avenues, she remains
with psychological limitations?
I think that at this time - the kinds of avenues that she described to me
were avenues that I might not, as a clinician, you know,
completely endorse.
She meditates. She, you know, restricted her work quite dramatically. She
actually went out of this job for
a long period of time. She forms a protective
environment for herself. She felt these things were enough to manage her
retraumatisation.
I would have liked to see her in regular therapy and being
provided, you know, with proper supervision. That's what I would think
she would need.
She seems keenly aware of her current psychological limitations
and actively seeks to reduce any extraneous stress...
have current psychological limitations?
She will say, "No, I'm not depressed, I'm fine now, I'm well now." But I don't
feel that that - I don't feel that that's the case.
When I say that she's
"keenly aware" of - what I was really alluding there to, and I admit it's
not terribly clear, is that she
has created a work life now for herself that
actively avoids any, you know, further work around sexual assault, perpetrators,
or anything.
... she is working two days a week in
a protective environment with doctors and nurses around her and very strong
support systems
And so it's not possible as a psychologist to entirely ring-fence your practice
so you never have to come into contact with that?
No, it's not entirely - you can't - you can't completely do that.
And no-one would ever suggest that there would be no possibility
for someone to
slip through that.
asked by the Tribunal about Ms Dene’s statement that she was able to work
as a psychologist but had put in place elaborate
measures to avoid certain types
of clients in her workplace, Ms Zandberg gave the following evidence:
... I still think she has a long way to go in herself. And
that - if she's able to start that journey and make it, I think she has
career in front of her.
... Understanding self is - is a very important aspect of our work.
And if we really lose ourselves or are unable to see ourselves,
our ability to
there's not a lot you can offer here.
... ideal answer to this ... highly experienced, compassionate supervisor
to meet with her ... fortnightly ... for the next couple
of years and provide
understanding support and supervision around these issues
Zandberg agreed with the proposition that such supervision should be accompanied
by concurrent individual therapy.
this topic in response to a question asked by Mr Ainsworth as to whether Ms
Zandberg considered that Ms Dene would respond to treatment,
Ms Zandberg
Yep, if the treatment was appropriate and--
... She may not take it up. I don't know what else you do, but I think
it needs to be offered.
... optimally, Ms Dene would receive in the next two years, perhaps,
a good clinical supervisor who she had - could make a relationship,
professional relationship, with and a therapist who she could make a personal
relationship to treat all the legacies
giving evidence in chief before the Tribunal Ms Zandberg gave the following
evidence when asked what her opinion was regarding
the proposition that Ms Dene
was an appropriate person to continue to treat Mr A after the disclosure, Ms
Zandberg answered (T66):
... [it] really mortified me as a clinician and a supervisor ...
she went directly to Mr Donnelly ... they discussed it ...she had
expected ... needed to be taken off the case immediately ... he said,
hold on, you know, perhaps you're the person in the best position to - to
keep an eye on this man, to make sure his children
are safe. You are -
because of your - your experiences, you are more cluey about these things."
... terribly inappropriate if that's the advice that was given. ... She
couldn't resist somebody saying,
"These children will be more safe because
you are there. You are the best person to be doing this."
She has to make
her abuse mean something. ... And the idea that he had told her that she was of
everyone in the best position to
keep those children safe, I don't think she
would have been able to resist that in her psychological position at the time
you look at her as a survivor of child sexual assault, all these things
make clinical sense. ... all that happened and laid out were
predictable.
Zandberg reported that Ms Dene reported the circumstances surrounding her
continued treatment of Mr A as if she was talking of
someone else. On the basis
of the circumstances as described to her, Ms Zandberg expressed the following
view during cross-examination
No psychologist I know and would have any respect for would
ever, ever, ever suggest to her that he should - that she should continue
with him after that point. That's just beyond anything I can imagine. ...
She trusted - she trusted Donnelly.
I was more concerned about the behaviour of her supervisor in the
university than she was. And I had no concern for
seemed to feel that she had let him down because she had done this
Zandberg commented that she thought it would be hard to avoid the class of
people that Ms Dene sought to avoid in her workplace
given the nature of the
work. Ms Zandberg expressed the view that the treatment required by Ms Dene
required a psychologist. When
asked by a member of the Tribunal a question
relating to Ms Dene’s steps to protect herself in her work environment, Ms
Because of the catastrophes in her life that this has led her to
lose her trust in the practitioners and practice of psychology.
Zandberg gave the following evidence before the Tribunal, clarifying a point she
had made in her report:
page 7 under
"Not Reporting an Instance of Child Abuse to DOCS"
you've just got:
"On this issue, Kerri reflected back to all the steps
she took to ensure that she was not included in the group for DOCS."
think her resistance isn't because she was in collusion with them or - I
think it was traumatic.
I think she basically didn't call DOCS and didn't want to call DOCS. She wanted
somebody else to take that job off of her, and
nobody did.
her oral evidence Ms Zandberg confirmed that Ms Dene had informed her that she
had established a private practice for the ‘sole
purpose’ of having
Ms A consult her so that she could make a report to DoCS. Ms Dene then saw Mr A
‘on three occasions:
two times prior to warning him that this was her
intent; and, one time post to debrief him about the fact that she had called
Evidence - Dr Donnelly
Brief overview – Documentary Evidence
writing to the University regarding issues raised about the care provided to Mr
A and his family, Dr Donnelly stated that he
considered he had complied with the
APS Guideline regarding reporting child abuse as well as the legislative
requirements (see page
3, exhibit R4).
same letter from Dr Donnelly to the University details considerable difficulties
he experienced with other senior members of the
University.
respect to his supervision of Ms Dene paragraph 40 of exhibit R4 records that Dr
‘became intimately familiar’
with the case of Mr A
because of the nature of his
‘psychological problems’
letter indicates that Ms Dene was completing her internship via a placement in
the ‘dementia care network’ and was
. Ms Dene was the first intern to take this position and
because of delays in the position being
‘established’
had worked for much of the placement ‘
. The letter
alludes to Mrs A as being
‘the patient at the centre of the
allegations’
letter continues at paragraph 41 as follows:
When Ms Dene first mentioned to me her concerns about the
behaviour reported by the father I attended the next available session to
interview the father personally and to reiterate what he had been told regarding
the limits of confidentiality. In other words if
after talking to the father I
felt that the situation had reached a stage where I was obligated to mandatory
report then I would
have no alternative but to do so.
at paragraph 42 Dr Donnelly states:
After assessing all of the available facts, reviewing the
clinical notes and findings and further discussion with Ms Dene I formed
professional view that there was no reportable incident or risk of harm to the
paragraph 43 and 44 Dr Donnelly describes Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s
involvement in the matter as follows:
To ensure that my decision was fully informed and appropriate I
arranged for a colleague with specialist skills in paediatric psychology
assess the two young children in the family. The goal was to obtain an objective
evaluation of the children as required under
The report that I received from the colleague indicated that the children
reported no concerns but were probably negatively affected
mother’s complicated medical history.
noting that other health professionals that had contact with the family had not
expressed any concerns about Mr A Dr Donnelly
states at paragraph 47:
To the best of my knowledge and belief there was no other time
when concerns about the safety and well being of the children reached
level as when I asked for my colleague to undertake a review.
detailing the nature of conversations that occurred with Ms Dene, at paragraph
49 Dr Donnelly states:
I reviewed the file notes taken by Ms Dene of all clinical
sessions with the father.
paragraph 50 Dr Donnelly confirmed that he signed off on the Discharge Plan for
Mr A when he ceased being a patient at the University’s
Psychology Centre.
of paragraph 60 reads:
In October 2003 the patient in question did report some touching
behaviour with his daughter that had become part of a once weekly
bedtime. As reported to us by the patient it ended before he began treatment at
[the University] with Ms Dene and myself.
The risk of inappropriate behaviour
during our treatment was not deemed by Ms Dene, Dr Brechman-Toussaint, or myself
to be reportable.
providing details of his understanding of the requirements of the
and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
Dr Donnelly states
the following at paragraph 67:
On the one occasion that I felt uncertain about the safety, well
being and welfare of the children I verified my own stance by obtaining
opinion from a qualified child psychologist.
this letter Dr Donnelly then goes on to express the view that only a
‘court of competent jurisdiction’
may determine whether or
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection)
had been breached and impose a financial penalty. The letter
continues at paragraph 69 and 70 to state the following:
It is not legally possible to determine if there has been a
without the intervention of a court.
It follows that I deny categorically that I failed to report pursuant to
section 27 of the Act.
Exhibit R13
exhibit R13 Dr Donnelly makes the following comments of a
‘Supervisor’s Practicum Evaluation Form’
signed by Dr Donnelly (and dated 1 April 2004 by Ms Dene when she signed the
Kerri’s experience prior to clinical training was
apparent. She excelled in most areas, especially in the area of professional
Kerri was an excellent ambassador for the program & clearly
communicated w/ clients, families & colleagues in writing and
Form also ranks the
‘Competence level’
of Ms Dene at
Above Standard’
‘Well Above’
areas of the 62 areas (and in only four as
‘Met Standard
Exhibit R14
Donnelly states in paragraphs 37 to 39 that he invited Ms Dene to meet Mrs A in
early June 2003 and that
‘It was the exact kind of case we wanted to
. During the meeting it ‘
became clear’
Mr A was essentially a single parent given his wife’s disability and he
suggested that Ms Dene may take on the role of
being Mr A’s therapist at
the University Clinic.
Donnelly confirms at paragraph 43 that Mr A was seen by Ms Dene under his
clinical supervision.
paragraph 46 Dr Donnelly recounts part of one of the more
he had with Mrs A when she mentioned that she had given her
daughter a massage in the evenings to help her settle and deal with an
stomach. Dr Donnelly did not relate this information to Ms Dene. Dr Donnelly
stated that he wondered if this information combined
with his knowledge of the
use of massage by parents to help children with stressful and medical settings
subconsciously affected my view of
paragraph 59 Dr Donnelly agrees with the records of Ms Dene as to the assessment
of Mrs A occurring in mid-June 2003 and the first
counselling session with Mr A
occurring on 10 July 2003. In paragraph 61 Dr Donnelly agrees that the notes of
Ms Dene appear to accurately
record the date on which an assessment feedback
session (i.e. the session in which the results of the neurological assessments
provided to Mrs A) occurred with Mrs A, with Mr A in attendance.
60 sets out Dr Donnelly’s observations of Mr A’s presenting issues
as follows:
The presenting problem was defined by me and Ms Dene as being in
the general category of dysphoric mood related to the effects of
wife’s medical condition. He wanted advice on how to help his wife and
children, and deal with his own grief, frustration,
anxiety and sadness.
According to Ms Dene’s reports to me in supervision, topics such as how to
deal with his children’s
feelings, and expanding demands on his time that
took him away from the children and his work were discussed. The changes in the
intimate relationship with his wife were also a concern raised early on in
Donnelly indicated that he was not concerned about the welfare of the children
as there had been no complaint about their ability
to cope and he was aware that
there were numerous care providers regularly visiting the home to provide care
to Mrs A (see paragraphs
61 and 62).
paragraph 64 Dr Donnelly gives details of the manner in which he supervised Ms
Dene as follows:
Ms Dene continued treating Mr A and meeting with me on a regular
basis for supervision. I chose to not videotape her sessions because
demonstrated good therapy skills previously, I noted her effectiveness in brief
joint interactions, and I wanted her to have
the opportunity to be identified as
the therapist without the intrusion of a camera on at least one occasion during
her training.
I, however, made it very clear to Mr A when I recommended that he
see Ms Dene at the clinic that she would be supervised by me and
that she would
be discussing what they had discussed. Ms Dene reported to me that she
reiterated this with Mr A and also stated
the limits of confidentiality
regarding harm to self or others.
66 reads as follows:
I recall that the respite services were scarce and required that
they transport Mrs A long distances to get appropriate residential
nursing care.
I recall discussing this challenge with Mr A in our initial meetings and
occasionally during my supervision of Ms Dene.
The issue as was reported to me
by Mr A was that if Mrs A was in care outside of Armidale, the children could
not see her and this
increased their level of distress. It also raised the
complicated feelings for them regarding feeling glad in some sense that she
not around yet feeling sad about missing her and frightened that she might not
come back after being taken away in an ambulance
again. In hindsight, if the
girls were being abused, it makes sense that their distress would increase when
Mrs A was gone if that
meant that the abuse increased. In fact there is no
evidence that the abuse varied as a function of Mrs A being home or
paragraphs 74 to 78 Dr Donnelly sets out details of his knowledge regarding
discussions involving various sexual aspects of Mr
A’s life as
A’s sexual needs and relationship were also discussed as his wife’s
physical impairment made mutual sexual activity
difficult but she had become
highly sexualised in her thinking and behaviour. This is not an unusual
complication of MS and was
within what I considered to be reasonable therapeutic
material for this case.
discussion of sexual needs did not reportedly lead Mr A to introduce the idea of
a relationship with Ms Dene in session. This
occurred before his disclosure of
the massage involving his daughter. Ms Dene discussed this behaviour in
supervision and considered
it with me in terms of transference theory given his
growing attachment in therapy and his sense of social isolation. Ms Dene
his fantasy or wish directly and professionally with Mr A based on her
report. It became the basis of discussions of other fantasies
he had about
young women in their 20s being attracted to him and even fleeting sexual
thoughts about his adult daughter.
discussion reportedly helped Mr A set reasonable relationship goals, talk
frankly with his wife about sex and his use of prostitutes,
and helped him focus
on substantive supportive friendships and a renewed healthier relationship with
his adult daughter, rather than
relying on unsatisfying unrealistic fantasies
that left him feeling lonely.
believed that Ms Dene set reasonable boundaries with Mr A regarding his
attraction to her while not shaming him for sharing positive
or even erotic
feelings. Ms Dene also admitted feeling flattered but clearly articulated the
professional ethical guidelines. She
also noted that this interaction was just
one where she felt great compassion for Mr A and a sense that she needed to
resist being
too nurturing as he was clearly suffering.
did not believe that a report of attraction by a patient was in itself grounds
for removing Ms Dene from the case. As part of my
training, transference
reactions were actually seen as a positive step in therapy and should be
considered normal and manageable.
I had certainly discussed many instances of
both negative and positive transference with supervisors in my internship years.
in hindsight, if I would have known then what I know now of Ms
Dene’s email communication with Mr A about meeting outside of
would have attended a joint session and considered more carefully what the
dynamic was between Ms Dene and this patient.
I may have been led to remove Ms
Dene from the case or introduce videotaping or audiotaping.
Donnelly gives the following evidence under the heading
‘Disclosure of
the past inappropriate touching’
at paragraphs 79 to 84 as
recall thinking at the time that Ms Dene’s handling of Mr A’s
disclosure of his feelings towards her and his other sexual
feelings allowed him
to disclose the far less appropriate behaviour: massaging his daughter and
touching her pubic area sometimes
during the massage. I concur with Ms Dene
that this disclosure occurred in Oct 2003, approximately 4 months after the
start of therapy.
was informed in October 2003 by Ms Dene that Mr A had disclosed that in the past
he had given his daughter Miss B “a light
massage that sometimes included
the pubic region”. I immediately arranged to meet with Mr A and Ms Dene
to investigate it
further to determine if it met the threshold for mandatory
reporting. We met with him later the same day.
behaviour was described by Ms Dene and again by Mr A as occurring approximately
once per week for two years. The massage behaviour
had stopped and Mr A denied
that there were any other behaviours, past or present, suggesting abuse or
Dene recalls in her report that Mr A said it stopped two weeks before. It is my
recollection that it had stopped two weeks before
he started treatment at the
[Regional University]
clinic. This is because I asked Mr A several
questions about the behaviour. I do not recall the specific language of my
but I asked when the massage had stopped and he said “two weeks
before coming here”. I asked, “Here to the clinic?”,
nodded yes. This aspect of the disclosure appears to be a point of
misunderstanding between myself and Ms Dene. I accept
the possibility that I
may be mistaken. I do however say that my recollection is as set out above.
However, Ms Dene and I made
an assessment at the time of the then current risk
massage was described by Mr A as occurring over the child’s pajamas, and
was reportedly designed to help the daughter settle
at bedtime as she and the
rest of the family was dealing with Mrs A’s severe medical condition. Mr
A denied that there was
genital contact, penetration, or coercion.
massage behaviour had occurred in the past during a period when Mr A was
reportedly drinking heavily, had little social support,
and was feeling more
these factors did not exist to
the same degree when he was being counselled at
[Regional University]
Clinic and there was verified evidence that he
was providing well for his children and wife with the support of social services
a medical team. In particular, there was no evidence of alcohol use during
sessions and reports of child distress and family upheaval
had reportedly
decreased since Mr A included in-home care and more regular respite periods in
the care of his wife.
under the heading
‘Disclosure of the past inappropriate touching’
Dr Donnelly gives the following evidence regarding Ms Dene’s reaction
to the disclosure at paragraphs 85 to 90 as follows:
disclosure was upsetting for Ms Dene when she first told me about it in
supervision and it became the focus of discussions as
we attempted to separate
what the reported behaviour was as opposed to Ms Dene’s feelings that were
seemingly linked to her
own abuse history.
Dene had reported her abuse history to me previously during supervision and had
explained that she had done a significant amount
of therapeutic work to address
lingering effects. She explained that she attended retreats that allowed her to
address personal
development issues and had individual therapy over several
was aware that Ms Dene impulsively revealed her abuse history to Mr A when he
disclosed the inappropriate touching during the past
massage. I agree that this
was substandard care on her part and I discussed this fact with Ms Dene as soon
as I was aware and later
in the context of other therapeutic issues as they
Dene was also already aware that it was inappropriate and was upset by her
therapy error. I agree with Ms Dene’s report
that she seemed to do so to
explain her emotional reaction in the session.
the time I believed that what I had learned in my training about working through
one’s reactions to patients, especially
those things that resonated with
our own unresolved issues, applied here. I believed that if Ms Dene was willing
and there was no
apparent harm to be done to the client, then she should be
allowed to continue as Mr A’s therapist. My views on the topic
informed by my own clinical supervision and training as a supervisor, and
continue to be reinforced by the clinical literature
(see for example,
the professional is personal: How psychology trainees experience and address
disturbing countertransference, with implications
for supervision and
professional and personal growth
(Latawiec, 2009);
Countertransference
and Intersubjectivity: Golden Opportunities in Clinical Supervision,
of Ms Dene’s distress appeared to be related to her belief that any report
to DOCs would be handled poorly. She noted
that they had a history of removing
children from the home, which in this case she believed would be disastrous, or
not doing anything
to actually support the family. There was significant
evidence in the press and I had personal knowledge of recent DOCs failures,
especially in rural communities but we truly tried to assess risk using
published guidelines and by referring the children to a specialist
Again, this referral was based on my training.
evidence regarding consideration of reporting the matter to DoCS are set out in
paragraph 91 as follows:
followed the written DOCs guidelines at the time that stated that there needed
to be reasonable concern that
risk existed. Our finding was
based on the belief that the behaviour had ended, that Mr A was progressing well
in therapy and providing
as best possible for his children, and that he had been
honest about other less than admirable behaviour. The feedback that I had
other team members at the hospital that he and the children had support in the
no reportable current risk.
paragraph 92, Dr Donnelly states that he did not believe he had the resources to
assess or offer treatment to Miss B and Miss C.
Further, given the ‘intern
status’ of Ms Dene , the fact that she was working with Mr A and Ms
Dene’s distress
over the disclosure that it would not be appropriate for
her to act as the therapist for Miss B and Miss C even if supervised.
the heading
‘Referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint’
Dr Donnelly
gives the following evidence at paragraph 93:
Independent
of the massage and inappropriate touching, the children in this case were
dealing with tremendous psychological stress.
To ensure that the children
received adequate care, even after Ms Dene and I had agreed that the past
behaviour did not constitute
current risk, I still referred Mr A’s younger
daughters for specialist clinical psychological care.
Donnelly set out evidence regarding his reliance on Dr Brechman-Toussaint who he
considered to be the most qualified child psychologist
in the region at
paragraph 95 as follows:
addition to following the DOCS guidelines, I relied on MB-T’s judgment
not initially perceive. I was
engaged in therapy/cognitive rehab support with their mother and was supervising
Ms Dene in the care
of the father and thought, based on my training and
experience, that I should not be the one to offer further assessment or
psychological
support to the children.
paragraph 96 Dr Donnelly gives the following summary of his consideration of
reporting the matter to DoCS:
on the information available to me at the time and consultation with a
specialist colleague and DOCs guidelines, I did not believe
the case reached the
reporting threshold for current risk of abuse or neglect in 2003 or
paragraphs 97 and 98 Dr Donnelly gives the following evidence regarding the
referral of Miss B and Miss C to Dr Brechman-Toussaint:
have only just now learned (May 2009) from Ms Dene’s report to the
tribunal that B-T failed to mention to me that she was
asked by Mr A to not
discuss the past massage behaviour with his children. I was never told this by
Ms Dene or B-T. It would have
raised my level of concern as it was inconsistent
with my view that he was cooperating fully with B-T in the care of his children.
This information also completely disconfirms B-T’s suggestion that she was
not aware of the massage behaviour.
have also now learned from reading the various versions of B-T’s reports
to the HCCC that she at first claimed that she questioned
me about the need for
further assessment about the past behaviour but later claims that she never knew
talk to B-T about our discussions with Mr A about
the massage and inappropriate touching when we asked her to see the children in
Nov 2003. I note that B-T included in her scribbled note that nothing needed to
be done. I believe this refers to the behaviour
Ms Dene and I
exhibit R14, being a statement dated 11 June 2009, Dr Donnelly states at
paragraph 99 (page 15):
I deny withholding any relevant fact that would have influenced
[Dr Brechman-Toussaint]
diagnostic assessment or
psychological treatment regarding risk. I did report that Ms Dene and I judged
the behaviour to be past and
not posing a current risk.
paragraph 124 of R14, Dr Donnelly further states:
Current risks – was still determined by me and Ms Dene to
be below the mandatory reporting threshold in January 2005. That is
not make a report. My instruction to Mr Dene was the same as reported
previously, that if additional information was obtained
that altered her
impression, she may need to file a DOCS report. She eventually chose to do so
later in August 2005. I had no contact
with the case after January 2005.
Character evidence – Dr Donnelly
character reference was provided by Emeritus Professor G Geffen (exhibit R8).
The reference states that Em. Prof Geffen has known
Dr Donnelly since he arrived
in Australia in 2001 after Dr Donnelly contacted him seeking collaboration on a
research project of
joint interest. The reference continues by detailing Dr
Donnelly’s skills as a lecturer, an academic and a researcher.
Prof Geffen talks of Dr Donnelly’s ability as a university lecturer and as
a researcher in extremely positive terms.
reference continues as follows:
Regarding service to the University and Community, Dr Donnelly
broadened the base of the Department of Psychology’s at the [Regional
University] useful contacts, provided services where none existed before and
created the reassuring feeling of a reliable presence,
who would provide
valuable service in areas of need. These are words of high praise, but they have
been earned.
I have always been impressed by Dr Donnelley’s (sic) commitment to
his students and to his patients/clients. Moreover, I respect
the depth of his
knowledge of clinical standards and Code of Ethics.
Oral evidence – Dr Donnelly
Donnelly provided evidence regarding what Ms Dene told him about the disclosure
made by Mr A as follows (T17.08.09, page 26.40
What she had disclosed she had said that
Mr A disclosed to her that after stating he had something to talk to
her about and he felt
it was somewhat taboo that he had mentioned that he had
been using massage in the past at night approximately once a week to help
daughter settle at night and he was feeling uncomfortable about it. He had
described it or demonstrated it as stroking her abdomen
lying on her back,
stroking this way with contact with her pubic region with his wrist as he went
by, and that based on Ms Dene's
report she had queried whether it was any
penetration and he denied any penetration. He denied that - any other kind of
behaviour and he had ceased the massage behaviour.
Again I think that is a misunderstanding on my part at the time, I thought
it was two weeks prior to coming to the clinic for treatment.
As I have looked
at the reports now Ms Dene was fairly sure that it was two weeks prior to
that session and other things that she
checked on, I'm blank now on some of the
details, but my thought at the time that I needed to, and Ms Dene thought
the same, that
I needed to go and have a session with her and Mr A to
talk about the details of this massage behaviour.
in his evidence (T 77) Dr Donnelly stated that the notes should have recorded
that Mr A had disclosed that he described his
‘light massage with contact, occasional contact with [the] pubic
Tribunal notes at this point that neither in the typed notes of the interview
with Mr A 21 October 2003 nor in the hand written
notes of the session with Dr
Donnelly post this disclosure interview is there any notation of either Ms Dene
or Dr Donnelly looking
up or referring to the Child Protection Legislation or
APS Guidelines. In the typed notes of the interview Ms Dene records that she
undertook to Mr A to continue to
‘provide therapeutic support to him
for both carer issues and also issues relating to the psychological needs of his
. This is in contrast to Ms Dene’s response to
the HCCC (Dene Vol 1, tab 7, pg 19) where Ms Dene states that she would not have
continued to work with Mr A without Dr Donnelly’s encouragement.
Donnelly, despite holding a senior appointment position in the profession and
being an in a position to be an influential teacher
with the potential to shape
the future of the psychology workforce he was both ignorant of the relevant
legislation and professional
guidelines or chose to ignore them. Erroneously, he
believed he had discretion in reporting stating:
There is always discretion - every kid's at risk - every kid's
at risk. To suggest that we have no discretion, that we should report
child case we have contact with is absolutely ludicrous. We tried to make an
informed decision because contacting DOCS in
rural New South Wales can have
devastating consequences - that's truly the reality, so we had to make an
informed decision and we
tried to inform ourselves as best as possible with
multiple sources of information.”
in his evidence he again returned to the his theme of universal risk:
They're at risk - I was looking in the paper in Bellingen where
we've got someone hanging out at preschools there, technically all
children in that preschool are at risk, what are people doing about it? There's
a level of risk that we just have to accept
and try to manage as effectively as
possible and that's what we tried to do in this situation.
his evidence Dr Donnelly maintains that the
referred to in this case were not inappropriate, not withstanding that he
co-signed a discharge summary that said:
Mr A had recently ceased inappropriate behaviours toward his
daughter Miss B. Mr A said that for several years he had given his daughter
gentle massage at bedtime about once a week. During the massage he had stroked
her genitals. He reported stopping when Miss B indicated
she had had enough, and
denied any coercion or penetration. Mr A requested help to maintain his changed
behaviours, and address harm
caused by his past actions.
Evidence - Clinical Notes – Psychology Clinic (of the Regional
University)
clinical notes made by various practitioners in the file held by the Psychology
Clinic are contained in Dene/Donnelly - Volume
1. Page 153
notes is an email from Ms Dene to Mr A dated 6 August 2003. The email includes
the following:
I have just visited your old studio, and looked at your old
Thanks so much for inviting me to see this. Perhaps when there is not a
therapeutic relationship happening and you have your studio
and classes up and
running I will connect with the rudimentary artist within (so rudimentary it
vary rarely is exposed, even in my
journalling (sic) and when i (sic) have been
supposed to produced mandalas!) and sign up. My life seems to invite me to do
that I am so not good at – probably the teaching of humility I
in the file is a copy of section 23
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
with a print out date of 21 October 2003. In a letter
from Ms Dene dated 23 August 2006 (Dene - Volume 1, exhibit 7) there is an
indication that she consulted the legislation and guidelines on 21 October 2003
before speaking to Dr Donnelly (page 2).
records of sessions are referred to extensively throughout this document.
Evidence of Dr Brechman-Toussaint
Referral note
the handwritten notes of Dr Margaret Brechman-Toussaint (Dene Volume 1, exhibit
17.6) the following is recorded:
Request from Jim D - provide psychoeducation intervention to two
young girls - mother in Memory Clinic assessment – father struggling
care of daughters mother serious decline – younger daughter very
Father reportedly not coping - requesting therapy input for girls.
Dealing with “loss” of mother, mother’s illness.
Also father
stress coping. Father missing wife – reported some inappropriate physical
feeling toward older child –
10 ½ year old female. Inappropriate
touch. ?Query sexual - Jim claims yes feelings but recognises not healthy
change thinking some “minor’ inappropriate touch –
Any possibility of sexual abuse here ???
Queried – Jim and Kerri claim no – but would like daughters to
have opportunity to develop gain knowledge of sexually
appropriate touch etc.
Danger of abuse ?? not seen at risk by Jim or Kerri.
Other team members involved = mother’s care GP dementia care network
case conferencing etc??
Need to meet briefly with father to set-up appropriate appointment
Need for full assessment of situation?? Jim claims done taken care of!!! 1
or 2 sessions – emotional response mothers absence
illness etc.
Sex ed, particularly older child. Will meet with Kerri father end of
session after next two weeks.
Letter - "To Whom it may Concern" dated 18 October 2005
Brechman-Toussaint wrote a “To Whom it may Concern" letter dated 18
October 2005 (HCCC - Donnelly volume 1 exhibit 13 –
last document in
this letter Dr Brechman-Toussaint sets out the instructions she received from Dr
Donnelly to provide brief counselling and psycho
educational intervention to
Miss B and Miss C. Essentially her role was to assist the girls cope with their
mother’s condition
and to provide the older girl with psycho educational
assistance about sexual changes in the body approaching puberty.
letter notes the request for assistance was made in the presence of Ms Dene.
Brechman-Toussaint was provided with a history of a statement being made to Ms
Dene that the father had begun to experience "thoughts
and feelings" towards his
older daughter which had sexual connotations. Dr Brechman-Toussaint notes that
she specifically asked whether
there was a possibility the behaviour could be
considered "sexually abusive" on the part of the father and was informed by Dr
that this was not the case. Dr Brechman-Toussaint records that both Dr
Donnelly and Ms Dene said they did not consider the children
to be at risk.
Brechman-Toussaint states that as Mr A was involved in treatment she assumed his
behaviour would be monitored. She also assumed
that the memory clinic team would
be monitoring the family's welfare. This team was essentially Dr Donnelly and Ms
letter records that at no time did Dr Brechman-Toussaint have access to written
file notes which documented Ms Dene’s engagement
with Mr A nor was she
shown any file which outlined the extent of involvement of any other
professionals in the case.
Brechman-Toussaint describes in the letter her active involvement with Miss B
and Miss C and states she found no evidence to suspect
that the children's
physical or psychological needs were not being met or that there was risk of
letter concludes with a summary which emphasises that Dr Brechman-Toussaint had
no clear evidence that she needed to make a report
to the Director-General of the Department of Community Services.
Dr Brechman-Toussaint stated there was no clear evidence that either
children had been or was at risk of being physically or sexually abused or
ill-treated. Dr Brechman-Toussaint also stated
that from the information she had
been given she had no evidence that a parent or care giver had behaved in a way
that put the children
at risk of serious psychological harm. Furthermore it was
her view that she had taken steps to provide the older of the girls with
knowledge and suggested behavioural strategies, which would protect her if she
were to encounter any an inappropriate or abusive
behaviour in the future
the final paragraph of the letter Dr Brechman-Toussaint criticises Ms Dene for
maintaining contact with the client long after her
official practicum with the
memory clinic had been finalised.
Letter from Dr Brechman-Toussaint to HCCC dated 19 June
letter (volume 1 – exhibit 17.1) is a response to the HCCC regarding the
matters raised in a letter from the programs manager
at Cedar Cottage (details
elsewhere). The complaint from Cedar Cottage regarding the failure on Dr
Brechman-Toussaint’s part
to report evidence of child sexual abuse of Miss
B, noting that Dr Brechman-Toussaint saw Miss B on three occasions in November,
December 2003.
response to these allegations Dr Brechman-Toussaint refers to her to reports
dated 15 September 2005 and 21 October 2005. The letter
also notes that Dr Moses
stated in her letter of 11 November 2005 that a university investigation had
reached the conclusion that
there was no evidence to substantiate allegations of
misconduct related to her involvement in the case.
Brechman-Toussaint also states that she has a doctorate in the area of childhood
anxiety and that she acted within the area of
her expertise.
Brechman-Toussaint details the history of her involvement in the matter and
states that, contrary to the belief of Mr Tolliday,
she was unaware that Miss B
had been abused by her father when she agreed with Dr Donnelly to provide
counselling. Dr Brechman-Toussaint
stated she would be disturbed if it were the
case that Dr Donnelly had not briefed her about any history of such abuse. Dr
Brechman-Toussaint
categorically denies that Dr Donnelly sought advice
concerning long-term abuse by the father of Miss B. She strongly criticises Dr
Donnelly for involving her in allegations of misconduct.
Letter to HCCC dated 18 September 2006
1 – exhibit 17.2 is a letter written on behalf of Dr Brechman-Toussaint by
Moray & Agnew Solicitors dated 18 September
2006. It simply encloses a copy
of a letter from Dr Brechman-Toussaint dated 18 September 2006 which responds to
letter of 24 August 2006.
Brechman-Toussaint’s letter has a number of annexures including a letter
from Dr Brechman-Toussaint to the Dean of the Regional
University dated 15
September 2005, a letter from Dr Brechman-Toussaint to the Vice Chancellor of
the Regional University dated 21
October 2005, Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s
Discharge Summary with respect to Miss B and Miss C along with her handwritten
The contents of these documents are summarised below.
response to the questions posed by the HCCC, Dr Brechman-Toussaint answers
included the following:
Psychology Clinic at the
[Regional University
] is a tertiary training
clinic. Clinical services are provided free of charge to the public by students
enrolled in post-graduate
clinical psychology degrees in the School of
Psychology.
November - December 2003, she was not supervising any students who were
completing an internship within the Regional University
She saw [Miss
A and Miss B] as a private psychologist with her fees met by [Mr A].
feeling pressured to take the case and felt that if l did not I would be letting
people down. Dr Donnelly assured me
I would only need to provide three or four
sessions and if I agreed to do so, that would solve a lot of
Donnelly said [Mr A] was reported to be experiencing grief and emotional upset
relating to his wife's ongoing physical and
cognitive decline and the
responsibility of managing the family on a daily basis. Dr Donnelly said 'Dad
'was a bit of a mess" and
that at case conference, it had been decided that Ms
Dene would provide therapeutic support to [Mr A]. I was, also informed by Dr
Donnelly of a "disclosure" [Mr A] had made to Ms Dene’.
November 2003 I asked Ms Dene to tell me (prior to a brief meeting I was to have
with [Mr A] on the ·same day) more
relationship with his daughters. Ms Dene told me that [Mr A] reported a good
relationship with
both girls but that he had also treated [Miss B] (the older of
the two) as his favourite. He viewed her as a more ‘sensitive’
than her sister and that she was more affected by his wife's illness than the
younger child. Ms Dene said that [Mr A] stated
that [MissB] liked to help him
with household chores and that perhaps the problem was that he was beginning to
view his relationship
with her as that of a friend and confidant rather than as
his child. Ms Dene informed me that [Mr A] had discussed the appropriateness
these thoughts and was working, to address them and to achieve a more balanced
perspective’.
paragraphs 21 to 30 Dr Brechman-Toussaint sets out her response to the HCCC
question as to whether Dr Donnelly or Ms Dene discussed
with her any disclosures
that [Mr A] had made in relation to inappropriate conduct towards his children.
She states that the initial
discussions took place on or about 14 November 2003.
After initially being approached by Ms Dene, Dr Brechman-Toussaint accompanied
Ms Dene to Dr Donnelly’s office and a
conversation’
Donnelly informed her that Mr A had recently told Ms Dene ‘
result of ongoing stress and lack of availability of his wife in a physical and
emotional sense, the father had begun to
experience ‘inappropriate
feelings’ towards his older daughter’.
Dr Donnelly clarified
inappropriate’
and that Ms A was particularly conscious of these feelings when he came into
physical contact with Miss B.
paragraphs 26 and 27 of this letter, Dr Brechman-Toussaint records the
asked what sort of physical contact and Ms Dene gave examples of “when
they play rough and tumble games or when they touch
such as when passing in the
hall”. Ms Dene said the father was worried he might be engineering
opportunities to come into
physical contact with her and was now consciously
avoiding contact. She gave as an example that he might previously have given
a light massage but that he no longer did this. I understood this to be a
neck and shoulder massage and in no way sexual.
asked if there was any possibility of, or if there had been, any behaviour which
would be considered to be “sexually abusive”
on the part of the
father. Dr Donnelly said that was not the case. He informed me that the father
was very conscious of the inappropriate
nature of his thoughts/feelings, that he
had expressed significant concern and regret about his present state of mind and
were being taken to ensure that these thoughts/feelings did not
continue or escalate in any way. Dr Donnelly and Ms Dene assured
me that they
themselves, and the children’s father, had the safety and wellbeing of the
children as their paramount objective.
Donnelly asked if she would be prepared to "
see the girls to check that they
". She took this to be the provision of three brief sections of
counselling. Dr Brechman-Toussaint stated that Dr Donnelly informed
members of the team providing care for Mrs A thought Miss B would benefit from
some psycho-educational program regarding
the sexual changes in her body as she
was approaching puberty and about
‘protective behaviours, that is, how
to recognise and respond if sexually inappropriate behaviours were to
on the basis that Mrs A could not provide this education in her
state of health.
29 and 30 provide more information regarding the information provided to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint as follows:
asked further questions of Dr Donnelly and Ms Dene about whether or not there
was any possibility this child as at risk of sexual
abuse from her father and/or
whether a report about the family should be made to the Department of Community
Services. Both Dr Donnelly
and Ms Dene said they did not consider the children
to be at risk of abuse. Dr Donnelly asked what the Department of Community
would do if a report was made. My response was that they would assess
the situation to determine if the children were at risk.
Dr Donnelly assured me
that he had already done this and they were not at risk.
complainants attached to the letter to me from HCCC dated 8 August 2006, allege
that Ms Dene described Mr A’s disclosure
as “indecent acts of
molestation that did not involve penetration”, and “massage”
of the genital area. They also indicate that Ms Dene
reported she was told the abusive behaviour had occurred over a number of years
(Hetherington complaint page 2, Tolliday complaint page 2). This is not the
description of the “disclosure” that was
given to me nor was I told
that Mr A had reported any long standing problems. Rather, my belief from the
conversation with Dr Donnelly
and Ms Dene was that the children had not been
abused, were not at risk of abuse and that the problem their father was
was a reactive response to his wife’s illness.
Brechman-Toussaint stated that from her clinical experience and knowledge of
literature she was aware that anxiety and stress might
contribute to intrusive
thoughts including the fear of hurting one's own children. She states thoughts
themselves are not necessarily
considered to constitute a risk. Rather, the
level of risk is dependent upon whether or not the individual believes they will
Brechman-Toussaint stated that she did not consider her brief include providing
Dr Donnelly with reassurances or advice as to whether
or not a child or children
had been abused or were at risk. It also did not include assistance to Dr
Donnelly with his decision as
to whether or not a report should be made to
26 November 2003 Dr Brechman-Toussaint reports that she met with Ms Dene and Mr
A. Mr A gave consent to her involvement to work
with his daughters.
paragraphs 35 to 42 Dr Brechman-Toussaint described her assessment and treatment
of the children during the three brief treatment
sessions. She used the
cognitive behavioural approach to assessment to determine whether there was any
recognisable change in the
children's behaviour that appeared to coincide with
the timeframe of the mother's illness. She endeavoured to assist the children
manage and understand the emotions and actions. The secondary focus of treatment
involved discussing with the older girl changes
that in the body with
paragraphs 43 to 46 Dr Brechman-Toussaint stated that while assessing the
children she endeavoured to determine whether there were
at risk from Mr A by
way of physical, sexual or emotional abuse. The assessment is essentially
described as a process of asking
Miss B and Miss C open ended questions followed
by questions asking for recent examples to backup their responses.
Brechman-Toussaint noted some ‘family strengths’ including the care
being provided by Mr A and the older sisters and
‘problems’ that revolved around Mrs A being very sick. Dr
Brechman-Toussaint concluded that the physical needs
of the children were being
met; she made comments regarding the discipline strategies employed and also
concluded that the social
support network for Miss B and Miss C was
considerable.
Brechman-Toussaint states that in her assessment the risk of sexual abuse was
limited to the aspect of treatment about protective
behaviour noting that Miss B
stated that she had no concerns about inappropriate touching.
Brechman-Toussaint also attached her handwritten clinical notes and a Discharge
Summary dated 29 January 2004.
paragraphs 49 and 50 Dr Brechman-Toussaint reiterates that once her treatment of
the children ceased she did not discuss her assessment
or treatment of the
children with Ms Dene or Dr Donnelly.
paragraphs 51 to 55 Dr Brechman-Toussaint reports on the sessions she undertook
with Miss B and Miss C. She states that Ms Dene
attended her room after the
first appointment with Miss B and Miss C on 5 December 2003 and enquired as to
whether Mr A attended
and if the session ‘had gone OK’. Dr
Brechman-Toussaint reported to Ms Dene that Mr A had attended and that after an
initial reticence to engage that they had
‘warmed up during the
Brechman-Toussaint provided a description of the balance of the sessions as
follows (paragraphs 53 and 54):
conducted my last of three sessions with the children on 19 December 2003.
Shortly after the session Ms Dene enquired of me as
to the treatment. She asked
me how things had gone and in particular wanted to know if I had managed to
discuss protective behaviours
with Miss B as planned. I said that I had. Ms
Dene then asked if everything had gone OK with that. Again I provided only a
response but I did comment that I was unsure how much Miss B had taken
in what we had discussed. I made this comment in the context
that I did not
feel the timing of the intervention was necessarily optimal given the immediacy
of her mother’s illness and
the upcoming school holidays. I informed Ms
Dene that I had arranged to telephone Mr A in the new year to see if he had any
concerns about the children. I said that unless he specifically
requested additional input I would not be seeing the children again.
this occasion I asked Ms Dene how her work with Mr A was going. She said she
was really pleased with how things were going and
said Mr A was learning some
good coping skills, getting more balance in his life and starting to do more
things for himself. I asked
Ms Dene to clarify what she meant and she said Mr A
had begun to focus more on his sculpture and that he was planning an exhibition
in the new year. I commented that I was pleased things were working out OK for
the family.
in 2004 Ms Dene informed Dr Brechman-Toussaint that Mr A had noticed Miss B had
more private in her bathroom and bedtime routines and had
recently told him “no” when she anticipated he was going to
her in a game’
. Dr Brechman-Toussaint commented that Ms Dene thought
that this was evidence of the success of Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s
intervention.
paragraphs 56 and 57 Dr Brechman-Toussaint notes that after her final session
with Miss B and Miss C on 19 December 2003 she spoke
to Dr Donnelly who thanked
her for seeing the girls.
paragraph 65 Dr Brechman-Toussaint stated that there was nothing arising from
the treatment sessions she had with the children
to suggest to her either at the
time or since that they were at risk of abuse or had been abused
Letter to Dean of the Regional University dated 15 September
1 exhibit 17.3 is a letter from Dr Brechman-Toussaint in response to the
Dean’s letter dated 31 August 2005 concerning
whether there has been any
‘misconduct or serious misconduct’
on her part in relation
the two issues identified in the attached document (volume 1 - exhibit 17.4).
Brechman-Toussaint details her involvement in the case (see end of page2) as
Thus when I became involved in this case I was under the
impression that the level of risk for the girls had already been assessed
colleague and the Intern or by other members of the multidisciplinary memory
clinic team. I believed that as a result of this
independent risk assessment, it
had been determined that the girls had not been harmed nor were they at risk of
harm. Nevertheless,
it seemed a decision had been made to provide the girls with
some brief counselling and that as a preventative measure, it had been
that the older of the girls ... .
(the quote ends as pages 3 and 4 of this
document were missing from the tender bundle)
page 5 Dr Brechman-Toussaint provides ‘
further evidence of (her)
professional integrity
’ as follows:
... on the 16th August 2005, after hearing from the Intern
involved in this case that she had recently made a report about this family
the Department of Community Services and had been informed that from the
information given, the Department was of the opinion
that a report should have
been made earlier in the case, I reported the circumstances of my own and my
colleague's past involvement
in this case to my Head of School. I did this as I
had a number of concerns related to the information she had given me. For
I was informed that the Intern had continued working with the
children's father for an approximate 20 months after I had been involved
case and that for at least 12 months of this time she had remained under the
supervision of my colleague. I was very concerned
had maintained contact with this client long after her official practicum within
the Memory Clinic had
been finalised. Interns are expected to finalise cases or
hand them on to another therapist when the placement comes to an end, so
behaviour was unusual and in my opinion inappropriate, particularly as my
colleague appeared to have sanctioned it by providing
ongoing supervision long
after his responsibility as her placement supervisor was over.
In closing I would like to reiterate that I do not believe there has been
any act of misconduct or serious misconduct on my part.
Letter to Vice Chancellor (Professor Moses) dated 21 October 2005
1 exhibit 17.4 is a letter dated 21 October 2005 written by Dr
Brechman-Toussaint in response to a letter from Professor Moses.
The letter from
Professor Moses detailed two allegations of misconduct in relation to her
professional involvement in Mr A’s
first allegation was that she provided advice/reassurance to her colleague, Dr
Donnelly, regarding the appropriateness of his
decision making and his action in
relation to the case.
second allegation was that Dr Brechman-Toussaint had failed to report to the
Director General of the Department of Community Services,
that a child or
children was or were at risk of harm, as required under the
Children and
Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Brechman-Toussaint’s response to the first allegation was that at no time
did Dr Donnelly ask her for an opinion or advice
give this. Dr Brechman-Toussaint notes the task she undertook was to provide sex
education to a child
whose mother was unable to communicate with her children
because of a neurological disorder.
Brechman-Toussaint makes the following comments in this letter:
interaction with Dr Donnelly and Ms Dene I asked specifically whether there was
possibility of or if there had been behaviour,
which would be considered to be
'sexually abusive' on the part of the father. Dr Donnelly stated that this was
not the case. I inquired
as to whether he was certain of this and whether a
report about this family should be made to the Department of Community Services.
Again Dr Donnelly stated that he did not believe this to be the case.
I reiterate
that my "brief' from Dr Donnelly did not include providing him with reassurance
or advice as to whether or not the child/children
had been abused or was/were at
risk of harm. Nor was it my "brief' to assist Dr Donnelly with his decision as
to whether or not
a report should be made to the Director General of the
Department. of Community Services about the children. My "brief' was to provide
sex education to the child in question and emotional counselling to her and her
younger sister ... . I carried out this "brief' as
again, at no time did Dr Donnelly specifically seek my
advice/reassurance/opinion as to whether or not the case in question
that he make a report to the Director General of the Department of Community
Services, as required under the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection)
. He did not ask my opinion as to whether or not I considered the
children to be at risk of harm either initially or subsequent to
my working with
the children. Rather he sought my professional involvement for the specific task
of providing psychosocial intervention
to children whom he himself had
determined to be "not at risk". I did not give advice/reassurance to Dr Donnelly
in relation to this case. If Dr Donnelly chose to use my
actions in accepting his "brief' as reassurance for the appropriateness
own decisions about the matter, I had no awareness of or control over
response to the second allegation, being failure to report to DOCS, Dr
Brechman-Toussaint referred to her letter dated 15 September
2005 to the Dean of
the facility at the University, enclosing a copy thereof.
conclusion, Dr Brechman-Toussaint notes the ‘
only clinical judgement
she was required to make in relation to this case was whether or not to accept
the brief from my colleague
to provide the requested service’.
Discharge Summary dated 29 January 2004
Discharge Summary, volume 1 – exhibit 17.5, sets out the terms of the
referral. The history of Mr A’s feelings toward
Miss B are recorded
Dr Donnelly reported that
had recently disclosed
to Ms Dene that as a result of increased stress and lack of availability of his
wife as a partner in an emotional
or physical sense, he has found had
"inappropriate thoughts and feelings" of a sexual nature toward the older of his
daughters and
to have engineered opportunities for physical contact such as by
engaging in rough and tumble play, brushing against her in the hall.
The summary continues:
The family situation has been assessed by the Dementia Care Network and
the children are considered to not be at risk of harm.
reported to be very aware of the inappropriate nature of his thoughts /
feelings, and to have the safety of the children as his
paramount objective. As
a result it was decided that the girls should be referred to an independent
clinical psychologist for brief
emotional counselling and for
receive a primary prevention intervention ...
Discharge Summary then records Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s observations at the
three sessions held in December 2003.
Brechman-Toussaint summarised her recommendations as follows:
I understand that Dr Donnelly and other members of the Dementia
Network will continue to monitor this family's situation. The children
well cared for, but as would be expected, are experiencing some emotional upset
associated with their mother's illness and
the uncertainty about the future it
brings. They appeared able to apply and to benefit from some of the emotional
management strategies
introduced during the intervention.
Following the third session with the children I arranged to made contact
again in the New Year to determine if he had any further
concerns. I subsequently contacted him earlier this week and he informed
the children were more settled and he did not feel they needed further
consultation at present.
I did not recommend any further sessions with the girls, but invited
to either contact me directly or to speak with Ms Dene if he had
any future concerns. I also recommended that he keep staff at the
school informed of the family current circumstances so that teachers and school
counsellors could continue to monitor
the children's well-being.
Handwritten clinical notes and part typed summary
1 exhibit 17.6 includes four pages of handwritten notes made by Dr
Brechman-Toussaint and described by her as ‘rough
case notes which outline
in brief my involvement’. The first page in this bundle of records relates
to the initial meeting
with Dr Donnelly and Ms Dene. This has been typed up.
It details a history and the request for assistance made. It is undated
the 21 October 2005 letter the initial meeting is stated to have occurred in
November 2003 for a five to eight minute period.
balance of the handwritten notes are clinical notes from Dr
Brechman-Toussaint’s consultations held on the 5, 12 and
December 2003. Those instructions and history are
referred to throughout the documents and are put forward as evidence of what Dr
Brechman-Toussaint knew at the time of her first consultation.
document includes the following:
Request from Jim D - provide psycho education intervention to
young girls - mother in Memory Clinic assessment - father
with care of daughters mother serious decline - younger daughter very
Father reportedly not coping - requesting therapy input for girls.
Dealing with "loss" of mother, mother's illness. Also father
coping. Father missing wife - reported some inappropriate physical
feeling toward older child -10 year old female. Inappropriate
?Query sexual - Jim claims yes feelings but recognises not healthy
desire to change thinking some "minor' inappropriate touch - minor
Any possibility of sexual abuse here ???
Queried - Jim and Kerri claim no - but would like daughters to
opportunity to develop gain knowledge of sexually appropriate
etc. Danger of abuse ?? not seen at risk by Jim or Kerri.
Other team members involved = mother's care GP dementia care
network case conferencing etc??
Need to meet briefly with father to set-up appropriate appointment
Need for full assessment of situation?? Jim claims done taken care
of!!! 1 or 2 sessions - emotional response mothers absence illness
Sex ed, particularly older child. Will meet with Kerri father end
session after next two weeks.
Other documentary evidence
Pre-Trial Diversion of Offender Program (P-TDOP) letter 9 May 2006
the letter from the Director of the P-TDOP (a NSW Health Department Service)
dated 9 May 2006 (Donnelly exhibit volume 1.3) there
is a record that Mr A
informed the author that soon after he had disclosed to Ms Dene in October 2003
he requested and was granted
a private interview with Dr Donnelly. The letter
In this interview [Mr A] sought an assurance from Dr Donnelly
that his disclosure would not be reported. [Mr A] reports he received
assurance from Dr Donnelly.
Director of P-TDOP recorded that Ms Dene had made a report on the DoCS Helpline
on 12 August 2005 that Mr A had sexually abused
A is recorded as having advised P-TDOP that he first informed Ms Dene of the
sexual abuse of Miss B on 21 October 2003. Mr A also
reported that soon after
this disclosure he sought assurances from Dr Donnelly regarding not reporting
the disclosure he had made
to Ms Dene.
Tribunal notes the comments made by P-TDOP regarding the harm that may have been
created by the sessions held by Ms Dene with
Miss B (when Mr A was present)
accord with the findings made herein.
letter includes details of the sexual abuse disclosed by Mr A to P-TDOP. The
Tribunal will not recount the details of this abuse
as it is not a matter that
is relevant consideration in this jurisdiction. However, as documents such as
this Reasons for Decision
are used for teaching purposes, the Tribunal records
that the admitted abuse not only covers the conduct recorded in the clinical
notes made by Ms Dene but to far more extensive abuse of Miss B. Further, Mr A
admitted he had been committing acts of sexual abuse
for a period of 43 years.
Peer Review Reports
psychologists were called by the HCCC to give evidence by way of a peer review.
The Tribunal notes that some of the evidence given
by Ms Zandberg was also in
the nature of a peer report
Evidence of Ms Boland
Boland set out in her report the steps she considered appropriate for a
supervisor of a ‘student ‘ that had had a disclosure
of child sexual
assault made to them by a client. This would include looking at a realistic
definition of ‘current abuse’,
an explanation of the grooming
processes employed by paedophiles, associated issues of unreliability of their
reports, the potentially
self-serving nature of voluntary disclosures and the
identification of the client’s minimising language.
Boland stated that she would challenge the student’s thinking regarding
the possible negative consequences of a DoCS Helpline
report. Reminded the
‘student’ of the need for specialist (DoCS) assessment of
‘Risk of Harm’. The supervisor
also had a role in assisting the
student to differentiate between his/her empathy for the client as a carer of an
invalid wife and
the distress and discomfort the student is likely to have felt
at the disclosure of the abuse.
supervisor should then assist the student to prepare the relevant information
for the report and make a report of Risk of Harm
to the Helpline in the
student’s presence. The supervisor should then have instructed the student
that they should not inform
the client about the DoCS Report due to Duty of Care
issues related to both the victim and to the client and that further therapy
with this client should be delayed pending a DoCS decision regarding what action
should be taken.
Boland indicated she would then inform the student she would not be working with
the client in the future, would provide the ‘student’
reassurance indicating that the emotional response was entirely understandable
given her personal history and insist that she
seek some counselling (that day
if possible) from the Student Counselling Service. Ms Boland indicated that any
failure by the ‘student’
to seek sufficient professional counselling
and support would be viewed with concern as willingness and ability to engage in
ongoing process of self-monitoring and self-reflection is essential to
ongoing professional development. At some time in the near
future the supervisor
should arrange to meet with the student to reflect further on the experience and
to discuss any further professional
issues raised.
Boland expressed the view that the tentative disclosure made by Mr A should have
been viewed by his therapist with compassion and
the client’s subsequent
disclosure would immediately create a cognitive and emotional dissonance for any
therapist as to how
a therapist should respond to paedophilic behaviour. A
‘student’ was entitled to look to the supervisor for clear guidance
and education.
the heading of
‘The demands of contradictory therapeutic goals and
their implications for the student’s conceptual clarity’
Boland makes the following comments:
... even for highly trained specialist therapists it would be
impossible to provide the rigorous therapeutic challenges necessary
rehabilitation of a sexual abuser while also required to act as a compassionate
and uncritically supportive therapist in
relation to other matters. I’m
astonished this was expected of any experienced Clinical Psychologist let alone
the heading
Ms Boland wrote:
I believe she should have been provided with much better
supervision regarding her client’s disclosure of child sexual abuse
that as a student of the university she was entitled to rely on the expertise
and direction of University supervisors.
Regarding the student’s personal disclosure to the client, it
appears from Ms Dene’s explanation, that this was spontaneous,
reflective, response. Firstly, she had just heard information that shocked and
disturbed her. Secondly, having behaved in
what would be viewed by her as an
embarrassingly unprofessional manner she would most likely want to provide an
explanation to the
client for this. ...
I would not expect such an unrestrained response from a fully trained and
experienced clinician but I believe we should not be surprised
by the reactions
of a student – particularly one for whom such a disclosure by a client
held such significant personal resonance.
the heading
‘Therapeutic Goals’
Ms Boland wrote:
Even for highly trained specialist therapists it would be
impossible to provide the rigorous and at times the relentlessly confronting
therapeutic challenges necessary for the attempted rehabilitation of a sexual
abuser while also required to act as a compassionate
and uncritically supportive
therapist. I do not believe Ms Dene. should have ever been expected to perform
both roles.
I have no difficulty in believing that all these circumstances, which
eventually led to the complaints against Ms Dene, could have
been avoided had
she been exposed during her clinical training to sufficiently comprehensive
education and supervision.
Boland made the following comments with respect to the relevance of Miss
Dene’s personal history and intellectual abilities:
Apart from the immediate impact of the client’s disclosure
upon her, I can see no reason to rely upon Ms Dene’s personal
CSA as an explanation for her later conceptual confusion and actions. Neither
can I see any evidence that Ms Dene’s
innate capacity for abstract
reasoning and conceptual clarity were not up to the professional challenge of
clinical work –
she has a First Class Honours degree after all. Therefore
I can see no reason to believe that she would not have responded very well
adequate supervision and support had she received it.
answer to a question in chief regarding her opinion as to whether or not Ms Dene
should have been ‘extracted out of the process’
after reacting
‘so profoundly’ to the disclosure Ms Boland stated the following (in
Absolutely.
...I can't see why on earth she should ever have been asked to work with
him in future, particularly in relation to his disclosures.
... I think that
was cruel to expect her to do that.
... very brave person who asserted themselves ... overriding the direction
that they received from their clinic supervisor. I wouldn't
Boland then expressed the view that not only would Ms Dene have gained nothing
in terms of clinical skills or learning in the situation
but that it would be
‘very counter-productive’.
Ms Boland continued with the
description of the position in which Ms Dene was placed:
position where, on the one hand, you're expected to be
comforting and supportive of a client, and on the other hand to be sufficiently
rigorous and challenging to ensure that he's not being - he's not lying,
he's not deceiving, that he's not simply being self-serving,
or simply being
strategic, they're two - they are two diametrically opposed therapeutic
approaches. And if she was asked to do both,
I really don't see how on earth
she could do it. I can't think of anyone in our profession who could maintain
effectively both roles.
Boland agreed, when answering questions by way of cross-examination (see around
T18.6.09, pages16-17), that if a psychologist was
informed that a person had
‘inappropriate thoughts about a daughter’,
that had been
‘acted upon’
in a way that included
‘inappropriate
fondling of a child's pubic area’
it should have been recognised as
sex abuse, should have been concerned and have taken the matter to the
supervisor.
Boland was taken to various parts of the evidence (eg Volume 2 – tab 2
page 103) including a record of a supervision session
held on 17 December 2003
that noted concerns regarding ‘his attraction to me’,
‘transference’ and ‘the
need to model safe boundaries’,
an email from Mr A to Ms Dene that was signed off “love [Mr A’s
first name], and
an email from Mr A with personal content. Ms Boland stated that
she considered that Ms Dene had handled the ‘transference’
at T 18.6.09, 28.22-25:
There was certainly evidence that I can recall now that he
[meaning Mr A]
was making it very clear that he was attracted to her, either
emotionally or sexually, I'm not sure, but certainly emotionally he
attracted to her. And this was the one where I thought, now, I would not have
handled that that way.
cross-examination Ms Boland was taken to paragraph 14 of Ms Dene’s
statement which records that Mr A’s disclosure
was in the following
I give my daughter a massage, I include the pubic area.
Behaviour had ceased two weeks earlier and Mr A wants help to maintain
behaviours.
Boland stated that this disclosure was indicative of ‘ongoing risk’
taken to paragraphs 18 to 21 of Ms Dene’s statement during
cross-examination, Ms Boland was of the opinion that if a ‘student’
was offered the opportunity to continue with the treatment of Mr A with the
‘emotional pressure’ placed upon them by
the supervisor (saying that
it would be a learning experience and that the ‘student’ should
‘be there’ for
the client) the student would not have
knocked that back’
18 to 21 read as follows:
I was leaving the supervision session, I recall that Dr Donnelly told me
that I did not have to continue the sessions with Mr
A. Dr Donnelly then
said words to the following effect:
However, it would be a great learning experience if you
decide to continue with the case. You should think about it because your
experiences make you perfect for this case.
19. I also recall Dr Donnelly said words to the following effect:
Mr A should know that you are there for him.
was nervous about continuing the sessions with Mr A as I found the issues that I
was then dealing with to be quite daunting. Notwithstanding
that I told Dr
Donnelly that I would continue working with Mr A on the provision that Dr
Donnelly would provide close supervision.
decided to continue treatment as I believe that Mr A's daughter Miss B
would benefit from my assistance to her father. I also believed
that because of
the high level of trust Mr A had placed in me as a therapist he would be
motivated to work diligently to maintain
safe and appropriate behaviours with
of Ms Boland’s evidence did not move beyond her view that Ms Dene’s
responsibility substantially ended once she raised
the disclosure with her
supervisor. Ms Boland did however agree that the issues she raised in her report
were matters that explained
why Ms Dene did not comply with the Code of Conduct
rather then an excuse therefore.
Ms Boland expressed concerns regarding the ‘auditing’ or lack
thereof by the supervisor, she gave the opinion
that the notes were too sparse
and should have been typed up.
Boland stated that had Ms Dene consulted her she would have advised her to ring
the DoCS ‘hotline’.
Boland stated that she was of the opinion that Ms Dene was not treating Miss B
by treating Mr A but that she should not have treated/see
Miss B (T 18/6/09,
Dr Banks - Reports dated 8 June 2007 and 11 June 2009
Banks is an experienced clinical and forensic psychologist. He has experience
supervising provisionally registered psychologists
and post graduate
the first volume of HCCC documents at exhibit 10(b) regarding Ms Dene there is a
report written by Dr Banks dated 8 June 2007.
Dr Banks wrote a further report
regarding Ms Dene dated 11 June 2009 (exhibit 10(c)).The initial report
regarding Dr Donnelly written
by Dr Banks is also dated 8 June 2007 and is found
in the first volume of HCCC documents regarding Dr Donnelly at exhibit 9(b).
is a further report regarding Dr Donnelly dated 11 June 2009 at exhibit
the first report regarding Ms Dene Dr Banks responded to a number of questions
posed by the HCCC. The first question asked by the
Whether Ms Dene’s care and treatment of Mr A under Dr
Donnelly’s supervision and independently, was appropriate, particularly
after the disclosure made by Mr A that he had inappropriately touched his
daughter, Miss K, during massages over a period of time.
response to this question Dr Banks noted that the:
...standard reasonably expected of the intern would have been to
assert herself sufficiently to be able to extricate herself from
the case. The
reasonable standard is that interns do not provide therapy without adequate
supervision as they are not fully registered
and cannot lawfully practise as
psychologists independently.
Banks opines at page 6 of 18 that ‘
the departure from the standards
described was
not just significantly but overwhelmingly below the reasonable
second question asked of Dr Banks was:
Whether Ms Dene disclosed her history of childhood sexual abuse
to Mr A such a disclosure was a transgression of professional boundaries
Banks described Ms Dene’s disclosure as
‘ill-considered, naive
and excessively familiar’
and that the
‘disclosure to Mr A of
her history of abuse represents a substantial transgression of professional
boundaries’
. Dr Banks re-iterated that
‘the standard
reasonably expected of the intern would have been to assert herself sufficiently
to be able to extricate herself
from the case’.
In addition Dr Banks
‘the standard reasonably expected of the supervisor would
have been to intervene, terminate the therapy, assist the intern to
seek therapy
for herself (from somebody else, and of course (in reverse priority) report the
matter to DoCS’.
Dr Banks expressed the view that the disclosure (by Mr A) and subsequent
management by both intern and supervisor represented
a departure
Significantly Below’
the reasonable standard and
would invite ‘
Severe Criticism’
(pg 7 of 18).
third question addressed by Dr Banks relates to whether Ms Dene complied with
the mandatory requirements of the
Children and Young Person’s (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
(NSW) with respect to the children of Mr A.
Banks notes that the standard reasonably expected is set out in NSW legislation
“both intern and supervisor draw heavily on the ethical
guidelines of the Australian Psychological Society
” (pg 8 of 18). Dr
Banks further notes that neither intern nor the supervisor makes even a passing
reference to the NSW Psychologists
Registration Board - Code of Conduct which
cross references it’s website with that of the APS. The legal requirements
of mandated
reporting are clearly set out by the APS in “Guidelines on
Reporting Child Abuse and Neglect, and Criminal Activity.
relation to the mandatory reporting Dr Banks opines that the departure from the
standard was
Significantly Below
the expected standard for the
intern Ms Dene and
Profoundly Below
the expected standard for Dr
Donnelly her supervisor. Dr Banks indicates that such a departure from the
expected standard invites
Most Severe Criticism.
fourth question addressed by Dr Banks was whether Ms Dene should have made a
report to DoCS given the level of knowledge she possessed
admitted to her that he had inappropriate ‘
thoughts and feelings’
towards Miss K, and that he had inappropriately touched her.
Banks expressed the view that Ms Dene should have made a report to DoCS (pg 10
of 18). Notwithstanding Dr Banks’ observation
Dene’s highly distressed state, most likely provoked by her own history of
abuse coupled with the disturbing
disclosures, Dr Donnelly should have
terminated the process then and there and instigated a mandatory report”,
Dr Banks noted that
“Regardless of Dr Donnelly’s actions, Ms
Dene should have made a report to DoCS”
(pg 10 of 18).
Banks opines that Ms Dene’s failure to report represents a
Significant Departure
from the standard and that such a departure
from the expected standard invites his
Most Severe Criticism.
fifth question addressed by Dr Banks was whether Ms Dene took adequate steps to
ensure the safety, welfare and well-being of the
“A” children and in
particular, whether Ms Dene took adequate steps to satisfy herself that the
“A” children
were not at risk.
regard to the standard reasonably expected Dr Banks notes that the failure of Ms
Dene and Dr Donnelly ‘
to report the information obtained from the
therapy session in October 2003, in and of itself, represents the greatest
both individuals in ensuring the safety, welfare and well-being of
the “A” children
[meaning Miss B and Miss C],
failure then resulted in the subject child being left in a position of ongoing
abuse for a further 20 months’.
Dr Banks further observed that
Dr Donnelly’s interventions did not protect the children, and
subsequently he then directed Ms Dene to intervene with the children
while they were still living in the same care environment. Her subsequent action
of following this direction was not ensuring
their welfare; rather it
potentially placed them at far greater risk.’
(pp 11&12 of
Banks opined that the actions of Ms Dene and the actions of Dr Donnelly
represent a significant departure
the reasonable
standard and invite his
Severe Criticism
(pg 12 of 18).
six asked of Dr Banks related to whether the supervision provided to Ms Dene by
Dr Donnelly was adequate given the circumstances
of the case.
Banks responds to this question in the context of the following significant
issues and reasonably expected standards:
knowledge vs Supervisor’s knowledge
history of prior sexual abuse
encouraging Intern to provide treatment to both father and children
Supervisor’s
justification of the Intern continuing with the case
The length of
therapy provided
Continuation of
supervision beyond the conclusion of the Intern’s practicum (mid-2004)
Banks opined that (in the context of detailed analysis of the above issues), the
departure from the standards was
Overwhelmingly Below
reasonable standard and would invite his
Most Severe Criticism
(pg 16 of 18).
pages 16 and 17 of his report dated 8 June 2007, Dr Banks summarised his
opinions as to the departure from the standard expected.
relation to the standard reasonably expected he opined that Dr Donnelly’s
failure to report represents a significant departure
from the standard and that
such a departure invites his
Criticism and in relation to
the failure to report issue, the treatment (intervention) was
Significantly Below
the standard expected.
relation to the complexity of a case being well beyond the training and
expertise of an intern Dr Banks considered the conduct
the standard expected.
relation to the excessive length of treatment provided Dr Banks considered the
conduct was
Significantly Below
the standard expected as it did
not accord with the university policy of providing only short-term therapy.
relation to the inappropriate disclosures by the intern and subsequent
inappropriate management by the supervisor allowing treatment
to continue (and
failure to recommend the intern to therapy) Dr Banks expressed the view that the
conduct was
the standard expected.
relation to the referral of the children to another clinician, but the failure
to adequately brief that clinician as to what the
known family dynamics were at
that stage the treatment Dr Banks expressed the view that the conduct was
Significantly Below
the standard expected.
relation to permitting the intern to continue therapy beyond a completed
practicum Dr Banks expressed the view that the conduct
the standard expected.
relation to encouraging the intern to involve the children in a therapeutic
process with the father
and then for it to occur in the absence of
supervision
Dr Banks expressed the view that the conduct was
Reprehensibly Below
the standard expected.
his summation Dr Banks included the following salient clinical observations at
pages 17 & 18:
From the notes available, I believe there was more than
sufficient information to know that it was well beyond this intern’s
of competence to be managing, much less leave her on her own to then expand her
mandate to include the children.
For a supervisor to argue that an intern was the most appropriate person
to intervene on this matter in light of the incremental but
ever-increasing
disclosures of abuse, and subsequent outcome highlights the inappropriate
management of this case from its earliest
The failure of two mandated reporters to fulfil their lawful obligations
to report this matter highlights a lack of competent supervision
and training in
key legislation that all
psychologists are not just expected to be
mindful of, but obligated to comply with. At the point of Ms Dene’s
inappropriate
disclosure during therapy of her own abuse history, it highlighted
yet another critical point when her supervisor should have stepped
terminate this process.
He (Dr Donnelly) encouraged the intern to continue with the case clearly
beyond her expertise, and due to her own abuse history, potentially
damaging not
just to client, and children, but the intern as well. He then referred the
children for ‘psycho-educational sessions’
to a well-trained, but
sadly, uninformed colleague whose intervention may have had a further negative
impact on the child he should
have been more focused on protecting.
He left his intern continuing to provide therapy, beyond a purportedly
completed practicum, and largely unsupervised, then to undertake
joint therapy
with both offender and victim, - while the victim still remained in an unchanged
Subsequent to his departure, and presumable on the basis of the inadequate
training and standards he espoused and/or provided his
intern, Ms Dene then
recklessly continued to provide therapy to this client, while not a student on
placement, but still not registered
as a psychologist and certainly not
supervised – but still not reporting further disclosures of abuse of the
subject children.
Reports were provided by Dr Banks dealing with the entire Regional University
Psychology clinic file, Ms Dene’s private
practice notes, Ms Dene’s
statement including her
curriculum vitae
(30.04.09) and a report of Ms
Carol Boland (14.04.09).
the Addendum Report dated 11 June 2009 when dealing with issues relating the
adequacy of the records kept by Ms Dene in respect
of Mr A Dr Banks concluded,
at page 5 of 11, that Ms Dene’s Therapy notes were ‘
significantly
below the standard reasonably expected and for failure to document the session
of 21.10.2003, even as an intern psychologist,
invites my strong
criticism’.
report continued:
‘Of the Supervision notes available, 25/7/03, 21/10/03,
23/10/03, 17/12/03, 10/2/04, 25/2/04, and 9/6/04 there is sufficient
to indicate
that the intern gave her supervisor frequent briefings of therapy sessions (and
even telephone conversations between
intern and client 23/10/03). The severity
of my criticism in my previous report about the inadequacy of the supervision in
still stands’.
relation to Ms Dene’s CV, Dr Banks makes the following comments:
It would be reasonable to conclude that Ms Dene’s prior
employment history leading up to her study at
[the Regional University]
involved multiple references to mandatory reporting obligations on individuals
working in the areas of health, education and welfare.
regard for the experience revealed in the CV, particularly taking into account
her experience as a Family Law Mediator and
her awareness of risk factors on
families under stress- particularly for children (such as increased likelihood
of domestic violence
and child abuse), Dr Banks stated that his criticism
regarding Ms Dene’s failure to report on multiple occasions only
report continued at page 8 of 11:
With increased knowledge of her employment background which
obviously included extensive client contact, I am also more critical of
failure to assert herself appropriately with her supervisor about not continuing
with the case after 21.10.03 and on 23.10.2003”.
respect to the Report of Ms Carol Boland Dr Banks confirms that he has read the
report and that
“for the most part, I concur with it”.
notes and agrees with Ms Boland’s itemised series of actions that Ms Dene
should have been directed to undertake by her supervisor.
However, he disagrees
with Ms Boland’s view that
“the client had not effectively
groomed Ms Dene or her supervisor” (Volume 2, exhibit 4, pg 3, paragraph
and Dr Banks suggests that there was evidence of manipulation of both Ms
Dene and Dr Donnelly by Mr A.
Banks also expressed disagreement with Ms Boland’s view that Ms Dene
did decide to report relatively quickly once she had completed her
(volume 2, exhibit 4, pg 4, paragraph 3), and he chronicles
the delay during which
“regrettably, a report was not made”.
Dr Banks notes at page 10 of 11 of his report that the
Children and Young
Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
NSW requirements of mandatory
reporters include
‘as the person must as soon as practicable report to
the Director General’
and Ms Dene continued to leave the subject child
at continued risk of harm (for a protracted period).
an Addendum Report dated 11 June 2009 relating to Dr Donnelly Dr Banks noted at
page 2 that he was unable to find any records that
Dr Donnelly had kept. Dr
Banks further notes in respect to Dr Donnelly,
“his involvement in this
matter needs to be addressed at two levels’. Dr Donnelly’s
‘direct involvement in
therapy invites strong criticism and appears
significantly below the standard reasonably expected”. With respect to his
ndirect involvement in therapy via supervision Dr Banks states as follows:
Whilst it is clearly below standard, I would be hesitant to
indicate Dr Donnelly’s failure to maintain notes is significantly
standard. It does however have multiple implications, it provides further
evidence about the mismanagement of this case. It
further illustrates that the
supervisor was setting but more importantly demonstrating, very poor standards
for his student –
particularly as he was acting in a clinical role within
a post-graduate university teaching facility. Finally, his failure to maintain
any notes is at his own professional peril, as clearly contemporaneous notes
must be accorded far greater weight than current ‘recall’
any defence”.
Banks maintained the level of the severity of his criticism as expressed in his
previous report about the inadequacy of supervision
in this case. (paragraph 4,
pg 8 of 10).
conclusion, Dr Banks stated (at paragraph 4, pg 10 of 10) that:
With respect to Dr Donnelly, his failures to act more decisively
and at the same time more supportively to his student while remaining
ever-vigilant about children at risk meant that under his supervision – a
child remained living in a most harmful environment;
a student was encouraged to
provide therapeutic services well beyond her competence in a conflicted role;
and that same student has
been re-traumatised by her involvement in a child sex
abuse matter
Dr Banks – oral evidence
cross-examination dated 15/6/09, Dr Banks confirmed that he had read through his
reports before giving evidence at the Tribunal
and that they set out his current
professional opinion in relation to the matters he had been asked to consider
for the purposes
of the hearing (T47.35-40, 15/6/09).
Banks was asked about the opinion he expressed in the report relating to Dene
dated 8 June 2007 in the following exchange (T49
Q. I would just like to ask you about a statement that you've
made under the heading "5A" on page 11. You've described, and in your
report you have set out your professional opinion:
"Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly's failure to report the information as
obtained from the session in October 2003 in and of itself represents
greatest failure of both individuals in ensuring the safety, welfare and
wellbeing of the A children."
You've then said:
"and this failure then resulted in the subject child being left in a
position of ongoing abuse for a further 20 months."
I wonder whether you could explain what you meant by that, that this
failure resulted in the subject child being left in a position
of ongoing abuse
for a further 20 months?
A. I think from the disclosure in October 2003 of Mr A to Ms Dene,
then some ongoing information that came out in multiple sessions,
if I'm - am I
able to refer to those as well?
Q. My question was what you were referring to or intended to convey when
you described the failure as having resulted in
being left in a
position of ongoing abuse for a further 20 months?
A. That from the point of the initial disclosure of 21 October 2003
then across a number of sessions where, certainly to myself as
a clinician I
would identify these as significant ongoing risk factors, I would cite
10 November 2003 - I don't know whether you
wish me to just list these or
go through them in detail?
Q. I think at this stage, because I'm simply wanting to clarify this bit,
I will go through more detail at a later stage, but just
at the moment I'm
wanting to clarify.
A. Okay, if I can just briefly list them. There are at least three that
caused me great concern - 10/11/03, 20/11/03, 3/02/04 and
finally, 6 April
'04, all gave me, if you like, indicators of concern, indicators that the risk
factors were current as opposed to
historical.
Dr Banks explained his concerns regarding the content of the clinical notes for
10 November 2003 the following exchange occurred
WITNESS: You will see in progress notes it's described as, "A
good week. Two occasions, awareness of urge for inappropriate behaviours
daughter." That was described as a good week. As a clinician that to me would
be a significant red flag of currency of risk.
STERN [T51.5] Q. Would you expect that to be a red flag of currency of
risk to an intern completing a practicum as well?
A. Possibly not, with the benefit of the doubt - possibly not. But as I
indicated in my most recent report, I was also unaware of
Ms Dene's prior
employment within the Family Law Court in the mediator role, and certainly that
experience would have highlighted
her awareness of children in conflicted
situations, certainly in situations where the parenting models are operating in
environments
under great stress and the significant increase of risk then
towards the children living in that environment. So with measure, yes,
have expected this intern to be more aware of the significance of that sort of
respect to the clinical notes for the session on 20 November 2003, Dr Banks
expressed the following view (T51.10)
A. So barely a week later, "Management of changed behaviours
going well. Inappropriate desire still there," - across a week. Again,
highlighting and emphasising the issue of currency of risk.
Q. Would you expect that to indicate currency of risk to an intern
psychologist of Ms Dene's training and experience?
A. In context of what's going on and that four sessions have now gone on
since the initial, if you like, major disclosure of 21/10,
and that the whole
mandate of this intern's activities has shifted to being focused on this
individual's inappropriate behaviours,
then yes, this intern should have been
more aware.
Q. You say "this intern should have been more aware." Should this have
indicated currency of risk in that context?
A. I believe so.
respect to the clinical notes made for the session held on 3 February 2004 Dr
Banks gave the following evidence (T51-52):
Q. Sorry, I'm jumping - 91, 3 February 2004.
A. Bottom paragraph of progress notes saying, "Relationship with
- emotional dependence, physical behaviours, instinct to touch."
Again, to me, just red flags of two issues now - the adult, or the
perpetrator's
declared emotional dependence on the child and the behaviours declared
inappropriate of an instinct to touch.
Q. Again, if I can ask the same question that I've asked in the past,
would you expect that to indicate currency of risk to a--
A. I believe it does indicate currency of risk, yes.
Q. Would you expect it to indicate that to a reasonable psychology intern
of Ms Dene's training and experience?
A. Yes, and in addition you're now getting a pattern of indications,
you're getting a multiple of indicators. So it's not just a
one-off in multiple
sessions, it's repeated - obviously different language and in different ways,
but the persistent theme is the
perpetrator, the child molester, having
difficulty restraining his behaviour.
Q. Is that something that you would expect to indicate currency of risk
to a reasonable psychologist in the position of Dr Donnelly
supervising
A. I believe so
following examination in chief occurred regarding the clinical notes made for
the consultation on 6 April 2004 (T52):
A. The bottom paragraph again, "[Miss B] and [Miss C] feeling
the ease of subtle inappropriate touch in games." Again to me it's
significant indicator of currency of risk.
Q. You've described this as "significant indicator." It wasn't a
descriptor that you used earlier, namely the significance of this.
something that is more or less or just the same in terms of indication of
A. It's in part the repetition of the themes and in part the notion, if
you like, by way of distorted thinking on the part of the
perpetrator that we're
playing games, that he's having a game with his daughter but in the process he
is still managing to engage
in sexual touch.
Q. Again, would you expect that to indicate currency of risk to a
reasonable psychology intern in the situation, with the background
and training
of Ms Dene?
A. I believe it does.
Q. And to a psychology supervisor in the position of
Dr Donnelly?
A. Again, I believe it does.
Banks clarified a comment made in his June 2007 reports as follows (T52 - 53):
Q. If I could go back, then, to page 11 of your report in
relation to Ms Dene, the June 2007 report, and what you have said there
that, "The failure resulted in [Miss B] being left in a position of ongoing
abuse for a further 20 months." Are you intending
to state there that to
your knowledge there was ongoing abuse over that period?
A. No, that's clearly too strong. I would suggest that there is
information - and it was only a brief interview by JIRT of
there's suggestions in the transcript of possible inappropriate behaviour across
2004, but more than likely 2003, and as I
indicated, there were suggestions in
the notes that there had been, if you like, no change in the structural risk
factors that were
present in that household from late 2003 onwards.
Q. So in the way that you've just described it, and in particular in
stating that you were not intending to say that there was ongoing
that period of 20 months, would it be more accurate in that sentence to
describe it as being left in a position of risk
or potential ongoing abuse,
rather than describing it as being left in a position of ongoing abuse?
A. I will concede that, yes.
Q. That same point would apply, for the record, at page 14 of your
report relating to Dr Donnelly in June 2007 - just for the tribunal's
- there is exactly the same expression and, I take it, a similar construction
would apply to that as well?
A. I accept that.
respect to the reporting obligations of psychologists Dr Banks expressed the
following view (T55):
Q. Are you able to offer an opinion, as a psychologist, clearly
not as a lawyer, as to what is required of psychologists by reason
requirements of
sections 23
Children and Young Persons (Care
and Protection) Act
A. To submit a report to the Director-General of the Department of
Community Services as soon as possible when the psychologist -
the clinician
becomes aware of a child at risk of harm.
Banks clarified ‘child at risk of harm’ as follows (T55):
Q. I wonder whether you could explain to the tribunal what is
meant by "child at risk of harm" in your understanding as a
psychologist?
A. Two issues are meant, to me: firstly, that there is a harmful event
that has been identified, that an environment of clearly
less than optimal care
for the child has been provided, or further up that continuum, an environment
that has directly compromised
that child's safety and welfare, or wellbeing.
That's step one. The second is "at risk of harm" - the "at risk" element then
the likelihood - sorry, introduces the concept of likelihood: is
that same environment that produced the compromise to the welfare
of the child
likely to occur, or recur. So to me there are those two elements that need to
be satisfied.
Q. If I asked you to turn to the definition, as you've identified, there
is two elements to it. The first is, in the chapeau which
says, "A child or a
young person is at risk if current concerns exist for the safety, welfare or
wellbeing of the child." In your
opinion, would those concerns need to relate
to the child's physical wellbeing or could they encompass other aspects of the
A. I believe that it refers to - and when you consider (a) to (e) in
their totality, it considers the whole listed care of the child,
the safety,
welfare and wellbeing. As a clinician I believe they are all-encompassing
constructs.
asked about the specific risk Miss B was exposed to Dr Banks gave the following
Q. I wonder if I could ask you to turn from the generic to the
specific, and to focus
on the situation of
Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly knew it to be in October 2003 after the first
disclosure, and I wonder whether you could say whether,
in your opinion, a
reasonable psychologist should have identified [Miss B] as being at risk of harm
within the meaning of
by reason of the disclosure on
21 October 2003?
Q. The question I asked related to you expecting a reasonable
psychologist to have identified child
as being at risk. What
background and training of Ms Dene?
A. At the point inside that session I think at best I would be
equivocal, and especially given Ms Dene's emotional response - declared
emotional response during that session; but immediately after that
session I would say yes, there should have been a clear awareness.
Q. You've referred us to four separate references in the records. They
are 10 November, 20 November 2003, 3 February 2004 and
April 2004. Would the matters set out in those notes be relevant to an
assessment by a psychologist of whether or not
fell within the
definition of being at risk of harm within
section 23?
A. I believe they are providing further credible evidence of currency of
Q. So should a reasonable psychologist in the position of
Dr Donnelly, having read those notes, have identified
being a child at risk within the meaning of
section 23?
A. Assuming all of those things, yes, then I believe he should.
Q. If I could ask you the same question but in respect of Ms Dene,
and asking you to apply to her the standard of the reasonable
psychology intern,
with her training and experience?
A. Taking Ms Dene's specific employment experience into account,
yes, I believe so.
Q. If you were just to take into account her training and experience as a
psychologist, as opposed to matters that she might have
undertaken prior to her
psychology training, would your answer be the same?
A. For her to form a good faith belief that there was a likelihood of
risk, I believe so.
STERN Q. I wonder whether I could then move to the specific. You've
expressed an opinion in your reports that really the only appropriate
the circumstances in which Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly found themselves
after the disclosure in October 2003 was to make a
mandatory report. Do I take
it from that that they should have assessed
as being at risk of
A. That's my starting position, that from 21 October onwards there
should have been an immediate report put in place. Depending
on the resources
available, discussions and negotiations could have occurred with DOCS to
determine whether they then proceeded with
support, assistance, assessment, et
cetera; but until that point their mandated obligation and duty was to file a
report, and then,
given the level of the individual providing the therapy at the
time, I can only say again that the intern should have stepped back
supervisor should have made the intern step back.
Q. If I could wind back to the starting premise of your answer, which is
that they should have made a report, could you please tell
the tribunal the
facts and matters that you rely upon as indicating that a report should have
been made following on from the disclosure
on 21 October 2003?
A. I draw attention to Ms Dene's wording in terms of on
21 October the sexual - sorry, the fondling of Miss B's pubic area. To me
that is a red flag moment for the intern to have raised with her supervisor and
for them both collectively to have filed a report.
That to me was sufficient in
and of itself.
Q. Could you explain what you rely upon in reaching the assessment which
is implicit in your opinion, that
was at risk within the
definition in
section 23?
A. The very nature of the discussion in the sense that Ms Dene
writes that "CA referred to a special subject that he needed to talk
behaviour. To me the usage of the term "massage,"
if you pulled out the basic
texts on treatment of sexual offenders you will see it's there listed in bold
terms in tables identifying
issues of denial and minimalisation that
perpetrators tend to use the words, "It was only play," "It was only massage,"
"It was only
a game," and they should have been key critical terms that were
picked up on.
Q. What should those terms have indicated to - if we start with Ms Dene
- to a reasonable psychology intern in her position with
her background and
training in October 2003?
A. It should have been - and with an awareness of the family environment
and knowing that the mother, who was probably the children's
only source of
protection and she was, as I understand it, significantly advanced in dementia
at that point, so the children were
without a protective force around them. It
also meant that the father, who was making these disclosures to Ms Dene,
was an isolated
individual. There had already been references in previous
sessions about his attractiveness - or attraction to young women. There
been issues in terms of reference to his efforts to transgress or violate
boundaries between client and therapist, and then there's
the discussion of the
taboo subject and the massage of the pubic area. So in context, to me it was
the critical point.
Q. All of those factors that you've just referred to, are those all
factors which go to the assessment of risk?
A. I believe so.
Q. Or do they go to the "current concerns for the child" element of the
definition in
section 23?
A. To me that's one and the same.
Banks was asked to comment upon the supervision notes made for 21 October 2003
(page 127 of volume 2), in particular the comment
made in the notes regarding
‘mitigating’ risk of harm factors:
Q. You've discussed the risk of harm. I wonder if I could ask
you to turn to page 127 of volume 2, which is the volume containing
the progress notes. If you look at page 127, this is a discussion of
mandatory reporting responsibilities, and it's referring to
a supervision with
Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly. There is a reference there to "risk of harm
mitigated by" - do you see that, it's about
six lines down from the top of the
Q. I wonder whether you could comment upon the extent to which the
factors identified there mitigated the risk of harm in the circumstances,
bearing in mind the disclosure on 21 October - and I should say that this
is the same day as the disclosure. If I could ask you
firstly to refer to the
fact that it was a voluntary disclosure?
A. That's been shown in the research to essentially be neither here nor
there in terms of offending behaviour, so to me it would
not be a mitigating
factor at all.
Q. Should a reasonable psychologist in the position of, firstly,
Ms Dene, in October 2004 [as said], have recognised what you've
namely that the literature says that's neither here nor there?
A. That's a good question. Presuming an intern had not had a lecture
stream on sex offenders or children at risk of harm specifically,
suspect not - that that would not be within an intern's knowledge.
Q. Same question as regards Dr Donnelly: is that something that
should have been within his knowledge at October 2003?
A. Given his declared background with these sorts of populations, I would
have expected so.
Q. If either Ms Dene or Dr Donnelly had looked into the
literature in relation to child sex abuse in October 2003, at that time would
the literature have disclosed what you've just said, namely that this is not a
factor which can be relied upon to mitigate risk?
A. Certainly the literature would tell you in volumes that there are very
few clearly predictive factors. So you can't look at any
single factor in
isolation, and it would certainly be a brave clinician that is postulating
forward just on the basis of those points
that appear in the notes.
Q. If you look at the second factor that's referred to there, namely that
the behaviour has ceased, is that a factor that can appropriately
be relied upon
by way of mitigation of risk?
A. With respect to child molesters and sex offenders, sadly not. It
needs to be accepted that there is an inherent motivation for
sex offenders to
lie, there is an inherent motivation for sex offenders to minimise and deny up
until the last possible moment and
even beyond, and certainly the literature -
and I can provide all of this to the tribunal if it wants - but the literature
indicate that it's only with the option of mandatory treatment programs
versus heading into, if you like, unprotected custodial environments,
level of denying reduces. There has been other studies by clinicians - some of
the foremost people - that have indicated
variably that the rates of lying go
from 50 to 60 to 98%. So the notion of an individual saying the behaviour has
ceased I would
be treating with an open mind, but I would certainly not be
relying on it whatsoever.
Q. Again, you've described the literature and you've indicated that it's
known that sex offenders may minimise or deny what's happened
in the past. Is
that something that should have been known to a psychology intern in the
position of Ms Dene and with her background
and experience in October
A. Yes, in the - there's a text of the reference material in the lecture
that I provide on forensic psychology. The text is by Hess
& Weiner, the
book is called Handbook of Forensic Psychology, there's a chapter in it by Bill
Marshall on just the assessment
of sex offenders and it focuses much of the work
on cognitive distortions and risk factors associated with recidivism. That was
their text.
A. That's a good question. Presuming an intern had not had a lecture
stream on sex offenders or children at risk of harm specifically,
suspect not - that that would not be within an intern's knowledge.
Q. Would you have expected Ms Dene to be aware of that in October
2003, bearing in mind her training and experience?
A. I can't respond as to when she did my course. I don't remember my
students at that level of detail. If she had done the forensic
component of the course in 2003 then I would have expected her to have been
familiar with that text. Beyond that, possibly
Q. It's clear that Ms Dene relied upon her relationship of trust -
or if I put it to you that it appears that Ms Dene relied upon
relationship of trust with Mr A that she had developed over providing
treatment for some four months. Bearing in mind that background,
appropriate for her to rely upon Mr A's own assertions that the behaviour
had ceased?
A. Probably not, and I would suggest that she was caught up in his
manipulative behaviour.
Q. The question is just whether it was a failure on the part of
Ms Dene to have relied upon Mr A's statements to her that he wouldn't
repeat the past abuse, bearing in mind her relationship with him as a therapist
over four months?
A. I would class that as naïve and understandable given her intern
status, and hence my difficulty in responding better. I
would just call that
the naïve actions of an intern.
asked the same question regarding ‘mitigating’ factors with respect
to Dr Donnelly, Dr Banks gave the following evidence:
Q. In relation to these factors that are listed on
page 127 as mitigating the risk of harm, in relation to Dr Donnelly,
in the circumstances
was it appropriate for him to rely upon those factors as
mitigating the risk of harm in the circumstances?
A. No, I don't believe so.
Q. I wonder whether I could ask you then just about the process that's
involved in the circumstances in a report, in that once a
child is identified as
being at risk of harm - and I understand from what you've said that [Miss B]
should have been identified as
at risk of harm within the section - is it up to
the psychologists to determine when that report should take place?
A. Whilst being mindful of compliance with the legislation?
Q. In order to comply with the legislation?
A. In order to comply, then clearly it's incumbent on the psychologist to
be doing that. No-one else can read the report other than
the psychologist
Q. What would be the required timescale for reporting from the point of view
of a psychologist?
A. On the day of the 21st - I would have indicated the day of the 21st.
As soon as practicable.
Q. Here, if one looks at page 127, there is an identification of the
best outcome and reference to a number of different factors
which would be
comprised in the best outcome. If a psychologist identifies the best outcome as
not involving DOCS, are they entitled
then not to report?
A. Definitely not.
Banks then referred to a substantial amount of empirical literature relevant to
the question of whether or not it was appropriate
for Ms Dene to continue with
Mr A after 21 October 2003. Some of this evidence is as follows:
A. There's a multitude of factors. First and foremost, I would
have suggested that the therapeutic relationship had been significantly
to the point of no coming back, to have had the client's information so
overwhelm the clinician - the therapist involved
- as for that clinician to be
unable to continue at that time, says that there is a significant personal
engagement in that therapy
process. I would have been encouraging her to seek
support - therapeutic assistance elsewhere. I would have just been putting in
mandatory report.
Q. You've spoken from the point of view of the supervisor as to what the
supervisor in your opinion should have done. Is that something
that you say the
reasonable supervisor should have done in those circumstances, as opposed to
just what you would have done?
A. With a newly declared mandate that had the potential to be considered
a sex offender - and clearly we were - the parties at this
point are indicating
that there is inappropriate behaviour, there's massage behaviour. Two days
later in the telephone discussion
on the 23rd, the telephone notes talked about
sexual fondling, so the language is strongly indicative of sexual offending
At that point it's falling into the land of the most serious cases
that we as clinicians are confronted with - one of the most serious
cases that clinicians are most confronted with - and I am certainly mindful, and
I would suspect seasoned clinicians are
mindful that community-based treatments
with sex offenders are less than impressive.
Q. If I focus specifically on Ms Dene's emotional response, rather
than the assessment of risk per se, you said you would have been
couldn't continue with the case, and you've said that it should have been
reported. Is that something that the reasonable
supervisor in
Dr Donnelly's position should have done, namely in response to her
emotional response during the session on 21 October?
A. Well, Ms Dene notes - and her latest statements indicate - that
she was so emotionally overwhelmed that she could not take notes;
that she was
so distressed that she immediately reported to her supervisor. As a supervisor
of interns, yes, I put them in challenging
positions, and yes, they are
emotionally confronted and on occasion certainly with rape victims and other
survivors of crimes and
violent assaults I have had the intern sitting next to
me with tears running down their faces, but I would certainly not see them
that work by themselves and I would certainly not be pushing them back into that
situation where they have demonstrated such an
emotional involvement.
Q. In your report you've criticised Ms Dene for not extracting
herself from the situation and I wonder if you could explain why it
is that you
say that it should have been apparent to her that she should have extracted
herself from the situation?
A. I took into account her - and what little I know of her account - but
I took into account her disclosure about being a victim
of previous sexual abuse
and the impact that that had had on her, and I think at a point of being a
clinical intern, to be involved
in a situation where a perpetrator is disclosing
issues of inappropriate behaviour towards his daughter and that so overwhelms
intern, there's obviously a clear personal message in that. But at a higher
level there should have been a reflection as to the
likely impact on this child,
Miss B, at the point a decade, two decades down the road, where Ms Dene
herself was and the impact that
her prior experience as a child was still having
on her in adult years. So I did raise that criticism, and I stand by that, to
at some point she clearly failed to listen - I talk to my students about it
- she clearly failed to listen to the small voice within.
She didn't listen to
her own conscience. She didn't listen to the little voice.
Q. I wonder if I could ask you to look at a comment that's been made by
the Joint Investigation Response Team and to ask whether
you agree or disagree
with that. It's "The failure by the psychology clinic to report the children
to DOCS meant that the children
were left at ongoing risk of sexual harm from
their father"; and I already take it from what you've said so far - what your
would be in respect of that - the second sentence says, "This means the
children were also left to experience ongoing psychological
abuse as well." I
want to ask you whether in your professional opinion you would agree with that
A. I believe it's a reasonable assertion if I put that together with Miss
B's JIRT transcript in terms of - I'm certainly doing this
from memory, but Miss
B talked about Dad's – Miss C's emotional volatility and his anger and his
angry voice and that he gets
angry and makes her cry. As I said, I'm doing that
from memory, but clearly there was evidence to suggest that Dad - sorry, Miss
- had a volatile emotional profile and that the possibility of psychological
abuse was there.
Banks was asked questions regarding the risk of psychological harm to Miss B and
Miss C as follows:
Q. You've talked about risk of harm, and so far we've looked at
risk of sexual harm, but you indicated that the definition in
applies to overall wellbeing and psychological harm as well. In saying that
there was a risk of harm are you intending to suggest
that there was also a risk
of psychological harm to
or are you referring simply to the risk
of future physical harm or sexual offending?
A. Sexual offending by definition invokes psychological harm.
Q. So if you could have regard to the notes leading up to 21 October
when I ask you whether or not it should have been apparent to
Ms Dene that
there was a risk of psychological harm to
by reason of what she
knew of the family up to and including 21 October 2003?
A. Given the indicators in the notes of the client's efforts to
transgress her own boundaries, coupled with the information from
should have been sufficient for her as a professional and as a woman to be most
vigilant, most aware, most alert and alarmed
at that point of the issues of
sexual and psychological harm.
Q. Can I ask you to explain why you say "as a woman"?
A. Because the client was making overtones towards her, from what the
notes read, in terms of pushing boundaries by way of seeking
more than just a
client/therapist relationship.
Q. In what way is that relevant to the risk of psychological harm that
she should have appreciated as regards
A. That she is dealing with an individual that has clearly got some
difficulties in terms of understanding social cues, that is misreading
brought gender into it - is clearly misreading signs from females about how he
perceives them versus what they are demonstrating
- or in the individual, what
the intern was demonstrating at this point. So there were issues of
misperception going on. Ms Dene's
notes identified that he was attracted
to young women. That to me, again, from this individual being in his mid-40s is
flag. Ms Dene identified in her earlier notes that he was
narcissistic, and certainly in her notes from, I'd say, August 2003 onwards,
there were elements of a significant level of self-centredness, which if you
start putting his self-centredness together with being
sexually needy, together
with being, if you like, excessively sexually aroused towards someone he had
only met a handful of times,
to then indicating inappropriate behaviour with his
daughter, you have got a multiple - a multitude of signs there.
Q. Are those factors you've referred to then relevant to the assessment
of risk of psychological harm to Miss B?
A. I am finding a great difficulty in teasing those two concepts apart,
because I just deal with them as being synonymous, that you
cannot have a sexual
offence without psychological harm. So that being said, Ms Dene needed to
be more aware of the cognitive distortions
that were being played out for her by
Mr A. That he had massaged Miss B until she rolled over or that she indicated
to him to stop
- that in itself should have been a massive red flag of
Q. Why is that? Why should that have been a particular red flag to a
psychology intern in the position of Ms Dene?
A. Because coming from an individual that is suggesting that
non-responsive behaviour is actually - has a potential to be perceived
sexually compliant, and that the absence of anything other than a declared "no"
is complicit in what he is doing, so that gives
him capacity to say in his own
mind, or clearly in the session, that it was okay that he was providing massage
to this child.
Q. You said a moment ago that to your mind psychological harm is
synonymous with sexual abuse in that you couldn't have sexual abuse
without risk
of psychological harm. Is that particular consequence - or inevitable
consequence in the way you describe it - something
that Ms Dene should have
been aware of in October 2003?
A. I believe her own emotional response is indicative of the
psychological harm that accompanies sexual abuse.
Q. And as a psychology intern, with her background and training in
October 2003, should she have been aware of what you say, which
is that sexual
abuse equals risk of psychological harm?
A. That may be assuming too much in terms of nuances without detailed -
or at least expressed lectures and reading in that area.
So I would be more
measured in that.
Q. In respect of Dr Donnelly, is that something of which he should
have been aware in October 2003, bearing in mind his training
and experience as
a psychologist?
A. I believe so.
Banks continued giving evidence on 17 June 2009. Dr Banks gave the following
evidence with respect to his opinion with respect
to Ms Dene as follows:
Q. ......... you've now read the handbook and the teaching
materials, is there anything in what you've read that would alter the opinions
you expressed on Monday as regards your expectations of what a reasonable
psychologist in Ms Dene's position would have been aware
A. In terms of level of vigilance of their responsibilities, in terms of
their understanding of legislation and their codes of conduct,
no, I don't see
any reason to alter my expressed views.
Banks was asked about the comments he had made regarding the care and treatment
provided to Mr A under the supervision of Dr Donnelly,
particularly after the
disclosure was made that he had inappropriately touched his eldest daughter
[Miss B] during massages over
a period of time. As detailed in his reports
dated 7 June 2007 as follows:
Q. If I could ask you then to turn through to page 6, the
opinion that you expressed in this report is that the departure from the
standard subscribed was not just significantly but overwhelmingly below the
reasonable standard and that the departure invited your
severe criticism. Is
that an opinion that you maintain?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. Dr Banks, you're well aware of what you've said in your report
and it's your report June '07 and then your second report relating
Ms Dene June '09, notwithstanding what you said during evidence on Monday,
do you maintain the opinions that you expressed in
those reports?
Q. And I'd just like to ask you as regards those obligations does the
situation of a psychologist as a mandatory reporter depend
in any way upon them
being in paid employment?
A. ... So irrespective to me of whether you are paid or unpaid your
activities as a psychologist working in the health education
and welfare field
would mean that you are a mandatory reporter.
Q. And is that something that's relevant as to whether or not a student
is a mandatory reporter in that way?
A. I believe so.
Q. And the Act relates, and again I appreciate your answers have been
given as a psychologist rather than as a lawyer, it covers
those who in the
course of their professional work provide or deliver healthcare, welfare, or
other services that are defined wholly
or partly to children, could you explain
why it is that you say in your report that that covered Ms Dene in her
treatment of Mr A?
A. Well she is mindful from the beginning of intervention with the family
from July of 2000 and - or it may have been June of 2003,
when the treatment
first started for the mother that it was a mother, father and two young
children. So the point at which you're
engaging the treatment of adults who are
parents then you are knowingly providing treatment to a family system.
A. I think the APS guidelines are enormously informative and I believe
very, very directive......... So that whole direction of
the APS guidelines is
to say the majority view should be to report.
Q. But if there is uncertainty on the part of a psychologist as to
whether they fit within the category of being a mandatory reporter,
resources are available to them by way of clarification of their
obligations?
A. First and foremost would be the DoCS helpline and then in addition,
though I'm not sure, you know, order of priority, you have
the APS. But
certainly as a registered psychologist in New South Wales I would be directing
interns towards the helpline to begin
Q. And would you have expected a reasonable intern in Ms Dene's
position to be aware of the DOCS helpline?
A. I believe so.
respect to Dr Donnelly’s reporting obligations, Dr Banks gave the
following evidence:
Q. Well, in your report you've criticised Ms Dene in
various respects. It's implicit in our opinion that you regard the obligations
under the Board's Code of Conduct as obligations which fall on an intern just as
much as on a psychologist or a supervisor?
A. As long as we're indicating on both parties, yes.
Q. In the circumstance where the intern is advised as to what he or she
should do in a particular circumstance, is the intern's obligation
that advice even if he or she believes it maybe contrary to the requirements of
the Board - of the code of conduct, I should
Q. And if they're advised to act in a way that they think is contrary to
the guidelines or the code of conduct what should they do?
A. They need to seek further advice. If they have a belief that they
have one view and it differs from their lecturer or supervisor
obviously need to take action on it.
the question of the purpose of record keeping Dr Banks gave the following
Q. I'm asking you what is the importance or the purpose for
which these notes should be recorded?
A. The purpose of the notes are to inform certainly a supervisor who is
not present in the room to help the supervisor understand
the processes going
on. It's also to provide a record of the event and to, you know, assist
treatment formulation as the case is
evolving and obviously by way of history,
demonstrating the activities and processes that have been undertaken in the
Banks gave the following evidence regarding voluntary reporting to DoCS:
Q. In your reports you refer to the obligation voluntarily to
report to DOCS as opposed to the mandatory reporting obligation--
A. ....The APS makes it very clear, very, very clear, in the guidelines
Q. As regards voluntary reporting, is the concern that DOCS intervention
may lead to harm or greater risk a relevant concern when
considering whether or
not voluntarily to make a report to DOCS?
A. With respect, it's not our job to make that decision. We can't assume
that the forces that the department are going to be benevolent
or malevolent, we
can't make either assumption. We just can't make the assumptions. Our job is
just to make reports. We're told,
we're mandated.
Banks provided an explanation of the term ‘grooming’:
Q. And in your report, page 9 of 11 June 2009 report
relating to Ms Dene, you refer to an expression, "grooming", could you
explain what grooming is?
A. Grooming implies a pattern of behaviour seeking to alter the
individual, if I can engage the terms, perpetrator and victim, the
perpetrator
is seeking to change the victim's mindset and thought set about the activities
being engaged. There is a, if you like,
a dissonance, a disparity within the
victim's thoughts about what they think may or may not be correct behaviour
versus, if you like,
an instinctual or more primal protective basis of
behaviour. And you end up with a feeling of discomfort, uncomfortableness, and
fear. The grooming process is designed to alleviate, minimise, reduce that
discomfort such that the victim becomes more accommodating
as the process
continues. So if you like, the victim is started to be manipulated or swayed
over to the perpetrator's line of thinking
and pattern of behaviour.
Q. Well I asked you about grooming and the explanation you've given
relates very much to a grooming process between the perpetrator
and the victim,
but that doesn't appear to be the context in which you're using the phrase,
"grooming", in this report. Could you
explain the concept of grooming as
regards a psychologist which is the context in which it's used here?
A. I disagree, if I made reference to the exchange of emails between
Ms Dene and Mr A immediately after the events of 21 October,
you will note if you like a heavy emotional overlay between Mr A and
Ms Dene in the sense of him expressing remorse about the burden
that he had
placed upon her, wanting her, then further within that email wanting her to if
you like engage greater sympathy for him
in his predicament, I would argue that
he is placing additional pressure or burden on her to shift her thought
processes towards
him in a more - in a stronger allegiance.
Q. And that grooming process is that something of which you would have
expected a reasonable psychology intern with the training
and experience of
Ms Dene to be aware of?
Banks expressed the view that it was possible that Ms Dene did not appreciate
she may have being ‘groomed’ by Mr A.
Banks gave the following evidence with respect to what he considered Dr Donnelly
should be aware of with respect to ‘grooming’:
Q. And what about a reasonable psychologist in the position of
Dr Donnelly, would you have expected him to be aware of this grooming
A. I would hope so.
Banks made the following comment regarding the incremental disclosure made by Mr
A as follows:
Q. You also in your report refer to a concept of incremental
disclosure and I wonder if you could just explain how that applies in
context of disclosure in relation to the child sexual abuse?
Q. And is that a concept that you would have expected Ms Dene or a
reasonable psychologist in Ms Dene's position to be aware of in
A. Possibly not.
Banks gave the following evidence regarding the referral of Miss B to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint:
Q..... you've described Dr Donnelly's briefing to
Dr Brechman-Toussaint as myopic. And then over the page at page 11
under the text
you've said why he chose to minimise the available information to
Dr Brechman-Toussaint remains unknown. In your opinion was the
information
provided by way of referral appropriate in the circumstances? And this is on
the assumption that the information is
as recorded in
Dr Brechman-Toussaint's referral notes?
A. Presuming as recorded by Dr Brechman-Toussaint then there was a
less than complete disclosure about the information known about
Q. And was that reasonable in the circumstances?
A. I don't believe so.
Q. ...you would have therefore seen that he indicates that he relies upon
Dr Brechman-Toussaint as having provided an assessment
of the risk to
. In the circumstances was it appropriate for him to have so
A. You are asking me to respond to that on the basis of her notes and
statement, so by way of second or third hand response. I'm
struggling given the
disparity of the two individuals' positions. Dr Brechman-Toussaint is
saying no she was engaged to implement
a psycho educational behaviour for the
children, for the girls, about appropriate and inappropriate personal
boundaries. And Dr
Donnelly is indicating that he referred the children to
Dr Brechman-Toussaint for a risk assessment. So based on notes alone
Brechman-Toussaint is saying she had a much more limited
Q. If you make the assumption that the information as provided is the
information recorded in Dr Brechman-Toussaint's note on the
November 2003
note that you've referred to in your report, was that information sufficient for
her to make an effective risk assessment?
A. On the base of that assumption?
Q. On the basis of that assumption, yes.
A. Asking a clinician to make a risk assessment but then not providing
that clinician with all possible information, I find that
extraordinary.
Banks gave the following evidence regarding the inclusion of Miss B in a
Q. If I could move to the attendance with
15 September 2004, at pages 14 to 15 of your report in respect of
Ms Dene in June 2007 you describe this as completely unconscionable.
you intending to apply that description to both Ms Dene and
Dr Donnelly?
A. With respect to engaging the child in this session?
A. If I'm looking at the notes that are available to me together with the
supervision notes that remain then it appears that the
intern was following
supervisor's directions as to the conduct of a case. Then I'm left with an
absence of supervision notes around
that period and then a question mark as to
how much supervision was actually occurring at the time.
Q. So if I just ask you to look at your report at pages 14 to 15 of
your June 2007 report, the third bullet point on the page is
referring to the
supervisor encouraging the intern to provide treatment to both father and
children, and you say you're mystified
et cetera. And then over the page
at page 15, the first full paragraph, you say, "In the field of sex
offender treatment the reasonable
standard is that a therapist who is providing
treatment to the offender does not simultaneously engage in the provision of
to the victim. To do so would not just be significantly below the
standard but completely unconscionable conduct." Just to clarify,
in the light
of your last answer is it your view that it was significantly below the standard
and unconscionable for Ms Dene to have
carried out the session?
A. I'm pondering that answer for many reasons. Firstly expressed about
the progress of treatment having gone on. The second is
the issue of not so
much treatment that is below standard but it is in areas that are completely out
of her areas of competence.
So we have another, if you like, primary
consideration and then secondary to that is the process that was engaged in of
treatment to the father and daughter concurrently within - well you
know, simultaneously, within that session. I drew on the strength
of that term
for a number of reasons. First and foremost was the level of preparation that
went in to Mr A's therapy for I think
more than four months prior to that
joint session occurring, getting, if you like, getting him ready for that joint
session. And
yet if as I take the notes as much as the day before in terms of -
sorry, days before, in terms of phone calls and emails and therapy
would appear that [Miss B], the daughter, had no idea whatsoever even to the
point of the day of the session. So a remarkable
disparity in terms of the
level of care and consideration provided to an adult versus the care and - even
if they were two adults,
there is this enormous disparity between how much care
and consideration had been given to one person for a discussion about obviously
a profoundly sensitive topic versus the amount of care and consideration given
to the second person. And then if we add in the age
discrepancies, to me it
becomes that much more significant.
Q. And you've said that it was outside of Ms Dene's competence, is
that something you would have expected her to be aware of?
A. Yes. Yes, I believe so
Q. And was there anything that occurred during that session which should
have led to a revision of the assessment of whether or not
there were ongoing
concerns as regards,
A. I would have thought a huge red flag to the therapist would have been
the father's reluctance to prepare the child for this session
that had been
discussed for some four months. And there's evidence in the notes of, "CA not
sure what to say to [Miss B]", the father
not sure what to say to the daughter
in the weeks leading up the event. And then again in the weeks just prior to
the session it
appears that there was a discussion in the therapy sessions with
the father about what to say to the daughter. And it's been resisted.
should have been a major flag to say am I seeing the whole picture here?
Q. And is there anything as regards to the session itself which should
have led to a revision of risk assessment?
A. ....During the session that the child is reported as being curled up,
crying, hiding behind her hat, that response even of itself
should have been a
significant concern. The response of the daughter at the end of the session in
the manner in which, to me, I
find this significant, the manner in which she
looked at Ms Dene, I found telling in the sense of I wonder whether this
looking at this adult, and again a woman, who had said, "I know what
your father has done", and yet this woman, this adult, was sending
again, for repeated assessment. But as I've
indicated in parts throughout this,
there was never a proper assessment done to begin with. And that was a major,
major failing
Banks was asked to comment upon a comment made in the clinical notes made on 28
September 2004 as follows:
Q. Dr Banks, do you have there a document dated
28 September 2004?
... it's written, "Today thinking about termination issues with father.
Concern now exists. Low risk." Now I want to ask you about
assessment, in your expert opinion is that an appropriate risk assessment at
that point in time?
A. That's not a risk assessment, that's a guess. Sorry, I need to cut
through this into if you like more base language, there has
been no assessment
conducted, there's not been a - again, if I'm reliant on the therapy notes as my
information base, there has been
no assessment conducted. So we are back at
best clinical intuition and there is, sorry, a vast literature to indicate that
intuition on the basis of sex offence risk prediction is no better than
a lay person in the community and at best no better than
Q. In the context as set out in the statement, and that would in
particular refer back to paragraph 79 which is describing
Dr Donnelly's
thinking and knowledge, as he puts it in his statement at the
time, so he's referring to the massaging of the daughter, touching
area sometimes during massage, it occurred in approximately October 2003. .. if
I could ask you in the light of that context
to comment on the appropriateness
of that by way of risk assessment in the circumstances?
A. To me that's not a risk assessment, to me it is identifying a couple
of risk factors. It's identifying that alcohol use may or
may not have been a
either precipitant or, if you like, dis-inhibiting substance that assisted or
fuelled Mr A's desires in the processes.
The difficulty is in familial child
molestation, sexual arousal and alcohol use has got a poor correlation at best.
The issue of
providing well for the children and seeking social support and
services and medical seems to me not relevant to the situation. It's
sadly child abuse doesn't recognise socioeconomic status and it doesn't
recognise an individual's capacity to function in greater
society and engage at
all levels of society. So in short, it's identifying a couple of risk factors
that may or may not have been
possibly modified. But again it's being assumed
on the basis only of direct declaration by an individual to an intern that the
was not present for. So as a supervisor I would be saying my radar
needs to be on high alert for what the intern is picking up and
then I need to
be on even greater alert as to identifying what the interns are assuming versus
what they are saying. And then I
need to be on alert to ensure that the intern
is recalling the individual's words as near to as close as possible. For all of
reasons this is not a risk assessment.
Banks was cross-examined by Counsel for Ms Dene. Evidence given by Dr Banks with
respect to legal reporting obligations and the
question of whether an
‘unpaid person’ has such an obligation is set out below:
Q. .....you have consistently referred to the non discretionary
legal obligation, mandated reporter, legislated obligation, legal
requirement,
all through your reports in relation to Ms Dene, haven't you?
Q. Are you saying to this tribunal that your interpretation of this
legislation to continually refer to Ms Dene as legally obligated
your piece of analysis that by providing services to Mr A she is also
somehow providing services to children?
A. Knowing that he is a parent and knowing that she is focused on his
capacity to function and capacity to care for those children,
Q. Can you just turn to point 4 where it says, "Are you a mandatory
reporter?" And it says, "A mandatory reporter is any person
who delivers the
following services to children as part of their paid work", do you see
Q. Well you didn't consider anything when you made that decision, did
you? You just went ahead on the basis that Ms Dene was a mandated
because other people said she was, and psychologists generally are?
A. You're quite right. On the basis of that, that psychologists
generally are.
Banks was cross-examined about the impact on Ms Dene of the view of Dr
Brechman-Toussaint regarding whether or not she was a mandatory
reporter as
Q. Certainly. But in relation to decisions made by interns, if
they're advised by their supervisor, if they're advised by someone
standing of Dr Brechman-Toussaint who has in fact seen the children, that
they are not a mandatory reporter, they'd be entitled
to act on that, wouldn't
they, entitled to accept the opinion of their superiors?
A. That's reasonable.
Q. Yes and Dr Brechman-Toussaint, on any view, is a mandatory
Q. Because she is in paid employment and she provides services to
children because she provided services to these children, and in
Q. And if Dr Brechman-Toussaint has made no mandatory report, having
and having had some dealings with Mr A, wouldn't
that also - wouldn't the intern also be entitled to take that into account as to
whether they were a mandatory reporter, the fact that Dr Brechman-Toussaint
did not make a mandatory report and she was a mandatory
A. I'm being asked to make assumptions here, if I'm being asked to assume
on the basis of the notes made by Dr Brechman-Toussaint,
then her notes say
that she satisfied herself on the information provided by Ms Dene and
Dr Donnelly that there was nothing reportable.
Q. So the fact that Dr Brechman-Toussaint satisfied herself, rightly
or wrongly, that there was no need for a mandatory report by
herself who was a
mandatory reporter, that would be something that should reasonably influence
Ms Dene, wouldn't it?
A. Well no, because it begs the question as to how informed
Dr Brechman-Toussaint was.
Q. Here if we add to this, and I can safely tell you that we can add it
to it, add the words, "massage and bedtime ritual", that
to anybody who has had
some exposure to, in a psychological, psychiatrical, legal, capacity to
paedophiles in a family situation,
they are big red flags, aren't they?
A. I believe so.
Q. And that if you combined - and let's face it, if you combined the
phrase, "inappropriate touch", with, "inappropriate physical
feeling", toward a
ten and a half year old girl by her father, if you've had any real exposure to
sexual abuse within a family dynamic
it would be beyond red flag stuff, there
are alarm bells and sirens, aren't there, really?
A. I'm still with you on red flags.
CHAIRPERSON: On the basis of yesterday's evidence - 17.5 or 14.5. It's
in the first folder of the Health Care Complaints Commission--
AINSWORTH: Is that the discharge summary?
CHAIRPERSON: Yes. That was put to the witness yesterday, was it
AINSWORTH: Yes.
Q. That if you add to the typed notes I've shown you, add to it
Dr Brechman-Toussaint's finding that Mr A has an inappropriate -
in the referral, "Inappropriate thoughts and feelings of a sexual nature towards
the older of his two daughters and to have engineered
opportunities for physical
the hall", right, if that
was added to the situation, for completeness--
And thank you very much, Madam Chair, for that.
Q. --would there be alarm levels raised at all?
A. It would depend on what assurances I've had from the referring
Q. But you're making an assessment - that's from the referring clinician,
referral, "Dr Donnelly reported that Mr A had recently
to Ms Dene as a result of increased stress and lack of availability of his
wife as a partner in an emotional and physical
sense, he has found had" - it
should be, "that he had, inappropriate"--
...--within that phrase I just read, "thoughts and feelings of a sexual
Q. Doctor, in your briefing, if the documents are provided to you for you
to then express the opinion about what Ms Dene should or
should not have
done in relation to mandatory reporting, we can then assume that you weren't
given that document recording Dr Brechman-Toussaint's
assessment of the
situation. You haven't seen that before, have you?
A. Counsel, I can't recall. I would need to go through my first
statement. I can come back to you after the break if you wish.
Q. Sure, fine.
SHORT ADJOURNMENT
Q. So you've read now the discharge summary?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. So we add the combination of information now in relation to
Dr Brechman-Toussaint is the typed account, the typed transcript of
she was told, plus her impressions that are obvious from that discharge summary.
And she is plainly on any - even on my view
of the legislation or on your view
of the legislation, Dr Brechman-Toussaint is a mandatory reporter?
A. I believe so.
Q. Yes. So if she, having assessed the situation, assessed the children
with that information and spoken to Mr A and chosen not
to file the
mandated report, would it be fair for Ms Dene to take some guidance from
Q. That somebody in the position as a child psychologist, a doctor,
didn't see fit to mandate - to make a mandatory report, that
Ms Dene could
be assisted in her decision not to make a mandatory report either by the fact
that it wasn't done in these circumstances
Dr Brechman-Toussaint.
A. Can I ask for clarification of that additional wording?
A. About the massage.
Q. What about it?
A. When you said add those words on to this document.
A. Is that assumed that that was part of these discussions?
Q. Yes, that Dr Brechman-Toussaint was told there was some massage
A. Involving the pubic area, in the words that Ms Dene used?
Q. Dr Brechman-Toussaint said the word "massage" was used, I think
her exact word was she assumed it was of the neck and shoulders.
But whether
she could say she was told where it was but she assumed that.
AINSWORTH: The massage was part of a bedtime ritual, would still be a bit
of a flag, wouldn't it? The massage of a ten and a half
year old that it was
already disclosed sexually inappropriate thoughts towards?
A. I can only respond as myself, I would need to ask more questions about
the nature of that massage.
Q. Okay but if you take the existence of the term massage, bedtime
ritual, sexually inappropriate thoughts towards a ten and a half
daughter that would cause you as practitioner to ask questions about that
certainly of the child?
A. Clearly that appears to have been done.
Q. And back to what really, with respect, matters is that if
Dr Brechman-Toussaint hasn't seen fit to make a mandatory report and
fact is communicated to Ms Dene, that would be fair that it would have some
influence on Ms Dene's beliefs as to whether she
should make a mandatory
A. I believe so.
Cross-examination
returns to the issue of mandatory reporting as follows:
Q. In your second report, 11 June 2009, at page 9 in
reference to Ms Boland, the third paragraph up from the bottom which
"Ms Boland makes a valid point"?
Q. In that paragraph and elsewhere in this second report, you have proceeded
on the assumption that Ms Dene received training in
mandatory reporting in
her previous occupation, is that correct?
Q. What do you base that assumption on?
A. On a knowledge of the structure and function of Relationships
Australia and on a assumption, I hope I made that clear elsewhere,
an assumption
of what would be provided to a teacher in - sorry, an individual undergoing a
degree in education.
for Ms Dene indicates that Ms Dene previous work as a teacher was not in NSW and
continues the cross-examination of Dr Banks
as follows:
Q. And if she didn't receive instruction in mandatory reporting
that was useful or relevant to these new circumstances that criticism
fail, wouldn't it?
A. I can only go on the documents that she provided within her CV and there
was evidence of mandatory reporting responsibilities
associated with her
activities as a Family Law mediator, a Family Law Court mediator.
Q. Well she didn't actually work for Relationships Australia, do you
realise that?
A. Sorry, Interrelate--
Q. Interrelate, yes. So if she worked for Interrelate as a clinical
supervisor and a family and child counsellor on private practice
as a mediator
you assume she received training in mandatory reporting?
A. I am assuming that, yes.
Q. Yes, and if that assumption was incorrect your magnified criticism
must be removed, mustn't it, must be withdrawn?
A. I will leave that to - I still remain critical--
Q. Now you also agree, as I note the first part of that paragraph that I
took you to, "Ms Boland makes the valid point that health
care professional
training like mandatory reporting is far too basic. I concur." Do you see
Q. So some of the criticism in relation to intern psychologists
understanding of their obligations, if I use that in a general sense,
than mandatory, must fall to those they teach?
Banks agreed with Counsel for Ms Dene that it appeared that Mr A had been very
successful at avoiding having his paedophilic behaviour
discovered, given a 43
year history of abuse was recorded when Mr A was ultimately interviewed in the
Cedar Cottage program.
Banks was asked a series of questions regarding the prospects of success of the
treatment provided by Ms Dene. The line of questioning
was as follows:
Q. So in those circumstances, and bearing in mind the program
that Ms Dene's a part of, the prospect of ever achieving anything in
relation to Mr A is zero, isn't it?
A. From the 21st onwards?
A. I'll accept that.
Q. Yes, and once you realise - and even if it's only the tip of the
iceberg, and we obviously have the benefit of wonderful retrospect
in relation
to Mr A and his activities, perhaps, perhaps, the true length and
breadth and depth of his deviancy, there is no prospect
that in this environment
and with Ms Dene conducting the sessions, she's going to get anywhere with
him at all in terms of the issue
of is paedophilia?
A. Correct.
Q. So whilst she may or may not have been equipped to assist him to deal
with the disruption and the grief, and the loneliness and
isolation, of his wife
proceeding into dementia, she may have had those skills, in this environment and
with her skill set, and bearing
the particular nature of paedophilia, this
fellow should have been somewhere else, if he was truly seeking help about his
paedophilia?
A. As should have the intern.
Q. And you agree with Ms Boland that the moment Ms Dene
received the disclosure of Mr A's limited - just pardon me a moment,
received Mr A's tidbit of information and reacted as she did,
so - not hysterically, but reacted so badly to it, she should have
been removed
from this role with this man?
A. Absolutely.
Q. And if you accept that she's gone back to - if you accept that her
prior history of being a child victim of sexual assault was
known to her
supervisor and known to Dr Brechman-Toussaint that's all the more reason
why she should have been taken out of this
Q. Because she's not going to help Mr A and there's a very,
very real risk that she's going to get hurt.
A. Clearly by her expressed behaviour during that session it caused her
hurt and distress.
Q. So she can't realistically be expected to have - in treating him in a
dimension - in these circumstances, can't reasonably be
expected to have seen
him coming?
A. I don't believe so. I fully agree.
Q. As an intern she's just not trained and equipped to see a person like
Mr A for what he is, correct?
A. Yes, that's reasonable.
Q. And if we accept that so many paedophiles only become apparent upon
detection of having committed a crime and been prosecuted,
they must move
amongst us in society in general circumstance without alerting us to their
A. Sadly, yes, you're right.
Q. Okay, but the criticism seems to be that she wasn't assertive enough
in making the decision, in making a decision to discontinue?
A. Correct.
for Ms Dene cross-examined Dr Banks as to the impact of aspects of Ms
Dene’s character on the situation as follows:
Q. Bearing in mind the re-ignition of all her own issues and
the frozen moments of fear you mentioned and the revisitation of that,
think she's really in a position to be that assertive?
A. Again, given the situation she was in and that she is a female victim
of child abuse working with a male supervisor, having just
come out of a session
where a male perpetrator is making those disclosures and triggered all of those
things, and she heads off to,
if you like, a similar position of power imbalance
and authority, it's quite reasonable she may not have been.
Q. Because it is somewhat a power imbalance, supervisor/supervisee,
male/female, and she's a victim and she's dealing with a male
A. I believe there was none (no?) directional therapy provided.
Q. But the direction must come, surely, from above, mustn't it, as to
what she supposedly is going to do--
A. At this level with an intern at year 5 and heading in to year 6, I
would be expecting, and certainly given that the, if you like,
the clarity of
the mandate going forward, there was a literature base that she could reach for.
Sadly all of that literature base
would highlight our discussions for the last
20 minutes about all the factors likely to make treatment successful versus
factors likely for treatment to be unsuccessful. And as I indicated in
my second report, the more detailed review of the literature
highlighted to her as a student how badly positioned she was to head off down a
treatment path.
Q. Yes, the idea that I could bring any impartiality or any true ability
to establish a therapeutic dynamic if I have been a victim
of the very crime of
the person I'm counselling has committed against somebody else is zero.
A. Yes, I believe I've argued that in both reports.
Q. You have. But so all the things that have occurred after the
disclosure and their inappropriateness and their failure is only
to be expected,
isn't it, beyond post disclosure--
A. And that's exactly where I started at the first report, I had
struggled to go forward from that point.
Q. Yes, because there's nothing beyond that point is ever going to be
productive. In fact it's only ever going to be counterproductive.
A. Correct. Ms Dene's better position, you know, with hindsight and
knowledge, would be working with
Q. So the criticisms that follow about the lengthy period that the
counselling provided over and the inappropriateness of involving
[Miss B] and
the intervention and all that sort of stuff, I mean, like that's all very well
but I mean this process that has been
effective is dead in the water the moment
of disclosure. You wouldn't expect it to ever get better, would you?
A. On the basis of the evidence, the published evidence I'm referring to,
the odds are stacked against you.
Q. And it would appear from the perspective of the university, do you
think that from a person who lectures in universities, and
a person who's been
to this university, that somebody has got to take some overall responsibility
for the way a program like this
is run? Like other than, you know,
Dr Donnelly, that somebody else has got to take - somebody else has got to
oversight the way
things are going on?
A. I need to clarify, is that the first phase of this treatment?
Q. All phases.
A. Let's say sessions 1 to 10?
A. I would suggest without knowing, and I need to step back from it,
without knowing the issues of where this memory clinic integrated
and fitted in
with the university structure and the psychology clinic itself, without
understanding those, I would have thought the
initial presenting mandate was
appropriate.
Q. Initial presenting mandate, memory clinic, dementia, husband losing
wife, kids, all fine, okay? The moment this paedophile pops
up like a mushroom
in the middle of the program shouldn't there be some process whereby, like some
safety valve, where you can go
to some overseeing personal committee and say,
"Look this is all very well with dementia and it's all helping, we're doing
work, but look we've got alarm bells going off, we've got somebody who's
admitted to some paedophilic desires and inclinations, what
A. Are you saying within this clinic or as a general rule?
[Regional University]
, with this psychology entire
program that, you know, that it should be brought to somebody's attention that
there's somebody with
paedophilic desires that has cropped up in therapy in the
intern program.
A. I'm struggling because I don't have the knowledge of the intrinsic
workings of that clinic. But having said that, the intern
went to her
supervisor, and I would presume if the supervisor was becoming stumped in terms
of behaviour then he reviews the case
with peers. We are a peer review
profession. So you'd seek advice from colleagues that you have respect and
Q. But there's no peer and no colleague that you have respect and trust
for that, in your fields, that would advise Ms Dene to continue
disclosure point, is there?
A. On the basis of what we've got?
A. I'd be curious to see if there were.
Q. Yes, that anybody would say with all the material in front of them, up
to the point of the - after the point of disclosure and
knowing Ms Dene's
background, nobody would suggest that she - no peer, no colleague of yours,
would suggest that any other course
other than she should have been extracted,
and Mr A should have been referred on?
A. I can't answer on the basis of the whole profession, I can
speculate--
A. --on what peers of my, sadly, vintage, would say and say no I don't
believe she should have continued.
for Ms Dene questioned Dr Banks about the possible impact of Ms Dene’s own
mental state on her clinical competence and
treatment initiatives and included
the following exchange:
Q. Okay, her own view of her own competence to continue may be
A. There are notes further on from the 21st where she reflects in
progress that KD is the best person to provide the therapy. So
she's writing
that reflecting her own thoughts, "I am the best person to be providing this",
and you're reaching for distorted, I'm
reaching for reckless, it's just - maybe
that's too strong and I'll pull back from that. It is of limited, perhaps
greatly limited,
insight, as to what the complexity of the factors are going on
for a case like this even on the basis of that initial disclosure
Q. See but we accept that her background would make her better equipped
to deal with the victim than the perpetrator?
A. Absolutely.
Q. But the distortion may be that she's trying to assist the victim via
the perpetrator, as psychologically dumb as that is?
Q. Not working with children. That she thinks that somehow she's going
to assist the overall environment by bringing her background
to deal with the
perpetrator?
A. That thought could have been there, it doesn't appear to be there
other than the references to assisting
with protective
behaviours.
the question of whether Ms Dene should have just been removed from the situation
by her supervisor the following evidence was given
by Dr Banks:
Q. Yes, but there's a point in this process when you try and
teach anybody anything, you're trying to reach an intern psychology
trying to teach a young lawyer what to do and not to do, or an apprentice chef
or something, with a person who has the
responsibility of being the supervisor,
the mentor, or the teacher, just says, "You're not doing it. You can't do
that." And that
is what is expected of the mentor supervisor or teacher, isn't
A. In my role, frequently.
Q. Yes, you just say, you know - and the student can argue about, "oh,
no, I'm going to get this right sooner or later, you know,
like I'm not - it's
only a flesh wound and I'm going to keep on going." And quite plainly they are
- they've just got no clue and
you as their supervisor and the senior person
say, "Conrad, get out." Fair?
A. Absolutely.
Q. And that's what's expected in these circumstances, that somebody with
all the skills, with all the experience, and all the rest
of it, in a direct and
coercive, direct and inarguable sense, says, "Get out", and the person gets out.
No ifs, buts, maybes, "You're
A. Correct.
Q. And in terms of if that wasn't done by her immediate supervisor
Dr Brechman-Toussaint, Dr Brechman-Toussaint, knew of Ms Dene's
background and knew from her referral dealing with this circumstance, you would
also expect it would also be incumbent on Dr Brechman-Toussaint
Ms Dene to get out in a forceful and direct way?
A. I'm struggling only because I don't know the dynamics of that
relationship and I don't know where--
Q. Supervised her in other parts of her course, lectures in ethics,
lectures in child psychology, a fellow woman, knows that she's
the victim of
child sexual assault, knows that she's the victim of sexual harassment from a
member of the school which is being investigated
and acted upon by the
university in and about that time?
A. It's possible and reasonable.
Banks agreed that ultimately it was Ms Dene’s report to DoCS that caused
the abuse perpetrated by Mr A to be discovered and
that both Dr Donnelly and Dr
Brechman-Toussaint failed to make such disclosure. Dr Banks gave the following
Q. Yes, okay so that the distortion of and flaws, and inability to
realise competence issues, all given, eventually after some -
and you've seen
her notes where she's thinking about it and thinking about it, and she gets it
right, even though there's substantial
consequences for herself?
Q. And it would appear that nobody else had this fellow, Mr A, on
their radar, except her.
A. No, sadly not.
Q. So if she has reported him and he's been prosecuted, put in Cedar
Cottage and made this expanded confession of all his - or a
portion of his evil,
she's ultimately transcended the manipulation by Mr A?
A. That's a reasonable argument.
for Ms Dene took Dr Banks to evidence regarding steps Ms Dene had taken to
address her own issues so as to better equip herself
with insight. Dr Banks gave
the following evidence:
Q. Yes, that that is despite - she's shown, belatedly,
sufficient skill and insight and assertiveness to get past the distorted dynamic
and manipulation of this practised paedophile and hand him in.
A. I believe so.
Q. Well that would show some promise on her part, wouldn't it?
A. That's reasonable.
Q Yes, and if she's getting help in relation to her own issues from her
own unfortunate circumstance of being a victim of sexual assault
as a child,
she's getting help with that, and she gets help to better equip herself and
develop a bit of insight, and perhaps be
a little harder on herself as to what
she's - where here talents best lay, assuming she can achieve those things, well
there's certainly
a place for her, given that her other academic achievements
and so forth, there's certainly a place for her in the profession of
psychology,
isn't there? There's nothing to indicate the contrary?
A. It's a reasonable proposition. Yes, I'm guessing only on the basis of
obviously the finding of the tribunal, but--
CHAIRPERSON: And also the witness has already expressed the view that he
was critical of the fact that there doesn't appear to have
been a treatment
AINSWORTH: A treatment plan of Mr A?
CHAIRPERSON: Yes.
AINSWORTH: Yes.
CHAIRPERSON: So that he's already expressed a view to the contrary, or in
some element he's critical of her treatment, or with respect
to other aspects of
AINSWORTH: Of Mr A?
CHAIRPERSON: Yes, treatment of Mr A And also he hasn't seen, as
I understand it, he hasn't seen those assessments from the university.
sure if he has and I'm--
AINSWORTH: All right, well in the interests of saving some time, because
I have nothing further, I will just try and refine that
question just a little
Q. Assuming that Ms Dene has sought professional help in relation to
her own issues in terms of previously having been the victim
of sexual assaults,
and assuming she has from her statement filed these proceedings a grasp and an
admission on her part that she
was outside of her range of competence in this
situation, there's a way forward for her in the profession, isn't there?
A. Possibly
Banks was also cross-examined by Counsel for Dr Donnelly. Early in the
cross-examination the issue of the material available to
Dr Banks was raised as
Q. And are you saying, although we can't identify it from your
report, that when answering a particular issue you only had recourse
information available at a particular time?
A. Certainly in my work with the commission and--
Q. No, well I'm just asking you in relation to this report.
A. Well I was trying to express how I would approach any matter referred
to me by the commission and--
Q. Well could I just ask you, how did you approach this matter, this
report, with this information?
A. I approached it in the mind of I think of myself as a clinician that's
been in practice for more than 20 years. I approached
it in the mindset of
senior clinician who looked at the information that would have been available to
the clinician in question at
that time. I regret that I didn't make that clear
in the reasoning of my report.
Q. And it's clear to you now though that there are certain documents that
you weren't provided with at that time in June 2007?
A. Experience has taught me that I only ever get a fraction of the
Q. Yes, Dr Banks, can you just answer--
A. I believe I did.
Q. No, with respect, just listen. Now you know now that you weren't
provided with all the material that would have been relevant
to those questions
in June 2007?
CHAIRPERSON: I'm not sure I understand the question,
WITNESS: I don't understand the question.
DARAMS Q. You were provided with the discharge document prepared by
Dr Brechman-Toussaint today, were you not?
A. I actually had that in this brief.
Q. But you didn't refer to that in your report, in relation to
Dr Donnelly?
A. I actually didn't refer to - I don't believe so. I didn't refer to
many documents at all, with respect to - I tried to focus
my attention
specifically on the information that was arising from the therapy sessions
because that would have been the information
available to the clinician on the
spot, and obviously the supervising clinician.
Q. And in relation to the information that was provided to you - I
withdraw that. You've given a subsequent or addendum report as
recently as last
week, that's correct?
Q. And you identify in that report that you weren't provided with the
entire amount of documents in June 2007 when you prepared your
first report and
you were subsequently provided with additional documents?
A. Correct.
Q. So do you accept that as at June 2007 you hadn't been provided with
the entirety of the documents?
A. I will accept that.
Banks was questioned about the general view he expressed in his reports
regarding credibility as follows:
Q. And again I'm just asking you in relation to how you had
this hierarchy of, or descending level of credibility, because clearly
made findings based upon disputed factors, is that correct, a fair
assumption?
A. I had to make a judgment somehow, yes.
Q. And what I was asking you on page 12, you've assigned this
descending level of credibility essentially which puts Dr Donnelly
bottom of the list, essentially, that's what you're doing at
A. I was outlining my reasoning as to what information I had available to
Cross-examination
on the question of the impact of the 14 month delay in the creation of the
clinical notes of for 21 October 2003
occurred as follows:
Q. And what I was just asking you is that did you do that not
only in relation to that issue, (3), but for the other questions you
to opine on in your report?
A. I would have been applying those principles, yes.
Q. But it's a fair assumption that you applied those principles?
A. I hope I've expressed that, yes.
Q. We now know though that the notes of 21 October 2003 were created
some 14 months after the event, you understand that now, don't
A. So I'm told, yes.
Q. Well you're not actually told that you've actually read it, haven't
A. Same principle, yes, I've read that that was - there is no date of
when they were created so there's been estimates of time.
Q. Well is that actually correct on your recollection,
A. The date of when the document for 21 October was created, to my
knowledge I could not find a single specific reference to that.
Q. Yes, well could I ask you then to go to the statement of Ms Dene,
....And you've seen this statement a couple of times, well you've seen the
statement previously? .. And you actually were provided
this statement so you
could give an addendum report?
A. Correct.
Q. And you've read it and you understood it and the like?
Q. So you knew, and I know you make comment in your report, that you knew
that from paragraph 26 - well from 22 and following, that
Ms Dene didn't make notes of 21 October 2003?
A. Correct.
Q. Until some 14 months later?
Q. So that those notes weren't available to Dr Donnelly at that
time, were they? That is in October 2003?
A. Those notes, no, they were not.
Q. And there's no evidence of any other notes at that time, is
A. I can't respond to that.
Q. Well you hadn't seen--
A. I honestly, I don't know. I don't know that. We've got Ms Dene
indicating supervision notes were destroyed so I just don't know.
Q. It appears to be the evidence of Ms Dene that she didn't make the
notes of 21 October plus other sessions around that time until
14 months later?
A. By that statement, yes.
Q. It seems to be Ms Dene is saying that in fact the note of
21 October 2003 is in fact has been distorted and overstated through
number of matters set out there in that paragraph, do you see that?
A. That she's writing that she overstated that in that it overstates what
she objectively knew.
Q. And in particular that's a distortion of that record,
Q. Well in light of that information, and given that a number of your
criticisms of Dr Donnelly are based upon that information set
out in that
document, the 21 October 2003 note, does that cause you reason to
reconsider the opinions set out or the criticisms set
out in your report of
A. The time elapsed between that session and the time the notes were
taken has got to be taken as being an influencing variable about
the quality and
accuracy of those notes, that's a given.
A. For Dr Donnelly, in my review of this peer, I've suggested that he
needed to look at all the information available, that was the
intern's state,
emotional state, and information presented, her level of distress, the
information coming out of that session. His
direct interaction with CA, the
subsequent phone call two days later and the terminology that Ms Dene used
in terms of sexual fondling
and the fact that straight after that phone call she
then advised Dr Donnelly and advised him of - I don't have the words, but
him of the phone call. So yes there's an element that I will concede
significant verbal information being available.
Q. For instance I will give you an example, if you go to page 12, at
the bottom of page 12, you've underlined and emphasised something
recollection was some time before the commencement
in June as opposed to the two
weeks before the disclosure period, you understand that, don't you?
Q. And in fact when you - isn't it the case that you've used the note,
the 21 October note, 2003, and Dr Donnelly's response to the
his explanation to the HCCC, in coming to the finding that I first took you to
bottom of page 9 and his
recollection of events?
A. In part, absolutely.
Q. So what I'm suggesting to you is that your criticism of
Dr Donnelly and the differences between the evidence of the two needs
viewed in light of the particular disclosures now made by Ms Dene, you'd
accept that as a proposition?
A. Absolutely.
for Dr Donnelly then cross-examined Dr Banks about the term ‘sexual’
and the evidence of Dr Brechman-Toussaint
as follows:
Q. In addition we now know because Dr Brechman-Toussaint
gave us evidence that the reference to massage was also used and that
information
Q. Dr Brechman-Toussaint, you make some statements--
A. I acknowledge from Dr Brechman-Toussaint's discharge summary that
she's making reference to Dr Donnelly's referral about an individual
had inappropriate thoughts and feelings.
A. I acknowledge from your colleague this morning that
Dr Brechman-Toussaint has included now the word "massage" in to her
but not the term "sexual", okay? I find that a really critical,
critical issue of awareness for a clinician.
Q. Yes, and the word "sexual" where does that come from?
A. The telephone notes of 23 October.
Q. In relation to what I want to take you to is what you've referred to
as the myopic briefing of Dr Brechman-Toussaint. Do you
recall that, it's
at page 10, paragraph 3? What part of the briefing to
Dr Brechman-Toussaint do you say was myopic?
A. The references that Dr Donnelly makes in his statements to the
HCCC that he wanted to ensure Dr Brechman-Toussaint independence,
wanted an independent review, but then, again on my interpretation of the
information available, was not providing Dr Brechman-Toussaint
with as full
an understanding as he and Ms Dene had.
A. And the circumstances of that but taking into account the information
within the other notes, I'm still saying measure but I'm
saying there was more
information there that potentially could have been reviewed. We have spent time
this morning talking about
what avenues were available for a case review and a
hallway door stop, five minute or what Dr Brechman-Toussaint said, a five
eight minute discussion is not a case review to sit down with the senior
clinician and say, "Here's everything we have. Where do
we go?" So I don't
believe - I am left with the possible interpretation that all information was
not brought out at the point of
that referral
Q. What is that additional information you are saying wasn't brought
A. I'm talking about the telephone call for a start and the discussion
the session. At the
point Ms Dene wrote those notes there was no review, there was no
investigation, there was no police and DOCS
involvement, there was nothing.
There was an intern reflecting on a process clearly that had been distressing
for her, that clearly
had weighed on her mind for some time and she wanted to
write it down, to get that monkey off her shoulder, so we've got to put some
faith in to what she wrote at that point, given there was no system awareness,
there was no systemic awareness of needing to position
herself, she was just
writing the notes as she saw it.
Q. Sorry, who was writing the notes?
A. Ms Dene. Of that date - sorry, about the date of
21 October, so I think we need to put some faith into that - the type of
information
that was coming out of that session, that even if the wording is
slightly askew that the general drift, the thrust of the conversation,
the terms as she expressed in those notes.
this point of the cross-examination Ms Stern makes the following comment with
which the Tribunal agreed:
STERN: I wonder if I might just raise one matter? My learned
friend used the question, "The information we now know is available",
taken the witness to paragraph 26 of Ms Dene's statement suggesting
that in her recollection there's a degree of overstatement.
But he hasn't taken
the witness to paragraph 14 of that same statement which does say, "Even at
this point", namely the time that
this statement was prepared, her recollection
is that the information set out in paragraph 14 was available in October
I just think out of fairness when questions are going to be asked of
the witness as to information that was available in October
information should be put to the witness as having been available on
Ms Dene's recollection. Because it's just been left
very vague as to what
might have been available and I think out of fairness that should be put to the
witness as well.
Cross-examination
then turned to the issue of whether it was reasonable for Dr Donnelly to have
referred Miss B and Miss C to Dr Brechman-Toussaint:
Q. Well I'm asking you to put yourself in the position of
Dr Donnelly?
A. Then I would have directed the intern to stop and directed the intern
to make a mandatory reporting and then I would have just
Q. The reference to what about involving or arranging to involve someone
independent of himself to counsel, provide therapy, to the
children. That
conduct, do you accept that that conduct was appropriate, bearing in mind the
safety and wellbeing of the children?
A. I believe it's arguable, I believe I would have taken a far more
cautious and conservative response.
Q. And it would be reasonable, in your opinion, to refer it to someone,
the treatment of the children, refer it to someone like
Brechman-Toussaint, who is a specialist in providing services to
children, that would also be reasonable, would it not?
A. The action in and of itself of seeking that help is
reasonable.
Q. Do you accept now that in fact the two children were referred to
Dr Brechman-Toussaint for more than just psycho-educational
A. No, she'd make a - I do, brief emotional counselling.
Q. Yes, and counselling equates to therapy, that's
interchangeable?
A. I believe it would be considered certainly across the profession as a
more superficial, a more shallow approach.
Q. But in any event she has provided that to the children?
A. By her declaration.
Q. And you see that it's as a consequence of the referral by
Dr Donnelly?
Q. And you had - do I take it that it had been your assumption previously
that all that Dr Brechman-Toussaint had been asked to do
would be to
provide the psycho-educational training, that was the assumption you had at some
stage, wasn't it, based on her notes?
A. I had her notes, yes.
Q. What I would like to take you back to now, you were asked some
questions about in these circumstances Dr Brechman-Toussaint didn't
report, because she was a mandatory reporter, we've all accepted that, or I
think you accepted this morning, she was a mandatory
reporter, didn't make a
report to DOCS after the counselling - or sorry, counselling, therapy, of the
children, you know that, we
A. Well yes, she's indicated that on the basis of the information she got
- on the basis of the fact she didn't get any information
out of those sessions,
she felt she had nothing to report about.
Q. What I'm asking you is that Dr Brechman-Toussaint provided
therapy and counselling to the children in this period of time, in
A. Brief emotional counselling.
Q. Well you can see what she provided there, counselling to the children
over a number of sessions, she also met with Mr A, out of
those sessions,
made a decision not to - or formed the view that it wasn't anything to report to
DOCS, you accept that?
A. As indicated, yes.
Q. And I think in answer to the questions of Mr Ainsworth this
morning you said - that he asked you whether it was reasonable at
based upon, given that a mandatory reporter hadn't reported, it would be
reasonable for Ms Dene to rely upon that?
A. Well the element I'm still struggling with is that this clinician
didn't have all the information, she didn't have that reference
to massage of
the pubic area. She didn't have the reference two days later in a phone call
So I don't know what
Dr Brechman-Toussaint would have done with a greater knowledge. Certainly
I concede what you're saying, based
on the information that I understood that
Q. And the point of distinction you are making is that based upon your
assessment of - sorry, your understanding of what's set out
in those notes, the
different information as what's set out in those notes around that time, that is
21 October and 23 October 2003?
A. Correct.
Q. We know now that Mr A was a paedophile, obviously with a
long history according to Cedar Cottage, we know that now. And you knew
the time of preparing your report in June 2007, didn't you, as a consequence of
reading that material?
A. Correct.
Q. We also know up until 21 October, we take that period from June
to October 2003, that Mr A was being provided therapy by Ms Dene
under the supervision of Dr Donnelly in the Dementia Care Network, and we
know that. And we know that because he was getting that
therapy as a
consequence of there was a need seen for him to be provided with therapy because
of the circumstances of his wife, you
understand that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. It also appears that the mother before she had lost her functioning,
motor skills and the like, that she'd used massage to relieve
the stress of the
daughters, that's something that had been disclosed to Dr Donnelly?
A. As I'm told.
Q. In light of those - in relation to the disclosures on 21 October
by Mr A did you consider, in reviewing and providing your report,
you consider any alternative hypothesis as to why those disclosures might have
CHAIRPERSON: What disclosures are we talking about?
DARAMS: The disclosures made on 21 October 2003 about the massage.
The inappropriate thoughts, the ones that had been recorded by
Dr Brechman-Toussaint as having been made, that everyone refers to as
disclosures continually throughout the reports.
CHAIRPERSON: I think I understand what you're talking about now.
DARAMS: Yes.
CHAIRPERSON
Q. Dr Banks, I think the question is did you consider that there might
be some other reason why those disclosures were made on the
A. There's a raft of possible explanations.
Q. Not just that he was a paedophile.
A. No, he could have gone completely insane at that moment. He could
have been a pathological liar. There's a whole continuum,
a multiple continuum,
of explanations.
Banks was cross-examined about the suggestion that Dr Donnelly and Ms Dene could
have interpreted the massage as not sexual in
nature as follows:
Q. Yes, so to the treating psychologist, Dr Donnelly, and
Ms Dene at the time, there are alternative hypothesis as to the explanation
of the massaging the children? Is it possible?
A. Possible, yes.
Q. At point 6 on page 3 you can see confirmation of that there
in point 6, "When should I make a report?" You note there that, "You
should make a report to DOCS if you suspect a child is at risk of harm. This
means if you have current concerns." So again this
just clarifies that it's a
subjective element in that test.
A. I think the context of the second paragraph needs to be added
A. "You just need to have concerns."
A. And then if - well you just need that your concerns are well founded
and based on information that's coming from a reliable source,
it's coming from
the father. And then if you're unsure, ring DOCS.
Q. But you accept that there's a degree of subjectiveness in it?
A. Clearly, yes.
Q. And so that different circumstances or different disclosures might
result in a different decision to report or not report, do
A. That's a given.
Q. And we take it you don't agree or don't accept the proposition that a
report should not have been made in or around 21 October
2003, that appears
to be from your report, your opinion is a report should have been made at that
time, that's your opinion?
A. Correct.
Q. But would you accept though that in the briefings given to
Dr Brechman-Toussaint in the notes at the time that there is a
consideration
by Dr Donnelly and Ms Dene as to whether there was a
current concern for the risk to the children, do you accept that?
A. On the basis of those notes.
Q. That's the underlying assumption there. What you're actually
referring to is that if the obligation under the legislation applies,
obligation to report is satisfied, what you're saying here is that your
discretion is taken away by these guidelines alone,
that's what - this is what
this part of your opinion is addressed to, isn't it?
A. Taking into account both factors, yes, being the legislation and our
societal guidelines, yes.
Q. In relation to the way that we have to understand your opinion in
paragraph, well in subheading (2), page 9, is that you've assumed
there was an obligation to mandatory report. But before we even get to that
we've got to satisfy the legislation.
A. I understand that.
Q. But what I'm asking you, and I'm just trying to clarify, is that in (2),
the question that you were asked in (2), the assumption
you've made there that
there is an actual obligation to make the mandatory report, you're actually
talking about the fact that if
those circumstances exist you don't have the
discretion any longer under the legislation?
A. Correct.
Q. That's how we read that.
A. That's how I intended it.
cross-examination of Dr Banks included his views on the contractual relationship
between a supervisor and supervisee and the trust
that is placed by a supervisor
in the information provided by the supervisee as follows:
Q. Well you would expect as a supervisor that your intern
trainee would keep you informed as to things that come up in their
A. Depending on the nature of that agreement, how explicit that was
Q. But you would expect that?
A. I can only answer from my internship agreements and I make it a
categorical statement, I have a pre interview with interns and
I have signed
declaration of their requirements to keep me absolutely informed.
Q. Could I ask you to have a look at the documents behind
Q. I think you said this morning in answer to a number of questions as to
the training or the level of training received by Ms Dene
that you didn't
have much knowledge of her particular training, around that area, do you recall
A. Along those lines, yes.
Q. What we do have here is the supervisor's evaluation form for the
particular practicums that Ms Dene had actually undertaken.
The first one,
which is at, it shows page 24 on the top right hand corner, this appears to
be the first internal Practicum supervised
Dr Margaret Brechman-Toussaint. And one sees from that Practicum that
on the last page, that's page 30--
Banks was cross-examined about the assessment made of Ms Den by Dr
Brechman-Toussaint and the acceptance of Dr Donnelly that he
supervision to Ms Dene from a baseline of her being an above average trainee.
The evidence of Dr Banks included:
Q. That Ms Dene had been assessed by
Dr Brechman-Toussaint as being well above, in the overall performance
[Note: further evidence deleted in this condensed summary]
A. Correct.
Q. If you go then to page 31, you can see this is an evaluation by
Dr Donnelly of Ms Dene in a subsequent Practicum and we know that
dates of that Practicum were from 4 February 2003 to 24 September
Of that Practicum were, 4 February 2003?
To 24 February 2003 - sorry, 24 September 2003. You
A. 24.9.03?
A. Okay, thank you.
A. Okay, so we're at the early phase of the first 10 sessions when we're
talking about supportive counselling for Mr A?
Q. But it's around that period of time. The last Practicum is that which
starts at page 36. And this is the second external Practicum
undertaken by
Ms Dene. And this is where she is supervised by
Dr Brechman-Toussaint. And once sees that that Practicum extended
period, 18 September 2003 to 15 June 2004. And again, she was
assessed by Dr Brechman-Toussaint, this is Ms Dene, as being
above average. So in her second year being compared to a first year Masters
level employee, and being well above that. Okay?
Q. Do you accept that in his supervision of Ms Dene in relation to -
and given the period of time where he had already been supervising
her, already
assessed her at a particular level, that he was entitled to base the supervision
contract upon the experience that he
had already had with Ms Dene?
A. Dr Donnelly using his prior knowledge?
Q. Yes, well his prior experience of this student.
A. I will accept that.
Q. So to the extent that he had already supervised for instance the
manner in which she identified particular issues, particular
competencies, he
had formed some base level of her competency in that, he was entitled to rely
upon that in subsequent supervision
A. I believe that's reasonable.
Q. Yes, and expect a particular level based upon previous demonstrated
competency, expect that level to continue, one would have
thought, that would be
a reasonable assumption?
A. I will take that as given, yes.
Q. Have you read any executive summary of that [The Wood Report], and do
you understand any of the recommendations coming out of
A. (No verbal reply)
Q. Do you see that, have you seen that before and have you had an
opportunity to read that?
A. I would say a fleeting reference would be fair. And I would certainly
not declare a familiarity with it, an awareness of it.
A. I've had an awareness and we've certainly had a, if you like, general
discussion at Children's Court Clinic Peer Review meetings
associated in general with the Wood recommendations.
Q. At the bottom of page 6 [In your first report] you in one of your
opinions on the failings of Dr Donnelly is that he is alleged
encouraged Ms Dene to provide therapy to the children directly, and I take
it that it's at the same time as providing it
to the - Mr A?
A. Correct.
Q. Can I understand that your opinion there is based upon you accepting
Ms Dene's evidence that she was directed by Dr Donnelly to
A. By way of analysis of notes throughout the therapy process.
Q. Do you know that there's a disagreement between Dr Donnelly and
Ms Dene over that?
A. I'm unaware of that. Unless it's - I'm not aware of that appearing in
the material before me.
Q. But it is in Dr Donnelly's statement that you've seen, that is
A. We're back to levels of recall at points distant versus notes made at
Q. And the other hypothesis put forward is that Dr Donnelly didn't,
that is his - he didn't direct Ms Dene to undertake a joint
STERN: But again, is it on the hypothesis that he knew about it and he
didn't stop it, is it on the hypothesis he had no knowledge
of it, one can't
just take one element away without giving the expert a factual basis upon which
to exercise his judgment.
Q. [Vol 2] Tab 1. Just as a general concept, the therapeutic
process involves individuals from time to time disclosing distressing
information, would you agree with that as a proposition?
A. Being the client?
Q. Sorry, the client, yes, the person being under therapy, being provided
with therapy?
A. More than likely.
Q. And from time to time that information when disclosed may elicit some
reaction from the therapist, the psychologist?
A. Again, more than likely.
Q. And the range of reaction could be anything from aghast to being upset
and things like that?
Q. And is one reason why a client might contact a psychologist after a
particular session where some disclosure or some distressing
fact may have come
out which has elicited a response, would be for the patient to seek some
reassurance from the therapist that they
will continue treating the
Q. So can I ask you then to go to page 123 of those notes? And just
before looking at it and again I've said this before, we know
Mr A is a paedophile, we know that and I want you to put that out of
your mind for the moment, I recall that you used this
example, the email
following the session of 21 October, you used this as an example of what
might be termed as grooming behaviour
by Mr A, do you recall that?
A. Possible grooming behaviour.
Q. So with the benefit of hindsight now, knowing what we do know about
Mr A, one alternative is this is a process of grooming, alternatively
knowing at say 21 October, not knowing he was a paedophile, not knowing
anything like that, another alternative is that this
isn't an indication of
grooming but just some seeking reassurance of the therapeutic process would
STERN: And just before the witness answers, could it just be clarified it
was said not knowing that he's a paedophile, but is the
question being asked on
the basis that he knows about the information that was disclosed on
21 October 2003? So namely, not knowing
what we might know now from the
Cedar Cottage notes but knowing what would have known at that point in time. I
just wonder whether
that could be clarified for the witness?
DARAMS: Yes, I will clarify that.
Q. In light of only what was known at the time, that is 22 October,
or 21 October, at the time a reasonable hypothesis of this email,
alternative hypothesis, is that it's only seeking reassurance of the therapeutic
process going forward?
Q. You'd accept that?
A. It's another hypothesis, yes. They're not mutually exclusive
Q. Could I ask you then to go to page 115, I think on Monday you
referred to the reference under "Good week. Two occasions. Awareness
for inappropriate behaviour with daughter." You identified this as a red flag,
I think you called it a red flag matter.
A. That was my term.
Q. Yes. Is another alternative hypothesis in relation to that reference
is that it's perhaps Ms Dene checking in with Mr A as to
or not he was dealing with those alleged inappropriate thoughts?
A. You're left with a range of possible hypotheses, you're obviously left
with asking the author of those notes.
Q. Likewise with the note on page 113, the next page, we know that
Mr A had some stated desires towards younger women, younger females,
not children, but that he was also being treated in relation to those
A. So you need to say as well as.
Q. As well as.
A. Not, not.
A. You said younger women, not children.
A. I would be saying as well as.
Q. Yes, but is it this reference on this page, could not an alternative
reading of that bullet point there not be a reference to
inappropriate desires
to children but those in relation to young females and trying to establish
satisfying relationships with adults,
do you see that that's a possibility in
the treatment?
A. It's a possibility.
Q. So it's not necessarily a red flag of more paedophilia or more
evidence of paedophilia?
A. As you indicated there's a range of possible interpretations.
Q. But looking back with the benefit of hindsight, and benefit of
hindsight in know what we all do now, that you'd identified these
references as being red flags and the like, as a particular behaviour,
paedophilic behaviour, or the like, of Mr A?
A. Incremental concerns, I would reach for, yes.
Q. As increasing the currency of risk and the like?
A. Correct.
Q. Based in hindsight of what we know subsequently?
A. No. Just incremental concerns contemporaneously, not
Q. Well based on the fact that he is a paedophile?
[Clarification as to what information was known about Mr A at various time
was provided in the absence of the witness]
DARAMS Q. Dr Banks, I was just asking you in relation to the
reference at page 113 of the notes there's a reference here to the
of Mr A's behaviours and how he is managing inappropriate
desires, and obviously the note taker would be the best person to give
evidence on what that is, but I just wanted to understand what - because I
understood that you'd made particular reference to
this note as being a
particular indicator, or a flag, and could you remind us what that was
A. There was incremental information on top of the disclosure from
21 October.
Q. An alternative reference, or alternative hypothesis, is that is in
fact in relation to something unrelated to desires with the
children, would you
accept that?
A. Given the notes from the week before, I'm struggling. But again we've
got to take it back to the author but putting those two
weeks together, one week
straight after the next week, and you've got the week before with awareness of
urges for inappropriate behaviours
with the daughter and then the week after
we're at, you know, inappropriate desire is still there, I see those two as
linked, week
on week. So I'll leave it to you as yes there are alternate
hypotheses available, that's the interpretation I placed on it.
Banks was cross-examined about his role at the Regional University between 2002
and 2004 and his experience with placement of students
in rural settings as
Q. Did you have any specific or particular
knowledge of the, other than you being a visiting lecturer, of the Doctorate or
Program at the
[Regional University]
through 2002, 2003,
A. Extremely limited, that was one of my bigger concerns, that as a
visiting lecturer I would simply fly in and fly out and have
no crossover with
any of the clinic staff, the department staff, whatsoever. The residential
programs occurred on a weekend so the
university itself was a ghost town. So
invariably it tended to be - on one occasion it was lecturers - but it was
students that
would pick me up from the airport and take me back to the
Q. Have you had any experience in providing, or supervising and providing
clinical - sorry, providing clinical services in rural
A. I provide, if you like, distance supervision for psychologists in
Bourke currently, Broken Hill, I'm trying to think of current
- yes, a number, a
number from regional and rural, quite remote areas.
Q. You made a particular criticism of the length, 42 session program that
Ms Dene was being involved in, and you've given opinion
that interns should
only be limited to sessions of say 12 to 16 sessions, are there any
circumstances where longer term care or sessions
might be beneficial to an
intern in relation to their training?
A. For themselves doing it alone?
Q. Under supervision?
A. I would be struggling to find those circumstances. Do you wish me to
A. I mean I struggle with that issue, and with the permission of the
Commissioner, the time actually talked to - sorry, emailed the
other university
clinics to gain their protocols. Not that there was any disclosure of the
matters under review, but to gain their
protocols of what their guidelines and
limits were. And it was across the board of just short term limited therapy for
So I can not find a good reason to put before the tribunal why any
intern would engage in a long term therapy at such an early point
Q. If there were for instance in a particular area very limited
opportunities for practical experience, would that necessarily be
something you
would take in to account in deciding whether a longer term Practicum might be
appropriate?
A. It would be considered, it would obviously be considered. I would
need to step back and say it would be up to the clinical program
people making those decisions. As a clinician and as supervisor my answer would
Q. Okay. Dr Banks, do you have any experience in providing training
for long term supervision?
CHAIRPERSON: Are we talking supervision of a student?
DARAMS: Students, yes.
CHAIRPERSON: Or supervision with all psychologists--
DARAMS: Students.
Q. No, sorry, students, supervision of students.
A. I believe you're saying long term therapy?
A. You said long term supervision.
Q. Sorry, do you have any experience in supervising students in long term
CHAIRPERSON: Are they having the therapy or are they undertaking the
therapy with a client?
DARAMS: No, no the students are, they are providing long term
Q. As students, yes.
A. To the best of my - do I have any specific training?
A. None that I can think of.
Tribunal also asked questions of Dr Banks as follows:
Q. Dr Banks, given that Ms Dene's clinical
intervention with Mr A included therapeutic goals and outcomes directly
related to the
, inclusive of support for parenting
capacity stressors, would you consider this to be child related in the context
of family issues?
A. I did. That's how I framed my report. That was my thinking from the
outset, yes. I found - I just considered that the services
by virtue of there
being a family the services were involving children.
Q. And would you expect a clinical and ethical duty of care to be
extended to child
by a professional person treating her
A. Without a shadow of a doubt. Just without doubt.
Q. Dr Banks, are you familiar with the supervision program that's
offered, the training that's offered by the New South Wales Registration
for people who take on internal provisionally or conditionally registered
psychologists?
A. For state registrants?
A. Yes, I am, I believe I'm booked up to do the course in
Q. All right, and how long is the general period in which a provisionally
registered psychologist, what's the minimum period for
which they are - they
have to undertake supervision?
A. The current guidelines I believe are two years supervised
Q. So it would not be unusual for one person to be supervising a
provisionally registered psychologist for a period of two years
A. It's not unusual, it's an issue I've raised with the Registration
Board, I find that a most flawed construct, but it's not unusual.
understand how in this profession a single clinician can provide everything to a
single student. And I tell all of my interns
that they need - this is a peer
review profession, they need to be seeking information from many, many sources
and many clinicians.
Q. With respect to your understanding of what's required of a
provisionally registered psychologist, as well as a psychologist who
has met all
the conditions and gains unconditional registration, if you like, or ordinary
registration, with respect to them, do
you consider that they both are bound by
the code of conduct that's published by the Board?
A. Absolutely.
Q. And are they, both classes of psychologist, are they both ultimately
personally responsible for meeting those guidelines?
A. Absolutely.
Q. You were asked a question about pages 115 and 113 in those notes,
which were the handwritten notes of contact, and I think you've
indicated that
you would see the note on page 113 as referring back to the inappropriate
behaviours with respect to the daughter
Q. And you've also been asked generally about your interpretation of
these records, if you did not come to the knowledge that was
given to you in the
Cedar Cottage documents, so that if you had no idea whether or not
Mr A ultimately made disclosures of sexually
assaulting a range of
people, if you put that from your mind would you still read these notes in the
same way as being red flags?
Q. So to you the fact that ultimately Mr A has been, if you
like, labelled or found to be a paedophile, to you did that influence
opinion in any way, any of the opinions that you've expressed?
A. Madam Chair, as a clinician I review these matters and I find them
enormously challenging. I review them as if I were the clinician
involved and I
review them as but a flawed member of the human race capable of making lots of
mistakes, so yes I took that into account.
And I tried really hard to work on
the assumption that let's assume he had not been convicted of anything but let's
just assume
as best I could on the information that I had.
Q. You made a comment earlier about the use of alcohol and I think I've
recorded your evidence accurately but I just wanted to check,
you said something
along the lines of sexual arousal and alcohol use in the familial setting were a
poor correlation at best?
A. They are a poor correlation and they are a very poor predictor. So
it's not helping you assess future risk. It may or may not
be involved at the
time of the offence, it may be involved in the lead up to the events but
regardless it has a minute correlation,
and I think from memory there was a
significant meter analysis and I can provide that for the tribunal if it wants.
From memory
it's about .1 or .2 of a correlation coefficient, so a minute
correlation.
Q. And if the alcohol abuse ceased prior to the time the sexual abuse of
the child commenced would you see it as having any real
influence on the
likelihood of the behaviour recurring?
A. On the basis of what I've got I just wouldn't be relying on that as a
decision making variable, I certainly wouldn't be relying
on it as a risk
reduction or a harm minimisation factor.
Q. I just wanted to ask a few questions about the supervision of post
graduate students, and I guess in and around frequency. So
you know, some
placements are constructed as 300 hours, well it's 32 days - but in
terms of when you went out to the various universities
to find out what their
expectations were, what were their expectations in terms of how much supervision
per unit of Practicum and
how often, that sort of thing?
A. I'd say rule of thumb probably similar to the Registration Board,
depending on the number of days an intern is doing any placement
but a rule of
thumb would be a minimum one hour per week direct face to face individual
supervising.
Q. So if they were working one day per week you'd expect one hour of
supervision and if they working two--
A. I'm not sure that follows. I would be saying just as a minimum, and
again working on the Registration Board requirements, I believe
on two full days
eight hours each, so 16 hours of applied work as a psychologist to even
meet the definition, then you've got two
days, so essentially one hour per two
days as a minimum.
Q. You were asked some questions about the situation where a decision was
made that a mandatory report was not in order, was not
appropriate, and asked
questions about, to comment about the referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint for
the three - or for the counselling,
I think there wasn't a specified amount
requested, but referring to her. In the circumstances of the case as it would
know to the respondents in this matter, to Ms Dene and to
Dr Donnelly, putting yourself in their shoes, could you, would you imagine
that such an intervention may actually be harmful with the children rather than
being productive with the children?
A. On the basis of what information was there and potentially some
information being held back?
A. Sadly, yes. The fact that it becomes crystallised to the child the
risk of losing her father. So the possibility that she would
was educated about
how bad this is it is very likely. And the fact that it could have created a
microcosm of the child becoming
aware, "If I disclose the heavens shall open and
the world shall rent apart, my life with fall apart so I'm not telling anybody
So that to me is not just possible but probable on the basis of what I
have been give.
for Ms Dene asked the following questions by way of questions arising from the
Tribunal questions:
Q. The child would have to realise that that was the process,
wasn't it, that they were being asked by Dr Brechman-Toussaint with
to of certain answers providing a trigger for their father to be taken from
A. Yes, absolutely.
Q. But if the counselling proceeds with Dr Brechman-Toussaint about
sexual education and so forth and the child never realises that
it's about what
Dad's done, well they wouldn't have that fear, would they?
A. I can only go on what Dr Brechman-Toussaint was saying to her
obviously inappropriate touch and to tell somebody if somebody is doing it. And
there was a open question of Dr Brechman-Toussaint
asking [Miss B] about
has anyone done it to you? And she denied that. So I can't - there's not
enough information to make that
next step for me on behalf of the child so I can
only leave it open.
Q. So it's a potentiality, we don't know and will never know whether the
child was in fact harmed by the intervention of being directed
Dr Brechman-Toussaint?
A. Yes, it's open.
Stern asked further questions by way of re-examination and questions arising as
Q. Dr Banks, if I could go back to one of the questions
that you were asked in the course of Mr Ainsworth's questioning to you?
You were asked about the manipulation that was exercised by Mr A and
following on from that you were asked that whether or not Ms
trained or equipped to see him for what he was, and you said it was reasonable
that she wasn't. And then the question was
put that Ms Dene can't be
criticised for not dealing with what she was dealing with if he was a supreme
manipulator. And your answer
was you don't believe you'd criticise her for that
element. In the light of that answer, I want to ask you first of all whether
that changes your opinion as to the criticism you've put forward in your report,
which is severe criticism of Ms Dene, for firstly
not reporting following
on the disclosure in October 2003, and secondly for not terminating that
therapeutic relationship immediately?
A. Do I stand by it?
Q. I wonder if I could ask for you to look at the black file in front of
you and the first tab of that should be yellow and with
the writing on it,
"Codes of Conduct 1997 and 2004", and if I could ask you to turn to, I think
it's about five pages into that tab
and in there should be 3 November 1997,
New South Wales Psychologist Registration Board Code of Ethical Conduct, do you
A. Yes, I do.
Q. I wonder if I could ask you first under paragraph A(5) there's a
reference to, "Psychologists should safeguard the welfare of
clients", and you
were asked some questions from the tribunal as to whether or not that a
psychologist in the position of Ms Dene
and Dr Donnelly should have
had to have regard to the welfare of
and would have had a duty
of care to her. In that context would paragraph 5 include both the welfare
of Mr A and the welfare of
A. I believe it's implied, yes.
Q. And if I could ask you then to turn over the page under the heading,
(D), "Responsibilities to Self."? There's a reference in
paragraph 3 to
psychologists - sorry, subparagraph (4), is that, "Psychologists
who see an impairment of their ability to practice
should withdraw from practice
and seek professional help where appropriate for their impairment." Would the
reference to impairment
of their ability in that paragraph cover something of
the nature of what you've seen as regards to Ms Dene's emotional response,
bearing in mind her own history? Was that something that--
Q. Because this is a code that would have bound you at the relevant
A. Well it's a code for psychologists. I'm not reading it as a lawyer.
I'm reading it as a psychologist.
A. So I would take it as for myself whether I considered myself impaired
in my ability to practice. And if I transpose myself into
that situation and
with that history as declared, for me to have been reduced to the emotional
state as described and then afterwards
is suggesting that my ability to practice
is impaired.
STERN Q. And in your professional opinion is that something that should
have been appreciated by Ms Dene in October 2003?
A. I think it was appreciated by Ms Dene because it was demonstrated
by Ms Dene as to how profound the effects of that session was.
In terms of
subsequently acting in response to her reaction, no, sadly there was
insufficient insight. But we have canvassed the
additional factors surrounding
Q. But the question I put was slightly different, is whether she
should have appreciated that her ability was impaired in that way
and that she
should withdraw from practice?
A. I'm back to a student, and an intern in a trainee role, so I believe I
expressed at the time of Mr Ainsworth's examination the
benefit of the
doubt. And she was an intern, she was horrendously upset, that should have been
Q. If I can move to another point in that during the course of some
questioning it was put to you that there was a divergence as
to recollection as
to whether or not the abuse was reported in October 2003 as having stopped two
weeks prior to October 2003 or
whether it stopped two weeks prior to June 2003,
to what extent would your opinion be altered if in fact the disclosure was that
the abuse had stopped two weeks before June 2003?
A. Assuming that as a microcosm alone, it would not have altered my views
Q. You were asked some questions about the threshold in the Act, which is
behind the green tab in the bundle that I think should
still be in front of you,
and your attention was drawn, I'm sure you're already aware of it, of the two
elements in section 23.
One is current concerns and the other is the
circumstances including that a child has been sexually abused. And I want to
opinion as to whether any reasonable psychologist could form the view
that there were not current concerns for
bearing in mind what
you know of the disclosure in October 2003?
A. I'm being asked to respond on behalf of many of my peers and I'm
struggling with that mandate. I can answer for myself, I can
speculate what my
peers would say. And I would presume the past tense element of that term being
specifically informative that somebody
must identify a past
history - sorry, somebody must report a past history of sexual abuse.
It's that critical. So if I'm just aware
of it, that it's historical, the
impetus is on me to make that report.
Q. In giving that answer are you intending to state that if you've got
the past history of abuse you've got to assume current concerns,
or is there
some other premise?
A. That needs to be, to me, that needs to be first and foremost in your
mind. There certainly is many other options and hypotheses
available, we
routinely work on a differential diagnostic model so we are trying to include
all possible factors and trying to include
all possible hypothesis that we can
think of as to what's going on. But care and protection of children must be
Q. And again, I don't mean to sort of harp on but I just wonder whether -
the question is directed, is saying, if you know what you
knew in October 2003
Q. With the benefit of that information would a reasonable psychologist
reach the conclusion that there must be current concerns
for the safety, welfare
or wellbeing of
A. I believe so.
Q. The last question I wanted to ask you is you were asked some
questions relating to whether or not Dr Donnelly had encouraged or
Ms Dene to see
in a concurrent therapy session, if I can
call it that, with Mr A and
Q. And if the factual scenario was that Dr Donnelly was aware that
that treatment session was proposed and he did nothing to stop
it, as opposed to
him having directed it, would that alter your criticism that you expressed in
your report?
A. No, it would not.
Submissions - Ms Dene
submissions made by each party are annexed hereto. The Tribunal sets out below a
mere summary of the submissions and the Tribunals
consideration thereof.
Submissions - HCCC re Ms Dene
HCCC provided a submission dated 18 September 2008. At Paragraph 4, the HCCC
made a submission that invited the Tribunal to deal
with an additional
complaint, being that Ms Dene suffers from impairment, namely Post traumatic
Stress Disorder, within the meaning
of the Act. The HCCC stated that the
evidence of Ms Zandberg and the nature of the evidence and demeanour of Ms Dene
should be relied
upon in this regard.
9 to 11 inclusive set out the HCCC submissions regarding the obligations of an
intern psychologist. The Tribunal accepts
these submissions as accurately
setting out the obligations placed upon a provisionally registered psychologist
in the position of
Ms Dene and notes the submissions made on behalf of Ms Dene
does not directly address this matter.
HCCC submitted (at paragraphs 12 and 13) that given the definitions of
unsatisfactory professional conduct (section 25 of the
Act) and professional
misconduct (section 24 of the Act) Ms Dene’s own personal history and her
psychological or emotional
issues are not relevant considerations to the
characterisation of the conduct. The Tribunal accepts this submission as a
interpretation of the legislative test. Personal history, psychological
or emotional issues may well be matters that are relevant
to consideration of
the appropriate orders to be made by a Tribunal.
HCCC submitted that Ms Dene was providing health care or welfare services to
Miss B (at paragraph 14 of the submission) from October
2003 to August 2005. The
Tribunal accepts the evidence set out by the HCCC as supporting this submission,
commenting that the Tribunal
does not consider the question of whether it was Dr
Donnelly or Ms Dene that made the referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint is of any
moment in the circumstances of this case. They were both actively involved in
the process.
15 to 19 of the HCCC submissions deal with the question of reporting obligations
of Ms Dene. The Tribunal accepts the submissions
made therein but does not rely
upon the payment of Ms Dene as the foundation for finding Ms Dene had an
obligation to report the
disclosure.
20 to 27 inclusive of the HCCC submissions relate to the nature and extent of
the disclosure made by Mr A in October 2003.
The Tribunal accepts the
submissions as an accurate representation of the nature of the disclosure made
by Mr A. The Tribunal further
observes that Ms Dene gave evidence that early in
the session on 21 October 2003 Mr A had told he was apprehensive about raising
matter with her because the topic was ‘taboo’. Disclosure of abuse
is also consistent with Ms Dene’s extreme
emotional reaction, her
inappropriate disclosure and the evidence regarding the discussions that took
place between Ms Dene and Dr
Donnelly regarding whether or not Ms Dene was a
mandated reporter.
HCCC made submissions regarding Ms Dene’s demeanour and manner at
paragraphs 28 to 39. The Tribunal accepts this description
of Ms Dene’s
conduct and demeanour.
reproducing Particular 1 relating to the Complaint against Dr Donnelly in the
submissions regarding Ms Dene (see page 14 of
the submissions), the content of
the submissions made from paragraphs 42 to 77 inclusive deal with the
Particulars of the Complaint
made regarding Ms Dene.
78 to 81 deal with the characterisation of the conduct of Ms Dene. The HCCC
submit that the Tribunal should make a finding
of professional misconduct.
HCCC submitted that it would be appropriate for the Tribunal to make a
Prohibition Order with respect to psychological services,
mental health
services, counselling and welfare services. The HCCC also submitted that a costs
order would be appropriate.
Submissions on behalf of Ms Dene
lengthy written submission on behalf of Ms Dene dated 16 October 2009 was
received from Unsworth Legal (Annexure C hereto). The
Tribunal has had regard to
the entirety of the submission. Despite the admission made on behalf of Ms Dene,
many of the Particulars
are denied in the submissions. Further, in many regards
the submissions do not sit with the Complaint as it came before the Tribunal
do they fit with the evidence given by Ms Dene. The Tribunal does not intend
dealing with every aspect of the submissions in
this document. The Tribunal sets
out in the following paragraphs some of the submissions made and makes comments
Tribunal is uncertain as to the intention of the submission setting out the
terms of section 34 of the Act. This section applies
to the processes that occur
prior to the referral of a matter to the Tribunal. As the section states, it is
the Board that confers
with the HCCC not the Tribunal. The Tribunal does not
‘confer’ with the HCCC. Rather, the Tribunal determines complaints
referred to it by the HCCC. The Tribunal has disregarded this submission as
irrelevant to the issues to be determined.
Tribunal accepts the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene at paragraph 9 as to
the application of the
‘Briginshaw’
test and is of the view
this test could be described as the
‘requisite standard of the balance
of probabilities’
referred to in paragraph 3 of the HCCC
submissions.
Tribunal notes the submissions made on behalf of Ms Dene regarding the
interpretation of section 24 of the Act (made in paragraphs
10 -13 of the
submissions). In so far as they accord with the Act, the Tribunal accepts the
submissions. The Tribunal notes that
the submissions do not make reference to
consideration of the psychologists
‘experience’
required by the Act. Further, the submissions appear to totally ignore the
provision that allows the Tribunal to making a finding
of unsatisfactory
professional conduct if reasonably satisfied that the conduct was
‘unethical’
. These are
matters that not only form part of section 24 of the Act but were clearly set
out in the Complaint and the evidence before
the Tribunal.
paragraph 14 a number of factors are listed as indicating that the admitted
conduct of Ms Dene does not fall ‘significantly
below’ that which is
‘reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or (sic) experience’
. The first matter raised is the
‘specific training’ of Ms Dene. The submissions note that Ms Dene
‘had not undertaken a professional clinical psychology session with any
prior to commencing her Degree in Clinical Psychology at the
University. The Tribunal accepts this is so but notes the significant
experience of Ms Dene in the related areas of school teaching, Family and Child
Mediation, Family and Child Counsellor and
Chairperson of Legal Aid Family Law
Conferencing. Even without such experience, the Tribunal expects that any
provisionally registered
psychologist will comply with legislative requirements,
including the Code of Conduct published by the Board. There can be no acceptance
of a position that would allow a registered health professional not to be
expected to comply with legislative requirements.
second example submitted as relevant to the question of the conduct failing to
reach the level of ‘significantly below’
is the fact that Ms Dene
was undertaking a practicum at the University at the relevant time. The Tribunal
notes that all provisionally
registered psychologists utilising the university
pathway to complete their hours of supervised practise will be completing a
that is supervised by a university. Ms Dene was in no different a
position to any other provisionally registered psychologists undertaking
graduate clinical studies.
submissions note that Ms Dene was supervised by two senior psychologists, one of
whom was responsible for teaching the child psychology
course at the University.
The Tribunal notes the evidence supports this submission and has had regard to
this matter in making the
findings set out below. Supervision, even supervision
by senior psychologists, does not negate personal professional responsibility.
Registration is a privilege which is granted to an individual who must then
ensure they practise to the appropriate standard. Given
the factual matrix of
this particular matter, responsibility cannot be abrogated by Ms Dene to the
degree submitted.
it was submitted on behalf of Ms Dene that the Tribunal would not find her
conduct ‘significantly below’ the
reasonable standard due to her
status as a
‘conditional’
registration status as opposed to
full registration. The Tribunal is of the view that matters such as compliance
with statutory obligations
and Codes of Conduct are essential for anyone holding
registration, no matter the class or nature of that registration. The Act does
not provide for a two tiered system of compliance with statutory obligations.
While it is reasonable to expect that a provisionally
registered psychologist
was developing clinical skills, all psychologists are expected to be practising
in accordance with statutory
requirements, all are expected to be practising
ethically, all are expected to be practising in a proper manner.
18 to 26 of the submissions made on behalf of Ms Dene deal with Particular 1(a).
The submission omits
‘and professional’
from the wording of
this Particular. This is a significant omission. Although the Tribunal is of the
view that there is a professional
obligation to practise in accordance with
legal obligations and professional obligations. Professional obligations are far
than legal obligations as it includes matters such as ethical and moral
considerations.
written submission states that Ms Dene does not admit Particular 1(a).
the context of the submission dealing only with the legal obligation of Ms Dene
and not her professional obligations, the Tribunal
notes the evidence that Ms
Dene did ultimately form the view that the conduct of Mr A should be reported to
DoCS. Ms Dene then set
herself up in a private practice, ‘prepared’
Mr A for the disclosure to DoCS and ultimately made a disclosure many months
Tribunal notes the submission made at paragraph 20 of Ms Dene’s
submissions to the effect that Ms Dene was able to rely
upon the views of her
two supervising psychologists. The Tribunal is of the view that it does not have
to deal with this submission
directly given the finding made below; however, the
Tribunal expresses the view that such a submission should be rejected. All
practitioners with registration have an obligation to ensure they practise
within professional boundaries. It is an obligation that
is not able to be
delegated. Decisions such as
HCCC v Nicholls
(Nurses’ and Midwives
Tribunal NSW, 26 June 2000) support the Tribunals view. While such
considerations may provide an explanation
for behaviour they do not excuse
behaviour. It would therefore be a matter to be properly considered by a
Tribunal when making protective
Tribunal has elsewhere dealt with the correct legal interpretation of
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
the Tribunal’s view, it is not necessary to consider in any detail the
submissions regarding whether or not Ms Dene
was providing services as part of
her ‘paid work’. While there was evidence of payments being made for
the work of Ms
Dene as part of the dementia care network, quite clearly, Ms Dene
was obtaining a benefit from her work as it was a requirement of
receiving her
final qualification and of having her provisional status removed from her
registration. The Tribunal reinforces its
view that the question of whether
monetary payment is made for services is not in any way relevant to the
professional obligations
of a psychologist.
Tribunal rejects the submission that Ms Dene was not providing
‘services to children’
. Going no further than the evidence
(e.g. the clinical notes and the evidence of Ms Dene) regarding the session
involving Miss B
such a submission must be rejected as without foundation. The
Tribunal does not accept that the evidence of Dr Banks supports the
that Ms Dene was not providing services to children.
submissions made on behalf of Ms Dene deal with Particular 1 (b) in paragraphs
27 to 30 inclusive. The submission states that
Ms Dene does not admit this
Particular.
Tribunal rejects the submission that there was no requirement under
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
a report for the reasons set out elsewhere in this document.
submission to the effect that the credit for the (ultimate) notification should
be attributed to Ms Dene is another matter the
Tribunal considers relevant to
protective orders. The weight given to this factor will be significantly
influenced by the delay in
the making of the report.
to the submission made in paragraph 29, there is no evidence before the Tribunal
to support the assertion that Dr Brechman-Toussaint
was in any way involved in
the care of Mr A.
31 to 35 inclusive of the submissions made on behalf of Ms Dene relate to
Particular 1 (c). Once again, the submission
states that Ms Dene does not admit
this Particular.
Dene relies upon the reassurances she received from Dr Donnelly and Dr
Brechman-Toussaint and the referral by Dr Donnelly to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint of
Miss B and Miss C as supporting the position that Ms Dene
‘clearly took
all steps available to her to assess the potential risk to the 2
. It is submitted that the referral was made with full
disclosure of
‘all of the known information’
provided to Ms
Dene by Mr A relying upon the handwritten note made by Dr Brechman-Toussaint of
the referral conversation (Dene exhibit
volume 1, tab 17.6).
Tribunal notes that Ms Dene was fully aware of the referral of Miss B and Miss C
to Dr Brechman-Toussaint. Ms Dene gave evidence
that she was present during the
relevant conversation (T 109, 18/6/09). Ms Dene also gave evidence that Dr
Brechman-Toussaint was
present during the discussions regarding mandatory
reporting (T45, 19/6/09).
36 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 1(c) with respect to Particular
1(d). Once again, the
submission states that Ms Dene does not admit this Particular.
37 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 1(c) with respect to Particular
1(e). Once again, the
submission states that Ms Dene does not admit this Particular.
38 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 1(c) with respect to Particular
1(f). Once again, the
submission states that Ms Dene does not admit this Particular.
Tribunal notes it was the Code of Ethical Conduct dated 3 November 1997 that was
in place at the time of the 21 October 2003 disclosure
by Mr A. This Code was
replaced by the Board with the Code of Professional Conduct dated 1 November
2004 (which became widely available
when a copy was provided in June 2005 to all
registered psychologists in NSW).
C4 of the 1997 Code imposes an obligation on registered psychologists to
communicate with the appropriate professionals
‘about the risks to the
welfare of people....such as children...’. Given the Tribunals finding of
fact regarding the
nature of the disclosure made by Mr A on 21 October 2003
there can be no doubt that the appropriate professionals for Ms Dene to
communicate with were officers from DoCS. While communication with supervisors
would be an appropriate step, communication with a
health professional within
the child protection framework is what is required by the Code of Ethical
39 and 40 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene relate to Particular 1(g).
Once again, the submission states that
Ms Dene does not admit this
Particular.
The submission relies upon the fact that Ms Dene did make a voluntary report of
the disclosure to DoCS and invites the Tribunal to
see this report as
potentially bringing to light conduct that would in all likelihood never have
been detected. The submission does
not attempt to explain the inordinate delay
between the disclosure and the time Ms Dene formed the view that a report should
nor does it deal with the extraordinary delay from the time after she
formed the view that a report should be made and the time the
ultimately made. The submission made at paragraph 40 indicates that Ms Dene
accepts that the report she ultimately made
was appropriate as it alerted the
‘Authorities’ to the conduct of Mr A.
41 to 49 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene relate to Particular 1(h).
Ms Dene admits this Particular.
The Tribunal accepts the submission that Ms Dene was not told that she must
continue to treat Mr A but that she was advised that
she was suitable to
continue. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Ms Boland (T18.6.10, page
That's a huge emotional message in that. And this man as a
supervisor has power. She does not want to disappoint him; she's going
guidance from him; and, she is going to in many cases override her own cognitive
and emotional responses, whatever they were,
to actually work with this client.
She's been put in a place - in a position of enormous dissonance.
accepting this position, the Tribunal also notes that Ms Dene did not take steps
to ensure that her notes were being reviewed by
Dr Donnelly. At this point the
Tribunal notes it does not accept Ms Dene’s evidence that her clinical
notes were not an accurate
record of what she was told by Mr A, rather they were
versions tainted by her own emotional state
. While it is certainly an obligation for a supervisor to
review the notes of the supervisee (a matter dealt with elsewhere in this
decision), in the circumstances of this matter, where Ms Dene was relying solely
on the views of her supervisors then it would be
incumbent upon her to ensure
they were provided with a totally accurate account of the sessions, undertake
her own independent consideration
of the matter, challenge the advice provided
by the supervisors and seek advice further afield.
there is strong criticism made by this Tribunal of Dr Donnelly’s role in
Ms Dene continuing to treat of Mr A, Ms Dene
must be held to be responsible for
her own conduct.
50 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene relates to Particular 1(i). Ms
Dene admits this Particular and relies on
the submissions made with respect to
Particular 1(h).
51 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene relates to Particular 1(j). Ms
Dene admits this Particular and relies on
the submissions made with respect to
Particular 1(h).
the evidence supports the assertion that Dr Donnelly advised Ms Dene to continue
with the treatment of Mr A in the period immediately
following the 21 October
2003 disclosure session, there is nothing to indicate that Ms Dene raised
concerns regarding her lack of
professional competence with Dr Donnelly (or
anyone else) at any other time. The Tribunal again notes that it is ultimately
registered psychologist’s responsibility to ensure they are
practicing within their field of competency. This principle is
applied across
all health professions.
52 and 53 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene deal with Particular 2. Ms
Dene admits this Particular. The submission
substantially relies on the evidence
of Ms Boland (at page 5 of her report) that:
‘That this was a spontaneous, almost reflective response.
Firstly she had just heard information that shocked and disturbed
Secondly, having behaved in what would be viewed by her as an embarrassingly
unprofessional manner she would most likely want
to provide an explanation to
the client for this. Her ability to quickly self-monitor and reflect on her
initial responses is evidenced
by her willingness to raise these issues in
supervision the next day.’
evidence of Ms Dene confirmed that the disclosure was spontaneous. In the view
of the Tribunal, it could not be characterised
as a ‘reflective
response’. Having already rejected Ms Dene’s evidence that her
records of the sessions were in
some way exaggerated by her own emotions
‘bleeding through’
the Tribunal accepts that Ms Dene most
likely was shocked and disturbed by the disclosure made by Mr A. A reaction in
the nature of
that of Ms Dene would not have been an expected professional
response of a registered psychologist. Even taking into account the
fact that Ms
Dene had limited experience working as a psychologist she had significantly more
experience than most provisionally
registered psychologists dealing with
children and family related issues. Ms Boland talks of
‘self-monitoring’ and reflection
on the part of Ms Dene. The
evidence is that Ms Dene immediately sought out Dr Donnelly and was so obviously
emotionally distressed
there can be no inference that there had been a conscious
decision on her part to raise the issue with her supervisor ‘the
54 and 55 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene relate to Particular 3.
Once again, the submission states that Ms
Dene does not admit this
Particular.
is submitted that Ms Dene did not in any way make a referral to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint, rather it was Dr Donnelly who made the referral
and provided
all of the information he had been given by Ms Dene. In the submission made with
respect to Particular 1(c) (also relied
on for Particulars 1(d), 1(e) and 1(f))
Ms Dene sought to rely upon the referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint as a factor
disputing a
finding with respect to those Particulars. It is the view of the
Tribunal that the question of who actually made the referral is
immaterial. Both
Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly were involved in the decision to make the referral to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint, both were aware
of it, both had the opportunity to discus
the referral with Dr Brechman-Toussaint, both had opportunity to provide further
information
(such as copies of clinical notes) to Dr Brechman-Toussaint.
Reliance is placed upon the handwritten note made by Dr Brechman-Toussaint
the referral (Dene volume 1, tab 17.6). Dr Brechman-Toussaint gave evidence that
she had questioned Dr Donnelly and been assured
that there was no sexual abuse
issues. Whether or not Dr Brechman-Toussaint should have accepted that
reassurance is not a question
that is before this current Tribunal, however, the
tone of her letters, notes and reports indicate she had accepted the reassurance
respect to Particular 3, the Tribunal notes that Ms Dene did not provide a copy
of her notes to Dr Brechman-Toussaint and there
is evidence before the Tribunal
that the note regarding the session on 21 October 2003 was not written until
well after the session
between Dr Brechman-Toussaint and the children. The
Tribunal is of the view that it was incumbent upon both Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly
to ensure Dr Brechman-Toussaint was fully informed.
not considered by the Tribunal for making a finding with respect to this
Particular or with respect to the Complaint, the
Tribunal notes that the
clinical notes made by Ms Dene also record that there were further disclosures
made by Mr A. At no time did
Ms Dene seek to again refer Miss B and Miss C to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint in light of the additional information. Even when she had
formed the view that a report should be made to DoCS Ms Dene did not inform Dr
Brechman-Toussaint.
56 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 1(c) with respect to Particular
2(b). Once again, the
submission states that Ms Dene does not admit this Particular.
Tribunal relies upon the comments made with respect to Particular 1(c).
57 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 1(c) with respect to Particular
2(c). Once again, the
submission states that Ms Dene does not admit this Particular.
58 to 60 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene relate to Particular 4(a).
Ms Dene admits this Particular. By way
of explanation, the submission points to
the evidence of Dr Donnelly (T18.08.09. page 41.43):
I saw the worth of it. I saw the worth of it and I can imagine
that I communicated to her that it wouldn't be inconsistent with our
goals and it could be useful and explored what it might be like for the
submission omits the preceding words of Dr Donnelly’s evidence being
‘I can imagine that her discussions about it and...’
61 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 4(a) with respect to Particular
4(b), which is admitted.
clinical notes reveal the rationale discussed between Ms Dene and Mr A for the
session with Miss B. The notes clearly illustrate
the meeting was for the
benefit of Mr A. Although reference is made to preparation of Miss B for the
session it appears that it was
left to Mr A to inform her of the session and
that this was not done until the day or so before the session (if it was done at
There is no support in the evidence of any of the peer reviewers for a
session of this nature. The potential for harm of such an
interaction is
enormous, with some degree of harm being inescapable.
a basic level careful consideration must be made by a psychologist before
engaging in treatment of more than one member of a family
so as not to
compromise the therapeutic relationship with the original client. Given the
nature of the session there it is hard to
envisage any more inappropriate
circumstances than involving Miss B in the therapeutic process of Mr A.
62 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 4(a) with respect to Particular
4(c), which is admitted.
noted above, the clinical notes record that Miss B was to be informed of the
session with Ms Dene by Mr A and that he had not done
this as late as the day
before the session. There was no preliminary assessment of Miss B by Ms Dene or
anyone else. There was no
follow up undertaken with Miss B save for enquiries
being made to Mr A by Ms Dene. The severity of this conduct is compounded by
reaction of Miss B to the session as recorded in the clinical notes and as
recounted by Ms Dene. There is nothing in the evidence
regarding guidance being
sought from Dr Donnelly or Dr Brechman-Toussaint about the appropriate
assessments or safeguards.
62 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 1(a) with respect to Particular
again, the submission states that Ms Dene does not admit this Particular and
significantly relies upon the involvement of Dr
Brechman-Toussaint.
64 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 1(b) with respect to Particular
5(b). Once again, the
submission states that Ms Dene does not admit this Particular.
65 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 1(c) with respect to Particular
5(c). Once again, the
submission states that Ms Dene does not admit this Particular.
66 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 1(d) with respect to Particular
5(d). Once again, the
submission states that Ms Dene does not admit this Particular.
67 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 1(e) with respect to Particular
5(e). Once again, the
submission states that Ms Dene does not admit this Particular.
68 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 1(f) with respect to Particular
5(f). Once again, the
submission states that Ms Dene does not admit this Particular.
69 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 1(g) with respect to Particular
5(g). Once again, the
submission states that Ms Dene does not admit this Particular.
70 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene states that she relies on the
submissions made for 1(h) with respect to Particular
5(h). This Particular is
71 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene relates to Particular 5(i). Ms
Dene admits this Particular and relies on
the submissions made with respect to
Particular 1(i), which in turn relies on the submissions made with respect to
Particular 1(h).
Tribunal notes from the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene that Particulars 6
and 7 are admitted, but make no further submission
specifically relating to
these Particulars.
74 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene note that Ms Dene ‘gained
conditional registration’ (meaning
that she was provisionally registered)
on 2 April 2002 and gained full registration on 9 April 2005. It further notes
that she was
supervised by Dr Donnelly between January 2003 and November 2004
and that she provided treatment to Mr A between June 2003 and August
the fact that the legislation provides for a single test for the Tribunal to
apply to professional conduct, that test having
two tiers, the Submissions made
on behalf of Ms Dene also state in paragraphs 75 to 102 that the submissions
made regarding each
Particular of Complaint Two is repeated as for the
Particulars of Complaint One.
103 to 111 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene address the submission
made by the HCCC that a complaint of impairment
should be made by the Tribunal.
In summary, the submission noted the following matters:
Ms Dene had
previously indicated to the HCCC that she was
distressed’
The opinion of
Ms Boland that Ms Dene should receive ‘compassion’ due to her
misfortune of having the ‘
very bad luck....to be faced with such a
personally confronting issue so early in her training. Added to this the support
and guidance
that she appears to have been denied later compounded her
misfortune’
The opinion of
Ms Zandberg (at page 8 of her report)
‘...this experience has shattered
Ms Dene’s personal and professional life. A life she has made painstaking
steps to reenter,
and rebuild’
The HCCC was
granted leave to amend the Complaint on two occasions, the second of which
occurred on the fourth day of the hearing
(which had originally only been set
down for five days).
The HCCC were
aware that Ms Dene did not
‘react well’
to the initial
disclosure made by Mr A and had thereafter found it
‘incredibly
difficult and confronting to deal with’
was known to the HCCC as
early as August 2006 and was then set out in documents received from Ms Dene in
April 2009.
109 of Ms Dene’s submission reads:
With respect, to wait until well after the conclusion of the
Hearing to make such a submission to the Tribunal and bearing in mind
evidence is plainly outrageous.
110 indicates that the power of the Tribunal to amend or make a Complaint is
provided for in Clause 2 of Schedule 5 of the
Act, however, the submissions seek
to limit such a power to matters which
‘might arise during the course
of any such proceedings’
. The submission continues:
respect, nothing has arisen during the course of the Hearing which was either
not known to the HCCC at the time or before’
111 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene reads:
‘In the circumstances, we submit that to even entertain
such an invitation, let alone act upon it, would be a gross denial of
fairness and ought to be denied forthwith.
112 of the submission urges the Tribunal to ‘have close regard’ to
the actual content of the primary evidence
referred to in the HCCC submissions
so that the Tribunal may satisfy itself
‘...that the references to
certain evidence actually refer to that evidence in full’.
Tribunal notes that the submission does not provide one example of where the
HCCC references do not actually refer to the evidence
in full. There were no
Directions made limiting the scope of the written submissions. In the normal
course it would be expected that
a submission would set out those areas where
the other party’s submissions do not accurately reflect the evidence in
Despite this not having been done, as will be evident from the length
of this document, the Tribunal has had regard to the entirety
113 and 114 make submissions that appear to address the HCCC submissions
regarding Ms Dene’s demeanor and manner during
her oral evidence
(paragraph 28-30). It is submitted that the fact that the matter had been
investigated for a period of over six
years could not be disregarded when making
an assessment of demeanor. It was further noted for consideration was the fact
Dene remained under cross-examination during the 8 week adjournment.
115 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene appears to deal with paragraphs
31 to 39 of the HCCC submission which relate
to candour and insight. It is
submitted that Ms Dene’s evidence would clearly indicate that in no way
did she wish to deflect
her responsibility in this matter. Further, her evidence
confirms she is regretful and possesses insight into her actions and should
seen as an explanation for her behaviour rather than as an excuse. The
submission refers to the view expressed by Ms Boland T18.6.09,
Page 57.45-50.
The submission made on behalf of Ms Dene attributes the questions asked of Ms
Boland to Mr Ainsworth when in fact
a reading of the transcript reveals it was a
view expressed by Ms Boland in answer to a question asked by the Chairperson of
Tribunal. It was preceded by the following question and answer (line
However, would you agree that ultimately it is up to the person who holds the
registration to comply with the code of conduct
that ultimately it's for them to
comply with it, and that the factors that you've listed are an explanation of
why that did not happen,
rather than an excuse?
116 to 120 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene deal with the referral
and treatment of Mr A.
121 and 122 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene address the submission
made at paragraph 14 of the HCCC submission
dated 18 September 2009 regarding
obligations to Miss B. Paragraph 121 states that the quotation from the
Transcript (T18.6.09, Page
42.44) of the evidence of Ms Boland that after the
disclosure had been made the welfare of Miss B should have been the paramount
consideration of Ms Dene should be read in the context of Ms Boland’s
entire evidence. Then at paragraph 122 the submission
quotes another part of the
oral evidence of Ms Boland (T18.6.09, page 62.45-50) as refuting the proposition
made by the HCCC at paragraph
14(e) that the referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint
was ‘in effect’ Ms Dene providing therapeutic services to Miss B.
clarity, rather than leave comments to the Findings section of this document
on this matter the Tribunal notes:
Ms Boland gave
the following evidence (at T 18.6.09, page 62.39-43):
Q. Is the distinction between having a duty of care
to that Miss B and actually treating the Miss B, if you don't--
A. I think the duty of care to that child was that she shouldn't have
treated that child, she shouldn't have seen that child.
Ms Dene was
fully aware of the referral of Miss B and Miss C to Dr Brechman-Toussaint. As
noted elsewhere a determination of who in
fact made the referral to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint does not have to be made by this Tribunal to determine the
issues in this matter.
Both Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly were involved in the
decision making and the referral process.
leaving this issue, the Tribunal confirms it’s finding that Ms Dene
provided treatment to Miss B. This finding could
be founded in the single
session held when Miss B attended, however, there are many other factors that
support such a finding (see
the balance of paragraph 14 of the HCCC submission
dated 18 September 2009).
123 to 125 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene address the submission
made in paragraphs 15 to 19 of the HCCC submission
dated 18 September 2009
regarding the reporting obligations under
Children and
Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
. Elsewhere in this document,
the Tribunal sets outs its view regarding the interpretation of this section.
The Tribunal specifically
accepts the submissions made by the HCCC at paragraphs
16 to 18 inclusive. As noted elsewhere, the Tribunal does not consider the
question of whether or not Ms Dene received payment a relevant
consideration.
126 to 134 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene relate to the
characterisation of the conduct. It is submitted that
a finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct could not be made when considering the
individual Particulars or when considering
them cumulatively. It is submitted
that all that is expected and entirely appropriate for an intern i.e.
‘seeking clarification, advice and guidance’
as soon as the
disclosure was made from her supervisor.
submission invites the Tribunal to see Ms Dene’s conduct as misguided, but
well intentioned. Further, it is submitted on
behalf of Ms Dene at paragraph 131
that if she had received the assistance, advice and guidance she was entitled to
‘then the disclosure may have been made at a much earlier
paragraph 134 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene it is noted that the
peer reviewers considered her conduct to be ‘acceptable’.
submission continues:
Her decision to seek assistance from supervisors in our
submission is commendable and, at no time did Ms Dene take the case into her
135 to 140 of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene relate to protective
orders. It was submitted that there were indications
during the course of the
Hearing that
‘Ms Dene can continue to make a valuable contribution to
the community as a psychologist’
. It is submitted that this
proposition is supported by the evidence of the peer reviewers.
was submitted that there was no protective orders required to be made in this
matter as there should be no findings adverse to
Ms Dene. If the Tribunal was to
make protective orders it was submitted on behalf of Ms Dene that conditions
such as those she had
already put in place would be sufficient to meet the
objectives of the jurisdiction. The conditions relate to there being in place
support system in the form of mentors (supervision) and counselling. Ms Dene
indicated in the submissions that in light of the
evidence in this matter she is
willing to consult a clinical psychologist for the purpose of addressing
‘any issues related to her past abuse’
and to this end has
already commenced on such a course of treatment.
141 of Ms Dene’s submission made application for a suppression order
(Clause 6 of Schedule 5 of the Act) with respect
to the sensitive personal
details of Ms Dene on the basis that it is appropriate to do so.
submission made on behalf of Ms Dene does not address the HCCC submissions
regarding the obligations of an intern psychologist
(paragraphs 9 to 11 of the
HCCC submission dated 18 September 2009), and the standards required of Ms Dene
(paragraphs 12 and 13
of the HCCC submission dated 18 September 2009).
143 to 145 inclusive of the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene relate to the
Tribunal’s order for costs. It is
submitted that costs should follow the
cause and in the event that either (or both) Complaint is proven then costs
should be limited
to four hearing days
‘which would on any view would
have been more than sufficient to resolve this matter’
. Further, the
fact that the two matters were ‘prosecuted together’ should result
in the costs being equally borne by
each Respondent.
Submissions in reply - HCCC re Ms Dene
HCCC made a submission in reply dated 9 November 2009 (Annexure D hereto). The
HCCC submit that the referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint
should be regarded as a
joint referral. The submission notes that Ms Dene was largely the recipient of
the information from Mr A
that was relevant to the referral. Further, the
information provided to Dr Brechman-Toussaint was incomplete.
other submissions made in reply are dealt with elsewhere.
Findings – Generally
Tribunal has not had regard to the ultimate discovery of the extent of Mr
A’s paedophilic activity. As noted above, the
Tribunal characterises the
conduct having regard to the potential for harm rather than the actual harm that
eventuates. The ultimate
disclosure of Mr A’s paedophilic behaviour serves
as a reminder as to why the Parliament has made laws in this area and why
profession of psychology has developed a Code of Conduct, but nothing more.
it is clear that the evidence for the Complaint against each Respondent was
heard together the Tribunal has taken care to consider
the Complaint relating to
each of the Respondents separately and distinctly.
matter that may appear to cloud the consideration of this complaint is the
manner in which Mr A became a client. It is the
view of this Tribunal that the
manner in which Mr A came into the care of Ms Dene is ultimately of no
relevance. The fact is Mr A
became a client and Ms Dene provided therapy to him.
Further, when Ms Dene conducted a session with Miss B, she entered into a
professional
relationship with her. As to the relationship between Dr Donnelly
and Mr A, although it could be viewed as an intervention on the
supervisor in a supervisee’s session, there is evidence before the
Tribunal that Dr Donnelly’s involvement
was not superficial in nature. In
paragraph 80 of his statement (exhibit R14) Dr Donnelly stated that after Mr A
made the disclosure
to Ms Dene he ‘immediately arranged to meet with [Mr
A] and Ms Dene to investigate further to determine if it met the threshold
mandatory reporting’. Paragraph 81 of his statement provides details of
this meeting as follows:
The behaviour was described by Ms Dene and again by
as occurring approximately once per week for two years.
massage behaviour had stopped and
denied that there were any other
behaviours, past or present, suggesting abuse or neglect.
The Tribunal notes that the submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly states at
paragraph 120 at page 50 of the submissions 4 November
2009 as follows:
Dr Donnelly concedes that he did not maintain a clinical record
regarding his provision of treatment to Mr A on 27 October 2003. This
joint session, started by Ms Dene in which Dr Donnelly joined and was thereafter
present with Ms Dene.
at paragraphs 84 to 99 there are submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly
extensively setting out the information that was
or was not provided to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint ‘upon the occasion of making the referral’.
Tribunal notes the submissions made with respect to the scope of section 27
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
. As at 21 October
27 Mandatory reporting
(1) This section applies to:
(a) a person who, in the course of his or her professional work or other
paid employment delivers health care, welfare, education,
services, residential services, or law enforcement, wholly or partly, to
children, and
(b) a person who holds a management position in an organisation the duties
of which include direct responsibility for, or direct supervision
provision of health care, welfare, education, children’s services,
residential services, or law enforcement, wholly
or partly, to children.
(a) a person to whom this section applies has reasonable grounds to
suspect that a child is at risk of harm, and
(b) those grounds arise during the course of or from the person’s
the person must, as soon as practicable, report to the Director-General
the name, or a description, of the child and the grounds for
suspecting that the
child is at risk of harm.
Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units.
Sub-section
27(3) was added on to this section on 27 November 2003, it has no relevance to
the current matter.
was submitted on behalf of Ms Dene that the Tribunal should interpret
in the course of his or her professional work or other paid
employment...
’ to be read so that the section only applies to
professional work for which a person is paid
Following this
interpretation would result in a registered psychologist being a mandatory
reporter if his or her work was being renumerated
but not if it was being
undertaken on a pro bono basis. For the reasons set out below, the Tribunal
rejects the interpretation urged
by those acting for Ms Dene.
applying simple statutory interpretation principles there is nothing in the
construction of the sub-section that would require
to be read to be inserted before the words
‘professional work’
the interpretation urged upon the Tribunal would be inconsistent with the
general legislative framework of the
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
it would be absurd for a registered psychologist to be a mandatory reporter if
they were being renumerated but not if it
was being undertaken on a
basis if presented with identical information regarding the welfare of
a child. Such a position has no place in the practise of the
profession of
psychology or any other profession. A member of the public is entitled to the
same protections and standards of care
from a health professional whether or not
that health professional is being renumerated.
the interpretation urged upon the Tribunal would be inconsistent with the
general ethical standards that registered psychologists
are required to adhere
to by virtue of their holding the privilege of registration.
the weight of the above the Tribunal does not consider further supporting
reasons are required. The Tribunal does however note
that the view of the
Tribunal coincides with the interpretation set out in a recent publication
The Structured Decision Making System – New South Wales
Mandatory Reporter Guide’
published on 24 November 2009 by the
Children’s Research Centre (www.nccd-crc.org). On page 103 of this
publication, a mandatory
reporter as defined by
‘....include those who deliver the following services wholly or partly
to children as part of their paid or professional work’.
‘Health Care’
is included in the
referred to. The same publication notes that the
legislation also
‘...mandates any person who manages an employee from
the above services to report risk of significant harm’.
Tribunal notes the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene regarding the fact that
she held ‘conditional’ rather than
full registration (paragraph 14,
submissions 16 October 2009). Once registration is granted, the Code of Conduct
applies. While the
experience of a practitioner is relevant to a consideration
of whether conduct amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct, experience
does not excuse a departure from the Code. Relevantly, section 19(1) of the Act
clearly applies to all registered psychologists and
19 Code of professional conduct
(1) The Board may establish a code of professional conduct setting out
guidelines that should be observed by registered psychologists
professional practice. The Board may from time to time amend or replace a code
of professional conduct.
Tribunal’s findings regarding the nature of disclosure made by Mr
Tribunal has carefully considered the question of the nature of the disclosure
made by Mr A on 21 October 2003.
is evident from the Complaints, a finding with respect to the nature of the
disclosure made and what Dr Donnelly subsequently became
aware of must be made
by the Tribunal before considering most of the Particulars of Complaint
(although clearly this finding is more
relevant to some Particulars than
Tribunal has carefully considered all of the evidence and makes the observations
set out below.
Tribunal notes the generally evasive nature of the oral evidence of Ms Dene
regarding the disclosure made by Mr A on 21 October
2003. Ms Dene made
statements like
‘to me it was like a betrayal of trust as a
rather than Mr A making any statement to the effect that he
was sexually attracted to his daughter or had had sexual thoughts about
Ms Dene gave evidence that it was the
probably his body language’
of Mr A during the session on 21
October 2003 that had caused her to be distressed during that session. She
claimed that for most
of the session Mr A did not talk. Mr A had
‘indicated’
that the massages were
. Ms Dene also stated that she had not previously come
across a really distressed person during counselling. In her oral evidence
Dene also claimed not to have a clear recollection of what she told Dr Donnelly,
however in her statement (exhibit Dene R1) Ms
Dene includes the following in her
account of 21 October 2003 (paragraphs 14 – 17):
21 October 2003, (at the 11
session) Mr A disclosed
to me that he had inappropriately touched his daughter, Miss B. Mr A was
distressed and cried during the
session. Mr A said words to the following
“About once a week give my daughter a massage
before she goes to sleep. Sometimes I include her pubic area in the
A told me that the behaviour had ceased two weeks prior to that consultation and
that he wanted help to maintain safe behaviours.
did not react well to Mr A’s disclosure. I had experienced sexual abuse
in my past and his disclosure reignited memories
for me. I became distressed
and was teary during the session. I became concerned about my reaction and in
an effort to explain
and reassure my client that I would not be prejudiced
towards him because of my past I disclosed the fact of my past abuse. My
was by no means the focus of the session.
Immediately
after the session I walked to Dr Donnelly’s office, only a short distance
[Regional University]
clinic and reported Mr A’s
disclosure to him. I was extremely distressed when I spoke to Dr Donnelly and
was in shock from
the disclosure Mr A had made. I cried during most of the
one-hour session with Dr Donnelly.
is nothing in the evidence that would persuade the Tribunal from the view that
Mr A disclosed to Ms Dene that he was inappropriately
touching Miss B at least
until two weeks prior to 21 October 2003.
short of a disclosure of this nature does not fit with what would be expected to
have prompted Ms Dene making the disclosure
regarding her own history of sexual
abuse. It would be hard for the Tribunal to believe that Ms Dene had not come
across a really
distressed person when she had the work experience in evidence
before the Tribunal. However, the Tribunal is of the view that nothing
upon this issue and has not relied upon it in any way.
paragraph 76 of the submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly reference is made
to his evidence regarding Ms Dene relaying to him
the disclosure of Mr A. Dr
Donnelly described Ms Dene as
‘distressed’
‘sitting at the edge of her
with an affect that was a
‘combination of sadness and
anxiousness and she appeared agitated’
. This account accords with the
evidence of Ms Dene.
T17/8/09, 26. 34 -38 Dr Donnelly stated in his oral evidence:
To her credit Ms Dene, despite being distressed, over the course
of about an hour was able to explain quite well what had gone on
in the sessions
and was quite insightful in terms of her own reaction to it. I think she was
distressed about - my view at the time
was she was most distressed about what
she considered to be a therapeutic error in revealing her history to
Mr A. She explain that
she - that in response to him disclosing that
he had been using massage with his daughter--
written submission also repeats the following evidence from Dr Donnelly
regarding the session with Ms Dene directly after Mr A
had made disclosure to
her regarding his conduct (T17/08/09, 27.23-28.37):
A. Okay, so again as a supervisor my first thing is to try to
create a safe place for Ms Dene to talk about what went on and to follow
on the issues that - some of the issues that actually Ms Dene raised and
again this is to her credit because she was already thinking
the difference between her reaction that may be related to her history and the
content of actually what was disclosed.
She had already started thinking about
is this something to report to DOCS and there was some discomfort about
reporting to DOCS
and we were trying to - and talked about that, about what our
responsibility was because I don't think either one of us had a very
experience with DOCS at that time but we would try to go ahead and make an
objective decision based on a further conversation
with Mr A and this
was all happening in the context of a very complex case to start out
Ms Dene had a strong therapeutic relationship with this client and I
think part of her distress was her sense that her trust in this
person had been
violated because of that initial reaction. One of the things that I pay
attention to in supervision are countertransference
issues, we already there
some attachment already between Mr A and Ms Dene
which is expected and I can talk about how this case was conceptualised in
but we needed to think about countertransference issues regarding
Ms Dene's reaction to Mr A and one of the things that was noted
in the testimony was that someone believed that Ms Dene was actually
experiencing PTSD at that point. I found that to be a dangerously
conceptualisation of what went on and it is one of the things that I paid
attention to.
She obviously had an autonomic nervous system reaction to what was going
on but there is some very good literature, and I refer to
the panel to just a
recent article, but there is very good research on the use of autonomic nervous
reactions to judge whether or
not someone is having a countertransference
reaction to their patients and it absolutely does not preclude that person from
in therapy with that person - with that client in fact it's an index that
in fact in the title of the paper it's called "Countertransference
Intersubjectivity: Golden opportunities in clinical supervision." It is
actually an index that that is the exact kind of case
that someone should be
supervised on during their internship as opposed to being yanked from the case
whereas Dr Banks suggested
I be scolded for having that kind of reaction.
It is an unbelievably harsh approach and ineffective approach for training
psychologists.
Any rate, I have lots of other references regard the use of
countertransference in supervision and clinical treatment, so at that
to think about was there evidence that she is actually so traumatised by what
went on that she was highly avoidant, was
there any evidence of a disassociative
state, was there any evidence that she couldn't speak about what was going on,
that she couldn't
think clearly and none of those things existed. By the end of
the session she was actually, like I said, she explained articulately
complicated constructs with respect to this case as well as dealing very
effectively with some very powerful emotions that
are not unusual in dealing
with the clinical psychological work and this is consistent with my
understanding of Ms Dene's skills
prior to this disclosure. I thought that
she was a very strong therapist and a very good clinician up to that point and
it was nothing
that went on around this case that violated my view of her in
The distressed being tearful, being very upset by what went on in a case
does not mean that someone has some kind of pathological
condition like PTSD
where they are incompetent to continue with the case. It's very distress to me
to hear people comment and characterise
in that way and it was certainly
inconsistent with the facts that were available to all of the witnesses about
how she felt with
the situation so, for example, if she was so highly avoidant
and disassociated her behaviour in going back to the session with me
meeting with me for supervision that wouldn't make any sense at all. The fact
that she called me the next day, that's not
an avoidant response. The fact that
she was able to talk clearly about things and behave as a responsible therapist
is not consistent
with PTSD at all and all of those facts were ignored by the
experts looking at this case in hindsight.
written submission omits to recount Dr Donnelly’s answer to the next
question. At T17/8/09, 26.40 – 27.12:
Q. Can I just stop you there, perhaps it is best if you explain
to the tribunal what Ms Dene said to you?
A. The disclosure was?
A. What she had disclosed she had said that Mr A disclosed to
her that after stating he had something to talk to her about and he
felt it was
somewhat taboo that he had mentioned that he had been using massage in the past
at night approximately once a week to
was feeling uncomfortable about it. He had described it or demonstrated it as
her abdomen lying on her back, stroking this way with contact with her
pubic region with his wrist as he went by, and that based
on Ms Dene's
report she had queried whether it was any penetration and he denied any
penetration. He denied that - any other kind
of touching behaviour and he had
ceased the massage behaviour.
Again I think that is a misunderstanding on my part at the time, I thought
it was two weeks prior to coming to the clinic for treatment.
As I have looked
at the reports now Ms Dene was fairly sure that it was two weeks prior to
that session and other things that she
checked on, I'm blank now on some of the
details, but my thought at the time that I needed to, and Ms Dene thought
the same, that
I needed to go and have a session with her and Mr A to
talk about the details of this massage behaviour.
the first part of Dr Donnelly’s evidence set out above it is clear to the
Tribunal that Ms Dene raised reporting the reported
conduct of Mr A to DoCS and
that there was a discussion about their obligations in this regard. In this
regard Ms Dene’s evidence
supports Dr Donnelly’s evidence. The
Tribunal notes that they both gave consideration to these issues in light of
their previous
experiences with DoCS. Dr Donnelly’s evidence was that
there was to be consideration for the purpose of making an
further conversation with Mr A’
Apart from the one session in which Dr Donnelly spoke to Mr A there is nothing
before the Tribunal to indicate that these further
conversation for the purpose
of clarifying this issue ever occurred.
evidence of Dr Donnelly regarding consideration given by both of them to
reporting the disclosure to DoCS demonstrates that they
must have formed the
view that the conduct was likely to be reportable however giving consideration
to their previous experience
of dealing with DoCS they decided not to report.
the second part of the evidence of Dr Donnelly set out above, the Tribunal is
reasonably satisfied that Ms Dene informed Dr Donnelly
of the details of the
disclosure made to her by Mr A.
Donnelly stated that he thought Ms Dene suffered an autonomic nervous system
reaction suffered at the time. Such a reaction would
ordinarily be indicative of
the person suffering from shock or extreme distress. There is no evidence that
this occurred with Ms
Dene on other occasions.
response of Ms Dene to the disclosure, the content of the clinic notes
eventually made by Ms Dene as well as the subsequent clinical
notes (which were
made contemporaneously), the evidence of Dr Donnelly that there was a decision
‘make an objective decision based on further conversation with Mr
before proceeding with a report to DoCS, the content of the letter
written by Dr Donnelly to the Regional University (R4) are all
consistent with
the Tribunal’s finding with respect to the nature of the disclosure made
by Mr A to Ms Dene and conveyed to
Dr Donnelly. Although the Tribunal has not
relied upon the subsequent disclosures made by Mr A to authorities, it should be
that reports of his disclosure are entirely consistent with the
Tribunal’s finding.
in October 2003 Dr Donnelly was aware that Mr A was disturbed about some aspect
of his conduct, that the conduct of Mr A involved
pubic region and that the disclosure by Mr A had provoked Ms Dene to disclose
her history of childhood
sexual abuse. He only realised that he may have been
wrong about his assumption as to when Mr A had indicated he had ceased the
behaviour was when giving evidence before the Tribunal. It was not a
matter that he had sought to clarify at or around the time of
the disclosure.
Although there was a subsequent session that involved Dr Donnelly and Mr A,
there is no clinical record of what was
actually discussed. Ms Dene’s
evidence was that Dr Donnelly was called into this session as she had sought
assistance from
Dr Donnelly to deal with Mr A’s distress when she informed
him that Dr Donnelly knew about the content of the session of 21
October 2003.
Findings re Particulars - Ms Dene
respect to the HCCC submission inviting the Tribunal to make an additional
Complaint of impairment in relation to Ms Dene the
Tribunal accepts that it has
the power, in accordance with Clause 5(2) of Schedule 5 of the Act, to make
additional Complaints. The
Tribunal also accepts the HCCC submission that the
Tribunal would have an obligation to be ‘just and equitable’ in the
circumstances, although the Tribunal would take this further and state that if
any such steps were taken the principles of procedural
fairness would be
applied. The Tribunal has carefully weighed up this submission and considers it
is a matter for any subsequent
Tribunal that hears an application from Ms Dene
to be restored to the Register.
Dene accepted that there was a relationship between her own history of abuse and
the emotional reaction she experienced during
the session with Mr A on 21
October 2003. Only Ms Dene could know the full impact that this past history had
on her ability to work
in a professional fashion. Given the nature of the
disclosure made, her dramatic reaction to the situation, her limited experience
with this area of psychology she should have been able to form a view about her
fitness to continue with Mr A.
to the submissions made regarding Ms Dene’s demeanor, the Tribunal accepts
the submissions made by the HCCC (at paragraphs
28 to 30). The length of time
this matter has been under investigation and the stress caused by a hearing,
even remaining under cross-examination
for a lengthy period of time, is not
unusual in this, or any other jurisdiction.
respect to the parties’ submissions on the question of the candour and
insight of Ms Dene, the Tribunal accepts the submissions
made by the HCCC (dated
18 September 2009) at paragraphs 31 to 39. The HCCC submission accords with the
factual findings made elsewhere
in this document by the Tribunal.
respect to the submissions made on behalf of Ms Dene at paragraphs 116 to 120
the Tribunal cannot have regard to whether or not
Dr Donnelly and Ms Dene
‘agreed’ that Ms Dene would continue with the treatment after
September 2003 when she had completed
the hours required for that particular
practica. The reality was that Ms Dene commenced the treatment of Mr A as part
of the work
she was required to do to satisfy the university and she continued.
Professionally she had taken the responsibility for the care
Particular 1
the reasons set out above, the Tribunal is satisfied that on 21 October 2003 Mr
A disclosed to Ms Dene that he had touched his
daughter, Miss B, in an
inappropriate fashion for a period of over two years, having ceased that
behaviour only two weeks earlier.
respect to Particular 1(a), the Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the
HCCC from paragraph 44 to 48 and finds Ms Dene failed
to properly understand the
legal and professional obligations in cases of potential child abuse. The
Tribunal is of view this conduct
demonstrates a lack of knowledge, skill,
judgment and care in the practice of psychology that is significantly below the
reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or experience.
Tribunal has set out elsewhere in this document the correct interpretation of
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
. The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Ms Dene failed to make a
report to DoCS as required by
when potential child abuse was
disclosed to her on 21 October 2003 (Particular 1 (b)). The Tribunal is of view
this conduct demonstrates
a lack of knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the
practice of psychology that is significantly below the standard reasonably
of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training or experience. The
Tribunal is also of the view that the conduct is unethical
and improper.
submissions made on behalf of Ms Dene do not appreciate the issues raised by
Particular 1(c) in terms of the practise of psychology.
It was Ms Dene who was
having the regular contact with Mr A. After Mr A made the disclosure on 21
October 2003 it was for her to
take steps to properly assess the risk to the
children. A disclosure of the nature made by Mr A is a
prima facie
indication that Miss B was at risk. There is nothing in the evidence to suggest
that Ms Dene took any steps to illicit further information
from Mr A regarding
his conduct. There is no evidence that Ms Dene looked to the vast amounts of
authoritative written material on
this topic for assistance in the assessment of
the information she was receiving from Mr A. Further, the contact between Ms
and Miss B was focused on Mr A’s needs rather than any fact finding
from Miss B (not that this would necessarily have been
appropriate in the
circumstances). The clinical notes made by Ms Dene strongly focus, to the point
of near total obsession, on the
needs of Mr A with respect to his inappropriate
conduct rather than there being a proper assessment or appreciation of the risk
the welfare of the children. If Ms Dene was to rely in any way on the input
of Dr Donnelly or Dr Brechman-Toussaint it was incumbent
upon her to have shown
each of them detailed notes regarding her sessions with Mr A. Clear
documentation of the information given
to both of them as well as the advice
provided should have been created by Ms Dene. The advice given would need to be
in unequivocal
terms and would then have to accord with Ms Dene’s own
assessment of the situation. The Tribunal accepts the submissions made
HCCC at paragraphs 49 to 52 of the HCCC submissions with respect to this
Particular and Particular 1(d). The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that Ms
Dene did not take adequate steps to assess whether or not Miss B or Miss C were
at risk and that this conduct demonstrates
a lack of knowledge, skill, judgment
and care in the practice of psychology that is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected
of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training or
experience. The Tribunal is also of the view that the conduct is unethical
respect to Particular 1(d) the Tribunal notes that ultimately Ms Dene did form
the view that the conduct of Mr A should be reported
to DoCS. While giving
evidence before the Tribunal Ms Dene displayed great distress over her omission
to act promptly to protect
Miss B and Miss C from their father. The Tribunal
accepts the submissions made by the HCCC at paragraphs 54 and 56. The Tribunal
is reasonably satisfied that Ms Dene did not appreciate the risk to Miss B and
Miss C for a considerable period of time and that
this conduct demonstrates a
lack of knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the practice of psychology that
is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training or experience.
Tribunal has already found that there would be a prima facie conclusion based on
the disclosure made by Mr A on 21 October 2003
that the Miss B and Miss C were
highly likely to be at risk. When considering the finding with respect to
Particular 1(e) the Tribunal
is of the view that Ms Dene did not take
appropriate action to protect the safety of Miss B and Miss C. The Tribunal
relies on the
reasons provided for Particulars 1 (c) and (d) above and is of the
view that this conduct demonstrates a lack of knowledge, skill,
judgment and
care in the practice of psychology that is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a psychologist of
an equivalent level of training or
experience.
upon the evidence set out above under the heading of ‘Submissions –
Ms Dene’, the Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that Ms Dene did not
communicate with the appropriate professionals about the risks to the welfare of
both Miss B and Miss
C. The Tribunal has taken into consideration the contact
with both Dr Donnelly and Dr Brechman-Toussaint and finds that this conduct
demonstrates a lack of knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the practice of
psychology that is below, but not significantly below,
the standard reasonably
expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training or experience. The
Tribunal is however of the
view that the conduct is unethical. Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is therefore established.
respect to Particular 1 (g), the Tribunal notes that the Particular 5(h) deals
with the fact that further disclosures as to the
nature and extent of his
conduct were made by Mr A after the session on 21 October 2003, although the
general nature of the conduct
disclosed did not significantly change. The
Tribunal accepts that ultimately Ms Dene did make a voluntary disclosure to
set out in the Complaint, this Particular fails, however, the Tribunal
is of the view that Ms Dene inexplicably delayed the voluntary
reporting of the
disclosure. In the circumstances, the Tribunal will not take this view into
account when making a determination
with respect to the Complaints.
respect to Particular 1(h) the Tribunal has considered the role of Dr Donnelly
in Ms Dene’s continued treatment of Mr A.
The advice provided by Dr
Donnelly may be a partial explanation of the conduct of Ms Dene, but not an
excuse thereof. The breakdown
suffered by Ms Dene during the session with Mr A
on 21 October 2003 and her disclosure of extremely personal and highly
inappropriate
information should have left Ms Dene under no misapprehension as
to her lack of competence and experience to continue with the treatment
she was not in any way suited to continue with Mr A. It appears Ms Dene may have
subsequently reached this view given her
evidence that she now avoids any work
that involves the possibility of sexual abuse being raised with her. This issue
is so highly
distressing to Ms Dene that at the time she gave her evidence
before the Tribunal she was still in a highly emotional and fragile
Tribunal finds that the conduct of Ms Dene is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a psychologist
of an equivalent level of training or
experience.
respect to Particular 1(i) the Tribunal finds the evidence supports Ms
Dene’s admission. The Code of Ethical Conduct devotes
one of four sections
to ‘Responsibility to Self’. Perhaps more than any of the other
health professions, the practise
of psychology requires careful consideration of
one’s own emotional well being. While the Tribunal accepts the evidence
demonstrates
that Dr Donnelly was aware of the disclosure made by Ms Dene to Mr
A on 21 October 2003 and witnessed the distress of Ms Dene immediately
thereafter, this does not relieve Ms Dene of the obligation to guard her own
well being. The Tribunal finds that the conduct of Ms
Dene is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
The Tribunal is also of the view that the conduct is
unethical and improper.
Tribunal finds the evidence supports Ms Dene’s admission of Particular
1(j). The Tribunal finds that the conduct of Ms Dene
is significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or experience.
Particular 2
Tribunal finds the evidence supports Ms Dene’s admission of Particular 2.
The Tribunal finds that the conduct of Ms Dene
is significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or experience. The Tribunal
is also of the view that this constitutes
improper conduct.
Particular 3
respect to Particular 3(a) the Tribunal notes that Ms Dene did not write up the
notes of the session on 21 October 2003 for many
months, and the evidence of Dr
Brechman-Toussaint as set out above. The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that
Ms Dene did not provide
all relevant information to Dr Brechman-Toussaint in
relation to the risk of harm to Miss B and Miss C and that this conduct
demonstrates
a lack of knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the practice of
psychology that is significantly below the standard reasonably expected
psychologist of an equivalent level of training or experience. The Tribunal is
also of the view that the conduct is unethical
and improper.
respect to Particular 3(b) the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Ms Dene did
not adequately reconsider the question of whether
or not Miss B and Miss C were
at risk at the time the referral of the children was made to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint. The Tribunal accepts
the submissions made by the HCCC in
this regard. As an aside at this point the Tribunal notes the comments made by
Ms Dene in the
case review made on 28 September 2004 record the rationale for
the referral of the children to Dr Brechman-Toussaint as follows:
Rationale to assist father to maintain safe behaviours with
Even to suggest that children should be involved in such a
process is well outside the bounds of appropriate conduct. The Tribunal
the view that this conduct demonstrates a lack of knowledge, skill, judgment and
care in the practice of psychology that is
significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training or
experience. The Tribunal
is also of the view that the conduct is unethical and
respect to Particular 3(c) the Tribunal repeats the view that the statutory
obligations placed on a registered psychologist cannot
be delegated to another
person. Even if it were the case that both Dr Brechman-Toussaint and Dr Donnelly
were fully informed of all
the information disclosed by Mr A and advised Ms Dene
that a report was not required, it was still incumbent on Ms Dene to satisfy
herself that this was in fact the case. While this may appear to be a high
standard, the Tribunal is of the view that this benchmarks
the appropriate
standard for a registered health professional. This is particularly so having
regard to the carefully crafted legislative
scheme that has been designed by the
Parliament to ensure that the protection of children from abuse is a paramount
consideration.
The evidence is that Dr Donnelly did not read the notes made by
Ms Dene and that Dr Brechman-Toussaint had been assured that there
was no sexual
abuse in this matter. In any case their advice was that Ms Dene was not a
mandatory reporter rather than the conduct
not warranting such a report. The
Tribunal is of the view that this conduct demonstrates a lack of knowledge,
skill, judgment and
care in the practice of psychology that is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent
of training or experience. The Tribunal is also of the view that the conduct is
unethical and improper.
Particular 4
Tribunal finds the evidence supports Ms Dene’s admission of Particular
4(a). While the Tribunal accepts the evidence demonstrates
that Dr Donnelly
believes he would have encouraged Ms Dene to hold the session involving Miss B
and the Tribunal makes comments elsewhere
regarding his conduct, the Tribunal
reiterates that the duty of every health professional to work within their area
of competence
is not able to be delegated or off loaded. The Tribunal finds that
this conduct demonstrates a lack of knowledge, skill, judgment
and care in the
practice of psychology that is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a psychologist of an equivalent
level of training or experience. The
Tribunal is also of the view that the conduct is unethical and improper.
Tribunal finds the evidence supports Ms Dene’s admission of Particular
4(b). The involvement of Miss B in the therapeutic
process was extremely
inappropriate. The potential for harm created by such an intervention is
enormous. The Tribunal finds that
the conduct of Ms Dene is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of
or experience. The Tribunal is also of the view that the conduct is
unethical and improper.
Tribunal finds the evidence supports Ms Dene’s admission of Particular
4(c). The failure to properly assess Miss B or to
ensure her welfare in relation
to her involvement in the therapeutic process was extremely inappropriate. The
Tribunal finds that
the conduct of Ms Dene is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training
experience. The Tribunal is of the view that this conduct is of such a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation
psychologist’s registration. The Tribunal is also of the view that the
conduct is unethical and improper.
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct detailed in Particular 4 is of such a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension
or cancellation of the
psychologist’s registration. The Tribunal makes a finding of professional
misconduct with respect to
this Particular standing alone.
Particular 5
Tribunal notes that the submissions made by Ms Dene with respect to Particular
5(a) rely on the submissions made regarding Particular
1(a). These submissions
do not relate to the professional obligations to which Ms Dene was required to
adhere. There is no evidence
that Dr Brechman-Toussaint was informed of any
further disclosures made by Mr A. There is nothing that records Ms Dene seeking
guidance with Dr Donnelly as the incremental disclosures continued
during the sessions with Mr A. The Tribunal refers to the comments
relation to Particular 1(a), in particular, the Tribunal notes that eventually
Ms Dene formed the view that a report should
be made and ultimately made that
disclosure to DoCS.
respect to Particular 5(a) the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Ms Dene
failed to properly understand the legal and professional
obligation incumbent
upon her in cases of potential child abuse. The Tribunal finds that the
conduct of Ms Dene is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent level of training or experience.
respect to Particular 5(b) the Tribunal repeats the remarks made regarding
Particular 1(b).
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Ms Dene failed to make a report to DoCS of
the disclosures made to her by Mr A in accordance
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
Tribunal finds that the conduct of Ms Dene is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent
level of training or
experience. The Tribunal is also of the view that the conduct is unethical and
Tribunal repeats the remarks made regarding Particular 1(c) with respect to
Particular 5(c).
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Ms Dene failed to take adequate steps to
assess whether or not Miss B or Miss C were at
The Tribunal finds
that the conduct of Ms Dene is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a psychologist of an equivalent
level of training or experience. The
Tribunal is also of the view that the conduct is unethical and improper.
Tribunal repeats the remarks made regarding Particular 1(d) with respect to
Particular 5(d).
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Ms Dene failed to appreciate the risk of
harm to Miss B and Miss C
The Tribunal finds that the conduct of Ms
Dene is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist
equivalent level of training or experience.
Tribunal repeats the remarks made regarding Particular 1(e) with respect to
Particular 5(e).
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Ms Dene failed to take appropriate action
to protect the safety and welfare of Miss B and
The Tribunal
finds that the conduct of Ms Dene is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training or experience.
Tribunal repeats the remarks made regarding Particular 1(f) with respect to
Particular 5(f).
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Ms Dene did not comply with the Code of
Ethical Conduct when she failed to communicate the
facts of the disclosure to
appropriate professionals or organisations. The Tribunal finds that the conduct
of Ms Dene is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent level of training or experience. The Tribunal is
the view that the conduct is unethical.
Tribunal repeats the remarks made regarding Particular 1(f) with respect to
Particular 5(g), adding that the Tribunal would have
expected Ms Dene to make a
re-assessment of whether or not a report should have been made of the
disclosures each and every time
there was further disclosure. Apart from Ms
Dene’s evidence that eventually she made the decision to report (which she
inexplicably delayed for an inordinate period of time) there is nothing to
suggest that she undertook these further assessments.
Tribunal accepts that ultimately Ms Dene did make a voluntary disclosure to
DoCS. As set out in the Complaint, this Particular
fails, however, the Tribunal
is of the view that Ms Dene inexplicably delayed the voluntary reporting of the
disclosure. In the circumstances,
the Tribunal will not take this view into
account when making a determination with respect to the Complaints.
Tribunal repeats the remarks made regarding Particular 1(h) with respect to
Particular 5(h). In addition, the Tribunal notes that
the treatment of Mr A
continued over a significant period of time. While the Tribunal has accepted
that Ms Dene was in a state of
high emotional stress both during and immediately
after the disclosure session on 21 October 2003, subsequently there was a
significant
period of time for Ms Dene to reflect on her reaction and to seek
opinion other than that of Dr Donnelly. Each and every time there
was a further
disclosure made by Mr A there should have been a re-consideration by Ms Dene as
to whether or not the matter was within
her area of competency. This is not a
matter where the lack of competence and experience of a psychologist may result
for a few more sessions to be held for a desired outcome to be
reached. This is a matter where extremely serious outcomes potentially
from incompetent and/or inexperienced treatment.
the comments made by the Tribunal in the findings regarding Particular 1(h),
while the Tribunal has already made a finding
that it does not accept the
evidence of Ms Dene that her own emotional state was
into the clinical notes to the point that rendered the
clinical notes inaccurate, it is quite clear from the contents of the notes
(particularly the preparation for the session to allow Mr A to tell Miss B that
he was ‘sorry’ for his conduct, the preparation
of Mr A for the
report to DoCS, and the dominance of considerations for Mr A) that she was not
in any way suited to continue with
Mr A. There is no documentation of any
reconsideration of her suitability to continue with the treatment. This finding
is consistent
with her subsequent avoidance of any work that involves the
possibility of sexual abuse being raised with her and her highly emotional
fragile presentation of Ms Dene whilst giving her evidence before the Tribunal.
The Tribunal finds that the conduct of Ms Dene
as set out in Particular 5(h) is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of
training or experience. The Tribunal is also of the view
that the conduct is unethical and improper.
respect to Particular 5(i) the Tribunal finds the evidence supports Ms
Dene’s admission of this Particular. The Code of
Ethical Conduct requires
that a psychologist only work within their area of competence. The additional
disclosures should have caused
Ms Dene to re-assess her own ability to deal with
the continuing care of Mr A. While it is to be expected that all psychologists
should be able to make appropriate initial assessments it is not expected that
all psychologists will be able to treat the full range
of clients. Not only have
clinical psychologists completed additional training in the treatment of
clients, specialist areas such
as Child and Adolescent Mental Health, Drug and
Alcohol Addiction and Sexual Assault have been well established within the
of psychology for many years. Ms Dene was the person with the primary
responsibility for the care of Mr A. Ms Dene had no specialised
training in this
area. The Tribunal finds that the conduct of Ms Dene is significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of
a psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or experience.
Particular 6
stated elsewhere, the Tribunal is severely critical of the period of time
between when she resolved to report the matter to DoCS
and when she ultimately
made a report to DoCS. The delay in making a report is inexplicable and
inexcusable. The Tribunal finds the
evidence supports Ms Dene’s admission
of Particular 6. The Tribunal is of view this conduct demonstrates a lack of
skill, judgment and care in the practice of psychology that is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist
equivalent level of training or experience. The Tribunal is also of the view
that the conduct is unethical and improper.
Particular 7
main area of criticism with respect to the clinical records (Particular 7) is
found to be Ms Dene’s delay in writing up
the clinical notes for the
session on 21 October 2003. The Tribunal has elsewhere indicated it rejects the
evidence of Ms Dene that
her own history of abuse was
in the notes and that they were therefore an inaccurate
record of the sessions. The Tribunal finds that the conduct of Ms Dene
demonstrates
a lack of knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the practice of
psychology is significantly below the standard reasonably expected
psychologist of an equivalent level of training or experience. The Tribunal is
also of the view that the conduct is unethical
and improper.
if the Tribunal had taken the view that Ms Dene could rely to some extent on the
views of her supervisors once she made decision
to report this matter to DoCS
the delay was unconscionable.
Findings in relation to the Complaints – Ms
Complaint One
set out above, the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the conduct of most of
the Particulars of the Complaint constitute unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Complaint One is established.
Complaint Two
Tribunal accepts (as is submitted by both Respondent’s) that Mr A was the
first long term clinical psychological interaction
undertaken by Ms Dene and
this was the first time Dr Donnelly had supervised a practitioner/student
undertaking long term treatment
of a patient.
Tribunal accepts that Ms Dene was placed in a difficult position by the deficit
in the guidance provided by Dr Donnelly. The
input of Dr Brechman-Toussaint was
not ideal. The submission made on behalf of Ms Dene was to the effect that she
was placed in a
quite impossible situation
Dene’s submission - paragraph 128). Every registered health professional
has to ultimately take responsibility
for their own actions. That is an integral
part of the responsibility that accompanies the privilege of registration. The
before the Tribunal would not allow comfortable satisfaction that Ms
Dene revisited the situation with Dr Donnelly as new information
came to hand to
ensure she had the benefit of ‘
clarification, advice and
Tribunal accepts that Ms Dene’s conduct could be characterised as
misguided. To some extent it was misguided by the lack
of effective supervision;
however it was also misguided by factors internal to Ms Dene. Ms Dene did not in
any way make accommodation
for her reaction to the disclosure, for her own
history, for her limited experience in psychology, and in particular for her
of experience in this area of psychology and to the fact that Dr Donnelly
did not actively supervise her treatment of Mr A.
Tribunal has no doubt that Ms Dene thought she was acting with the best of
intentions in this matter. Whether or not conduct is
well intentioned is not the
test. In the matter of
Health Care Complaints Commission v Lopez
(30 September 2008) where the intention of the endorsed enrolled nurse
(EEN) was to administer medication to a patient. It was the
manner in which the
EEN went about administering the medication that was the issue, oral medication
via an IV line, that was the
misconduct.
Tribunal notes evidence given by Ms Dene herself confirms she was aware that
Miss B was being abused. The Tribunal looks to evidence
such as (T45.45-48,
Q. So you're clear that the content of what you were told was
A. Clearly, now when I look back, it was. I believed the child was
harmed. I didn't believe it was sexual harm.
the submission made on behalf of Ms Dene at paragraph 131 to the effect that if
she had received the assistance, advice and guidance
she was entitled to receive
‘then the disclosure may have been made at a much earlier
is read with the word ‘
disclosure’
by the word ‘
’ meaning a report to DoCS then the
Tribunal accepts that it is likely that the report would have been made at an
earlier stage.
Tribunal notes that there was still many months of delay after the time that Ms
Dene had formed the view for herself that the
conduct should be reported and at
the time she did make the report she had long ceased supervision with Dr
Donnelly. There certainly
can be no offloading of Ms Dene’s responsibility
past the time she formed the view to report. Further, as noted elsewhere,
evidence of Ms Dene was that the advice she received was that she was not a
mandated reporter, rather than the conduct not being
reportable conduct.
Similarly, the submissions regarding the conduct of Ms Dene do not address the
issue of the period of time after
Ms Dene ceased supervision and had made the
decision to report the conduct when making submissions regarding professional
misconduct.
to the submission at paragraph 134, the Tribunal does not find in the evidence
support for the submission that the peer reviewers
consider the conduct Ms Dene
acceptable. As set out elsewhere, while a provisionally registered psychologist
should look to their
supervisor for assistance and guidance there can be no
total abdication of professional responsibilities. At the end of the day it
the person in the treatment room with the client that bears the ultimate
responsibility for their conduct. This does not exculpate
a supervisor from
his/her own responsibilities as these exist separately and distinctly from the
responsibility of the supervisee.
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC regarding the characterisation
of this conduct as professional misconduct (paragraphs
78 to 81 of the 18
September 2009 submissions).
indicated above, the Tribunal finds the conduct of Ms Dene as set out in
Particular 4(c) constitutes professional misconduct. The
Tribunal is also of the
view that when the balance of the Particulars are considered together that the
conduct amounts to professional
misconduct in that the conduct was of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of her
registration.
Protective Orders – Generally
primary function of the Tribunal is to protect the public. Other matters to be
considered by the Tribunal as relevant considerations
are the maintaining of
standards within the profession, a general deterrent effect and the maintaining
of public confidence in the
profession. The Tribunal therefore must consider
orders that fulfil these roles. Whilst it is an established principle of law
the Tribunal should impose the least restrictive Orders possible in the
circumstances, the protection of the public is paramount
and outweighs
consideration of the onerous burdens that Orders may place upon a practitioner.
In this matter the maintenance of confidence
that the public is entitled to
expect in the profession of psychology, the maintenance of proper standards
within the profession
and the general deterrent effect are prominent
considerations.
Protective Orders – Ms Dene
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC in paragraphs 82 to 92 as to
the appropriate orders to be made. It is of significant
concern to the Tribunal
that Ms Dene did not have the insight to seek counselling until just recently,
and then it appears the arrangements
were made with the assistance of her legal
advisers. There is no doubt that Ms Dene requires treatment and it is
commendable that
her legal advisers have facilitated this clinical intervention.
Tribunal has carefully considered the role of the advice Ms Dene received from
her supervisors. It is indeed unfortunate that
Ms Dene was not more closely
supervised and was provided with supervision of such a poor quality. The
Tribunal accepts the HCCC submission
(made in reply dated 9 November 2009) that
Ms Dene is not entitled to rely on a claim that her conduct was subject to the
and guidance of her supervisor. The Tribunal accepts that at all times
Ms Dene had access to the DoCS helpline. Her apparent low
opinion of the
services provided by DoCS does not absolve her of acting in accordance with the
legal and professional requirements
of a registered psychologist.
conduct of Ms Dene was such that the Tribunal cannot be satisfied that Ms Dene
is currently safe to practise psychology even with
a comprehensive range of
conditions in place. The Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC
(particularly those set out in
paragraph 91 of the submissions dated 18
September 2009) as to the reasons why the only appropriate order to be made is
one of de-registration,
or if she is not currently on the Register and order
that she remain off the Register for a period of time.
Tribunal has carefully considered the appropriate time for Ms Dene to remain off
the Register. At least by 21 October 2003 Ms
Dene became aware that her own
history had intruded into her practice as a psychologist. Until just recently,
Ms Dene had not sought
any treatment in that regard, and then only did so with
the assistance of her legal advisers. The issues facing Ms Dene are well
entrenched. The evidence before the Tribunal supports there being no
‘quick fix’ for these issues. The nature of the
conduct is also
relevant. Ms Dene allowed children to remain in a highly vulnerable risk of harm
situation for a very significant
prolonged period of time. The Tribunal has had
regard to the references provided by two colleagues and a friend and has no
that Ms Dene performed well as a mediator.
was however nothing before the Tribunal, apart from comments from Ms Dene, which
would provide any reassurance that conduct
of this nature would not recur or
that Ms Dene’s own history would not intrude into her practice again. Time
to read and consider
ethical matters will certainly assist Ms Dene. Weighing all
factors relevant to the consideration of the minimum period Ms Dene should
remain off the register the Tribunal is of the view that a minimum period of
years is required.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Ms Dene currently poses a substantial risk
to the safety of the public, particularly with
respect to any matters involving
sexual assault. The Tribunal will make a Prohibition Order with respect to the
provision of health
service that involve therapy, counselling, psychotherapy,
hypnotherapy, mental health services, any other alternative/healing
healthcare/therapies
and welfare service as defined in
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
the Respondent makes an application for re-registration, this Tribunal is of the
view that such an application should be determined
by a Tribunal.
While this decision makes it quite clear that a formal Complaint of impairment
was not considered by the Tribunal, the fragile mental
health of Ms Dene
certainly played a significant role in many aspects of this matter. The mental
health status of Ms Dene is certainly
a matter that should be considered if an
application for re-registration is made, or indeed if the matter is in any way
or considered.
Submissions of Ms Dene re Suppression Order and Costs
application for a suppression order with respect to the personal details of Ms
Dene in the final submissions is not granted. The
Tribunal notes the evidence
was given in an open hearing. The basis for the application does not meet the
‘special and exceptional circumstances
’ set by the
Court of Appeal in
Momot & Anor
NSWCA 17 April 1997.
Further, an understanding of the background of Ms Dene provides the context for
her reaction and is essential
to be an integral part of her addressing the
deficits in her practice demonstrated by the decision in this matter.
submissions did not provide any reasons why the costs in the matter should be
limited to four days. While the length of the hearing
was marginally increased
by the matter being heard together, the total hearing time for two separate
matters would have been higher.
As each Respondent is only bearing half of the
costs, the results will be lower than they would have been in a separate
Orders re Ms Dene
Tribunal orders:
(1) That the
name of the Respondent, Ms Dene, be cancelled from the Register from close of
business on 6 August 2010 (if her name
has not already been removed
administratively). From the date of this document until 6 August 2010 Ms Dene is
to limit her practise
(if she is entitled to practise) to current clients and is
to only see each client on no more than two occasions for the purpose
terminating treatment and referring the clients on appropriately.
(2) That The
Respondent, Ms Dene, is not to reapply for registration for a minimum period of
three years from the date hereof.
(3) That the
Respondent, Ms Dene, is prohibited from providing the following health services
for a period of three years from close
of business on 6 August 2010 (assuming
she holds current Registration) or from the date hereof if she does not):
(i) therapy
(ii) counselling
(iii) psychotherapy
(iv) hypnotherapy
health service
(vi) welfare
services (as defined in
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
(vii) any other
alternative/healing health care/therapies.
(4) After the expiry of the period of three years in Order 3 above, the
Respondent, Ms Dene, is permitted to provide these health
services on the
condition that she gains registration as a psychologist or other health
professional, at which time the registration
authority should consider the
further continuation of the prohibition order.
(5) The Respondent, Ms Dene, is to pay the costs of the HCCC with respect to the
preparation of her matter for hearing and half of
the HCCC costs with respect to
the joint hearing.
Dr Donnelly - Submissions
noted above the submissions made by each party are annexed hereto (Annexure
The Tribunal sets out below a mere summary of the submissions and the
Tribunals consideration thereof.
Submissions - HCCC re Dr Donnelly
HCCC submitted that both Complaints should be found proved by the Tribunal (see
paragraphs 74 to 83 annexed).
Obligations of a supervisor
HCCC made submissions regarding the obligations of Dr Donnelly as a supervisor
of Ms Dene in paragraphs 9 to 16 inclusive. Further
at paragraph 38 the HCCC
submitted that between June 2003 and November 2004 Dr Donnelly provided therapy
to Mr A and/or his daughter
Miss B either directly or through his supervision of
Ms Dene as Ms Dene was providing those services under his supervision.
HCCC made submissions regarding the obligations of Dr Donnelly as regards Miss B
in paragraph 17.
Reporting obligations
HCCC made submissions regarding the reporting obligations of Dr Donnelly and
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
in paragraphs 18 to 20 inclusive.
Nature of the Disclosure
HCCC made submissions regarding the nature and extent of the disclosure made by
Mr A in October 2003 in paragraphs 21 to 26.
Candour and insight
HCCC made submissions regarding the candour and insight of Dr Donnelly in
paragraphs 27 to 37 inclusive.
Submissions regarding Particulars
HCCC made submissions regarding Particular 1 in paragraphs 39 to 54 inclusive.
HCCC noted that Dr Donnelly’s letter to the Regional University (volume 1
–exhibit 6 pages 3 and 4) advised that Mr
‘complicated
clinical presentation
’ and that any case involving paedophilia would
be inappropriate as a training case at a University (Particular 1(h) and (i)).
The submission also noted that Dr Donnelly must have appreciated he had
‘influence over’
Ms Dene and that it was Ms Dene’s
evidence that she was initially reluctant to continue with Mr A. The HCCC
submitted that
it was likely that allowing continued contact with Mr A would be
detrimental to Ms Dene and also ‘
make her more vulnerable to grooming
(paragraph 52).
HCCC made submissions regarding Particular 2 in paragraphs 55 to 58 (see
HCCC made submissions regarding Particular 3 in paragraphs 59 to 62 (see
HCCC made submissions regarding Particular 4 in paragraphs 63 to 65 (see
HCCC made submissions regarding Particular 5 in paragraph 66 (see annexed).
HCCC made submissions regarding Particular 6 in paragraph 67 (see annexed).
HCCC made submissions regarding Particular 7 in paragraph 69 - 71 (see annexed).
HCCC made submissions regarding Particular 8 in paragraphs 72 and 73 (see
Submissions - Dr Donnelly
Submissions
dated 4 November 2009 were filed on behalf of Dr Donnelly.
is submitted on behalf of Dr Donnelly that Ms Dene informed him that Mr A
disclosed to her that he had
‘massaged his daughter
sometimes during that massage his hand had brushed or moved over her pubic
(paragraph 4(c)). Dr Donnelly denies the disclosure was in the
terms set out in paragraph 21 of the HCCC submissions.
8 of the submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly make submissions regarding
the status of the clinical record made by
Ms Dene of the session with Mr A on 21
October 2003. The submission note that the clinical record was not
contemporaneous, being
written some 14 months after the event. The submission
also state that the HCCC submissions ignore the evidence of Ms Dene that the
clinical record was not accurate as her own issues were
and that they were
‘appalling’,
‘overstate what she was told by Mr A’
and ‘cannot be relied upon’
paragraph 9 the Tribunal is asked not to accept the HCCC submission placing
reliance on statements provided by Mr A as to what
he alleged to have disclosed
in October 2003 as he was not called for cross-examination during these
proceeding and therefore is
an inference, used to support a likelihood as to the
disclosure occurring in the manner recorded in the notes written by Ms Dene.
Submissions regarding Particulars
13 to 19 of the submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly relate to the
amendment of Particular 1(g) and the subsequent
scope that should be given to
this Particular. Clearly, this Particular is limited by virtue of its wording to
the failure to communicate
the fact of Mr A’s disclosures to appropriate
professionals or organisations.
20 to 36 of the submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly address the issue of
the nature of the initial disclosure made
by Mr A in October 2003.
was submitted that the notes made by Ms Dene cannot be relied upon to have the
accuracy expected of contemporaneous notes as Ms
Dene gave evidence that the
notes she made were inaccurate and
‘appalling’
22). Reference is made to the specific evidence of Ms Dene (T19.6.09, Page
222.15-28). In this evidence Ms Dene stated
that she had only realised earlier
in 2009 (i.e. prior to giving her evidence before the Tribunal) how inaccurate
the notes were.
Ms Dene stated that she had not included a record of the fact
that Dr Brechman-Toussaint had not done what she as ‘supposed’
(when she consulted the children), that the notes contained her
‘subjective impression’, and her own issues had
to the notes made at the University clinic and in her own
private practice. The submission notes that the evidence of Ms Dene, given
oath, regarding the inaccuracy of her notes was repeated several times.
was further submitted that regard should be made for the evidence concerning
when the clinical notes for that session were actually
written, being some time
in late 2004.
submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly note that he was not present while Ms
Dene gave her evidence, that the oral evidence
of Dr Donnelly and Ms Dene was
strikingly similar on the issue of the nature of the disclosure made by Mr A,
that they were each
separately represented throughout the proceedings, there was
no suggestion of collaboration between them and no evidence that Dr
Donnelly’s evidence was a recent invention.
the evidence of Dr Donnelly is consistent with the explanation he provided to
the HCCC (HCCC Donnelly volume 1 – tab
final matter submitted for consideration with respect to the nature of the
disclosure are details of the session conducted with
Mr A by Dr Donnelly after
the disclosure
‘in order to question Mr A about the massage
(paragraph 34 of the submissions). It is submitted that the
disclosure made to Dr Donnelly by Mr A on that occasion was consistent
Ms Dene had reported to him.
was submitted on behalf of Dr Donnelly that the nature of the disclosure to Ms
‘was that he had given his daughter a massage at night to help her
relax in which sometimes when giving that massage his hand
moved or brushed over
her pubic region’
(paragraph 35).
submission made on behalf of Dr Donnelly in paragraphs 37 to 42 deal with the
use of the word ‘inappropriate’ in the
Particulars of the Complaint.
is submitted that if the Tribunal made a finding that Mr A had disclosed he had
B’s pubic region then there would be no doubt that such touch was not only
inappropriate but reprehensible. However,
it is submitted that the word
inappropriate appears to have arisen from the clinical notes prepared by Ms
Dene. The submissions regarding
Ms Dene’s evidence as to the quality of
her notes is repeated but in addition it is submitted that Ms Dene’s
explanation
for the use of the word inappropriate should also be considered. Ms
Dene’s evidence explained that the massage was inappropriate
because of Mr
dependency’
on his daughter and that this was a
boundary violation (see T19.6.09, page 56.43-47.40).
submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly state that the only
‘inappropriate’
feelings or thoughts that Mr A disclosed to
either Dr Donnelly or Ms Dene was his sexual thoughts for women in their 20s.
The submissions
also state that the references in the clinical notes made by Ms
Dene should not be seen as ‘red flags’ as indicators
perversion as Dr Bank’s suggests.
43 to 49 address the evidence of Dr Banks more specifically and submit that the
entirety of his reports should be rejected
by the Tribunal. The basis for such
rejection, it was submitted, was primarily that Dr Banks had based his opinions
on the clinical
notes of Ms Dene, which Ms Dene described during the Inquiry as
‘appalling’. It was submitted that his reports were then
compromised
’ by having been provided with information such
as the police brief and the reports from Cedar Cottage when they contained
information
not known to either Ms Dene or Dr Donnelly at the relevant time.
50 and 51 address the issue whether or not Dr Donnelly was providing treatment
to Mr A’s children. It was submitted
on behalf of Dr Donnelly that he was
treating Mrs A and through the supervision of Ms Dene, Mr A. However, Dr
Donnelly accepts that
he is a mandated reporter, having obligations under the
relevant legislation to make a report ‘
if he had current
(paragraph 51).
52 to 57 deal with the reporting obligations under the
Children and Young
Persons (Care and Protection) Act
NSW. It was submitted and
accepted that Dr Donnelly was a mandated reporter. The submissions deal with the
‘subjectivity’
inherent in the test of whether a child is at risk of
harm for the purposes of section 23 of the Act.
submission emphasises the use of the words ‘current concern’ and the
requirement for there to be the presence of one
or more of a list of one of the
circumstances listed in sub-paragraphs (a) to (f). Further, it is submitted that
the interpretation
set out in the HCCC submissions was not an accurate
interpretation of section 23. The submission notes that
‘much does turn
upon the Tribunal’s findings as to what was disclosed by Mr A on 21
October 2003’
submissions reference several parts of the transcript that support the
proposition that it cannot be disputed that Dr Donnelly
did not fail to consider
whether a report had to be made to DoCS. Dr Donnelly considered the
circumstances and determined they did
not warrant a report.
submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly deal specifically with Particular 1 of
the Complaints in paragraphs 58 to 83. In summary,
the submissions concede that
the Tribunal’s finding with respect to the nature of the disclosure made
by Mr A on 21 October
2003 applies to all of the Particulars of Complaint, but
are especially pertinent to Particulars 1(a) to (i).
Tribunal has set out elsewhere in this document the reasons why it has not, as a
matter of fact, accepted the submission of Dr
Donnelly regarding the nature of
the disclosure made by Mr A on 21 October 2003. The submissions made on behalf
of Dr Donnelly concede
that if the Tribunal was so satisfied (comfortably
satisfied) then Dr Donnelly accepts that the disclosure should have been
to DoCS and the failure to do so would satisfy Particulars 1 (a), (b),
(f) and (g).
submission continues by another reference to the evidence disclosing that both
he and Ms Dene did consider and discuss
‘whether or not a report had to
be made in light of the disclosure of Mr A’.
It was further submitted
that there was evidence (T 18.8.09, pages10.39 -11.30) that Dr Donnelly
reassessed whether or not to make
a report. At this point the Tribunal notes
that this submission is relevant to Particular 3(c) rather than 1(d).
was submitted on behalf of Dr Donnelly that the HCCC relies upon the evidence of
Dr Banks with respect to Particular 1(e) and 1(f).
The submission notes the
evidence of Dr Banks (at page 14 of his report dated 8 June 2007) included the
following comment:
Taking into account the disclosure [Mr A] made to Ms Dene and
subsequently reviewed with her supervisor, for Dr Donnelly to then assume
the children were “safe” without having had any direct contact with
them represents the next critical error of judgment
and failure to ensure their
is submitted on behalf of Dr Donnelly that the view expressed in the evidence of
Dr Banks is
‘based solely on the disclosure that was made by Mr A on 21
October 2003’.
The submission then notes that the HCCC submission was
that the case against Dr Donnelly with respect to Particular 1(f) ‘
all premised upon the fact that the disclosure made by Mr A was in the form and
to the extent which it now alleges’
. The submission continues:
Insofar as such criticisms of Dr Donnelly are based upon a
disclosure that was not made, then such criticism cannot be sustained.
does not advance any other basis for sustaining of the allegations against Dr
Donnelly on this aspect of the particular.
paragraphs 68 to 81 extensive submissions are made regarding Particulars 1(h)
and 1 (i). The submission notes that the HCCC is
again underpinned by the
assumption that Mr A disclosed on 21 October 2003 that he deliberately and
regularly touched Miss B’s
pubic region in a sexual way and that he had
sexual thoughts about his daughter.
70 of the submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly address an
‘allegation that Dr Donnelly permitted Ms Dene to provide therapy to Mr
A over the course of at least 42 sessions as being excessive’
indicates this allegation is also disputed. This is the subject of Particular 8
of the Complaint. It is submitted that the involvement
of interns in long-term
treatment is a matter
‘on which different minds will
. Reference is made to the evidence of Dr Donnelly (T17/8/09,
41.49-42.43). This evidence was:
Q. Dr Donnelly, can I ask you, you used a reference in
giving your evidence a short time ago to long-term therapy, can you explain
you haven't already and tell me what if the evidence you have given covers this,
but why did you make the decision to involve
Ms Dene is what has been
described as long-term therapy?
A. The point of reference is in the literature. This idea of revolving
door therapy, there is a dissertation by Lenneberg in 1999
that speaks to it but
this is in Australia, it's a clinical training program in South Australia. But
again from my perspective with
my training to not expose interns to long-term
therapy is highly unethical. I think it throws people into the deep-end when
out there as a fully registered psychologist to have never seen a case
for more than eight weeks I think it's just unfathomable to
me. It was one of
the huge flaws that I saw in the training program. Now when you think about a
case that really requires long-term
treatment, for example, a family coping with
a mother with a chronic illness that's degenerative, where there are repeated
in function, repeated events that cause a destabilising effect within a
family, that there are new therapeutic issues, to think that
what you should do
is have someone see that case like in a university clinic or even a clinical
psychologist fully registered, to
change therapists every six months, every
year, for a 20-year course of treatment it's absolutely ludicrous. I think it's
good treatment.
The other side of it is that, how do you deal with transference and
countertransference issues for interns if you don't ever get to
see them. You
can't insulate interns from that kind of - from that experience and then expect
them to cope with it effectively down
the road. It sets them up to have the
reactions that are cited in the literature over and over, that's why it's
dangerous to not
deal with countertransference issues in supervision. The fact
that the experts have talked about here - I know Dr Banks has absolutely
experience with long-term therapy. He testified to that. He has no experience
in providing long-term supervision.
I think it's a foreign concept and it's foreign concept that's very well
accepted in Europe and very well accepted in the US that
it's the richness of
the experience is so much greater than what's available in the training programs
that I've been exposed to here
that I constantly battle and think about how can
I create some kind of situation where an intern can feel what it's like to have
a therapeutic relationship where there's stuff comes up and they actually get a
chance to work through it in supervision. So this
was a case that called for
long-term therapy. We specifically got university department approved funding,
a collaboration with the
division of general practice to create opportunities
for the interns so they could have exposure to long-term cases, dementing cases,
people with traumatic brain injuries, people with multiple sclerosis where we
knew it was going to be a long-term course.
submission also notes that Dr Donnelly provided clinical references that
supported the view that helping an intern to work through
countertransference
issues was an essential part of their training. The submission is critical of
the view of Dr Banks on the basis
that he provided no justification for his
statement other than the ‘outcome’ of the current matter and notes
‘does not advance any further basis as to why such
practice would be hazardous to intern and client’.
Donnelly’s submissions urged the Tribunal to note the oral evidence of Ms
Dene (T17/8/09, 15.48-16.47).
paragraph 78 of the submissions, the Tribunal was referred to the evidence of Dr
Donnelly at transcript 27.36-46 and 28.39-29.42
(17/8/09). Dr Donnelly gave
evidence that he had already noted that there was
attachment’
between Mr A and Ms Dene before the disclosure. Dr
Donnelly gave details of having considered the ‘pros and cons’ of
allowing Ms Dene to continue with Mr A and his view that it is only through long
term therapy that an intern is able to identify
and deal with unresolved issues
from their own past. In summary, Dr Donnelly expressed the view that ‘you
to deal with transference and countertransference issues in the
same way in short term therapy’.
the heading ‘Paragraph 2’ the submissions deal with Particular 2 of
the Complaint at paragraphs 84 to 99.
is submitted that the bulk of the HCCC’s submission is based upon the
opinions of Dr Banks. Dr Donnelly’s submissions
gave extensive detail as
to why Dr Banks’ opinion should not be accepted (the submission indicated
this was in Part d of the
submission, which the Tribunal reads as a reference to
Part E of the submission).
submission made at paragraph 86 reads:
The HCCC has not further particularised what is meant by the
“relevant information” in the Complaints. Nor, significantly,
the HCCC do so in its written submissions. All that the HCCC says in its
submission is that it is
“clear from the evidence that salient details
were omitted in the briefing to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint”.
submissions state at paragraph 87 that it is ‘..an entirely unsatisfactory
position.....[that].... Dr Donnelly is left to
guess as to the specific nature
of the allegations made against him’.
submissions thereafter set out parts of the oral evidence of Dr
Brechman-Toussaint, Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly. It was submitted
that the Tribunal
would not be satisfied that this Particular was made out as the Tribunal should
make the following findings (paragraph
In light of the above evidence, it is submitted that the
Tribunal should find the following as regards the briefing by Dr Donnelly
Brechman-Toussaint in or around November 2003:
(a) the ‘relevant information’ that Dr Donnelly purportedly
failed to provide to Dr Brechman-Toussaint was information
contained in the
Cedar Cottage Report, NSW Police Files and the clinical notes written by Ms
(b) information that Dr Donnelly had regarding the disclosure by Mr A was
provided to him by Ms Dene; and
(c) Dr Donnelly gave Dr Brechman-Toussaint
all information
had been provided with by Ms Dene in his briefing to her (Dr
Brechman-Toussaint).
Submissions
regarding Particular 3 are made on behalf of Dr Donnelly at paragraphs 100 to
109 of the document dated 4 November 2009.
was submitted on behalf of Dr Donnelly that the Tribunal would have to make a
finding as to whether Ms Dene’s or Dr Donnelly’s
version of events
is preferred. Dr Donnelly accepts that he was aware that Ms Dene was aware of Ms
Dene’s ‘desire’
to involve Miss B in a therapeutic session but
denies any knowledge that Ms Dene
‘proposed to undertake the session on
15 September 2004 without proper steps being taken to ensure [Miss B’s]
(paragraph 102). It was submitted that the discussions on
this topic had been brief but that Dr Donnelly had indicated that as the
treatment of the children had been provided by Dr Brechman-Toussaint that she
should be involved in the process. Dr Donnelly’s
evidence was that he had
told Ms Dene to leave the treatment of the children to Dr Brechman-Toussaint. As
no discussion of details
such as how and when the session would be conducted had
taken place, Dr Donnelly submits that he was surprised when Ms Dene conducted
the session.
was submitted that in contrast to the evidence of Dr Donnelly, Ms Dene’s
evidence was ‘
confusing and convoluted
’ (paragraph 106),
making particular reference to the evidence given by Ms Dene at T29.29-30.45
was submitted that the HCCC had not pointed to a ‘scintilla’ of
evidence to support the proposition that Dr Donnelly
encouraged or permitted Ms
Dene to involve Miss B in a therapy session without steps being taken to assess
or ensure Miss B’s
submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly deal with Particular 4 in paragraphs
110 to 115. Dr Donnelly conceded (in cross-examination)
that he was not checking
Ms Dene’s clinical notes regularly by October 2003. It is further accepted
that the evidence of Dr
Donnelly was that if he had looked at the notes he would
have seen that Ms Dene was ‘
going wrong
’. He accepted that he
should have checked the notes more regularly.
submissions reproduced part of the evidence of Dr Donnelly wherein details of
the manner in which he undertook supervision of
Ms Dene post the disclosure made
in October 2003. Dr Donnelly describes having previously read the notes of Ms
Dene but over time
had found this process to be redundant as he found the face
to face meetings with Ms Dene to be more informative and reflected what
written in the notes. Dr Donnelly stated that this failure to read the notes was
a departure from his ‘
own model of supervision
’ but that he
‘sufficient evidence that she was managing that part of the role as
. Dr Donnelly acknowledged that he had not kept any notes of
the supervision. Dr Donnelly also gave evidence that supervision could
actually sitting in the room with an intern or reviewing a video of a session
frame by frame
was submitted that Ms Dene’s evidence was that for the period July 2003 to
September 2004 supervision was irregular and not
recorded in the log book. Ms
Dene confirmed that she was informing Dr Donnelly of the disclosures made to her
submission lists a number of factors that Dr Donnelly had balanced at the time
he decided to change the supervision method he
used with Ms Dene. The factors
balanced by Dr Donnelly were:
Ms Dene was enrolled in the doctoral program at
Regional University and was accordingly a provisionally registered
psychologist;
(b) Ms Dene had already undertaken clinical practicums under the
supervision of Dr Donnelly and Dr Brechman-Toussaint. Each of them
had rated Ms
Dene extremely highly in relation to her various areas of competency, including
her note-taking ability. In fact, her
assessment was judged as against
Master’s degree level employee.
Donnelly submission on this Particular concluded ‘
although comment may
be necessary about his failure to review Ms Dene’s clinical notes, the
Tribunal will not be comfortably
satisfied that this alone warrants a finding
that the Complaint is made out based on this particular’
submissions made on behalf Dr Donnelly with respect to Particular 5 (at
paragraphs 116 &117 – footnotes omitted):
only justification in support of this particular is that Dr Donnelly was aware
of Ms Dene’s history of child sex abuse and
that her disclosure to Mr A in
October 2003 made her more vulnerable to grooming. The underlying premise of
that submission is that
Dr Donnelly knew or considered Mr A to be a paedophile.
This is vehemently and strenuously denied by Dr Donnelly.
Donnelly relies upon the matters submitted above in paragraphs 70 - 81 in the
then known circumstances of the case in further support
of this particular.
submissions made on behalf Dr Donnelly with respect to Particular 6 (at
paragraphs 118 &119 – footnotes omitted):
Donnelly agrees that he did not make a report to DoCS during the period January
2005-August 2005. Dr Donnelly was not providing
treatment to Mr A after late
November 2004. He was not responsible for the treatment of Mr A during this
Donnelly accepts that he signed the discharge summary. The evidence of Ms Dene
is that the discharge summary was not signed until
June 2005. The discharge
summary also suffers from the same defects.
submissions made on behalf Dr Donnelly with respect to Particular 7 (at
paragraphs 120 &121 – footnotes omitted):
Donnelly concedes that he did not maintain a clinical record regarding his
provision of treatment of Mr A on 27 October 2003. This
was a joint session,
started by Ms Dene in which Dr Donnelly joined and was thereafter present with
Ms Dene. Dr Donnelly relied upon
Ms Dene to keep record of the therapy sessions
with Mr A. The obligation to keep the records was part of Ms Dene’s
requirements
in the Regional University course. Dr Donnelly was operating under
the assumption that Ms Dene did keep such records. In fact, the
evidence in the
Tribunal hearing is that Ms Dene did in fact prepare a clinical record of this
Dr Banks’ observations that there were no notes kept of that
session is therefore incorrect.
Any criticism of Dr Donnelly by Dr
Banks in this regard must surely be tempered by the fact that notes of the
session were kept, however
not by Dr Donnelly personally.
[Highlighting
added by Tribunal]
the extent that the HCC purports to rely upon Dr Donnelly’s act in signing
the discharge summary as establishing this particular
of the Complaints, it is
noted that this was not relied upon by the HCCC in its particularisation of the
Complaints. It cannot run
that case now in closing submissions. However, and
without in anyway diminishing his failing in this regard, Dr Donnelly submits
that the discharge summary suffers from the same defects as the other notes
maintained by Ms Dene.
respect to the highlighted section of the above submission (at paragraph 120)
the Tribunal notes that at page 3 of the supplementary
report dated 11 June 2009
provided by Dr Banks he is clearly referring to the failure of Dr Donnelly to
make his own record of the
discussions regarding the maintenance of client
confidentiality and the issues of mandatory reporting.
Submissions in reply – HCCC re Dr Donnelly
submissions in reply are Annexure G hereto.
Tribunal’s Findings regarding Particulars of Complaint
- Dr Donnelly
Findings re the Reports of Dr Banks
setting out the Tribunal’s findings with respect to each of the
Particulars, the Tribunal will deal with the submissions
made on behalf of Dr
Donnelly regarding the evidence of Dr Banks.
Tribunal has set out above reasons for rejecting the position put forward by Ms
Dene that her clinical notes were tainted by a
‘bleeding through’ of
her own sexual abuse history. The Tribunal is of the view that Dr Banks is
entitled to rely on
the content of the notes. Further, the Tribunal accepts the
evidence of Dr Banks that he appreciated that the full extent of Mr A’s
history of sexual abuse was not known to Ms Dene or Dr Donnelly. Counsel for Ms
Dene squarely raised this issue while Dr Banks was
giving evidence and Dr Banks
indicated that his answers were either ‘generic’ in nature (e.g.
that psychological harm
flows from sexual abuse) or related to the information
he gathered from the clinical notes made by Ms Dene. Dr Banks is experienced
the requirements of an expert witness. Having stated elsewhere that the Tribunal
is mindful of the protective nature of this jurisdiction
and the potential for
harm rather than the actual harm, the Tribunal has considered Dr Banks’
evidence in this light.
Particular 1
made factual findings regarding the nature of the disclosure made by Mr A on 21
October 2003, the Tribunal notes the acceptance
of Dr Donnelly of findings with
respect to Particulars 1 (a), (b), (f) and (g). The Tribunal is of the view that
the evidence supports
the acceptance of Dr Donnelly of findings with respect to
these Particulars. The Tribunal is of view this conduct demonstrates a
knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the practice of psychology that is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected
of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training or experience. The conduct in Particular 1(b) is
also found by the Tribunal
to be improper and unethical, and the conduct in 1(g)
to be unethical.
is unfortunate that Particular 1(g) was amended during the hearing. It is highly
desirable for there to be a correct reference
to the Code of Ethical Conduct.
However, the conduct complained of was clearly described in the Particular and
falls within Clause
C4 of the 1997 Code. While it is the view of the Tribunal
that the conduct is fundamentally of a serious nature, it is to be viewed
context of the conduct being a breach of the Code. The Code should have been
well known to Dr Donnelly, not just as it related
to his own practice but also
as it was part of his role as supervisor to monitor Ms Dene’s compliance
with the Code.
was the evidence of Ms Dene that Dr Donnelly was asked into the session with Mr
A shortly after 21 October 2003 because of Mr A’s
reaction to being
advised that Dr Donnelly had been informed of the disclosure that he had made to
Ms Dene on 21 October 2003 and
Mr A was concerned about confidentiality. While
the Tribunal is satisfied on the evidence of Ms Dene that the session involving
Donnelly was not planned or instigated by Dr Donnelly the Tribunal also notes
that there are no notes produced by Dr Donnelly with
respect to the session he
had with Mr A. Not only is it an expectation that a written record be kept of
any sessions undertaken by
a registered psychologist, if the purpose of the
session was as stated on behalf of Dr Donnelly it would have been an absolute
for a written record to have been made.
if the Tribunal accepted the submission made on behalf of Dr Donnelly as to the
nature of the disclosure reported to him as having
been made by Mr A, the
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that a disclosure of this nature is sufficient
to raise prima facie concerns
for the welfare of Miss B.
is significant that the submission made on behalf of Dr Donnelly as to the
nature of the disclosure made by Mr A to Ms Dene omits
reference to the
disclosure being made in to the context of Mr A’s statement that the topic
he wished to raise being
nor the reaction that it
provoked in Ms Dene. Such context is significant and relevant to the proper
consideration of the situation.
Tribunal has considered the submissions made by Dr Donnelly regarding the use of
inappropriate
’ in the Particulars. The Tribunal
does not accept Ms Dene’s explanation that it was the
dependency’
of Mr A on his daughter that was described by
subject. There are numerous aspects of the
evidence that allow the Tribunal to be reasonably satisfied that this is so.
Significantly,
the Tribunal has the evidence of Ms Dene’s reaction to the
disclosure made by Mr A (described elsewhere) and the context of
the content of
the balance of the clinical notes.
extract of Dr Donnelly’s evidence relied upon (17.8.09, T29.44- 30.31
– see paragraph 40 of submissions) in support
of the submission that Mr
A’s lack of comfort surrounding the massage of Miss B related to a non
sexual boundary violation
is an example of many of the concerns the Tribunal
generally had with the evidence. Dr Donnelly’s evidence was distracted
references to the grave illness of Mrs A, overriding concern for the well being
of Mr A and distracting unsupported propositions.
With respect to this latter
issue the Tribunal notes that Dr Donnelly gave evidence as to the appropriate
use of massage ‘
in dealing with kids with psychosomatic
. While the Tribunal would not have difficulty accepting
massage as an appropriate tool to assist with all manner of ailments, there
no evidence before the Tribunal that Miss B was suffering from any
‘psychosomatic’ symptoms as alluded to in the
evidence of Dr
Donnelly. Further, appropriate massage, no matter what the symptoms, would
involve a hand being brushed or moved over
the pubic area of a child.
Tribunal notes that Dr Donnelly did not ever make a voluntary report to DoCS
despite signing the discharge summary in evidence.
The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that Particular 1 (c) is established. The Tribunal is of view this
conduct demonstrates a lack
of knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the
practice of psychology that is significantly below the standard reasonably
of a psychologist of an equivalent level of training or experience. The
Tribunal is also of the view that the conduct is unethical
and improper.
Donnelly also made lengthy and detailed submissions to the effect that he did
consider whether or not to make a report and then
reassessed whether or not to
make a report after further disclosures were made by Mr A (see T 18.8.09, pages
10.39 -11.30). As set
out elsewhere the Tribunal is of the view that Dr Donnelly
failed to take basic and fundamental steps to assess whether or not Miss
Miss C were at risk. The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Particular 1 (d)
is established. The Tribunal is of view this
conduct demonstrates a lack of
knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the practice of psychology that is
significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training or experience. The Tribunal is also of the view
that the conduct is unethical and improper.
the Tribunal is of the view that there were absolutely compelling reasons for
Dr Donnelly to take steps to assess the risk
to Miss B and Miss C after he
became aware that further disclosures were made to Ms Dene by Mr A. The Tribunal
is therefore reasonably
satisfied that Particular 3 (c) is established.
Tribunal is of the view that the evidence demonstrates that Dr Donnelly failed
to appreciate the risk to Miss B and Miss C. The
Tribunal has made factual
findings as to what was the nature of the disclosure made by Mr A to Ms Dene and
findings in relation to
what Dr Donnelly knew or ought to have known from taking
steps such as reading the clinical notes, questioning Ms Dene or Mr A.
1 (e) is established. The Tribunal is of view this conduct
demonstrates a lack of knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the practice
psychology that is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent level of training or
experience.
respect to Particulars 1(h) and (i), the Tribunal is of the view that having
knowledge of either Ms Dene’s limited experience
or her history of child
sex abuse, would form the basis for a psychologist of Dr Donnelly’s
training and experience to have
removed Ms Dene from providing any further
treatment services. Noting the submission made on behalf of Dr Donnelly
regarding the
assumption as to the nature of the disclosure that was made by Mr
A on 21 October 2003, the Tribunal has dealt with the nature of
the disclosure
made and rejects the submission that the disclosure would need to have been that
there was touching of Miss B’s
pubic area in a sexual way and that he had
sexual thoughts about his daughter was required before it was appropriate for a
to be made against Dr Donnelly with respect to these two Particulars.
Putting aside the question of the disclosure made by Ms Dene
to Mr A, in the
view of the Tribunal all that was required was the knowledge of touching of the
pubic area in the manner found by
the Tribunal to have been disclosed by Mr A.
The test does not involve a finding of what was in the mind of Mr A at the time
he undertook
the touching. The Tribunal emphasises the view that a disclosure of
the nature made by Ms Dene would inevitably compromise the future
therapeutic relationship between Mr A and Ms Dene. Such a situation requires
careful consideration on the part of a supervisor
and may involve the referral
of the supervisee for counselling/therapy. While a degree of counselling may be
properly part of a supervision
relationship, it is not appropriate for it to be
a focus of supervision.
Tribunal is of view this conduct demonstrates a lack of knowledge, skill,
judgment and care in the practice of psychology that
is significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or experience. The Tribunal
is also of the view that the conduct is
unethical and improper.
Particular 2
respect to the criticism that is made of the opinion expressed by Dr Banks
regarding Particular 2, as detailed elsewhere the
Tribunal rejects the
submission regarding the unreliability of the clinical notes made by Ms Dene and
is of the view that it is appropriate
that reliance is placed upon them. Further
the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Dr Banks that his opinions were not
influenced by
the police reports or the reports from Cedar Cottage.
respect to the submission made on behalf of Dr Donnelly at paragraph 86
(Particular 2), from a procedural perspective the time
for Particulars of
Complaint to be ‘further particularised’ has well and truly past.
The ‘salient details’
in a matter such as this are obviously a full
summary of what was known to Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly regarding both Mr A and Mrs
and their family so that Dr Brechman-Toussaint could make an objective
assessment of the risk of harm to Miss B and Miss C. A psychologist
training and experience of Dr Donnelly should be fully cognisant of this.
respect to the submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly regarding Particular 2,
the Tribunal cannot consider documents produced
at a later point in time as
constituting ‘relevant information’. Whilst the contents of the
Cedar Cottage report and
the NSW Police Files may contain some information that
was available in the notes of Ms Dene at the relevant time, the Tribunal does
not accept that the Cedar Cottage report and the NSW Police Files could be
construed as ‘relevant material’ for the purpose
of this Particular.
The Tribunal cannot see how there could be such a suggestion when the documents
did not exist at the relevant
time. What did exist at the relevant time were the
clinical notes made by Ms Dene. These were available to Dr Donnelly. The note
made by Dr Brechman-Toussaint of the referral of Miss B and Miss C records that
Dr Donnelly informed her that Mr A was not coping
and was seeking therapy input
for his daughters. The note continues:
Father missing wife – reported some inappropriate physical
feeling towards older child – 101/2 year old female. Inappropriate
?Query sexual – Jim claims yes feelings but recognises not healthy desire
to change thinking some ‘minor’
inappropriate touch - minor how
Any possibility of sexual abuse here???
Queried – Jim and Kerri claim no – but would like daughters to
have opportunity to develop gain knowledge of sexually
appropriate touch etc.
Danger of abuse ?? not seen at risk by Jim or Kerri.
clinical notes made by Ms Dene for the session on 27 October 2003 (HCCC Dene
volume 2 – exhibit 1, page 119) record that
during the session Dr Donnelly
was present and the following conversation occurred:
Talked to [Mr A] about us continuing to provide support to his
family – me to continue [with Mr A]; [Dr Brechman-Toussaint with]
email in the clinical notes records that an appointment was made for Dr
Brechman-Toussaint to see Mr A while he was in a session
with Ms Dene to
organise the consultations with Miss B and Miss C.
clinical notes of the session held between Ms Dene and Mr A on 26 November 2003
(HCCC Dene volume 2 – exhibit 1, page 109)
record that Dr
Brechman-Toussaint had come into the session and discussed the brief she had for
the sessions with Miss B and Miss
C. The notes record that Mr A expressed:
‘fear about meeting [Dr Brechman-Toussaint] his sense of
exposure and shame about what he has done. Concerns about who she is,
wanting to cause further distress to [Miss B].
his oral evidence (T55, 17/8/09) Dr Donnelly said:
I referred the children to check in to make sure that there was
someone who could check in with them to see if there was any inappropriate
touching and that was part of the referral question...
Tribunal notes that Dr Donnelly could not have read the clinical note relating
to the disclosure by Mr A on 21 October 2003 as
it is the unchallenged evidence
of Ms Dene that she did not write this note until some time later, possibly
fourteen months later.
Tribunal notes the evidence of Dr Donnelly that after his session with Ms Dene
on 21 October 2003 they decided they ‘
would try to go ahead and make an
objective decision based on a further conversation with Mr A’
17/8/09). Dr Donnelly did not provide the Tribunal with any notes regarding his
supervision of Ms Dene, the session with Ms
Dene on 21 October 2003 or his
documentation to support any
attempts to make
‘an objective
. Dr Donnelly did not even avail himself of the opportunity
of reading the balance of Ms Dene’s clinical notes let alone ensuring
clinical note for 21 October 2003 was written so he could be fully briefed
before referring the matter to Dr Brechman-Toussaint.
There is no formal
referral letter.
than use the referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint as an opportunity to recruit the
assistance of an experienced psychologist to
assist with gathering information
relevant to the
‘objective decision making’
process, Dr
Donnelly took no steps to re-assess the situation. In his letter of 16 June 2006
(volume 1- exhibit 6, page 6) Dr Donnelly,
when responding to a letter from the
HCCC, wrote ‘
I said nothing to Dr Brechman-Toussaint about my
impressions, made no effort to influence the type or duration of her
Tribunal finds that Dr Donnelly did not use the occasion of making the referral
to Dr Brechman-Toussaint to reconsider whether
Miss B and Miss C were at risk or
to make a referral to DoCS. Each part of Particular 2 is established.
Tribunal is of view the conduct described in Particular 2(a) demonstrates a lack
of knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the
practice of psychology that is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training
or experience. The Tribunal is also of the view
that the conduct is unethical and improper.
Tribunal is of view the conduct described in Particular 2(b) demonstrates a lack
of knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the
practice of psychology that is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training
or experience. The Tribunal is also of the view
that the conduct is unethical and improper.
Tribunal is of view the conduct described in Particular 2(c) demonstrates a lack
of knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the
practice of psychology that is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training
or experience. The Tribunal is also of the view
that the conduct is unethical and improper.
Particular 3
Tribunal finds that Dr Donnelly permitted Ms Dene to involve Miss B in the
therapeutic session on 15 September 2004, notwithstanding
that such an
undertaking was beyond Ms Dene’s competence and that it was inappropriate
in the circumstances (Particulars 3(a)
Tribunal does not find that Dr Donnelly ‘encouraged’ Ms Dene to
include Miss B. It is sufficient that he was aware
of Ms Dene’s intention
to do so. It was then a matter for Dr Donnelly to give guidance to Ms Dene with
respect to the matter.
Given the intended subject matter of the session (as
disclosed by the clinical notes), the only appropriate advice in the
circumstances
of this matter would be that Ms Dene should not have undertaken
any sessions with Miss B, whether Dr Brechman-Toussaint was or was
not involved.
The Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC in paragraphs 59 to 61.
Tribunal notes at this point that if Dr Donnelly had reviewed the clinical notes
made by Ms Dene of this session he could have
taken steps to address the issues
patently disclosed therein, minimising the potential for harm to Miss B.
Although the Tribunal
finds that Dr Donnelly permitted this session to occur
without any steps being taken to assess or to ensure Miss B’s welfare
relation to this process, the Tribunal is of the view that the session should
never have been permitted to have occurred. Particular
3 is established.
Tribunal is of view the conduct described in Particular 3(a) demonstrates a lack
of knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the
practice of psychology that is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training
or experience. The Tribunal is also of the view
that the conduct is unethical and improper.
Tribunal is of view the conduct described in Particular 3(b) demonstrates a lack
of knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the
practice of psychology that is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training
or experience. The Tribunal is also of the view
that the conduct is unethical and improper.
Tribunal is of view the conduct described in Particular 3(c) demonstrates a lack
of knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the
practice of psychology that is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training
or experience. The Tribunal is also of the view
that the conduct is unethical and improper.The Tribunal is of the view that this
conduct is of such a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or
cancellation of the psychologist’s registration.
Particular 4
respect to Particular 4 the Tribunal notes that Ms Dene clarified the time that
entries of supervision ceased being recorded
in the log book as being the time
that her university practicum ended. Although Ms Dene’s evidence is not
entirely straightforward,
she does clearly describe supervision during the time
she was treating Mr A as ‘
the novelty of a long term client for Ms Dene, her reaction during the session
with Mr A on 21 October 2003 and what Dr Donnelly
described as the
complicated clinical presentation’
there was no scope for Dr
Donnelly to depart from a diligent supervision regime.
failure to record supervision (both the fact that supervision had occurred in a
log book format as well as a record of the substance
of the supervision) is a
significant departure from the standard of supervision expected of any
registered psychologist as it is
an integral part of supervision of the nature
undertaken by Dr Donnelly of Ms Dene. The process of reviewing clinical notes to
they are accurately and appropriately kept is also essential to
supervision. Failure to review the clinical notes is a more fundamental
departure from the standard reasonably expected of any registered
psychologist.
Tribunal also considers relevant to the finding with respect to this Particular
the following additional factors submitted by
That supervision
occurred by telephone for a period of approximately two months during 2004;
That Dr Donnelly
did not once read Ms Dene’s clinical records and only attended one session
with Mr A (being 27 October 2003).
conduct of Dr Donnelly in failing to appropriately supervise Ms Dene warrants
more than just a comment. Even if this was just
the first long term therapy that
had been provided by Ms Dene or if she had had the reaction described by Dr
Donnelly to the session
with Mr A on 21 October 2003, the circumstances would be
such that Dr Donnelly should not have departed from basic supervision standards
or as Dr Donnelly described as his ‘
own model of
supervision
supervision
’ provided by Dr
Donnelly on this occasion was extremely deficient in many respects and falls
significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training and experience. The Tribunal is also of the view
conduct is unethical and improper. The Tribunal makes a finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct. The Tribunal is of the view
failures with respect to this Particular was of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of Registration.
The Tribunal makes a finding
of professional misconduct with respect to this particular.
exercising protective jurisdictions frequently frame criticism in terms of the
potential for harm of particular conduct.
This flows from the protective rather
than punitive nature of the jurisdiction. In this matter the potential for harm
have been, by and large, realised. This matter should act as a
reminder to practitioners who accept the responsibility of supervision
discharge their professional obligation with a high degree of diligence.
Particular 5
submission made on behalf of Dr Donnelly with respect to Particular 5 totally
misunderstands the submission made by the HCCC.
There is no underlying premise
of the nature described in Dr Donnelly’s submission, nor has there ever
been an allegation that
Dr Donnelly knew Mr A was in fact a paedophile (although
he should have had serious concerns about Mr A’s conduct). The Tribunal
has set out elsewhere its finding as to what had been disclosed by Mr A and that
it was sufficient for Dr Donnelly to have reasonable
grounds to suspect that a
child was at risk of harm within the meaning of section 23 and 27 of
and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC with respect to this
Particular. Given the description given by Dr Donnelly
of the condition of Ms
Dene after the session with Mr A on 21 October 2003 he should have ensured she
received some independent counselling.
Subsequently, after Ms Dene continued
with the treatment of Mr A, Dr Donnelly certainly should have ensured he closely
Ms Dene from that point on. The Tribunal also considers that the
failure of Dr Donnelly to prevent Ms Dene from involving Miss B
in a session is
another failure on his part with respect to the welfare of Ms Dene. The Tribunal
is of the view that there was a
total failure to safeguard Ms Dene’s
welfare on the part of Dr Donnelly when she clearly had compromised capacity to
clinically with this particular patient. The Tribunal finds this
conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill and judgment possessed,
exercised in the practice of psychology was significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training or
experience. In particular the Tribunal is of the view that the conduct of Dr
Donnelly demonstrates
that his judgment was deeply flawed. The Tribunal is also
of the view that the conduct was unethical and improper. The Tribunal is
view that the conduct constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct of a
serious nature.
Particular 6
respect to Particular 6, Dr Donnelly submitted that he did not provide treatment
to Mr A after late November 2004, but notes
that Ms Dene’s evidence was
that the discharge summary was not signed by Dr Donnelly until June 2005. Dr
Donnelly was unable
to tell the Tribunal when he did sign it. What is clear is
that Dr Donnelly did not make a report to DoCS when he did sign it.
set out above, having regard to the circumstances, Dr Donnelly cannot, in the
view of this Tribunal, have the benefit of claiming
not to have read the
clinical notes made by Ms Dene. Not only was it his obligation to do so in his
role as supervisor, the Tribunal
has found that what Dr Donnelly knew as at 21
October 2003 independently of the clinical notes is sufficient to trigger the
obligations
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
to make a report to DoCS. Signing the Discharge summary document
without making a report is a serious breach of the ethical obligations
upon all health care professionals.
Tribunal finds this conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill and judgment
possessed, and care exercised in the practice
of psychology was significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
The Tribunal is of the view that the conduct of Dr
Donnelly was unethical and improper. The Tribunal is of the view that the
constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his registration.
Tribunal makes a finding of professional misconduct. This would be so if the
conduct considered was either his conduct in not
acting after becoming aware of
the nature of the disclosure made on 21 October 2003 or not acting when he
signed the discharge summary.
The Tribunal has already given reasons for not
accepting that the clinical notes of Ms Dene were not tainted in the manner Ms
described in her evidence. With respect to the Discharge Summary, it was
incumbent upon Dr Donnelly to ensure the document he was
signing was accurate.
He cannot have the benefit of making a claim that the document was defective
because of Ms Dene’s interpretation
of the situation when it was his
responsibility to take steps to minimise this possibility of this occurring.
Tribunal is of view the conduct described in Particular 6 demonstrates a lack of
knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the practice
of psychology that is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training or
experience. The Tribunal is also of the view
that the conduct is unethical and improper.
Particular 7
brief review of the evidence of the submissions and evidence of Dr Donnelly will
assist with respect to the considerations relevant
to Particular 7. Dr Donnelly
did attend the session on 27 October 2003 with Mr A. On any version of what
transpired during that session
important issues were discussed. It is Dr
Donnelly’s evidence that as at 21 October 2003 there had been a decision
for further
conversations to occur with Mr A so that an ‘objective
decision’ could be made about referring the matter to DoCS. The
27 October 2003 would appear to have been the only time that Dr Donnelly
attempted to have such a conversation with Mr
responsibility to keep notes of a session of this nature is not able to be
delegated. The obligations of Ms Dene to keep notes
in accordance with the terms
of her university placement would not doubt form an essential parts of the
requirements of her course
but are separate and distinct from the obligations of
a registered psychologist to keep notes. To rely upon Ms Dene making a record
this session and then not to read the notes demonstrates a significant deficit
in the practise of Dr Donnelly.
submission made on behalf of Dr Donnelly regarding the running of a ‘new
case’ is misconceived. The HCCC submission
regarding the Discharge Summary
would only be considered by this Tribunal had the evidence and submissions of Dr
Donnelly regarding
the nature of the disclosure made by Mr A been accepted. As
Dr Donnelly’s evidence and submissions on this matter was not accepted,
does not have to be considered by the Tribunal. Had the Tribunal not so found,
it is extremely difficult to see how it would not
be the logical position that
the signing of the Discharge Summary by Dr Donnelly without having read any
clinical notes or having
made any clinical notes would have been a failure to
keep appropriate clinical notes. This is particularly so if the submission of
Donnelly that the notes kept by Ms Dene were not accurate and represented her
distorted view of the sessions was accepted.
Tribunal is of view the conduct described in Particular 6 demonstrates a lack of
knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the practice
of psychology that is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training or
experience. The Tribunal is also of the view
that the conduct is unethical and improper.
Particular 8
to the submissions made regarding Particular 8, the Tribunal does not find there
is any evidence that Dr Donnelly was involving
Ms Dene in long term counselling
as part of her learning experience and certainly was not
‘helping an
intern to work through countertransference issues’
. This is a matter
where not only was there a high risk that there would be significant
countertransference issues but there were
obvious and acute signs that Ms Dene
was not appropriately coping with it.
submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly miss the point that it was not the
mere fact that Dr Donnelly allowed 42 sessions of
therapy with Mr A to occur but
that the sessions were undertaken by Ms Dene. It is when regard is made to the
nature of the disclosure
made by Mr A, Ms Dene’s reaction to that
disclosure, her experience and history, the lack of appropriate supervision of
sessions including a failure to read the clinical notes and the failure to
appropriately address countertransference issue that the
conduct of Dr Donnelly
comes into question. These considerations are fundamental and basic to the
appropriate practise of psychology,
long term or not. On this matter, the view
expressed by Dr Banks is representative of the basic standard reasonably
expected in psychology
and accords with the view of the Tribunal. The Tribunal
rejects the submission made on behalf of Dr Donnelly that the Tribunal requires
cogent evidence’
to corroborate the view of Dr Banks before
making a finding with respect to this Particular. Even if Dr Donnelly’s
was deficient merely in his failure to read the clinical notes kept by
Ms Dene allowing a provisionally registered psychologist with
the history of Ms
Dene to conduct this number of session is inherently hazardous and has a high
potential for harm.
the evidence demonstrated that Dr Donnelly closely monitored Ms Dene in her
continued treatment of Mr A the Tribunal may have
had a basis for accepting his
evidence that long term therapy was being utilised as a learning tool. Given the
facts and circumstances
of this matter, (Dr Donnelly knew of Ms Dene’s
previous history of sexual abuse, he knew she was in the midst of an
investigation
of a another member of staff at the Regional University that was
causing her considerable stress and that he was the only alternative
available) it is not possible for the Tribunal to accept Dr Donnelly’s
evidence in this regard. The evidence given
by Dr Donnelly that he had not
conceptualised’
the case of Mr A as involving a diagnosis as
‘hardcore sociopathic paedophile’
rather than a case
‘an adjustment disorder with mixed emotional features and
behavioural issues’
demonstrates to the Tribunal that Dr Donnelly was
not practising psychology at a level expected of a psychologist of an equivalent
level of training and experience.
Tribunal is of view the conduct described in Particular 8 demonstrates a lack of
knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the practice
of psychology that is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training or
experience.
is of concern that Dr Donnelly submitted that Ms Dene’s indication at the
end of their meeting on 21 October 2003 that she
would take up the learning
opportunity presented by continuing to treat Mr A. This matter was relevant to
the Tribunal’s consideration
of Particular 8. On any view of the distress
of Ms Dene resulting from that session, any decision, other than to relieve Ms
of the case, should have been deferred until further consideration could
have been made. The Tribunal is also concerned as to whether
any effective
treatment could have been provided to Mr A by Ms Dene given the disclosure made
by Ms Dene.
areas of Dr Donnelly’s evidence that the Tribunal has not accepted are
consistent with an attempt to provide a rational
explanation for his conduct.
light of the factual findings made by the Tribunal, the Tribunal rejects the
findings urged upon the Tribunal in paragraph 82 of
the submissions made on
behalf of Dr Donnelly.
Tribunal does not accept the submission that the article entitled
‘Countertransference and Intersubjectivity: Golden opportunities in
Clinical Supervision’
(Stephen Southern, 2007) has any application to
the current circumstances. While an article that post dates events may well
the thinking of a profession at the relevant time, not only does this
matter not accord with those described in the article, Dr Donnelly
conceded in
his evidence that he had never put the principles defined in this article to Ms
Findings Generally - Dr Donnelly
Tribunal accepts the submissions made on behalf of Dr Donnelly regarding the
seriousness of the allegations and that
‘reasonable
satisfaction’
should not be reached by the Tribunal by consideration
‘inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect
inferences’
noted elsewhere the Tribunal observed Ms Dene to be extremely tearful and
generally distressed throughout the Inquiry. This contrasts
markedly against Dr
Donnelly description of Ms Dene as a
‘very strong therapist’
in evidence (T17/8/09, 28). The Tribunal notes Dr Donnelly’s submission
that the assessment made by the
of Ms Dene as not
being suitable to continue with the treatment of Mr A ignored the facts that
she did not display any
‘avoidant behaviour’
, she was able to
clearly talk about the issues and she telephoned him the day after the
disclosure. With respect to these matters
the Tribunal only has evidence of Dr
Donnelly as to factors contradictory to the evidence considered by the
Donnelly’s position ignores the most salient consideration of the
circumstances. Despite Dr Donnelly’s knowledge of
psychosocial antecedents he displayed a callous disregard for her psychological
welfare and well-being. In pressuring
Ms Dene to continue her treatment of Mr A
Dr Donnelly demonstrated a flawed supervisory capacity and clinical judgment in
in the best interests of the children, Mr A and Ms Dene. Throughout the
entirety of treatment Dr Donnelly ignored the ongoing risk
of harm to the
the nature of the disclosure made, the observations made of Ms Dene immediately
after the disclosures on 21 October 2003, and
the knowledge Dr Donnelly had
regarding these matters he should have been able to form a view about Ms
Dene’s fitness to continue
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC regarding the obligations of
Dr Donnelly as a supervisor with the following
qualifications:
With respect to
paragraph 14(d) the Tribunal is of the view that the circumstances under which
Dr Donnelly was involved with the session
on 27 October 2003 should also be
considered.
Tribunal magnifies the submission made by the HCCC in paragraph 16 and is of the
view that Dr Donnelly cannot in any way be given
the benefit of his claim that
he had not read the clinical notes made by Ms Dene at the relevant time. Part of
the responsibility
of a supervisor of a provisionally registered psychologist is
to be satisfied that they have a comprehensive understanding of the
work of the
supervisee. Ignorance of matters such as the content of the clinical notes
cannot be a defence.
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC with respect to the
responsibility of Dr Donnelly with respect to Miss B.
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC with respect to reporting
obligations and
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act
and has set out details of these findings
elsewhere in this document.
respect to the submissions made by the HCCC regarding the nature and extent of
the disclosure made by Mr A in October 2003 the
Tribunal is of the view that it
was sufficient for Dr Donnelly to have been informed that there had been a
touching of the pubic
area of Miss B to have provoked an appropriate response.
The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied on the evidence that Dr Donnelly was
that Mr A had massaged Miss B regularly over the previous few years and that the
massage had involved contact with the pubic
area and that the conduct had ceased
two weeks prior. A perusal of the notes made by Ms Dene would have alerted any
reader to disclosure
of inappropriate sexual thoughts by Mr A.
suggest, as Dr Donnelly did in his evidence, that psychologists have discretion
when a child is in such an obvious position of
risk and that
psychologist’s should report every child case they have contact with, as
was suggested by Dr Donnelly in his
oral evidence, is a total misconception of
the principles underlying child protection provisions. As for the example of the
article of a
‘someone hanging around a preschool’
being a reason for a report to be made that all the children attending the
preschool were at risk reinforces the finding of the Tribunal
that Dr Donnelly
totally misconceives the nature of mandatory reporting obligations, of ethical
obligations to ensure safety and
of the moral obligation to protect the
vulnerable.
are a number of aspects of the evidence before the Tribunal that would not allow
the Tribunal to accept that Ms Dene only provided
Dr Donnelly with the an
version of the disclosure made by Mr A. Dr
Donnelly gave evidence of the emotionally distressed state Ms Dene was in when
she reported
to him the events of the session on 21 October 2003. Ms Dene also
informed Dr Donnelly of her inappropriate disclosure to Mr A.
if the Tribunal accepted the
version of the
disclosure the very least that would be expected of a registered psychologist
supervising a provisionally registered
psychologist would be for them to make an
assessment (or arrange for an assessment to be undertaken) of the situation. He
have read the clinical notes made by Ms Dene. In the event that the notes
had not been made by Ms Dene, Dr Donnelly should have assisted
Ms Dene with the
process. Given the reaction of Ms Dene and the nature of the disclosures made by
Mr A (even the
version) and by Ms Dene, the
supervision process should have been documented and counselling should have been
obtained for Ms Dene.
is discernable from the findings in this matter, the Tribunal has not relied on
the report of Mr A’s version of the nature
of his disclosure to Ms Dene on
21 October 2003. This is merely one factor that has been considered by the
Tribunal as consistent
with other evidence in this matter. The Tribunal has
elsewhere rejected the submission that the clinical record written by Ms Dene
was not accurate due to her own issues
‘bleeding through’
The Tribunal accepts that the clinical records made by Ms Dene were in some
respects clinically poor, they record in many places
in a coherent and
consistent manner that Ms Dene was concerned with the conduct of Mr A towards
Tribunal has not relied upon the information not ‘known’ at the time
of the events particularised and that has subsequently
become known through the
disclosures made by Mr A to Cedar House. The Tribunal notes at this point that
the pattern of conduct displayed
by Mr A might be described as
‘textbook’. He made incremental disclosures of his conduct and he
recruited the support
and friendship of Ms Dene. An important aspect of the
practice of psychology is an awareness of the potentially manipulative nature
some clients. This does not appear to have been considered by Ms Dene, which may
be explained by her relative inexperience and
her own personal vulnerabilities
but cannot be explained away for a person in Dr Donnelly’s position.
matter what the circumstances of the signing, it is indeed disturbing that Dr
Donnelly signed the Discharge Summary for Mr A given
the content thereof without
making a report to DoCS. Indeed, if this was the only matter before the Tribunal
a finding of professional
misconduct would be made.
unacceptable aspect of this matter is the lack of record of there having been
any intervention with Mr A to deal with the
impact of the disclosure made by Ms
Dene on 21 October 2003. As it eventuated it became apparent that Mr A had quite
a deal of experience
of child sexual assault however for many clients a
disclosure of this nature by a psychologist would be at least distressing.
respect to the issues of Dr Donnelly’s candour and insight the Tribunal
accepts the submissions of the HCCC (paragraphs
27 to 37). The Tribunal makes
the following specific comments:
Not only did Dr
Donnelly seek to minimise the nature of the disclosure he became aware of in
October 2003, the version put before
the Tribunal was not consistent with the
advice Dr Donnelly had given to the University when they investigated this
matter, or with
the responses he provided to the HCCC or with the evidence of Dr
Brechman-Toussaint nor with the contents of Ms Dene’s notes.
With respect to
the HCCC’s submission at paragraph 34(b) the Tribunal is of the view that
the context in which the disclosure
was made by Mr A cannot be accepted as an
‘explanation’ when dealing with a registered psychologist with the
and experience of Dr Donnelly.
respect to the submissions made regarding the reporting obligations under
of the relevant Act the Tribunal has set out its views elsewhere in
this document.
the transcript references provided by Dr Donnelly to support a finding that he
had considered whether the circumstances warranted
the making of a report to
DoCS but had decided the circumstances did not warrant the making of a report,
the Tribunal is unable to
accept this position. The evidence before the Tribunal
is that Dr Donnelly did not read the clinical notes made by Ms Dene. Dr Donnelly
did not assert that he forensically questioned Ms Dene about the disclosure made
by Mr A, despite Ms Dene’s intense emotional
reaction during the session
on 21 October 2003. There are no records of the supervision sessions between Ms
Dene and Dr Donnelly
that may have assisted Dr Donnelly in this regard.
is the firm view of the Tribunal that having been told that Mr A was distressed
that he had committed a
‘boundary violation’
by giving a
massage to Miss B at night wherein his hand moved or brushed over her pubic area
it was incumbent upon Dr Donnelly to
undertake further investigations if he was
to appropriately consider the matter.
Findings in relation to the Complaints – Dr
Complaint One
set out above, the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the conduct set out in
each of the Particulars of Complaint constitutes
unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Complaint One is established.
Complaint Two
indicated above, the Tribunal finds the conduct of Dr Donnelly as set out in
Particular 4 constitutes professional misconduct.
The Tribunal is also of the
view that when the balance of the Particulars are considered together that the
conduct amounts to professional
misconduct in that the conduct was of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration.
Protective Orders – Dr
that the Tribunal has reserved on the question of Prohibition Orders and sought
further submissions from the HCCC and Dr Donnelly
on this matter, the Tribunal
(1) That the
name of the Respondent, Dr Donnelly, be removed from the Register at close of
business on 6 August 2010. From the date
of this document until 6 August 2010 Dr
Donnelly is to limit his practise to current clients and is to only see each
client on no
more than two occasions for the purpose of terminating treatment
and referring the clients on appropriately.
(2) That the
Respondent, Dr Donnelly, is not to reapply for registration for a minimum period
of three years commencing from 7 August
Respondent, Dr Donnelly, is to pay the costs of the HCCC with respect to the
preparation of her matter for hearing and half
of the HCCC costs with respect to
the joint hearing.
General comment
stated above, this Tribunal does not consider the actual harm that results from
a health care professional’s action when
determining the appropriate
orders to be made once a finding of professional misconduct (or unsatisfactory
professional conduct)
is made. The Tribunal does however have a role in
providing guidance to the profession and for the protective orders made to
a deterrent effect to other members of the profession. Given the current
subject matter, the Tribunal notes that with respect to
the abuse of children,
harm accrues over time. It has been well understood and accepted for many years
by health professional such
as psychologists that more harm will result from
longer exposure to abuse. It is imperative that all registered psychologists
considered the mandatory reporting obligations.
Publication
copy of this document should be forwarded to each of the Respondents and the
respective legal advisers, the HCCC, Mr Dale Tolliday,
the Regional University
and otherwise as the Board sees fit.
8 July 2010
___________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Frances Taylor
___________________
Lizabeth Tong
___________________
Chris Wilcox
Annexure A – Index of Exhibited Documents
Annexure B – Submissions of the HCCC – Dene
Annexure C – Submissions on behalf of Ms Dene
Annexure D – Submissions of the HCCC in Reply
Annexure E – Submissions of the HCCC – Donnelly
Annexure F – Submissions on behalf of Dr Donnelly
Annexure G – Submission in Reply HCCC
Annexure H – Schedule of Names
INDEX OF EXHIBITED DOCUMENTS
HCCC v DENE & DONNELLY
DOCUMENTS SERVED BY THE HCCC RE: DENE
Complaint dated 20 June 2008
Certificate of Registration
Complaint from Cedar Cottage, New South Wales Pre-Trial Diversion of
Offenders Program dated 9 May 2006
Complaint from DOCs dated 22 June 2006
Letter to Ms Dene from HCCC dated 19 June 2006
Response to the HCCC by Ms Dene dated 22 June 2006
Response to the HCCC by Ms Dene dated 23 August 2006
Letter to Ms Dene from HCCC dated 1 February 2007
Response to the HCCC by Ms Dene dated 23 February 2007
to Expert dated 9 May 2007
Report dated 8 June 2007
S40 letter from HCCC to Ms Dene dated 13 August 2007
Letter from TressCox Lawyers received 25 September 2007 enclosing S40
submission by Ms Dene
Letter from TressCox Lawyers to Director of Proceedings dated 5 September
2007 with enclosures
Letter from HCCC to TressCox Lawyers dated 15 January 2008
Letter from HCCC to Detective Sergeant Douen dated 23 October 2006
NSW Police Indictable Brief of Evidence – Defendant [Mr A] dated 19
December 2005
Confidential File from the Regional University Psychology
relating to family p1 – 236
from Professor David Rich of University of
New England to HCCC dated 13
October 2006 enclosing teaching materials
material of Regional University Teaching
Materials for years 2003-2005
inclusive p1 – 229
Records of Private Practice of Ms Kerri Dene relating to [Mr A]
DOCUMENTS SERVED BY THE HCCC RE: DONNELLY
Certificate of Registration
Complaint from Cedar Cottage, New South Wales Pre-Trial Diversion of
Offenders Program, dated 9 May 2006
Complaint from DoCS dated 22 June 2006
Letter from HCCC to Dr James Donnelly dated 15 May 2006
Response to the HCCC from Dr Donnelly dated 16 June 2006
Submission by Dr Donnelly in relation to notification of investigation to
his employer dated 2 October 2006
Statement of Information provided by Dr Donnelly pursuant to
Health Care Complaints Act
received by 5 October 2006, with CV
to expert from HCCC
report dated 8 June 2007
letter from HCCC to Dr Donnelly dated 13 August 2007
submission by Dr Donnelly received 27 September 2007
Letter from HCCC to Detective Sergeant Donovan dated 3 September
NSW Police Indictable Brief of Evidence – Defendant [Mr A], dated 19
December 2005
Confidential File from the Regional University Psychology
relating to family p1 – 236
from Professor David Rich of University of
New England to HCCC dated 13
October 2006 enclosing teaching materials
material of Regional University Teaching
Materials for years 2003-2005
inclusive p1 –229
DOCUMENTS SERVED BY THE HCCC RE BOTH DEFENDANTS
1. Codes of Conduct – 1997 and 2004
Guidelines on reporting child abuse and neglect and criminal activity
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
4. DoCS Guidelines re Mandatory Reporting
Interagency Guidelines for Child Interventions
DOCUMENTS FILED BY THE RESPONDENT - DENE
exhibits relied upon by Ms Dene were marked as exhibits RA – RM as
RA Statement of Ms Kerri Dene
RB Letter from Unsworth Legal to
Ms Carol Boland dated 25 March 2009
RC Report of Ms Carol Boland dated 14
RD Letter from Unsworth Legal to Ms Nell Zanderberg (sic) dated 2
RE Report of Ms Nell Zanderberg (sic) dated 24 April
RF Letter from Unsworth Legal to Ms Louise Litchfield dated 25 March
RG Letter from Ms Louise Litchfield to Unsworth Legal dated 30 March
RH Letter from Unsworth Legal to Ms Siobhan Holmes dated 25 March
RI Letter from Ms Siobhan Holmes to Unsworth Legal dated 30 March
from Unsworth Legal to Associate Professor Neil Marshall dated 25 March
from Associate Professor Neil Marshall to Unsworth Legal dated 30 March
from Unsworth Legal to Mrs Margaret Allen dated 25 March 2009
from Mrs Margaret Allen to Unsworth Legal dated 29 March 2009
DOCUMENTS FILED BY THE RESPONDENT – DONNELLY
R1. Carondelet Management Institute – Certificae of Completion of James
F Donnelly – How to Help Adult and Child Survivirs
Sexual Abuse dated 3
December 1997.
R2. Agreement between [Regional University] and [Regional] Division of
General Practice (Commencement date: September 12, 2002; and
Cessation Date:
December 31, 2003.
R3. Regional University Teaching Schedule, ‘Timetable for Psyc 501 and
Psyc 701 Coursework and Research’, developed by
Brechman-Toussaint dated 2003.
R4. Letter from Dr Donnelly to Professor Ingrid Moses, Vice Chancellor
[Regional University] dated 20 September 2005.
R5. [Regional University] Misconduct Committee Report: Investigation into
allegations of Misconduct against Dr James Donnelly dated
24 February 2006.
R6. Area Health Service – Internal Only Draft Policy/Procedure –
Psychology Postgraduate Student Placements – Draft
for Comment dated May
R7. Report of the Special Commission Inquiry into Child Protection Services
in NSW – Executive Summary and Recommendations –
The Hon James Wood
AO QC dated November 2008.
R8. Character Reference: letter from Emeritus Professor G Geffen to Jodie
Nicholls dated 5 May 2009.
R9. Supervision contract for Ms Kerri Dene
R10. An unsigned letter addressed to ‘Jim’ from Annette Stevenson
dated December 5, 2002.
R11. Students Practicum Experiences for Ms Kerri Dene.
R12. An eleven page document entitled Practicum Diary, for Ms Dene.
R13. Supervisor’s Practicum Evaluation Form for Kerri Dene.
R14. Statement of Dr James F Donnelly, unsigned, dated 11 June 2009.
R15. Countertransference and Intersubjectivity: Golden Opportunities in
Clinical Supervision plus annexures.
HCCC v DENE & DONNELLY
HCCC SUBMISSIONS RE: DENE
Introduction
this matter the Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC) makes two complaints as
regards the conduct of Ms Dene from around October
2003 until August 2005. Ms
Dene is a registered psychologist with a certificate of registration under
section 123
Psychologists Act 2001
(the Act) valid until 30 June
2010. From 2 April 2002 Ms Dene was conditionally registered as a psychologist,
attaining full registration
on 9 April 2005.
complaint comprises seven separate particulars. One complaint is of
unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 25 of the
Act, the second is
of professional misconduct under section 24 of the Act.
complaints should be found proved. The evidence clearly establishes, to the
requisite standard of the balance of probabilities,
that Ms Dene’s conduct
is unsatisfactory professional conduct within s 25 of the Act, in that the
knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by Ms Dene in her
practice of psychology was significantly below the standard reasonably expected
a psychologist of an equivalent level of training or experience and/or she
engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course
of the practice or
purported practice of psychology, and this was of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or cancellation
of her registration as required by s 24 of
given the nature of the evidence and demeanour of Ms Dene (as set out below) and
the evidence of Ms Zandberg, the Tribunal
is invited, pursuant to the power set
out in paragraph 5(2) of Schedule 5 to the Act, to treat as referred to it and
deal with an
additional complaint that Ms Dene suffers from an impairment that
detrimentally affects or is likely detrimentally to affect her
mental capacity
to practise psychology, namely Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. The
Tribunal’s power in this regard is subject
to an obligation, prior to
dealing with the complaint, to give such adjournment (if any) as is, in the
opinion of the Tribunal, just
and equitable in the circumstances. Whilst that is
a matter upon which Ms Dene’s representatives may wish to make
submissions,
it may well be that the evidence is such that there would be no
requirement in this regard for any further evidence, and that further
submissions on this point from Ms Dene’s representatives could be
accommodated within the current timetable.
submissions set out below as to Orders are made on the basis of the complaints
currently before the Tribunal. If the Tribunal
adds and deals with a complaint
regarding impairment, it will remain the position of the Commission that the
Orders as set out below
are the appropriate orders.
Dene has a background in teaching and counselling services, including as regards
families. She completed a Bachelor of Psychology
with honours in 1999. She was
conditionally registered as a psychologist on 2 April 2002. She then undertook a
doctorate in psychology
between 2002 and 2004, but did not qualify at doctoral
level. She undertook a number of practica, two supervised by Dr Donnelly,
one supervised jointly by Dr Donnelly and Dr Brechman-Toussaint. By the end of
2004 Ms Dene had completed all of her training
and supervision.
Dene came to see Mr A initially as part of a practicum with Dr Donnelly, and
probably also as part of work which she completed
as an intern working under Dr
Donnelly’s supervision pursuant to a contract between the Regional
University and the New England
Division of General Practice for the provision of
neuropsychological and other related services. By September 2003 Ms Dene had
two practica, one with Dr Donnelly and one with Dr Brechman-Toussaint.
When Ms Dene completed her practicum with Dr Donnelly in September
2003, she and
Dr Donnelly agreed that she should continue treating Mr A as a long-term patient
under Dr Donnelly’s supervision,
albeit not formally under the structure
of an ongoing
her first long term clinical psychological interaction.
General Principles
number of issues of general application arise in respect of the
complaints.
Obligations of an intern
Ms Dene was at all times supervised by Dr Donnelly in her interactions with Mr
A, she was subject to professional and legal
obligations as a conditionally
registered psychologist. In this regard, she owed duties to the public, to Mr A,
and to Miss B and
set out in the [Regional University]
an intern was obliged to look critically at herself and her therapeutic role, to
recognise her own professional and personal
limitations, and to uphold
professional standards. Whilst she could certainly expect guidance from Dr
Donnelly as her supervisor,
she cannot abdicate her own responsibility by
reference to that expectation.
notwithstanding her status as an intern, Ms Dene was clearly personally
responsible for upholding the requirements of the
obligation to ensure that nothing of a psychological nature was done with or to
Miss B without her proper informed and voluntary
consent (A1 of 1997 Code). This
meant as regards Miss B that she should not have been made subject to the
treatment session on 15
September 2004 without the nature of that session having
been properly discussed with her before hand;
obligation to safeguard the welfare of Mr A and Miss B (A5 of 1997
obligation to refer for more specialised service those clients whose needs were
outside Ms Dene and/or Ms Dene as supervised by
Dr Donnelly’s,
professional competence (A8 of 1997 Code). The obligation to refer also includes
the obligation to ensure that
appropriate information is made on the referral so
that the referral is effective.
obligation to uphold the law (C1 of 1997 Code);
obligation to communicate to appropriate professionals about the risks to the
welfare of a child (C4 of 1997 Code).
obligation to maintain knowledge and practice at an acceptable level of
competence and to recognise the psychological issues involved
professional relationships, including transference and power differentials (D2
of 1997 Code). This would include both the
relationship between Dr Donnelly and
Ms Dene, and the relationship between Ms Dene and Mr A.
obligation to withdraw from practice and seek professional help, where
appropriate for impairment if she saw impairment of her
ability to practise (D4
of 1997 Code).
obligation to demonstrate continuing competence in her practice of psychology
that includes adequate knowledge, skill, judgement
and care (A1 of 2004
obligation to maximise benefit and do no harm in the practice of psychology (A2
of 2004 Code);
obligation to act ethically and properly and to promote accuracy, fairness and
honesty in their practice of psychology (A4 of
2004 Code);
obligations to give serious consideration to the potential vulnerability of
children and to refer, for more specialised service,
those clients whose needs
or requests are outside their professional competencies (B3 of 2004
duty to communicate information about serious concerns about the well-being or
safety of children to appropriate professionals
or organisations (B4 of 2004
obligation to be aware of relevant guidelines (C of 2004
Standard required of Ms Dene
the purposes of the definition of unsatisfactory professional conduct in s 25 of
the Act the standard of knowledge, skill and
judgment against which Ms Dene is
to be measured is that of “
a psychologist of an equivalent level of
training or experience
”. This standard is the basis of the definition
of professional misconduct in s 24 of the Act.
Dene’s own personal history and psychological or emotional issues are thus
not in any way relevant to the question of whether
or not the complaints in this
case are proved.
Obligations as regards Miss B
Ms Dene’s primary clinical interactions were with Mr A, it is clearly the
case that throughout the period from October
2003 up until August 2005 she was
also providing health care or welfare services to Miss B:
Dene’s paramount concern after the disclosure in October 2003 should have
been to protect Miss B’s
Dene’s therapeutic concern as regards the A family was with the family as
was a child related interaction in the context of family
all times from October 2003 Miss B’s welfare was part of the
considerations taken into account by Ms Dene in framing her
interactions, and her treatment goals, with Mr A;
Dene was in effect providing therapeutic services for Miss B in referring her to
Dr Brechman-Toussaint, and in discussing her situation
and treatment needs with
Dr Brechman-Toussaint;
reason of the disclosure of Mr A in October 2003 as regards Miss B her welfare
became a therapeutic concern of Ms Dene; and
Dene also undertook a direct clinical interaction with Miss B on 15 September
2004, and spent time planning for, and (with Mr
A) dealing with the
ramifications of, this session, including considering whether to conduct a
second session.
Reporting Obligations and
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
obligation under
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
respectively) are clear. They require
that a report be made to the Director-General as soon as practicable where (so
far as is relevant
to the present case):
person in the course of her professional work delivers or supervises the
provision of health care or welfare services wholly or
partly to children. That
unquestionably covers Ms Dene as regards this particular case.
person has reasonable grounds, arising during the course of or from his work, to
suspect that a child is at risk of harm, meaning
concerns exist for the safety, welfare or well-being of the child; and
concerns are because of one or more of the child having been, or being at risk
of being, physically or sexually abused or ill
treated or a parent has behaved
in such a way towards the child that the child has suffered or is at risk of
suffering serious psychological
points arise:
threshold is low, it arises where there are “reasonable grounds to
suspect” the prescribed matters, i.e. there is
no requirement of any
degree of certainty.
current aspect of the “at risk of harm” definition relates to the
concerns as to the child’s safety, welfare
or well-being. There is no
requirement that there be any perception of on-going risk of the abusive or
harmful behaviour continuing.
any view of the evidence here, the disclosure on 21 October 2003, in the context
of an already vulnerable child with a complex
family situation, were such that
there were current concerns for Miss B’s safety, welfare and well being by
reason of potentially
harmful and/or abusive behaviour by Mr A. The case notes
are littered with expressions of concerns for Miss B’s safety and
and those concerns were the factors precipitating the referral to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint. Indeed the Dene/Donnelly discharge
summary specifically
refers to the appreciation in October 2003 of the harm caused to Miss B by Mr
the obligation is on those who deliver health care or welfare services wholly or
partly to children in the course of their
professional work. Ms Dene, in
providing psychological services to Mr A and to Miss B and Miss C was clearly
doing so in her position
as a member of a health care profession. She did so
pursuant to her professional registration. She was clearly subject to the
obligation in
section 27.
there can be no doubt that from October 2003 her professional remit encompassed
the interests of Miss B. She was in the
course of her professional work
providing services that were partly to Miss B.
any event, and even if payment were relevant (which it is not under
appears from the contract tendered by Dr Donnelly at R2, and from Dr
Donnelly’s evidence, Ms Dene was in fact paid for work
including some (or
possibly all) of her work with Mr A. Ms Dene herself accepted that she was paid
for the dementia practicum and
received a stipend for the better outcomes in
mental health
Preliminary
observations on the facts
Nature and Extent of the Disclosure by Mr A in October 2003
characterisation of the initial disclosure by Mr A to Ms Dene, and of any
subsequent disclosures, is of critical importance to
an evaluation of the
complaints as regards Ms Dene. Having regard to all of the evidence, the
likelihood is that it was quite clear
to Ms Dene from October 21 2003 that Mr A
had deliberately touched Miss B’s pubic region in a sexual way, regularly
previous few years, ceasing only 2 weeks prior to his disclosure, and
that he was aware that he had inappropriate sexual thoughts
including attraction to her.
was or ought to have been clear to her that this was abuse.
Contemporaneous records are inherently more likely to reflect an accurate
picture of the nature and extent of the initial disclosure
by Mr A to Ms Dene in
October 2003 and thereafter. Moreover, the emphatic tone of Ms Dene’s
clinical records in the period
between September 2004 and June 2005 leave no
room to doubt the nature of what Mr A told her in October 2003, September 2004.
abusive and sexual nature of the touchings of Miss B by Mr A form an unstated
premise of Ms Dene’s clinical records of attendances
on other occasions.
On some occasions this became explicit, with references to urges for
inappropriate
behaviours,
instinct to touch Miss
Mr A feeling
the ease of subtle inappropriate
reason of the lack of contemporaneous notes taken by Ms Dene in October 2003
there is no immediately contemporaneous record of
the disclosure. However, the
clinical records provide considerable insights as to the nature and extent of
that initial disclosure.
Discharge summary dated by Ms Dene January 2005 contains repeated and
unequivocal references to the abuse of Miss B by Mr A and
uses language such as:
“he had stroked her genitals”, the “abusive behaviour”,
and “inappropriate desire”.
It is inconceivable that Ms Dene would
have prepared this document unless it accurately conveyed the nature and extent
of the information
that she had been given by Mr A.
session with Miss B and Mr A on 15 September
was premised
upon Mr A apologising for past abuse. Ms Dene specifically refers to
healing the abuse
Dene wrote on 28 September
disclosed that his previous sexual transgressions with daughter were much
greater than previously advised. In this note
the original October 2003
disclosure was described as being “
that he had touched his daughter
[Miss B] inappropriately about once a week (genital area) for about a few years.
He said he would
lie with her when he put her to bed and touch her until she
pushed his hand away
.” In this note Ms Dene also refers to the
touching as sexual abuse. This is the first time that Ms Dene reduced Mr
disclosure to her to writing. It is likely to be the most accurate
record of what she was told in both October 2003, and in September
Dene wrote on 11 October
that Mr A had
told her that he had told Miss B that he would not touch her inappropriately or
sexually again. At that time Ms Dene’s
goal was reporting. The inference
is that she was aware that the threshold of risk for mandatory reporting had
been crossed.
some time thereafter but before January 2005 Ms Dene wrote up the notes at HCCC
vol 2 at 121-133, relating to the period from 21
to 23 October 2003. These are
likely accurately to reflect what Ms Dene was told in October 2003. The stated
goal of Mr A “
not engaging in inappropriate sexual fondling of his
” leaves no room for doubt as to the nature and extent of the
disclosure.
character of the initial disclosure, and the extent of Ms Dene’s
knowledge, is manifested in her private treatment notes
relating to Mr A that
refer to molestation, past abuse, and incestuous
are a number of other indicators as to the nature and extent of the initial
disclosure:
Dene, in her report to the NSW Department of Community Services (DoCS), said
that she was told in October 2003 that Mr A had sexually
abused Miss B,
describing the abuse as
“indecent acts of molestation”
involving massage of the genital area (HCCC vol 1/4 at 2). Ms Dene’s
suggestion that DoCS have misrepresented her
Brechman-Toussaint recalled being told at the initial referral meeting that Ms
Dene had been told that Mr A was beginning to experience
sexual thoughts and
feelings in relation to Miss
This reflects
her initial notes on
given examples of Mr A engendering situations of physical contact with Miss B.
A’s own account appears to be that he told Ms Dene that he had touched
Miss B inappropriately on five
Ms Dene’s account to Dr Zandberg that she made many attempts in the course
of the time she was seeing Mr A to record
his disclosure in October 2003 but
“felt each time overwhelmed, emotional distressed and would put it off
supports an inference that Mr A’s disclosure was recognised by Ms Dene as
child sex abuse.
likelihood is that the initial disclosure to Ms Dene included both touching of
the genitals, and inappropriate sexual thoughts,
however that Ms Dene took the
view that there was no ongoing risk to Miss B and that the report should not be
acted upon given that
it was Dr Donnelly and Ms Dene’s view that it was
preferable for the family to remain together, and they had limited faith
benefits of DOCS intervention.
Ms Dene’s demeanour and
manner during her oral evidence
Dene’s demeanour and manner whilst giving her oral evidence displayed
considerable volatility and variation.
times, her reaction was one of high emotions. On occasion she showed that the
events that gave rise to these proceedings continued
to exert considerable
emotional influence over her. This fits with the evidence of Ms Zandberg, and
corroborates the opinions that
she expressed as to Ms Dene’s ongoing
other times Ms Dene was entirely composed and even argumentative in responding
to questions.
Again, this reflects the compartmentalisation described by Ms Zandberg.
Candour and Insight of Ms Dene
are number of features of the evidence which reflect poorly upon the candour and
insight of Ms Dene.
Ms Dene repeatedly sought to minimise the nature of the disclosure of which she
was in fact aware in October 2003, and of other
matters arising
thereafter.
does not reflect well on her credit.
Ms Dene repeatedly sought to deflect responsibility onto Dr Donnelly and/or Dr
Brechman-Toussaint, including asserting that
relevant ethical obligations were
on Dr Donnelly and not upon
This displays
a lack of insight into the critical nature of her own professional obligations
as a conditionally registered psychologist
providing psychological treatment and
management to Mr A. As set out by Dr Banks, she remained an individual capable
of asserting
herself, seeking additional information, and acting
unilaterally.
Ms Dene in these proceedings has sought to minimise the nature of her own
responsibility by reference to her own psychological
vulnerability around the
relevant period. However, this vulnerability was clearly apparent to Ms Dene and
she chose to continue treating
Mr A. The Tribunal should not find that Ms
Dene’s previous experiences were such that she should be excused from her
responsibility
for her failures. Rather, it appears that Ms Dene allowed her
desire herself to help Mr A, and Miss B and Miss C, to cloud her professional
judgment to an unacceptable degree. It was her professional judgment that the
risk of ongoing abuse was low, and that the potential
benefits she personally
could bring to the family were sufficient to justify her course of action in not
reporting to DoCS. As she
put it in her witness statement at [21]:
decided to continue treatment as I believed that Mr A’s daughter
would benefit from my assistance to her father.”
precisely the sort of analysis which is warned against in the APS Guidelines.
this case, Ms Dene’s inability over a period of 14 months to complete
records of the attendances on Mr A between 21 and 23
October 2003 is the
clearest possible indicator that throughout this period Ms Dene was well aware
of the nature and seriousness
of the disclosure, and her own inability to
respond to it in an appropriate professional manner.
as is clear from Ms Zandberg’s evidence, Ms Dene has built professional
relationships in circumstances where her colleagues
and peers are unaware of her
own history of abuse or of the matters the subject of these proceedings. This is
regarded by Ms Zandberg
compartmentalisation.
It is, however, indicative of a continuing lack of insight, as was confirmed by
Ms Zandberg in her opinion that Ms Dene required
further work in order to have
the capacity for
Ms Dene’s failure to seek psychological treatment herself since the events
the subject of this complaint, and also since
receiving the report of Ms
Zandberg dated 24 April 2009, is telling as to her lack of insight. This is
particularly so given Ms Zandberg’s
diagnosis of Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder with associated symptoms of anxiety and
depression.
Zandberg stated that she would have liked to see Ms Dene in regular therapy and
being provided with proper supervision. She felt
that Ms Dene continued to avoid
compartmentalise.
Ms Dene’s evidence that it was only in 2009 that she remembered that she
had not written notes relating to the October
21 2003 disclosure for
approximately 14 months should be
an example of Ms Dene being less than fully frank in order to excuse her
failure, in her written responses to the HCCC prior
to 2009, to indicate that
she had not written contemporaneous clinical records between October 21 & 23
Ms Dene’s characterising of herself as not a mandated reporter does not
reflect what appeared to be her understanding
in 2004 when she described herself
in the clinical notes as a “
known mandated
Her assertions to the contrary should be rejected. There is nothing in the
contemporaneous clinical records to suggest that Ms Dene’s
view was that
she was not a mandated reporter, or that she considered that question at the
time. Further, the DoCS record of Ms Dene’s
report is that her failure to
report was based upon her perception that reporting would increase the risk to
Submissions as to Particulars of the Complaints
is clearly the case that between June 2003 and August 2005 Ms Dene and Dr
Donnelly provided therapy to Mr A and/or his daughter
Miss B. Between January
2003 and November 2004 this was under the supervision of Dr Donnelly.
weight of the evidence also supports a finding that in October 2003 Mr A
disclosed to Ms Dene, in a treatment session, that he
had touched Miss B in an
inappropriate manner over a period of some two years.
October 2003, upon becoming aware that Mr A had disclosed to Ms Dene during a
therapy session that he had been touching his daughter
Miss B in an
inappropriate manner for the last few years,
properly or at all to understand the legal and professional obligations upon him
in cases of potential child abuse;
to make a report to the Department of Community Services of those disclosures as
required by
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection)
not voluntarily report the disclosures to the Department of Community
to take adequate steps to assess whether or not
Miss B or her
sister Miss C were at risk;
to appreciate the risk to Miss B and Miss C;
to take appropriate action to protect the safety and welfare of the Miss B and
contrary to the Board’s Code of Conduct to communicate the fact of Mr
A’s disclosures to appropriate professionals
or organisations;
or permitted Ms Dene (a trainee under your supervision) to continue to provide
treatment services to Mr A notwithstanding that
this was beyond her competence
and experience.
or permitted Ms Dene to continue to provide treatment services to Mr A
notwithstanding that she had disclosed her own past
history of sexual abuse to
is submitted that the Tribunal should find this particular proved in its
regards the Code, the HCCC relies in particular upon A5, A8, C4 and D2 of the
1997 Code and A1, A2, A4, B3 and B4 of the 2004 Code.
legal and professional obligations upon Ms Dene were clear. As set out above,
she was obliged to report the case to DoCS and she
had no discretion as to
However, her
approach was clearly one based upon discretion, “
weighing up the costs
and benefits
the guidelines of the 2001 Australian Psychological Society on Reporting Child
Abuse and Neglect and Criminal Activity, of
which Ms Dene was aware, emphasised
both the legal and moral responsibility to report and the factors which may
disincline a psychologist
to report a case of suspected child sex abuse to
concern as to the consequences of reporting, or her lack of certainty as to the
continuation of abuse, were factors which were identified
in the Australian
Psychological Guidelines as factors which clinicians should be aware might
influence their reporting
erred and misinterpreted the obligations upon her in allowing such matters to
motivate her decision not to report the disclosure,
and to continue treating Mr
Dene’s presumption that she had discretion and her serious error in
misinterpreting the legislation, are described by Dr
Banks as being
overwhelmingly below the standard required of
He severely
criticised this departure from the standards required of Ms
severely criticised Ms Dene’s significant departure from the standards
required as regards safeguarding the welfare
of Miss B and Miss
set out by Dr Banks, by October 2003 the standard expected would have been for
an intern immediately to report Mr A’s disclosure
to the DoCS helpline and
to refer the matter on. Any other course of conduct fell demonstrably short of
that standard.
Dene was clearly well aware of this obligation, of the Australian Psychological
Society guidelines, and of the DoCS helpline,
from her studies and training at
THE REGIONAL UNIVERSITY. That this would be so was confirmed by the oral
evidence from Dr
Brechman-Toussaint.
Ms Boland, Psychologist instructed by Ms Dene, agreed in her oral evidence, the
failure by Ms Dene to report was the first of many
Further, as confirmed by Ms Boland, a psychology intern in years 5 and 6 should
have recognised that inappropriate thoughts about
a daughter is a sure-fire
indicator of some problem which could potentially lead to sex abuse, if it has
been acted on it is crystal
clear that what you have is sex abuse, and if that
includes inappropriate fondling of a child’s pubic area there is no room
for any shadow of a doubt that that is sex
Ms Dene should have been aware that Miss B was vulnerable to further abuse if
she did not report what Mr A had told her,
and that there was always a risk that
his behaviour could be repeated or
Dene said in her evidence that in October 2003 she did not believe that Miss B
was at risk of psychological
inconsistent with her statement to DoCS that:
“[she] did not report it
at this stage [October 2003] as she believed it would increase risk to the
It is also inconsistent with Ms Dene’s acceptance that she arranged the
session with Miss B because she had concerns for the
psychological welfare of
Miss B, and that she had those concerns from October 2003.
as set out by Dr Banks, given the information disclosed in October 2003, a
reasonable psychologist would have reached the
conclusion that there must have
been current concerns for the safety, welfare or well being of Miss
Dene’s risk assessment was clearly inadequate and
approach was one:
which risk assessment to Miss B relied almost entirely upon an assumption that
Mr A was being entirely frank in his account to
placed inappropriate weight on the fact that this was a voluntary
disclosure;
omitted a fully informed assessment of the risk to Miss B bearing in mind the
nature and extent of the information disclosed
by her father,
failed to take into account the harm to Miss B in remaining with her father
without any properly informed professional support;
relied upon her own role as protecting Miss B in the future through her
treatment of Mr A and an assumption that she would benefit
the daughter and help
Mr A to maintain safe behaviours with Miss B. Ms Dene’s oral evidence that
she kept seeking Mr A because
she thought she was doing something very
clear indicator of her overriding motivation;
based upon her belief that she could be sure that Mr A would not repeat his
behaviours;
to recognise her own lack of knowledge, experience or competence.
was in no way excused by the subsequent limited referral to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint, in which critical facets of the information
provided by Mr A
was omitted, and which was not directed towards the role of risk assessment. The
limited nature of this referral
is further evidence of the failure by Ms Dene to
appreciate the risk to Miss B, and to a lesser extent HA, in remaining in their
described in the letter from
the circumstances, Ms Dene clearly failed to protect the safety and welfare of
Miss B and Miss C. The starkness of this failure
can be seen from Ms
Dene’s stated goal of treatment as being to include the goal of Mr A not
engaging in inappropriate sexual
fondling of Miss
failure of Ms Dene was exacerbated given her emotional reaction to the
disclosure on 21 October 2003. As Ms Dene candidly accepted
in her oral
evidence, even at that time she identified a link between her getting upset and
her own history of abuse, and it had
the characteristic or impression of some
sort of abusive
the nature of the disclosure, Ms Dene’s response thereto, the nature of
the risk to Miss B and Miss C, the many complications
associated with managing
and treating child sex abusers, the reported attraction between Ms Dene and Mr
A, and the background and
limited experience of Ms Dene, including her history
of child sex abuse and his knowledge that she had reacted in such an emotional
and unprofessional way on 21 October 2003, it was a serious error for her to
continue treating Mr A.
Boland identified a further mistake on the part of Ms Dene in responding
personally to emails that should have rung alarm bells
for her. According to Ms
Boland, Ms Dene should at her level of training and experience have been very
well aware of the dangers
of a situation whereby her patient was indicating that
he was attracted to
further factor which should have influenced her to terminate her professional
relationship with Mr A given its complexity
and the nature of his disclosure.
Transgressed
professional boundaries by making inappropriate disclosures to Mr A about her
history of sexual abuse
Dene disclosed to Mr A her own history of sexual abuse as an explanation for her
own emotive reaction and to reassure Mr A that
she would not be prejudiced
against him by reason of her own history of
In this she
was, despite her clear distress, acting in a rational, albeit unprofessional,
was an unfortunate and unprofessional failing to appreciate the boundaries of
her professional relationship, and to conduct herself
in an objective way in her
professional relationship. It was a significant failure to meet the standards
required of her inviting
Dr Banks’ severe
risks associated with such conduct within the professional relationship are
apparent given that this disclosure clearly made Ms
Dene more vulnerable to
grooming by Mr A.
on or around November 2003, upon the occasion of making a referral to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint:
provide all relevant information to Dr Brechman-Toussaint in relation to the
risk of harm to Miss B and Miss C:
to reconsider the question of whether or not Miss B and Miss C were at risk;
make a referral to the Department of Community Services.
set out by Dr Banks, the point of referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint was a point
at which Ms Dene ought to have reconsidered her
position about reporting to
DOCS, given the questions raised by Dr Brechman-Toussaint in the initial meeting
she had with Dr Donnelly
Banks’ view is that it was naïve and inappropriate to make a referral
to Dr Brechman-Toussaint in the circumstances
without properly informing her of
all potentially relevant clinical
information.
it is clear from the evidence that salient details were omitted in the briefing
to Dr Brechman-Toussaint, which details were
of critical significance as to the
characterisation of the matters disclosed by Mr A, and as to the ability of Dr
Brechman-Toussaint
properly to form a view as to the risk of harm, both past and
present, to Miss B and Miss C. At this point, Ms Dene should have given
potentially relevant information to Dr Brechman-Toussaint, including that the
massage had included the pubic
reconsidered all of the available material, properly assessed the risk to Miss B
and Miss C, and referred the case to DOCS.
Dene should have ensured that Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s brief specifically
included the question of assessment of risk of harm
to Miss B and Miss C. This
she manifestly failed to do. This is, in effect, conceded by Dr Donnelly in his
letter dated 16 June 2006
“I said nothing to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint about my impressions, made no effort to influence the type or
duration of her care.”
contrary to Dr Donnelly’s assertion, the clinical file relating to Mr A
would not have been available to Dr Brechman-Toussaint
as Ms Dene said that she
kept it at her home throughout the period of her treatment of Mr
to Dr Banks, this incomplete provision of salient clinical information to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint sadly gave rise to the potential
that her intervention could
in fact be harmful to Miss B and Miss
15 September 2004, involved Miss B in the therapeutic process that she was
undertaking with Mr A notwithstanding that this was:
her competence;
Inappropriate
in the circumstances; and
any steps being taken to assess or to ensure Miss B’s welfare in relation
to this process.
Dene’s account is that she conducted this session because she believed
that she was “
going to unburden [Miss B] of all the distress that she
carried because Dr Brechman-Toussaint hadn’t done her job properly,
thought the cost benefit analysis was that she was actually going to be
She also stated that she did not prepare Miss B for this meeting because she was
so focused on preparing Mr A and she supposed she
did not consider herself as a
counsellor or psychologist for Miss
reasoning reveals the depth of Ms Dene’s failings. It is also premised
upon an appreciation that there were matters which
Dr Brechman-Toussaint had not
identified, which in turn reveals Ms Dene’s contemporaneous understanding
of the nature of Mr
A’s disclosure and of the likelihood of his conduct
causing ongoing harm to Miss B.
The inappropriateness of the session with Miss B, and of it being carried out by
Ms Dene who was inexperienced, a survivor of child
sex abuse, and treating Mr A,
is abundantly clear. That this was done without any independent and/or
professional preparation or
support for Miss B exacerbates the severity of this
failure. As set out by Dr Banks, the “
level of preparation she offered
to her client versus that offered to the child, I can only express as
unconscionable
Boland also accepted that Ms Dene should not have involved Miss B in treatment
circumstances.
further information as to the extent of the inappropriate touching by Mr A of
Miss B being disclosed to her by Mr A in September
properly or at all to understand the legal and professional obligations upon her
in cases of potential child abuse;
to make a report to the Department of Community Services of those disclosures as
required by
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection)
to take adequate steps to assess whether or not Mss B or her sister Miss C were
to appreciate the risk to Miss B and Miss C;
to take appropriate action to protect the safety and welfare of Miss B and Miss
contrary to the Board’s Code of Conduct to communicate the fact of Mr
A’s disclosures to appropriate professionals
organisations;
not voluntarily report the disclosures to the Department of Community
to provide treatment services to Mr A notwithstanding that this was beyond her
competence and experience;
contrary to the Board’s Code of Conduct to refer, for more specialised
service, Mr A whose needs were beyond her professional
competence;
submissions set out above as regards particular one are repeated as regards
particular 5. In the light of the further disclosure,
the failures are even
starker. This is particularly so given Ms Dene’s awareness at this point
that the further disclosure
exacerbated the risk that Mr A’s account was
not entirely to be relied upon, and increased the risk of harm to Miss B.
even then, her risk assessment as regards both Miss B and Miss C was
inadequate.
further disclosure arose after the session with Miss B on 15 September 2004
during which the Miss B’s distress and concerns
welfare should have been readily apparent;
Dene’s flawed risk assessment is apparent from her response to a question
from Mr Wilcox:
“if you talked to me at the time and you said “Do
you think he will be a safe and appropriate father with his daughter?”
would have said
notes in respect of this further
illustrate beyond any doubt the flawed approach of Ms Dene both to her reporting
obligations, her ability to continue to manage and
treat Mr A, and to risk
assessment.
around September 2004 - August 2005, delayed making a report to the Department
of Community Services.
set out above, Ms Dene was at all times under an obligation to make a report to
DoCS, either as a mandated, or as a voluntary reporter.
She failed to do this
over a protracted period, during which she was clearly well aware of the
existence both of current concerns
for Miss B and/or Miss C, and of a history of
sexual abuse and/or potentially harmful behaviour from Mr A. It is a flagrant
of her reporting obligations to describe, as she did, the abuse in her
clinical notes but to decline to report in accordance with
obligations. Ms Dene’s procrastination as regards reporting, based upon
her perceived goal of preparing Mr A for
this to happen, shows Ms Dene’s
focus upon the interests of Mr A at the potential expense of the interests of
Miss B and Miss
C, and her misunderstanding of reporting requirements.
Dene’s oral evidence is that she decided that she wanted to report Mr A
around October
indicate that it was in September
the clear process of reasoning inherent in the Discharge Summary dated 4 January
is indicative
of the erroneous view which Ms Dene took at all relevant times of her legal and
ethical reporting obligations.
not keep any appropriate and/or accurate clinical records in relation to the
psychological treatment provided to Mr A.
Dene, by her own admission, failed to prepare any clinical records relating to
her attendances on Mr A and supervision with Dr
Donnelly between 21 and 23
October 2003. These records were not prepared for approximately 14 months in
circumstances where it should
have been apparent to her, as accepted by Ms
Boland, that these records would form an important basis for any further
interventions.
Given the nature of these sessions, and her emotional reaction thereto, this was
a serious breach of her obligations as a conditionally
registered psychologist.
It was potentially highly significant, as no one considering those records would
have been in a position
accurately to assess the risk. It also prevented the
most reliable record of these critical disclosures from being available. Dr
Banks strongly criticised this
given Ms Dene’s subsequent explanation the failure is all the more
concerning from the point of view of protection
of the public. Ms Dene, aware
that her own emotional reaction was precluding her from completing the most
basic of her professional
obligations, continued to treat Mr A, and did not
raise her failure to complete records from Dr Donnelly.
the evidence of Ms Dene’s own expert was that the standard of the notes
Unsatisfactory
Professional Conduct – Complaint One
definition of unsatisfactory professional conduct, equivalent to that in s 25 of
the Act, was considered by the Medical Tribunal
In re a Medical
Practitioner and the Medical Practice Act
(3 September 2007). The changes to
the previous definition were described in paragraph 10 as being twofold: first
in introducing
the concept of different levels of experience and skill requiring
different standards, and secondly, in introducing the idea that
the conduct had
to be “significantly below” the standard to be so expected. At
paragraph 12 “significantly”
was said to mean “not trivial, of
importance, or substantial”.
matters set out above, individually and cumulatively, clearly establish
unsatisfactory professional conduct. The standard required,
having regard to
professional training, the Code, s 27, and the guidelines of the Australian
Psychological Society clearly demanded
a standard of conduct of which Ms Dene
fell far short.
Professional Misconduct – Complaint
24 of the Act provides that professional misconduct is unsatisfactory
professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or
cancellation of the psychologists registration. Whilst the statutory definition
of professional misconduct
makes it unnecessary to turn to the common law
definition, it was held in
Prothonotary of Supreme Court of NSW v. McCaffery
[2004] NSWCA 470
, that it gives content to a statutory definition of
professional misconduct that it was enacted in the context that
“professional
misconduct” at common law was said “to connote
“conduct which would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or
dishonourable”
by one’s peers: see
Allinson v General Council of
Medical Education and Registration
[1894] 1 QB 750
and other authorities
collected by Spigelman CJ (with whom Mason P and Handley JA agreed) in
South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
the nature and potential risks associated with the conduct of Ms Dene as set out
above, her conduct was professional misconduct
within the meaning of s 24 of the
Act. Of particular significance in this regard is:
failure to protect the welfare of a child whose circumstances were such that the
vulnerability inherent in childhood was severely
exacerbated;
failure to take notes of a highly significant disclosure in circumstances where
that failure potentially prevented relevant clinical
information being
available, potentially preventing others from ascertaining the nature and extent
of the risk of harm to Miss B;
decision not to report Mr A to DoCS in October 2003 in part on the basis that
she felt that she would better be able to help Mr
failure to act upon her reaction both on 21 October 2003, and thereafter when
she attempted to record the disclosure in the clinical
inadequacy of her referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint;
inadequate risk assessment;
failures properly to reassess her initial decision not to report Mr A, including
at times when she openly described his treatment
of Miss B as abuse;
blatant disregard for Miss B’s welfare as regards the session with Miss B
Dene currently lives in Bellingen, working part time as a
psychologist.
has chosen to work with women. She makes attempts to protect herself from facing
a situation like that she faced with Mr A, but
in reality that is an impossible
goal. As a psychologist, she should recognise this impossibility and instead
seek to resolve any
issue that could adversely impact upon her own professional
competence to deal with whatever situations she may encounter in the
her professional interactions. Her failure to do this reflects poorly upon her
insight and upon her professional competence.
of Ms Dene’s colleagues at her current place of professional employment
are aware of her history of abuse, the diagnosis
of PTSD or of the matters the
subject of these
proceedings.
she was aware of the findings of Ms Zandberg as set out in her report in April
2009, she chose not to undertake any psychological
treatment explaining:
“It’s not something that I’ve turned my mind to at the
Again, this reflects poorly upon her insight.
regard to the protective jurisdiction of this
need to protect the public, the importance of maintaining standards within the
profession and in maintaining confidence in
psychologists as a
profession,
appropriate protective order as regards Ms Dene is cancellation of her
registration for a period in the range of 18 months to
a prohibition order should be made prohibiting Ms Dene from providing the
following health services for a period in the range
of 18 months to 3
Counselling
Psychotherapy
Hypnotherapy
Health Service
other alternative/healing healthcare/therapies; an
services as defined in
Health Care Complaints Act
regard to the evidence of Ms Dene, including her demeanour and emotional
responses whilst giving evidence, and to the evidence
of Ms Zandberg that Ms
Dene continues to suffer from post Traumatic Stress with associated symptoms of
depression and anxiety, this
Tribunal can have no confidence that at the
expiration of a period of suspension Ms Dene could safely return to the
register. Ms
Dene’s stated reluctance to seek the professional assistance
of a psychologist only compounds the problem.
Zandberg’s account is that Ms Dene continues to have psychological
limitations, and that Ms Dene does not herself recognise
this. She felt that Ms
Dene still needed to accept and address what has happened to
According to
Ms Zandberg Ms Dene avoids and compartmentalises her past, and that it would be
hard to know how she would respond was
she to be faced again with a patient
disclosing abusive behaviour.
the light of her psychological vulnerability, and given that it is simply not
possible to exclude the possibility of such a disclosure
or other information as
to child sex abuse coming to light, Ms Dene should not be allowed to practice as
a psychologist. As Ms Zandberg
candidly stated in response to a question from Mr
Wilcox, at this point in time she would not be happy to recommend her as a
psychologist.
is a telling answer from an expert instructed by Ms Dene.
added measure of protection afforded by an order of cancellation of registration
is essential in the case of Ms Dene.
is of particular importance in this case that:
conduct of Ms Dene left an already vulnerable child exposed to a considerable
risk of harm for a period of nearly two years;
important that psychologists are given a clear message by the Board that their
obligations as potential protectors of vulnerable
children in circumstances such
as those which arose in this case;
is equally important that psychologists recognise and act upon their own
vulnerabilities and impediments to them conducting their
interactions with
patients, and performing their professional obligations, in a professional and
appropriate manner; and
public needs to have confidence that psychologists will not allow situations
such as those which occurred in this case to continue
unabated. One element of
deterrence is “providing an assurance to the public that serious lapses in
the conduct of ... practitioners
will not be passed over or lightly put aside,
but will be appropriately dealt
the present case, the importance of the confidence of the public, including
relevant agencies, in the ability and willingness of
psychologists to perform
their public duties as regards protection of children at risk is manifest in the
complaints received by
the HCCC from both Cedar
Tamworth Joint Investigation Response
reinforces the importance of this Tribunal taking steps to maintain such
confidence.
HCCC also seeks an order that Ms Dene pay their costs in this matter if the
Tribunal finds one or both Complaints proved.
HCCC v DENE & DONNELLY
SUBMISSION TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST’S TRIBUNAL OF NEW
SOUTH WALES
ON BEHALF OF MS KERRI DENE
INTRODUCTION
matter proceeded to Hearing before the Psychologist’s Tribunal of NSW
(‘the Tribunal’) on 15 to 19 June inclusive
and, 17 and 18 August
2009. The Tribunal was constituted by the Chairperson, Ms Joanne Muller, two
psychologists, Dr E Tong and
Mr C Taylor and a layperson, Ms F Taylor.
to the commencement of the Hearing a number of Directions Hearings and informal
discussions between the parties took place in
respect of the conduct and
management of this and the related matter involving Dr J Donnelly. At the
Direction of the Chairperson,
the 2 matters proceeded to Hearing together.
the Hearing dealt with the conduct of both Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly, this
submission is confined only to the conduct of Ms Dene.
the course of the Directions Hearing on 7 May 2009, counsel for Ms Dene
indicated to the Chairperson that Ms Dene admitted
the substance of the conduct
that led to her coming before the Tribunal although did not admit that such
conduct amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional
misconduct.
that regard we note the transcript of that Directions Hearing in which
admissions in relation to each of the particulars of the
complaints regarding Ms
Dene were answered by counsel at the request of the Chairperson. We refer
particularly to page 9, line 15
of the transcript:
‘The timeline – the history of the counselling
provided by Ms Dene and what she did, a great deal, 95% of it I think is
admitted in terms of conduct, there would be no controversy there as to findings
of facts as to what was done and what was said in
Ms Dene’s case because
she has conceded most of it. There is no great double handling of information.
There will not be some
longwinded cross-examination of people as to who said and
did what because a great deal if that is settled, with respect.’
LEGAL FRAMEWORK
matter came before the Tribunal consequent upon a Complaint from the Health Care
Complaints Commission (‘HCCC’) in
accordance with
Psychologist’s Act 2001 (‘the Act’). Relevantly, section 34
of the Act states that:
34 Role of the Commission
(1) Before the Board deals with or refers a complaint
under this Part, the Board and the Commission must consult in order to see if
agreement can be reached between them as to the course of action to be taken
concerning a complaint.
(2) Division 2 of
Care Complaints
applies to the consultation and the outcomes of the consultation.
HCCCs Complaint, dated 26 June 2008 is divided into two particularised
Complaints. The First Complaint alleges Ms Dene:
‘Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of s.25 of the Act, in that she has:
(i) Demonstrated that the knowledge skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of an equivalent level of training or
experience and/or
(ii) Engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice
or purported practice of psychology.’
second Complaint alleges Ms Dene:
‘Has been guilty of professional misconduct in accordance
with section 24 of the Act, in that she has:
(i) Demonstrated that the knowledge skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of an equivalent level of training or
experience and/or
(ii) Engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice
or purported practice of psychology.’
note the assertion of the HCCC at paragraph 3 of its submission namely,
the evidence clearly establishes, to the requisite standard of the
balance of probabilities
.’ Whilst such a standard may well suit the
HCCC, it is not with respect the appropriate test. As the Tribunal would be
aware, the appropriate test in matters such as this is that espoused by Sir
Owen Dixon in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
‘But reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that
is attained or established independently of the nature and consequence
fact or facts to be proved. The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent
unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description,
or the gravity of the
consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must
affect the answer to the question
whether the Issue has been proved to the
reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters 'reasonable
satisfaction' should
not be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or
indirect inferences. ...’
the Tribunal would also be aware, the Act (along with other Health related
Legislation) was amended following the Special Commission
of Inquiry into
concerns in respect of the Camden and Campbelltown Hospitals by Special
Commissioner Walker SC. One of the amendments
to the Act was to introduce the
words ‘significantly below’ into the definition of
‘Unsatisfactory Professional
Conduct.’ Those words are not defined
in the Act although some guidance as to their operation may be gained from the
Reading Speech when the legislation was introduced into Parliament
‘The first main purpose of the bill is
to refocus the
Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC) on investigating serious complaints
. To achieve this, Commissioner Walker SC
recommended that unsatisfactory professional conduct be redefined so that only
significant
instances involving lack of skill, judgment, or care will result in
an investigation or disciplinary action. Unsatisfactory professional
will be defined as.....the reference to 'significantly' in that context may
refer to a single act or omission that demonstrates
a practitioner's lack of
skill, judgment or care, or it may refer to a pattern of conduct. In any
individual case, that will depend
on seriousness of the circumstances of the
’ (Our emphasis)
phrase ‘significantly below’ was also Judicially considered in the
Re A Medical Practitioner and the Medical Practice Act
2007] where Judge Freeman stated:
‘As a general principle, the use of the term
significant’ may in law be taken to mean not trivial, of importance, or
substantial.’
remarks of course, focus the decision-makers attention upon the nature of the
evidence required to establish the case. They
do not change the standard of
proof - which remains that of reasonable satisfaction as outlined above.
our submission the wording of the definition of ‘unsatisfactory
professional conduct’ is telling. As such, we submit
that for the
Tribunal to find unsatisfactory professional conduct in respect of Ms Dene the
conduct particularised in the Complaint
must be conduct that is
significantly
reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training.
With respect, both aspects of that definition must be met.
our submission and, notwithstanding the admissions made by Ms Dene prior to and
during the Hearing, her conduct does not fall within
the definition of
‘significantly below’ that reasonable expected of a psychologist of
an equivalent level of training
or experience. Importantly, we note the
level of specific training. Ms Dene obtained the degree of Bachelor of
Psychology (Hons) in 1999. Between 1994 and
1999, she worked as a mediator
and/or counsellor on a part-time / sessional basis. (Tab 1, RA) Prior to
commencing her Degree in
Clinical Psychology at the Regional University in 2002,
Ms Dene had not conducted a professional clinical psychology session with
Ms Dene was
undertaking a practicum through the Regional University at the relevant
Ms Dene was
supervised by two senior psychologist’s (both having been conferred with
the Degree of PhD) and, one of whom was
responsible for teaching the child
psychology course at the University;
Ms Dene held
‘conditional’ and not full Registration.
our primary submission, the Tribunal would not be satisfied that Ms Dene’s
conduct the subject of this matter amounts to
Unsatisfactory Professional
for the Tribunal to find Ms Dene guilty of professional misconduct, that conduct
would have to be of a
‘sufficiently serious nature’
justify suspension or cancellation or registration.
we submit the Tribunal would not be satisfied on a proper review of the evidence
before it that Ms Dene’s conduct amounted
to Professional Misconduct.
PARTICULARS of COMPLAINT
First complaint
The psychologist gained conditional registration as a psychologist on 2
April 2002 and gained full registration on 9 April 2005.
Between January 2003
and November 2004 Dr James Donnelly provided clinical supervision to the
psychologist. Between June 2003 and
August 2005 the psychologist provided
therapy to Mr A. The psychologist:
Mr A disclosed to the psychologist during a therapy session on 21 October 2003
that he had been touching his daughter
in an inappropriate
manner for the last few years:
to properly or at all understand the legal obligations upon her in cases of
potential child abuse;
Dene does not admit that she failed to properly understand the legal obligations
upon her in cases of potential child abuse. Ms
Dene has maintained since this
matter was first raised with her that she initially spoke with her direct
supervisor, Dr Donnelly
and the obligations upon her. She also thereafter attended a joint meeting
between Dr Donnelly and Dr Brechman-Toussaint where the disclosure was discussed
Dene was extremely concerned to ensure that she fulfill the legal obligations
imposed upon her and therefore also referred to the
Legislation and to
Guidelines provided by DoCS (Volume Three, Tabs 4 and 5 of the documents
provided by the HCCC) prior to that meeting
with Dr Donnelly and Dr
Brechman-Toussaint. Whilst she formed the view that she was not a mandatory
reporter in accordance with
the provisions of the
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
, she quite appropriately – we submit -
sought guidance and reassurance as to that decision from her 2
supervisor’s, both
of whom formed the view that in the circumstances, none
of them were mandatory reporters and neither was there a requirement or need
make a referral to DoCS.
our submission, a supervisee (Ms Dene in this case) must be entitled to rely
upon the direction and guidance of his or her supervisors
(Dr Donnelly and Dr
Brechman-Toussaint in this case) at the time. With respect, if it subsequently
becomes apparent that such advice
or guidance was erroneous, then the
responsibility for that should not be visited upon the supervisee. Indeed, in
our submission,
the supervisee would have a more difficult task seeking to
defend a position wherein he or she sought advice or guidance and thereafter
simply disregarded it.
Notwithstanding
that, Ms Dene was not of the view that there was a ‘current risk’ to
Mr A’s children (neither were
Dr Donnelly and Dr Brechman-Toussaint) nor
with respect, was Ms Dene providing services to children. The documentation
by DoCS is entirely consistent with such an understanding. In that
regard we refer to the DoCS document, ‘Do you work with
people?’ dated November 2000, within the documents provided by the HCCC at
Volume 3, Tab 5.
That document explicitly states that:
‘A mandatory reporter is someone who is required by law to make a
report to DoCS if they have current concerns about the safety,
wellbeing of a child. A child is a person under 16 years.’
Ms Dene did not have current concerns for [Miss B]’s welfare or wellbeing
neither with respect, did Dr Donnelly and Dr
Brechman-Toussaint.
note that document also provides a guideline for who is a mandatory reporter.
That states that a mandatory reporter is:
‘Any person who delivers the following
services to
as part of their
Dene was not providing services to children nor, in relation to Mr A was she in
paid work. With respect, that fact was made patently
clear to the Tribunal by
Ms Dene in her statement filed in the proceedings at paragraph 13 and, also
during the course of her oral
that regard, in response to a question during her evidence in chief namely,
there is some perception that you were paid some nominal amount of
money to treat Mr A, what do you say about that?
’ Ms Dene said,
No I wasn’t. Categorically no I wasn’t, Mr Ainsworth.
And I suppose the thing that has really frustrated me that seems
to have come
out of Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s notes is that she says the referral came
from the dementia care network
Notwithstanding
the HCCCs searching cross-examination of Ms Dene, that position was not in any
way shifted. In any event, we submit
the evidence in no way supports the
proposition that to treat Mr A in the circumstances in which he was treated by
Ms Dene under
the supervision of Dr Donnelly and Dr Brechman-Toussaint amounts
to providing services to or care of children. With respect, for
the HCCC to
persist with such a proposition despite of all of the evidence before the
Tribunal including that of its peer, Dr Banks,
is completely misguided, beggars
belief and is inappropriate.
to make a report to the Department of Community Services (DoCS) of those
disclosures as required by
Children and Young Persons (Care
and Protection) Act 1998
Dene does not admit that she failed to make a report to DoCS in accordance with
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
. Indeed, on the evidence before the Tribunal, there was no requirement
to make such a report.
Notwithstanding
that, Ms Dene did make a voluntary report to DoCS (Volume Two, Tab 3, page 15 of
the document served by the HCCC being
a letter from DoCS to Ms Dene dated 15
August 2005 confirming her report) in the absence of which we submit Mr A would
not have come
to the attention of the Authorities and, the true position as to
his past conduct would not have been discovered. With respect,
the credit for
such notification goes only to Ms Dene.
Importantly,
we note Ms Dene made that report despite the fact, that if in all of the
circumstances anyone was required to make such
a report, it must have been
primarily, her 2 supervisors who were not only aware of Mr A’s behavior
but were involved in his
care and yet did not make a report.
our submission when regard is had to the actual evidence, it is clear Ms Dene
was not legally obliged to make the report to DoCS
and therefore this particular
cannot be proven.
to take adequate steps to assess whether or not
or her sister
were at risk;
Dene does not admit this particular.
Dene approached both of her supervisors, initially Dr Donnelly and subsequently
Dr Brechman-Toussaint in a joint meeting with Dr
Donnelly. She discussed the
disclosure and the matter generally with them both. She was reassured that
[Miss B] and [Miss C] were
not at current risk of harm.
that end, Dr Donnelly referred [Miss B] and [Miss C] to Dr-Brechman-Toussaint
and in doing so provided to her a full disclosure
of the information provided to
him by Ms Dene. With respect, there is no doubt on the evidence before the
Tribunal that the referral
to Dr Brechman-Toussaint was made by Dr Donnelly
consequent upon Ms Dene’s meeting with him in which she discussed the
made to her by Mr A.
respect, to maintain the suggestion that it was in some way Ms Dene’s
referral in the face of all the evidence as the HCCC
seeks to do at paragraphs
14(e), 53 and 81(e) of its submission again simply beggars belief. Moreover,
there can be no doubt that
all of the known information was provided to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint’s given her handwritten note (undated) at Volume One,
17.6 of the documents provided by the HCCC. That note clearly states:
‘Inappropriate touch? Query sexual – Jim claims yes
feelings but recognises not healthy time to change thinking.....Any
possibility
of sexual abuse here????’
regard to the evidence before the Tribunal, there is no doubt in our submission,
Ms Dene clearly took all of the steps available
to her to assess the potential
risk to the 2 children. As such, this particular cannot be made out.
to appreciate the risk to
[Miss B] and [Miss C]
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission above at
particular 1(c).
to take appropriates to protect the safety and welfare of
[Miss B] and [Miss
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission above at
particular 1(c).
contrary to B5 of the board’s code of conduct , to communicate the fact of
Mr A’s disclosures to appropriate professionals
organisations;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission above at
particular 1(c).
not voluntarily report the disclosures to DoCS;
Dene does not admit this particular.
Dene made a voluntary report of the disclosure to DoCS. As submitted above, had
it not been for Ms Dene’s report, the likelihood
of Mr A’s behavior
having been detected and subsequently acted upon by the Authorities would have
been seriously diminished.
Indeed, it may still not have come to light!
to provide treatment services to Mr A notwithstanding that this was beyond her
competence and experience;
Dene admits this particular as she has maintained since the first occasion on
which it was raised with her.
submit the admission must be seen in light of the fact she sought advice and
guidance from her supervisor(s). Whilst Ms Dene concedes
she was not told that
she must continue to treat Mr A, she was advised by her supervisor that she was
indeed suitable for the role
and that it would be a good learning experience.
That proposition has not been disputed. In that regard we note the comment of
Ms Carol Boland on 18 June 2009 at page 49 of the transcript at line 25:
‘That’s a huge emotional message in that. And this
man as a supervisor has power. She does not want to disappoint him;
going to take guidance from him; and, she is going to in many cases override her
own cognitive and emotional responses,
whatever they were to actually work with
this client. She’s been put in a place – in a position of enormous
dissonance.’
note the HCCCs comments variously littered throughout its submission (for
example at paragraphs 10, 32, 33), in respect of Ms Dene’s
attempts to minimise or shift the blame to her supervisor(s). Lest there be any
confusion that is not what Ms Dene did.
She simply seeks to explain her
position vis a vis Mr A and this case, on the basis that she was an intern who
was being supervised
and as such, sought advice and guidance from that
supervisor.
we submit the role of Ms Dene’s supervisor is integral to Ms Dene’s
decision to continue treating Mr A. Dr Donnelly’s
conduct in that regard
invited the strong criticism of all three psychologists who provided reports and
gave oral evidence in these
proceedings. Specifically, we note the comments of
Dr Banks who at page 8 of his report dated 11 June 2009, (Volume One, tab 10(c)
of the documents served by the HCCC) states:
‘“This is not sufficient for her supervisor to step
back from responsibility, he directed Ms Dene to see this patient
and logically,
he should have directed Ms Dene to stop seeing this client at this
Dr Banks in cross-examination made the following comment on 17 June 2009, page
63 at line 5:
‘Q (Ainsworth)
Well I’m asking you to put
yourself in the position of Dr Donnelly?
Then I would have directed the intern to stop and directed the
intern to make a mandatory report and then I would have just
note Dr Donnelly’s evidence on both 17 and 18 August 2009 in support of
his argument that Ms Dene was a suitable therapist
for the Mr A’s
from the actual position which evidenced itself during his cross-examination
namely, if Ms Dene did not continue to treat Mr
A, then he (Dr Donnelly) would
have had to, Dr Donnelly based his argument upon the notion of
‘countertransference’ and
provided to the Tribunal, the HCCC and Ms
Dene’s lawyers, an article titled “Countertransference and
Intersubjectivity:
Golden Opportunities in Clinical Supervision” written
by Stephen Southern and dated 2007.
our submission that article does not support Dr Donnelly’s position, which
we note was first disclosed in his oral evidence
to the Tribunal despite the
fact he chose not to file and serve his written statement until shortly before
the commencement of the
proceedings.
having regard to the date of the article, we submit it ought to be afforded no
weight whatsoever by the Tribunal. In any
event, Dr Donnelly conceded that he
had never put that notion to Ms Dene in relation to her treatment of Mr A.
to provide treatment services to Mr A notwithstanding that raised issues about
her past childhood sexual abuse;
Dene admits this particular and we repeat our submission at 1(h) above.
contrary to BS of the Board’s Code of Conduct to refer, for more
specialised service, Mr A whose needs were beyond her
professional
competence.
Dene admits this particular and we repeat our submission at 1(h) above.
Transgressed
professional boundaries by making inappropriate disclosures to Mr A about her
history of sexual abuse;
Dene admits this particular.
refer page five to the report of Ms Carol Boland dated found at Tab RC of the
document filed on behalf of Ms Dene which states
‘That this was a spontaneous, almost reflective response.
Firstly she had just heard information that shocked and disturbed
Secondly, having behaved in what would be viewed by her as an embarrassingly
unprofessional manner she would most likely want
to provide an explanation to
the client for this. Her ability to quickly self-monitor and reflect on her
initial responses is evidenced
by her willingness to raise these issues in
supervision the next day.’
on or around November 2003, upon the occasion of making a referral to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint:
provide all relevant information to Dr Brechman-Toussaint in relation to the
risk of harm to
[Miss B] and [Miss C]
Dene does not admit this particular. With respect, it simply flies in the face
of the actual evidence before the Tribunal to maintain
a suggestion that Ms Dene
in anyway made a referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint.
the course of the Hearing Ms Dene provided evidence in cross examination that
Dr Brechman-Toussaint knew exactly what we knew’
(Transcript, dated 19 June 2009, page 59 at line 13) and we again refer to
the handwritten note of Dr Brechman-Toussaint (undated)
at Volume One, Tab 17.6
of the documents provided by the HCCC.
to reconsider the question of whether or not
Miss B] and [Miss C]
were at risk; and
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(c)
make a report to DoCS of those disclosures as required by section 27 of the
Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission above.
15 September 2004, involved [Miss B] in a therapeutic process that she was
undertaking with Mr A notwithstanding that this was:
her competence;
Dene admits this particular.
Notwithstanding
that, Ms Dene admits that conducting the session with [Miss B] on 15 September
2004 was beyond her competence. Ms
Dene has conceded that she placed an undue
amount of trust in her supervisor during the course of the treatment of Mr A and
refer to the evidence of Dr Donnelly regarding the intervention session
‘I saw the worth of it and I can imagine that I
communicated to her that it wouldn’t be inconsistent with our treatment
goal and it could be usual and explored what it might be like for the
(Transcript, 18 August 2009, page 41 at line 43).
statement must be borne in mind of the relationship being supervisor/student as
explained by Ms Boland and referred to above.
Inappropriate
in the circumstances; and
Dene admits this particular and we refer to our submission at 4(a).
any steps being taken to assess or to ensure [Miss B]’s welfare in
relation to this process.
Dene admits this particular and we refer to our submission at 4(a).
further information as to the extent of the inappropriate touching by Mr A of
Miss B being disclosed to her by Mr A in September
properly or at all to understand the legal and professional obligations upon her
in cases of potential child abuse;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(a)
to make a report to DoCS of those disclosures as required by section 27 of the
Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(b)
to take adequate steps to assess whether or not Miss B or her sister Miss C were
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(c)
Failed to appreciate the risk to Miss B and Miss C;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(d)
to take appropriate action to protect the safety and welfare of Miss B and Miss
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(e)
contrary to B5 of the Board’s Code of Conduct to communicate the fact of
Mr A’s disclosures to appropriate professionals
or organisations;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(f)
not voluntarily report the disclosures to DoCS;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(g)
to provide treatment services to Mr A notwithstanding that this was beyond her
competence and experience;
Dene admits this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(h) above.
contrary to B3 of the Board’s Code of Conduct to refer, for more
specialised service, Mr A whose needs were beyond her
professional
competence.
Dene admits this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(i) above.
around September 2004 – August 2005, delayed in making a report to
Dene admits this particular.
not keep appropriate and/or accurate clinical records in relation to the
psychological treatment provided to Mr A.
Dene admits this particular.
Second Complaint
psychologist gained conditional registration as a psychologist on 2 April 2002
and gained full registration on 9 April 2005.
Between January 2003 and November
2004 Dr James Donnelly provided clinical supervision to the psychologist.
Between June 2003 and
August 2005 the psychologist provided therapy to Mr A.
The psychologist:
Mr A disclosed to the psychologist during a therapy session on 21 October 2003
that he had been touch his daughter Miss B in
an inappropriate manner for the
last few years:
to properly to at all understand the legal obligations upon her in cases of
potential child abuse;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission above at 1(a)
in respect of the First Complaint.
to make a report to the Department of Community Services (DoCS) of those
disclosures as required by section 27 of the Children
and Young persons (Care
and Protection) Act 1998;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission above at 1(b)
in relation to the First Complaint.
to take adequate steps to assess whether or not Miss B or her sister Miss C were
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission above at 1(c)
in respect of the First Complaint.
o appreciate the risk to Miss B and Miss C;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(d) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
to take appropriates to protect the safety and welfare of Miss B and Miss
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(e) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
contrary to B5 of the board’s code of conduct , to communicate the fact of
Mr disclosures to appropriate professionals
or organisations;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(f) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
not voluntarily report the disclosures to DoCS;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(g) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
to provide treatment services to Mr A notwithstanding that this was beyond her
competence and experience;
Dene admits this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(h) above in
relation to the First Complaint.
to provide treatment services to Mr A notwithstanding that this raised issues
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(i) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
contrary to BS of the Board’s Code of Conduct to refer, for more
specialised service, Mr A whose needs were beyond her
professional
competence.
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 1(j) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
Transgressed
professional boundaries by making inappropriate disclosures s to Mr A about her
history of sexual abuse.
Dene admits this particular and we refer to our submission in relation to
particular 2 above.
on or around November 2003, upon the occasion of making a referral to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint:
provide all relevant information to Dr Brechman-Toussaint in relation to the
risk of harm to Miss B and Miss C;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 3(a) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
to reconsider the question of whether or not Miss B and Miss C were at risk;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 3(b) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
make a report to DoCS of those disclosures as required by section 27 of the
Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 3(c) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
15 September 2004, involved Miss B in a therapeutic process that she was
undertaking with Mr A notwithstanding that this was:
her competence;
Dene admits this particular and we refer to our submission at 4(a) above in
relation to the First Complaint.
Inappropriate
in the circumstances; and
Dene admits this particular and we refer to our submission at 4(b) above in
relation to the First Complaint.
any steps being taken to assess or to ensure Miss B’s welfare in relation
to this process.
Dene admits this particular and we refer to our submission at 4(c) above in
relation to the First Complaint.
further information as to the extent of the inappropriate touching by Mr A of
Miss B being disclosed to her by Mr A in September
properly or at all to understand the legal and professional obligations upon her
in cases of potential child abuse;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 5(a) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
to make a report to DoCS of those disclosures as required by section 27 of the
Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 5(b) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
to take adequate steps to assess whether or not Miss B or her sister Miss C were
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 5(c) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
to appreciate the risk to Miss B and Miss C;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 5(d) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
to take appropriate action to protect the safety and welfare of Miss B and Miss
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 5(e) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
contrary to B5 of the Board’s Code of Conduct to communicate the fact of
Mr A’s disclosures to appropriate professionals
or organisations;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 5(f) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
not voluntarily report the disclosures to DoCS;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 5(g) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
to provide treatment services to Mr A notwithstanding that this was beyond her
competence and experience;
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 5(h) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
contrary to B3 of the Board’s Code of Conduct to refer, for more
specialised service, Mr A whose needs were beyond her
professional
competence.
Dene does not admit this particular and we refer to our submission at 5(i) above
in relation to the First Complaint.
around September 2004 – August 2005, delayed in making a report to
Dene admits this particular.
not keep appropriate and/or accurate clinical records in relation to the
psychological treatment provided to Mr A.
Dene admits this particular.
THE HCCCs SUBMISSIONS
first with the HCCCs invitation to the Tribunal that it ought to ‘
as referred to it and deal with an additional complaint that Ms Dene suffers
from an impairment that detrimentally affects or
is likely to detrimentally
affect her mental capacity to practise psychology, namely Post Traumatic Stress
’, we note the following.
the HCCC initially contacted Ms Dene in respect of this matter in May 2006. Ms
Dene provided written responses to the HCCC
on 22 June 2006, 23 August 2006, 23
February 2007 and through her lawyers on 24 September 2007. In her response to
the HCCC dated
23 August 2006, Ms Dene confirmed that she disclosed her own
circumstances to Mr A upon his disclosure to her. Indeed, she said,
was very distressed
’. Further, Ms Dene indicated in her statement
which was filed in these proceedings on 30 April 2009 at paragraphs 16, 17 and
18 that she was inter alia, distressed and teary, extremely distressed and in
shock and crying.
Ms Boland said in her report dated 14 April 2009 at page 5, ‘
she should receive our compassion. It was after all, very bad luck for her to
be faced with such a personally confronting
issue so early in her training.
Added to this the support and guidance that she appears to have been denied
later compounded her
we note the comments of Ms Zanderberg at page 8 (un-numbered) of her report
this experience has shattered Ms Dene’s personal and
professional life. A life she has made painstaking steps to reenter, and
the HCCC sought and was granted leave on two (2) occasions during the course of
the Hearing to amend its Complaint dated
26 June 2008. Indeed, the second
occasion on which leave was granted to amend the complaint was on the fourth day
of a Hearing listed
for 5 days.
the fact that Ms Dene did not react well to the initial disclosure by Mr A and
thereafter has found it incredibly difficult
and confronting to deal with this
matter, has with respect been known to the HCCC since as early as August 2006
and, in any event,
since it received Ms Dene’s documents in April 2009.
respect, to wait until well after the conclusion of a Hearing to make such a
submission to the Tribunal and bearing in mind all
of the evidence is plainly
outrageous.
we readily accept the Tribunal has the power to amend the Complaint or make a
Complaint of its own, we note that power extends
to matters which
might arise
during the course of any such proceedings
. (Schedule 5, Clause 2 of the Act)
With respect, nothing has arisen during the course of the Hearing which was
either not known to
the HCCC at the time or before.
the circumstances, we submit that to even entertain such an invitation, let
alone act upon it, would be a gross denial of procedural
fairness and ought to
be denied forthwith.
next with the HCCCs submission generally, we most strongly urge the Tribunal to
read the HCCCs submission and to have close
regard not only to the various
purported transcript references and other evidence provided for within the
footnotes but, to also
review very closely the primary source document to which
the HCCC seeks to refer. With respect, the Tribunal must do that to enable
itself to be satisfied that the references to certain evidence actually refer to
that evidence in full.
note the HCCCs submissions regarding Ms Dene’s presentation during the
course of the Hearing. We accept Ms Dene displayed
considerable distress during
the course of the Hearing. As the Tribunal is well aware, Ms Dene has been the
subject of investigation
for over six years through various bodies and that
cannot be disregarded when assessing her demeanor.
also note Ms Dene remained under cross-examination during the 8 week adjournment
of the matter and, was unable to speak with anyone
to her, nor to seek reassurance from any persons in respect of this matter
including her lawyers. If
for no other reason that alone was of great
significance.
and as indicated above, Ms Dene in no way wishes to seek to deflect her
responsibilities and we submit she made that patently
clear throughout her
evidence. Indeed, we submit her statement and oral evidence clearly confirms
that she is regretful and possesses
insight into her actions. Ms Boland agreed
that Ms Dene’s reason and explanation were not a deflection and upon
questioning
she stated (Transcript, page 57, lines 45-50, 18 June 2009):
‘Q (Ainsworth): So that all the factors you’ve
listed – and I think you’ve given us a very comprehensive picture
– are explanations as to why Ms Dene acted in the was she
Q: Rather than an excuse for her behavior.
A: Oh, yes.’
The Referral and Treatment of Mr A
refer to paragraph 7 of the HCCCs submissions. The assertion that Ms Dene and
Dr Donnelly ‘agreed’ that Ms Dene continue
to treat Mr A is
incorrect even on the wording of the transcript. We note Ms Dene’s
response (page 9, line 22 of the Transcript,
19 June 2009):
“I understood that I was accruing practicum hours ready of
the next practicum. That’s what Dr Donnelly told me.”
agree with the HCCCs submission that Ms Dene’s treatment of Mr A was her
long term clinical psychological interaction
also note that this was Dr Donnelly’s first supervision of a student
undertaking a long term clinical psychological
interaction.
refer to paragraph 20 of the HCCCs submissions and to the assertion that it
ought to have been clear to her that this was abuse
respect, that is an entirely self-serving and inappropriate submission to make.
Ms Dene provided evidence that is
was not clear to her. Ms Dene sought
assistance and clarification from her supervisors. With respect, what ought to
have been clear
to Ms Dene was the assistance she received from her supervisors.
We refer to the following statement made by Dr Brechman-Toussaint
(Transcript,
page 26, lines 5-10, 16 June 2009):
‘Is there a possibility of sexual abuse with this child?
And the response that I had was no. Is the child at risk of abuse?
don’t believe so. Should we be reporting to DoCS and Dr Donnelly asked me
what would happen if we made a report, and my
response was that DoCS would
assess the case and made a decision as to whether she was risk or not, and Dr
Donnelly’s response
was that we have already done that and she’s
– there’s no risk.’
refer to paragraphs 24(a) to (f) of the HCCCs submissions. The HCCC states that
inconceivable that Ms Dene would have prepared this document
(discharge summary) unless it accurately conveyed the nature and extent
information
,’ and goes on to comment upon Ms Dene’s notes. In
our submission, such an occurrence is not inconceivable at all. Ms
Dene states
at pages 36 and 37 of the Transcript dated 19 June 2009, the following comments
in relation o the discharge summary:
It’s my subjectivity.’
‘They are poorly written.’
‘There’s my subjective language.’
refer to paragraph 26 of the HCCCs submissions which suggest that Ms
Dene’s distress regarding note taking support an inference
A’s disclosure was child abuse. Aside from making quantum leaps of faith,
that sentiment is completely inappropriate.
Notwithstanding that, Ms Dene
accepts, as she has since at least August 2006, that she became distressed upon
attempting to record
the session conducted with Mr A on 21 October 2003. That
distress is indicative of Ms Dene’s own child abuse.
The Treatment of Miss B
refer to paragraph 14(a) of the HCCCs submissions. It is stated that Ms Boland
accepted that ‘
Ms Dene’s paramount concern...should have been to
protect Miss B’s interest
.’ That response, with respect, must
be read in the context of Ms Boland’s complete evidence.
that regard we refer to paragraph 14(e) of the HCCCs submissions and note the
assertion that ‘
Ms Dene was
providing therapeutic
services for Miss B
.’ With respect, that statement was put to Ms
Boland in re-examination and she categorically denied it. We refer to the
response by Ms Boland (Transcript, page 62, line 45-50, 18 June
‘Q (Ainsworth): Ms Dene was plainly not also extended
treatment to treating his daughter MissB.’
A (Boland): In treating the father?
A: No, No.’
Mandatory Reporting
refer to paragraph 15(a) of the HCCCs submissions. With respect, a simple
review of the Legislation and, with the application
of rather straight forward
statutory interpretation skills, it is overwhelmingly clear that the provisions
a person who, in
the course of his or
her professional work or other paid employment.
health care
, welfare, education, children’s services, residential
services, or law enforcement, wholly or partly,
to children
a person to whom
this section
applies has reasonable grounds to suspect that a child is at
risk of harm.
respect, none of those qualifying factors apply to Ms Dene.
note the HCCCs submission at paragraph 19 that Ms Dene was ‘
.’ Ms Dene has denied that she was ever paid for providing
services to Mr A since the matter was first raised with her. Indeed,
course of her evidence, Ms Dene clarified that position namely, that payment was
made in relation to work regarding the
Dementia Care Network. Neither Ms A nor
subsequently, Mr A were at any time treated through the Dementia Care Network.
to the following evidence of Ms Dene (Transcript, page 9, line 45
– 50 and page 10, line 1:
‘Q (Stern): And you were aware that that was basis upon
which Mr A was first referred to Dr Donnelly?
Q: You weren’t aware that she was referred in any circumstances
relating to the Dementia Care Network?’
A: Because she wasn’t.’
UNSATISFACTORY PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT – Complaint One
make a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct, the Tribunal must find
the conduct in question
fell significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected
of a psychologist of equivalent training or experience
our submission the evidence before the Tribunal would not permit such a finding
either in respect of the individual particulars
to the Complaint or when
considered cumulatively. In our submission, not only was it entirely
appropriate for Ms Dene to approach
her supervisors seeking clarification,
advice and guidance as soon as Mr A made the first disclosure, it was what would
be expected
of any intern. To that end, we note the evidence of the HCCCs peer,
Dr Banks at page 22, lines 43 to 48 and, page 24, lines 35 to
Transcript of proceedings on 17 June 2009. Indeed, had she not done so then she
may well be facing a complaint alleging
unsatisfactory professional conduct in
respect of some subordinate-type of behavior.
our submission, the Tribunal would be well served to bear in mind the entirety
of the evidence and particularly, the quite impossible
situation Ms Dene found
herself in. It was undeniably, with the benefit of hindsight, a situation that,
despite any attempts for
assistance from her supervisors Ms Dene was never going
to be in a position to assist Mr A in any meaningful way.
as we have come to learn as a result of Ms Dene’s notification, Mr A was a
practiced and successful pedophile and had
been for many years. In our
submission, whilst Ms Dene’s initial response was inappropriate, the
circumstances of the entire
case must be born in mind. We refer to the
transcript dated 17 June 2009, page 36, line 50 and page 37, lines 1-6:
‘Q (Ainsworth)
So in the circumstances, and bearing in
mind the program that Ms Dene is a part of, the prospect of ever achieving
anything in relation
to Mr A is zero, isn’t it?
From the 21
accept that.’
Dene accepts that her treatment of Mr A was misguided. It was however, at all
times, well intentioned and cannot with respect
be seen in any other way.
we submit that had Ms Dene received the assistance, advice and guidance which
she was entitled to receive as an intern, then
the disclosure may have been made
at a much earlier stage. It was not disputed by the experts that the correct
course should have
been that Ms Dene was removed from treating Mr A at the
outset. We refer to the transcript dated 17 June 2009, page 37, lines 26
‘Q (Ainsworth)
And you agree with Ms Boland that the
moment Ms Dene received the disclosure of Mr A’s limited – just
pardon me a moment,
Ms Dene received Mr A’s tidbit of information and
reacted as she did, so – not hysterically, but reacted so badly to
should have been removed from this role with this man?
Absolutely.’
respect, the HCCCs submission appears largely reliant upon inference and
assumption rather than the evidence which was actually
given to the Tribunal.
Moreover, it seems with respect to largely miss-state the evidence and the
circumstances of the matters before
the Tribunal.
PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – Complaint Two
make a finding of professional misconduct the Tribunal must find the on conduct
‘sufficiently serious nature’
suspension or cancellation of the psychologist’s registration.
regard to our submission in respect of Complaint 1, we submit Ms Dene’s
conduct was not of a sufficiently serious nature
such as to result in the
suspension or cancellation of her Registration. Ms Dene’s conduct,
according to the peer reviewers
was acceptable. Her decision to seek assistance
from supervisors in our submission is commendable and, at no time did Ms Dene
the case into her own hands. We note the following line of questioning
from the Mr Wilcox to Ms Boland (Transcript page 56 lines
‘Q:...She should have some degree of autonomy being 18
months into her internship, in terms of going ‘well I’ve
pieces of evidence, maybe I, as a developing professional should.”
A: Yes, no, no. I agree with you. And I take your point that she should
feel able, I would hope to feel able if it’s safe enough
I can’t comment on that – to actually make her point and say
she’s concerned about a particular
situation and so on. But, ultimately,
the decision about which direction she goes has to be a consistent one form the
supervisors.’
PROTECTIVE ORDERS
was indicated to the Tribunal during the course of the Hearing that Ms Dene can
continue to make a valuable contribution to the
community as a psychologist.
view was expressed by both Ms Carol Boland and Ms Nell Zandberg as well as the
HCCCs peer reviewer, Dr Gary Banks. In that regard
we refer to the transcript,
17 June 2006 at page 48, lines 15 to 30:
‘Q (Ainsworth):
A vast number. And there’s nothing
to indicate that Ms Dene can’t make a contribution to the profession of
if she continues to embark on aspects of the profession that have
nothing to do with sex offending?
A (Dr Banks):
Presuming a more measured approach to practice and with
insight into additional errors made in decision making through this, it’s
a reasonable proposition.
Yes, and if she’s getting help in relation to her own issues from
her own unfortunate circumstance of being a victim of sexual
assault as a child,
she’s getting helps with that.......there’s certainly a place for
her in the profession of psychology,
isn’t there? There’s nothing to
indicate the contrary?’
It’s a reasonable proposition, Yes, I’m guessingly only on
the basis of obviously the finding of the Tribunal.’
regard to our submission above in respect of the findings the Tribunal ought to
make in relation to the Complaints, no protective
Orders are required. That
said, in the event, the Tribunal does not agree with us in respect of the
conduct not amounting to unsatisfactory
professional conduct, then we submit the
following protective orders would be sufficient to fulfil the objective of the
namely, public protection and, maintenance of professional
Ms Dene indicated in evidence during the Hearing, she has in place support
systems, mentors and counselling. Conditions of a like
nature may well be
appropriate. In that regard we note the comments of Ms Zandberg on 18 June 2009
at page 71, line 42 of the transcript:
I think that Kerri deserves the care and supervision
now that she wasn’t – that wasn’t available at the time when
this all went on. And I think that’s ......with good supervision and
support, psychological support, she could have a career
in this business and be
somebody I would be happy to recommend to. But maybe at this point in time,
the extent it is relevant and, in light of the evidence before the Tribunal, we
have been instructed Ms Dene is willing to engage
and consult with a clinical
psychologist for the purpose of addressing any issues related to her past
abuse. Ms Dene has instructed
us she has contacted a clinical psychologist
specialising in ‘
adult survivors of childhood sexual abuse
who is based in Lismore. Ms Dene has consulted with that psychologist over
the telephone twice to date and has made plans
to commence consulting with that
psychologist in person in January 2010 (the next possible appointment).
Dene is keen to engage with this particular psychologist the purpose of her own
wellbeing, regardless of whether the Tribunal is
minded to impose any conditions
upon Ms Dene’s Registration requiring that she engage in such
treatment. In the event the
Tribunal proposes to impose such conditions
upon Ms Dene’s Registration we submit the Tribunal
ought to give
due consideration to this particular psychologist having already begun a course
of treatment with Ms Dene.
Suppression Order
submit, having regard to all the evidence before the Tribunal and the nature of
that evidence, the Tribunal would be minded to
Order that Ms Dene’s
personal details be suppressed from the written Decision pursuant to Schedule 5,
clause 6 of the Act.
As the Tribunal is well aware, Ms Dene has been
enduring investigations related to these proceedings for some years. That
has brought to light, identified and publicly aired, very sensitive
information from Ms Dene’s past. Accordingly it is understandable
she wishes for that information to remain as private as possible given its very
personal and sensitive nature. The Tribunal
can have no doubt as to the
nature of that sensitive information and, in our submission should accept it is
appropriate to allow
such a suppression order in the circumstances.
the event the Tribunal does not accept our submissions in respect of the
findings it ought to make then, we submit the appropriate
protective orders
would be limited to the following:
Dene must engage in counselling with a psychologist approved by the NSW
Psychologist’s Board of NSW on a fortnightly basis;
Dene must engage in supervision with a supervisor approved by the NSW
Psychologist’s Board of NSW on a fortnightly basis.
the Tribunal would be well aware, costs routinely follow the cause. We submit
that ought to occur in this case.
the event the Tribunal finds either or both of the Complaints proven to the
required standard, we submit an appropriate costs order
would be limited to say
4 days of Hearing which on any view would have been more than sufficient to
resolve this matter.
further submit the costs Order in these circumstances ought to clearly identify
the fact the matters of Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly
were prosecuted together and
therefore, the costs be borne by each respondent equally.
HCCC V DENE & DONNELLY
HCCC SUBMISSIONS IN REPLY RE: DENE
Introduction
HCCC has already served lengthy and detailed submissions in this matter.
the extent that the submissions served on behalf of Ms Dene take issue with
those submissions, those matters remain in issue. It
is not proposed in any way
to repeat matters by way of reply.
reply submissions deal only with discrete points upon which it may assist the
Tribunal for the Commission to respond to matters
raised on behalf of Ms
Standard of Proof
standard of proof is the civil standard as stated in
Briginshaw v.
[1938] HCA 34
(1983) 60 CLR 336
at 362-3. However by reason of the seriousness
of the allegations and the gravity of the consequences the Tribunal must be
comfortably
satisfied that the matters in the complaint have been
established.
Court of Criminal Appeal has recently cautioned against the use of
“comfortably satisfied” as implying that proof
to a higher standard
than the balance of probabilities is required:
Gianoutsos v Glykis
NSWLR 539 at 547-9 applied by the Medical Tribunal in
In re Dr Suman Sood
[2006] NSWMT 1
at 10. More recently, in
Polglaze v Veterinary Practitioners
Board of NSW
[2009] NSWSC 347
, the court has confirmed that at
common law there are only two standards of proof, the ordinary civil standard of
proof upon a balance
of probabilities and the criminal standard of proof beyond
reasonable doubt. The
standard is not a third standard or
proof. Rather it is concerned with the quality or sufficiency of the evidence
necessary to discharge
the civil standard.
The Responsibility of
the Supervisee
set out in the HCCC’s closing submissions, a psychologist in Ms
Dene’s position in October 2003, and at all times up
to and including
August 2005, was subject to ethical and professional obligations notwithstanding
her role as an intern. Contrary
to the submission on behalf of Ms Dene at [20],
she was not entitled to rely upon the direction and guidance of her supervisor
was required to exercise her own individual judgment.
all times, to her knowledge, if she had any uncertainty as to the legal
obligations upon her she had access to the DOCS helpline.
is submitted that the submission that
“Ms Dene did not have current
concerns for Miss B’s welfare or wellbeing”
at [22] flies in the
face of the clinical notes completed by Ms Dene. It also flies in the face of Ms
Dene’s own evidence 19/6/09
at 41/40-47 that Ms Dene had concerns for the
psychological welfare of Miss B from the moment Mr A made his disclosure in
The referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint
is accepted that Dr Donnelly made the referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint, however
Ms Dene should be regarded as jointly referring
Miss B and Miss C to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint and as responsible (largely because she was the recipient of
relevant information from
Mr A, for the communication to Dr Brechman-Toussaint
of relevant treatment information).
set out in the HCCC’s submissions, the information provided to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint was incomplete.
The invitation to the
Tribunal to treat an additional complaint as referred
HCCC’s invitation in this regard ([4] of HCCC’s submissions) is made
having regard to the evidence and demeanour of
Ms Dene and to the evidence of Ms
Zandberg. It is made in the light of the protective jurisdiction of the
Tribunal. The extent of
Ms Dene’s impairment and/or its ongoing effect was
not known to the HCCC prior to the hearing.
the extent that the submissions on behalf of Ms Dene rely upon an absence of
procedural fairness, the HCCC has indicated that submissions
might be made by Ms
Dene’s representatives as to what procedure the Tribunal should adopt. The
consideration of an additional
complaint by the Tribunal does not, of itself,
indicate a lack of procedural fairness. Rather, the question is what is required
satisfy the requirements of procedural fairness in the individual case (cf
[111] of the submissions on behalf of Ms Dene).
Suppression
Dene is seeking a suppression order. The HCCC has a statutory duty under s94B(2)
of the HCCC Act to make publicly available information
whose registration has been cancelled or suspended. Moreover, as a matter of
generality there is a public interest
in proceedings such as these being public,
including any determination or protective orders. However, it is accepted that
the Tribunal
has, in the course of this hearing, considered sensitive personal
information relating to Ms Dene. The HCCC would not oppose an order
protect sensitive personal information relating solely to events occurring
during Ms Dene’s childhood.
reply to the submission that any costs order should be limited to a four day
hearing, the HCCC submits that the length of hearing
in this case was entirely
reasonable and proportionate given the serious, and complex, issues raised.
There is no basis upon which
to limit any award of costs to less than the actual
time taken in the hearing on the complaint relating to Ms
HCCC v DENE & DONNELLY
HCCC SUBMISSIONS RE: DONNELLY
IN THE PSYCHOLOGISTS TRIBUNAL OF NSW
CONSTITUTED UNDER SECTION 99 OF THE
PSYCHOLOGISTS ACT 2001
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
DR JAMES DONNELLY
SUBMISSIONS
ON BEHALF OF THE HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
Introduction
this matter the Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC) makes two complaints as
regards the conduct of Dr Donnelly from around
October 2003 until August 2005.
Dr Donnelly is a registered psychologist with a certificate of registration
section 123
Psychologists Act 2001
(the Act) valid until 30 June
2010. Each complaint comprises eight separate particulars. One complaint is of
unsatisfactory professional
conduct under section 25 of the Act, the second is
of professional misconduct under section 24 of the Act.
complaints should be found proved. The evidence clearly establishes, to the
requisite standard of the balance of probabilities,
that Dr Donnelly’s
conduct is unsatisfactory professional conduct within section 25, in that the
knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by Dr Donnelly in his
practice of psychology was significantly below the standard reasonably expected
of an equivalent level of training or experience and/or he engaged in improper
or unethical conduct in the course of the practice
or purported practice of
psychology, and this was of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension
or cancellation of his registration.
Submissions as to appropriate protective
orders are set out below.
Donnelly is a registered psychologist in New South Wales. He graduated from the
University of California at Irvine with a Bachelor
of Science in 1985, and
completed a Master of Science and a Doctorate in Clinical Psychology at
Vanderbilt University, concluding
in 2000. According to his Statement dated 11
June 2009, he has had considerable experience working with sex offenders and
of sexual abuse, and had himself completed 5 clinical practica
comprising approximately 4000 supervised hours. From 2001 to 2006
he worked as a
Lecturer and Clinical Neuropsychologist at the Regional University School of
Psychology, Clinical Training Program.
In this role he had considerable
experience supervising clinical graduate students, but had not prior to Ms Dene
conducted a long
term supervision involving a long term interaction between the
student and the patient.
Donnelly accepted in cross-examination that he had spent some time working with
child sex offenders, was aware of the concept of
grooming, and was aware that
sex abusers can avoid detection by having very careful phased disclosures of
information to people around
them (17/08, 52:14 - 23).
Donnelly also established a program known as the New England Memory Assessment
Program pursuant to which Dr Donnelly and Ms Dene
agreed with the New England
Division of General Practice to provide neuropsychological assessment and
consulting as part of a Dementia
Care Network funded through NSW Health. Both Dr
Donnelly and Ms Dene were to be paid consultancy fees for these services.
evidence also establishes that Dr Donnelly supervised Ms Dene in a 44 day
practicum with the aged care network from 4 February
to 1 August 2003, in a 44
day practicum at the psychology clinic at the Regional University from 4
February to 24 September 2003,
and jointly with Dr Brechman Toussaint in a 330
hour practicum at the School of Psychology at THE REGIONAL UNIVERSITY.
April 2006 Dr Donnelly had study leave in 2005 – 2006. In April 2006 he
took up a position as the Head of Psychology at the
Sydney Children’s
Hospital at Randwick. However, at the time of the hearing of these complaints he
was working primarily in
an academic role at Southern Cross University with a
one day allowance to provide clinical services. He is also trying to establish
private practice there.
number of issues of general application arise in respect of the complaints.
Obligations
of a supervisor
Donnelly himself conducted a clinical interaction with Mr A on 27 October 2003.
Other than this one interaction, during the period
of the complaints, Dr
Donnelly’s involvement with Mr A’s treatment was as a supervisor of
a supervisor, Dr Donnelly clearly owed duties to Ms Dene, Mr A, and to Mr
A’s children, in particular, Miss B. As set out
in the [Regional
University] Handbook (HCCC vol 2, p.134) the supervisor had responsibility to
ensure the client’s welfare,
and the absolute responsibility for the
client lies with the supervisor.
as a supervisor, Dr Donnelly was clearly subject to all of the requirements of
the Code, as regards interactions between
his supervisee and her patients. These
obligation to ensure that nothing of a psychological nature was done with or to
Miss B without her proper informed and voluntary
consent (A1 of 1997 Code). This
meant as regards Miss B that she should not have been made subject to the
treatment session on 15
September 2004 without the nature of that session having
been properly discussed with her before hand. Whilst a child, she would
the capacity to give or refuse consent to any such interaction;
obligation to safeguard the welfare of Mr A and Miss B (A5 of 1997
obligation to refer for more specialised service those clients whose needs were
outside Ms Dene and/or Ms Dene as supervised by
Dr Donnelly’s,
professional competence (A8 of 1997 Code). The obligation to refer also includes
the obligation to ensure that
appropriate information is made on the
obligation to uphold the law (C1 of 1997 Code);
obligation to communicate to appropriate professionals about the risks to the
welfare of a child (C4 of 1997 Code);
obligation to maintain their knowledge and practice at an acceptable level of
competence and to recognise the psychological issues
involved in the
professional relationships, including transference and power differentials (D2
of 1997 Code). This would include
both the relationship between Dr Donnelly and
Ms Dene, and the relationship between Ms Dene and Mr A;
obligation to demonstrate continuing competence in her practice of psychology
that includes adequate knowledge, skill, judgement
and care (A1 of 2004
obligation to maximise benefit and do no harm in the practice of psychology (A2
of 2004 Code);
obligation to act ethically and property and to promote accuracy, fairness and
honesty in their practice of psychology (A4 of
2004 Code);
obligations to give serious consideration to the potential vulnerability of
children and to refer, for more specialised service,
those clients whose needs
or requests are outside their professional competencies (B3 of 2004 Code);
duty to communicate information about serious concerns about the well-being or
safety of children to appropriate professionals
or organisations (B4 of 2004
obligation to be aware of relevant guidelines (C of 2004 Code).
duties were shaped by the position of influence he held as Ms Dene’s
supervisor, particularly bearing in mind the history
which he had of assisting
Ms Dene as regards a complaint of harassment which she pursued against another,
senior, member of staff
at the Regional University. The reality is that as
supervisor, his views held considerably sway with Ms Dene.
Dr Donnelly’s obligations as a supervisor included:
obligation effectively to supervise the treatment provided by Ms Dene.
included an obligation to satisfy himself the Ms Dene was conducting herself in
a reasonable and professional manner in her clinical
interactions under his
supervision.
entailed an obligation to consider her clinical notes both to ensure that her
clinical record keeping was adequate, and to avail
himself of a readily
available safeguard as regards the nature of her clinical
interactions;
supervisor, he was responsible for the standard of her conduct in those clinical
interactions, to the extent that he knew or
ought to have known of those
also had freestanding obligations to report, independent of those of Ms Dene,
arising from matters which came to his attention
as Ms Dene’s clinical
supervisor;
also had freestanding record keeping obligations, both as regards his
supervisions of Ms Dene, and as regards his own clinical
interactions with both
Mr A, and with Dr Brechman Toussaint.
this case, Dr Donnelly left Ms Dene effectively unsupervised in her interactions
with Mr A notwithstanding that:
case was clearly a complicated case;
Dene had not previously been involved in a long term psychologist-patient
relationship;
Donnelly did not at any time check Ms Dene’s notes as regards her clinical
and other interactions with Mr A (eg emails);
Donnelly did not other than on 27 October 2003 attend any clinical session;
were reported feelings of attraction between Ms Dene and Mr A;
Dene had clearly had a deep emotional reaction to Mr A’s disclosure on 21
October 2003, which was itself indicative of a
connection between what Mr A
said, and Ms Dene’s own history of child abuse;
Dene made an inappropriate personal disclosure to Mr A during the session on 21
October 2003, which she discussed with Dr Donnelly,
which was itself indicative
of a loss of judgment and which made her more vulnerable to grooming by Mr A (as
accepted by Dr Donnelly:
17/08, 52: 48);
any view of Mr A’s disclosure it was indicative of considerable risks of
harm to Miss B, which risks required careful assessment
and management which was
beyond Ms Dene’s expertise.
in the scientific literature relied upon by Dr Donnelly in this case provides
any support for leaving Ms Dene in the position
in which he left her, providing
treatment to Mr A over a very long period of time, in circumstances which were
clearly beyond her
professional competence and where her own history of abuse
made her both vulnerable and less able to perform the professional role
Dr Donnelly’s failures as regards the complaints cannot be excused by any
lack of knowledge which arises by reason
of his failure to exercise proper
supervision, in particular his failure to read the clinical notes. Thus, this
complaint should
be assessed on the basis that he was aware of all matters of
which he ought to have been aware.
Obligations
as regards Miss B
Ms Dene’s primary clinical interactions were with Miss B, it is clearly
the case that Dr Donnelly was also providing
treatment services to Miss
Donnelly’s therapeutic concern as regards the A family was with the family
as a whole;
was a child related interaction in the context of family
all times from October 2003 Miss B’s welfare was part of the
considerations taken into account by both Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly
in framing her
clinical interactions with Mr A;
Dene and Dr Donnelly were in effect providing therapeutic services for Miss B in
referring her to Dr Brechman Toussaint, and in
discussing her situation and
treatment needs with Dr Brechman Toussaint;
reason of the disclosure of Mr A in October 2003 as regards Miss B, her welfare
became a therapeutic concern of Ms Dene and Dr
Donnelly; and
Dene also undertook clinical interactions with Miss B, which were clearly
reflected in her clinical notes and of which Dr Donnelly
Obligations and
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
obligation under
sections 27
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1998
respectively) are clear. They require that a
report be made to the Director-General as soon as practicable where (so far as
is relevant
to the present case):
person in the course of his professional work delivers or supervises the
provision of health care or welfare services wholly or
partly to children. That
unquestionably covers Dr Donnelly both as regards his practice in general, and
as regards this particular
person has reasonable grounds, arising during the course of or from his work, to
suspect that a child is at risk of harm, meaning
concerns exist for the safety, welfare or well-being of the child; and
concerns are because of one or more of the child having been, or being at risk
of being, physically or sexually abused or ill
treated or a parent has behaved
in such a way towards the child that the child has suffered or is at risk of
suffering serious psychological
points arise:
threshold is low, it arises where there are “reasonable grounds to
suspect” the prescribed matters, i.e. there is
no requirement of any
degree of certainty.
current aspect of the “at risk of harm” definition relates to the
concerns as to the child’s safety, welfare
or well-being. There is no
requirement that there be any perception of on-going risk of the abusive or
harmful behaviour continuing.
any view of the evidence here, the disclosure on 21 October 2003, in the context
of an already vulnerable child with a complex
family situation, were such that
there were current concerns for Miss B’s safety, welfare and well being by
reason of potentially
harmful and/or abusive behaviour by Mr A. The case notes
are littered with expressions of concerns for Miss B’s safety and
and those concerns were the factors precipitating the referral to Dr Brechman
Toussaint. Indeed the Dene/Donnelly discharge
summary specifically refers to the
appreciation in October 2003 of the harm caused to Miss B by Mr A’s past
actions (HCCC vol
there can be no doubt that from October 2003 Dr Donnelly’s professional
remit encompassed the interests of Miss B.
He was in the course of his
professional work providing services which were partly to Miss B.
Preliminary
observations on the facts
and Extent of the Disclosure by Mr A in October 2003.
The characterisation of the initial disclosure by Mr A to Ms Dene, and of any
subsequent disclosures, is of critical importance to
an evaluation of the
complaints as regards Dr Donnelly. Having regard to all of the evidence, the
likelihood is that it was quite
clear to both Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly from
October 21 2003 that Mr A had deliberately touched Miss B’s pubic region
in a sexual
way, regularly over the previous few years, ceasing only 2 weeks
prior to his disclosure, and that he was aware that he had inappropriate
thoughts about Miss B, including attraction to her.
Contemporaneous
records are inherently more likely to reflect an accurate picture of the nature
and extent of the initial disclosure
by Mr A to Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly in
October 2003. That this was so was accepted by Dr Donnelly in cross-examination.
Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly might seek to minimise the extent of their
knowledge in proceedings such as these is likely.
reason of the lack of contemporaneous notes taken by Ms Deane in October 2003
there is no immediately contemporaneous record of
the disclosure. However, the
clinical records provide considerable insights as to the nature and extent of
that initial disclosure.
only document which Dr Donnelly accepts that he did read is the Discharge
summary dated by Ms Dene January 2005. Dr Donnelly’s
evidence is that he
signed this in January 2005 (and see HCCC vol 1 6/5 where he says he signed it
in January 2005). It contains
repeated and unequivocal references to the abuse
of Miss B by Mr A and uses language such as: “he had stroked her
the “abusive behaviour”, and “inappropriate
desire”. Whilst it is clear that this document was written by
Ms Dene, it
is inconceivable that Dr Donnelly would have signed his name to this if his
understanding of Mr A’s disclosure
was other than reflected in this
clinically significant Discharge Summary which would remain on file.
goal of the session on 3 November 2003 (HCCC vol 2 at 117, written
contemporaneously) includes “daughter’s safety”.
possible inference from the use of safety is that her father’s behaviour
as disclosed to Ms Dene posed a threat to
her safety. In this context, the
inference is that the note on 10 November 2003 (HCCC vol 2 at 115)
“good week: 2 occasions – awareness of urge for inappropriate
behaviours with daughter”
should be seen as supporting the nature of
the original disclosure as being of inappropriate touching with sexual desire
his daughter, as should the note on 20 November 2003 (HCCC vol 2 at 113:
“Management of changed behaviour. Going well, inappropriate desire
still there.”
and that dated 3 February 2004
“Relationship
with [Miss B], ... instinct to touch – cog retraining of
attraction”.
session with Miss B and Mr A on 15 September 2004 (HCCC vol 2 at 29) was
premised upon Mr A apologising for past abuse. Ms Dene
specifically refers to
“healing the abuse”.
Dene wrote on 28 September 2004 (HCCC vol 2 at 21) that Mr A disclosed that his
previous sexual transgressions with daughter were
much greater than previously
advised. In this note the original October 2003 disclosure was described as
being “that he had
touched his daughter [Miss B] inappropriately about
once a week (genital area) for about a few years. He said he would lie with her
when he put her to bed and touch her until she pushed his hand away.” In
this note Ms Dene also refers to the touching as sexual
Dene wrote on 11 October 2004 (HCCC vol 2 at 17) that Mr A had told her that he
had told Miss B that he would not touch her inappropriately
or sexually again.
At that time Ms Dene’s goal was reporting. The inference is that she was
aware that the threshold of risk
for mandatory reporting had been crossed.
some time thereafter but before January 2005 Ms Dene wrote up the notes at HCCC
vol 2 at 121-133, relating to the period from 21
to 23 October 2003. These are
likely accurately to reflect what Ms Dene was told in October 2003. The
description of the disclosure
“he would give her a light massage
which included fondling her pubic area”
(p.121). The stated new goal
of treatment as set out in notes of a telephone call on 23 October 2003 was Mr A
not engaging in inappropriate sexual fondling of his
” leaves no room for doubt as to the nature and extent of the
disclosure.
likelihood is that this information was all shared with Dr Donnelly in October
2003. Moreover, it was all readily available to
him if he had read the
are a number of other indicators as to the nature and extent of the initial
disclosure:
Donnelly in his letter to Professor Moses dated 20 September 2005 says that Mr A
reported some touching behaviour in October
Donnelly in his letter to the HCCC dated 16 June 2006 says that as at October
2003 he and Ms Dene regarded the words “fondling
the pubic region”
as an overstatement but as suiting both of their impressions without going into
excessive detail.
That expression is not included in the discharge summary, but is included in Ms
Dene’s note (belatedly written) of the 21 October
2003 disclosure and of
23 October 2003 telephone call to Mr A. This strongly suggests that Dr Donnelly
discussed the characterisation
of the touching at the time, and that this
influenced Ms Dene in her belatedly completed notes.
Dene, in her report to DOCS, said that she was told in October 2003 that Mr A
had sexually abused Miss B, describing the abuse
“indecent acts of
molestation”
involving massage of the genital
Brechman-Toussaint recalled being told at the initial referral meeting that Ms
Dene had been told that Mr A was beginning to experience
sexual thoughts and
feelings in relation to Miss
This reflects
her initial notes of the referral and her discharge
given examples of Mr A engendering situations of physical contact with Miss B.
A’s own account appears to be that he told Ms Dene that he had touched
Miss B inappropriately on five
likelihood is that the initial disclosure, as reported to Dr Donnelly, included
both touching of the genitals, and inappropriate
sexual thoughts, however that
Dr Donnelly and Ms Dene took the view that there was no ongoing risk to Miss B
and that the report
should not be acted upon given that it was their view that
it was preferable for the family to remain together, and they had limited
in the benefits of DOCS intervention.
and Insight of Dr Donnelly
are number of features of the evidence which reflect poorly upon the candour and
insight of Dr Donnelly.
Dr Donnelly repeatedly sought to minimise the nature of the disclosure of which
he was in fact aware in October 2003, and of
other matters arising thereafter.
This does not reflect well on his credit.
Dr Donnelly repeatedly sought to deflect responsibility onto Dr Brechman
Toussaint in circumstances where this was not, on
the contemporaneous notes,
justified (eg in his letter to Professor Moses dated 20 September
the goal [of the referral to Dr Brechman Toussaint] was to obtain an
objective evaluation of the children as required under the Act
“On the one occasion I felt uncertain about the safety, well being and
welfare of the children I verified my own stance by obtaining
a second opinion
from a qualified psychologist”
). As accepted by Dr Donnelly, he never
asked Dr Brechman Toussaint to form any assessment of whether or not there had
been any inappropriate
assessment of the nature of the touching, or the risk associated therewith, was
no part of the
Brechman Toussaint was not told of the areas of
critical omission if there was any expectation of her providing any comfort as
to whether or not Miss B was at risk of
harm. Dr Brechman Toussaint was also
clearly told that Dr Donnelly had taken care of risk assessment (HCCC vol 1,
15.6 & 16/06,
any event, Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s is that Dr Donnelly said that her
involvement would be
had Dr Donnelly made any enquiries he would have been aware that Dr Brechman
Toussaint did not see Miss B and Miss C after
January 2004. Dr Brechman
Toussaint’s evidence was that she did not recall saying anything to Dr
Donnelly which would have
lead him to believe that she had continuing
responsibility for Miss B and Miss C’s welfare and that she had no further
discussions
with Dr Donnelly about Miss B after January
Dr Donnelly vacillated as to his own awareness of the clinical
his letter to Professor Moses dated 20 September 2005 (Donnelly R4 at 5) he
stated that he “reviewed the file notes taken
by Ms Dene of all clinical
sessions with the father”.
his letter dated 16 June 2006 to the HCCC he said that he did not see the notes
for October and November 2004 written by Ms Dene
until 4 January
impression given by this is that he read other notes previously, and read those
notes then.
his statement to the HCCCDr Donnelly stated that he reviewed Ms Dene’s
inference is either that Dr Donnelly has been less frank in his evidence either
to minimise his contemporaneous knowledge, or
in his various accounts to
minimise the extent of his lapse of care in supervising.
Dr Donnelly repeatedly sought to justify his actions by reference to literature
which did not, on analysis, support his position.
Dr Donnelly continued to rely upon his conceptualisation of the case as other
than one involving abuse as justification for
his conduct. For
2003 I wasn’t treating a sex offender
Donnelly relied upon the fact that the disclosure was occurring in the context
of lots of other things as justification for him
conceptualising the case as an
Whilst that sort of context might explain a mistake, it cannot justify
a very different conceptualisation of the case emerges from the more
contemporaneous discharge summary which Dr Donnelly
from Ms Dene’s
strongly suggests that the conceptualisation of the case from October 2003 was
that the abusive nature of the behaviour was
recognised but that Ms Dene and Dr
Donnelly determined that it was safe to rely upon Mr A’s assertion that he
had ceased his
past abusive behaviour and in the circumstances it was preferable
to keep the family together. That is also apparent from Ms Dene’s
to DOCS that she did not report the abuse in October 2003 as she believed it
would increase risk to the child and she believed
that the abuse had
both conceptualisations depend upon the complexity of the case, the most likely
accurately to reflect the contemporaneous
thought processes is that which finds
expression in the contemporaneous documentation.
Dr Donnelly sought to rationalise his conceptualisation of the case by reference
to collateral sources of information, namely
the medical team and other
in fact he never raised the question of Mr A’s massage of his daughter
with any members of that
in his letters and witness statement Dr Donnelly has sought to rely upon an
additional factor of cessation of alcohol dependence
as a factor indicative of
reduction of risk of past abusive behaviours continuing (eg
“elimination
of a factor that had affected risk in the past (i.e. Mr [A]’s alcohol
However, as accepted by Dr Donnelly in 2003-2004 he had no basis for believing
that alcohol played any role in what Mr A was doing
to Miss B. The inference is
that Dr Donnelly was embellishing the history in order to rationalise his
actions. Moreover, as set out
by Dr Banks, cessation of alcohol prior to the
time of sexual abuse should not be relied upon as a decision-making
matters undermine the reliability of Dr Donnelly’s evidence before the
Submissions
as to Particulars of the Complaints
is clearly the case that between June 2003 and November 2004 Dr Donnelly
provided therapy to Mr A and/or his daughter Miss B himself
and/or through his
supervision of Ms D, a provisionally registered psychologist providing treatment
services under his supervision.
weight of the evidence also supports a finding that in October 2003 Dr Donnelly
became aware that Mr A had admitted to Ms Dene
that he had touched Miss B in an
inappropriate manner over a period of some years.
October 2003, upon becoming aware that Mr A had disclosed to Ms Dene during a
therapy session that he had been touching his daughter
Miss B in an
inappropriate manner for the last few years,
properly or at all to understand the legal and professional obligations upon him
in cases of potential child abuse;
to make a report to the Department of Community Services of those disclosures as
required by
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection)
not voluntarily report the disclosures to the Department of Community
to take adequate steps to assess whether or not Miss B or her sister Miss C were
to appreciate the risk to Miss B and Miss C;
to take appropriate action to protect the safety and welfare of the Miss B and
contrary to the Board’s Code of Conduct to communicate the fact of Mr
A’s disclosures to appropriate professionals
or organisations;
or permitted Ms Dene (a trainee under your supervision) to continue to provide
treatment services to Mr A notwithstanding that
this was beyond her competence
and experience.
or permitted Ms Dene to continue to provide treatment services to Mr A
notwithstanding that she had disclosed her own past
history of sexual abuse to
is submitted that the Tribunal should find this particular proved in its
regards the Code, the HCCC relies in particular upon A5, A8, C4 and D2 of the
1997 Code and A1, A2, A4, B3 and B4 of the 2004 Code.
legal and professional obligations upon Dr Donnelly were clear. As set out
above, he was obliged to report the case to DoCS and
he had no discretion as to
concern as to the consequences of reporting, or her lack of certainty as to the
continuation of abuse, were factors which were identified
in the Australian
Psychological Guidelines as factors which clinicians should be aware might
influence their reporting
as set out by Dr Banks, given the information disclosed in October 2003, a
reasonable psychologist would have reached the
conclusion that there must have
been current concerns for the safety, welfare or well being of Miss
Donnelly has from an early stage conceded that he is a mandated
set out above, in the circumstances, there was a clear obligation upon Dr
Donnelly to make a report to DOCS. There was also a
professional obligation upon
him to report the case to DOCS irrespective of the legal obligations. The
circumstances were such that
a specialised risk assessment was called for,
requiring referral to appropriately trained and resourced professionals. Dr
failed to do that. His
ex post facto
attempts to rationalise
this by reference to his referral to Dr Brechman Toussaint for generalised
counselling are, if anything,
indicative of his own belated recognition that
specialist assessment and management of the risk and welfare of Miss B was
This is a breach of both s 27, and of professional obligations as
reflected in the Code. Dr Banks described this as falling profoundly
standard expected as of Dr
contemporaneous notes indicate that Dr Donnelly’s conceptualisation of the
case was that reporting was not required (either
as a matter of law or as a
matter of professional obligations) because he was satisfied that the harmful
behaviour had ceased and
he believed that it was best for the family to remain
together. A failure to report in those circumstances is indicative of a clear
failure to understand his legal and professional reporting obligations.
Dr Donnelly’s approach was one:
which risk assessment to Miss B relied almost entirely upon an assumption that
Mr A was being entirely frank in his account to
placed emphasis upon the fact that this was a voluntary report when he ought to
have known that this could not be a factor of
weight in such risk
assessment;
omitted a fully informed assessment of the risk to Miss B bearing in mind the
nature and extent of the information disclosed
by her father.
was in no way excused by his subsequent limited referral to Dr Brechman
Toussaint, in which critical facets of the information
provided by Mr A was
omitted, and which was not directed towards the role of risk assessment. The
limited nature of this referral
is further evidence of the failure to Dr
Donnelly to appreciate the risk to Miss B, and to a lesser extent HA, in
remaining in their
is eloquently described in the letter from DOCS HCCC vol 1 at 4/10.
Donnelly could not have known the full extent of the harm to which he left Miss
B and Miss C exposed, he failed to appreciate
the risk of harm of that nature
which should have been apparent to him. Dr Banks severely criticises Dr Donnelly
for his misjudging
of the case from its earliest days, for making assumptions
referral to Dr Brechman
the guidelines of the 2001 Australian Psychological Society on Reporting Child
Abuse and Neglect and Criminal Activity, of
which Dr Donnelly was aware,
emphasised both the legal and moral responsibility to report and the factors
which may disincline a
psychologist to report a case of suspected child sex
abuse to DOCS.
the circumstances, Dr Donnelly clearly failed to protect the safety and welfare
of Miss B and Miss C.
the nature of the disclosure, the nature of the risk to Miss B and Miss C the
many complications associated with managing and
treating child sex abusers, and
the background and limited experience of Ms Dene, including her history of child
sex abuse and his
knowledge that she had reacted in such an emotional and
unprofessional way on 21 October 2003, it was a serious error for Dr Donnelly
allow her to continue treating Mr A. As Dr Donnelly himself said in a letter to
the HCCC, Mr A had a “
complicated clinical presentation”
any case involving paedophilia would be inappropriate as a training case at the
University.
given what he must have known was his influence over her, his conduct in
explaining to her that it would be good for her to
continue with the case
clearly caused her to continue to treat Mr A notwithstanding what she described
as her initial reluctance
This is particularly so given that that was
likely both to impact adversely upon Ms Dene and to make her more vulnerable to
seriousness of this error is compounded where, as here, Dr Donnelly thereafter
failed even to check Ms Dene’s clinical notes
by way of ongoing risk
assessment, or to involve himself in any further assessment of the risk to Miss
B arising out of Mr A’s
conduct. The starkness of the consequences of this
failure can be seen from Ms Dene’s stated goal of treatment as being to
include the goal of Mr A not engaging in inappropriate sexual fondling of Miss B
(HCCC vol 2 at 121).
on or around November 2003, upon the occasion of making a referral to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint:
provide all relevant information to Dr Brechman-Toussaint in relation to the
risk of harm to Miss B and Miss C:
to reconsider the question of whether or not Miss B and Miss C were at risk;
make a referral to the Department of Community Services.
set out by Dr Banks, the point of referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint was a
salient point at which Dr Donnelly ought to have reconsidered
his position about
reporting to DOCS, given the questions raised by Dr Brechman-Toussaint in the
initial meeting she had with Dr
Donnelly and Ms
Banks’ view is that in these matters Dr Donnelly significantly departed
from the standard required of
it is clear from the evidence that salient details were omitted in the briefing
to Dr Brechman-Toussaint, which details were
of critical significance as to the
characterisation of the matters disclosed by Mr A, and as to the ability of Dr
Brechman-Toussaint
properly to form a view as to the risk of harm, both past and
present, to Miss B and Miss C. At this point, Dr Donnelly should have
potentially relevant information to Dr Brechman-Toussaint, reconsidered all of
the available material, properly assessed
the risk to Miss B and Miss C, and
referred the case to DOCS. Further, if, as he has subsequently suggested, he was
in any doubt
as to the risk to Miss B and Miss C, he should have ensured that Dr
Brechman-Toussaint’s brief specifically included the question
assessment of risk of harm to Miss B and Miss C. This he manifestly failed to
do. This is, in effect, conceded by Dr Donnelly
in his letter dated 16 June 2006
“I said nothing to Dr Brechman-Toussaint about my impressions,
made no effort to influence the type or duration of her care.”
to Dr Banks, this incomplete provision of salient clinical information to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint sadly gave rise to the potential
that her intervention could
in fact be harmful to Miss B and Miss
15 September 2004, encouraged and/or permitted Ms Dene to involve Miss B in the
therapeutic process she was undertaking with Mr
A notwithstanding that this
her competence;
inappropriate
in the circumstances; and
any steps being taken to assess or to ensure Miss B’s welfare in relation
to this process.
can be no doubt in this case but that Dr Donnelly was aware that Ms Dene
proposed to involve Miss B in a treatment session with
Mr A. It is specifically
referred to in notes of supervision with Dr Donnelly on 9 June
Donnelly accepted in his response to the HCCC that he was aware of MS
Dene’s plan to involve Miss B and Miss C in a
joint session with Mr A
potentially to include discussions of the
Further, Ms Dene’s evidence as to this was that Dr Donnelly himself
brought up with her the possibility that she should consider
any event, the contemporaneous clinical records include repeated references to
this proposed session. The inference is that this
would have been raised during
informal conversations with Dr Donnelly, and that if he had read the clinical
notes (as he ought to
have done) he would have been aware of it. In these ways
also, he permitted these sessions to occur.
inappropriateness of the sessions, and of them being carried out by Ms Dene, is
abundantly clear. Indeed, Dr Donnelly himself
concedes that it would have been
inappropriate for him to have sought to provide any treatment to Miss B. That
this was done without
any independent and/or professional preparation or support
for Miss B exacerbates the severity of this failure.
to exercise appropriate supervision of Ms Dene in her treatment of Mr
Donnelly failed in this regard in a number of different ways.
he caused and permitted Ms Dene to provide a therapy program to Mr A over the
course of at least 42 sessions, over a period
of some 19 months. As Dr Banks
“this would be considered not just excessive for an intern
but entering areas of potentially hazardous and/or harmful practice
Dr Banks described Dr Donnelly’s conduct in this regard as
“overwhelmingly below the reasonable standard
” inviting his
“most severe
was in circumstances where Ms Dene had not previously undergone a long term
placement Dr Donnelly had not previously supervised
a long term placement. Ms
Dene had recently been involved in a stressful complaint against a senior member
of staff, there were reports
of mutual attraction between Ms Dene and Mr A, the
case was complicated and became even more so after Mr A’s disclosure in
October 2003, the case clearly called for specialist services and involved
complex management and assessment issues, Ms Dene’s
history made her
inherently vulnerable in the circumstances and Ms Dene’s reaction in
October 2003 was clearly indicative of
her own emotional reaction to the
circumstances of Mr A’s disclosure. Compounding matters,
Donnelly did not once read Ms Dene’s clinical records, nor did he attend
any session with Mr A other than the one session
on 27 October 2003;
supervision for approximately two months in 2004 was by
Donnelly placed the responsibility for decisions as to continuation of the
professional relationship with Ms Dene, and probably
also as to the conducting
and timing of the sessions with Miss B and Miss C, onto Ms Dene.
to take steps to safeguard the welfare of Ms Dene in relation to her therapeutic
relationship with Mr A.
Donnelly was clearly aware of Ms Dene’s history of child sex abuse and of
her relative inexperience as a psychologist. She
was his intern. She had no
experience in long term placements. Notwithstanding these factors he left her
with inadequate supervision
in a situation in which it was entirely foreseeable
that she would suffer emotional, psychological and/or profesionnal harm. This
was a serious lapse.
around January 2005 - August 2005, delayed making a report to the Department of
Community Services.
set out above, Dr Donnelly was at all times under an obligation to make a report
to DOCS, either as a mandated, or as a voluntary
reporter. He failed to do this
over a protracted period, including in January 2005 when he signed up to a
Discharge Summary in the
terms he did. By that point he was or ought to have
been clearly aware of the nature and extent of Mr A’s disclosure, the harm
this had caused to Miss B, Miss B’s continuing vulnerability, Miss
B’s distress as manifest in the attendance on Ms Dene,
and of the clear
indicator of increased risk associated with Mr A’s further disclosure in
September 2004. His failure to report
at a time when he signed a Discharge
Summary clearly referring to past abuse and to a report to DOCS “at the
appropriate time”
is a dramatic failure to comply with both his statutory
and professional obligations.
not keep any appropriate and/or accurate clinical records in relation to the
psychological treatment provided to Mr A.
Donnelly attended a treatment session with Mr A on 27 October 2003. On any view,
this was an important session, and the precise
nature and extent of the
information provided by Mr A was likely to be of considerable influence in
determining Dr Donnelly and Ms
Dene’s response to Mr A’s disclosure.
It would also be important as regards future management, potentially involving
Miss B and Miss C also. Notwithstanding this, Dr Donnelly neither completed his
own clinical records in respect of this attendance,
nor checked that Ms Dene had
made a record, and that it was consistent with his own recollection. As set out
by Dr Banks, this is
a significant failure inviting strong
if contrary to the submissions set out above, Dr Donnelly’s knowledge
is that it was entirely
non-sexual and did not involve anything which could be described as abuse, it
would have been a significant
failure for Dr Donnelly to sign the Discharge
Summary in the terms in which it was written.
Donnelly’s failure to record supervision sessions is another instance of
his failure to keep appropriate and/or accurate
clinical records in relation to
the treatment provided to Mr A.
or permitted Ms Dene to provide 42 sessions of therapy to Mr A as an
set out above, Dr Banks described this as potentially hazardous and
describes this as overwhelmingly below the standard required of Dr Donnelly. The
failures inherent in this are set out above.
Dr Donnelly’s attempts to justify the length and continuance of the
therapeutic relationship between Ms Dene and Mr
A are unconvincing. This is
particularly so bearing in mind the nature of the A family’s
circumstances, the
“complicated clinical
presentation”,
the fact of Mr A’s disclosure, Ms Dene’s reaction to that
disclosure, the failure of Dr Donnelly to read the clinical
notes, the fact of
supervision by phone for two months in 2004 and the complexities likely to be
associated with risk assessment
and management of Mr A in the circumstances.
Unsatisfactory
Professional Conduct – Complaint One
definition of unsatisfactory professional conduct, equivalent to that in s 25 of
the Act, was considered by the Medical Tribunal
In re a Medical
Practitioner and the Medical Practice Act
(3 September 2007). The changes to
the previous definition were described in paragraph 10 as being twofold: first
in introducing
the concept of different levels of experience and skill requiring
different standards, and secondly, in introducing the idea that
the conduct had
to be “significantly below” the standard to be so expected. At
paragraph 12 “significantly”
was said to mean “not trivial, of
importance, or substantial”.
matters set out above, individually and cumulatively, clearly establish
unsatisfactory professional conduct. The standard required,
having regard to
professional training, the Code, s 27, and the guidelines of the Australian
Psychological Society clearly demanded
a standard of conduct of which Dr
Donnelly fell far short.
Professional
Misconduct – Complaint Two
24 of the Act provides that professional misconduct is unsatisfactory
professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or
cancellation of the psychologist's registration. Whilst the statutory definition
of professional misconduct
makes it unnecessary to turn to the common law
definition, it was held in
Prothonotary of Supreme Court of NSW v. McCaffery
[2004] NSWCA 470
, that it gives content to a statutory definition of
professional misconduct that it was enacted in the context that
“professional
misconduct” at common law was said “to connote
“conduct which would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or
dishonourable”
by one’s peers: see
Allinson v General Council of
Medical Education and Registration
[1894] 1 QB 750
and other authorities
collected by Spigelman CJ (with whom Mason P and Handley JA agreed) in
South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
the nature and potential risks associated with the conduct of Dr Donnelly as set
out above, his conduct was professional misconduct
within the meaning of s 24 of
the Act. Of particular significance in this regard is:
failure to review Ms Dene’s clinical records relating to Mr A;
failure to protect the welfare of a child whose circumstances were such that the
vulnerability inherent in childhood was severely
exacerbated;
Donnelly’s failure to conduct any proper risk assessment as regards Miss
Donnelly’s failure to revisit his risk assessment as regards the risk to
Donnelly’s encouragement to Ms Dene to continue treating Mr A when he
ought to have known that this would carry considerable
weight with her;
Donnelly’s willingness to leave Ms Dene in a position of considerable
professional vulnerability without ensuring vigilant
and thorough
supervision;
inadequacy of the referral to Dr Brechman-Toussaint;
inadequate risk assessment;
failures properly to reassess risk or his initial decision not to report Mr A,
including having read and signed up to the discharge
actions in causing or permitting the joint session with Miss B and Mr
regard to the protective jurisdiction of this
the need to protect the public, the importance of maintaining standards within
the profession and in maintaining confidence in
psychologists as a
profession,
appropriate protective orders as regards Dr Donnelly are:
Cancellation
of Dr Donnelly’s registration for a period of 18 months; or
upon the Tribunal’s findings, suspension for a period of 18 months with
conditions that:
should not supervise students as regards any clinical practice and that
should undertake formal professional supervision of any psychological services
which he provides to patients, to be conducted on
at least a fortnightly basis
at any time when Dr Donnelly is providing such services. Dr Donnelly is to
nominate an appropriately
qualified senior psychologist to undertake this
supervision. The supervisor must be approved by the Board. The Respondent is to
to the Board seeking approval for a nominated supervisor and provide
sufficient details for the Board to consider the suitability
of the supervisor.
14 days of written notification from the Board regarding the suitability of the
nominated supervising psychologist, Dr Donnelly
is to provide a copy of his
written authorisation of the supervising psychologist to provide written reports
to the Board every four
months until such time as the Board advises the
supervising psychologist and Dr Donnelly in writing that such reports are no
is of particular importance in this case that:
Banks was strident in his opinion:
“In short [Dr Donnelly] was not just
reckless with the safety and welfare of the subject children, it is my opinion
he was also
cavalier with the welfare of the
”I cannot think of a comparable case involving such a blatant
disregard of a clinician’s statutory
responsibility.”
conduct of Dr Donnelly left an already vulnerable child exposed to a
considerable risk of harm for a period of nearly two
conduct of Dr Donnelly also exposed Ms Dene, his supervisee, to a considerable
risk of harm and professional damage;
important that psychologists are given a clear message by the Board that their
obligations both as supervisors, and as potential
protectors of vulnerable
children in circumstances such as those which arose in this case; and
public need to have confidence that psychologists will not allow situations such
as those which occurred in this case to continue
unabated. One element of
deterrence is “providing an assurance to the public that serious lapses in
the conduct of ... practitioners
will not be passed over or lightly put aside,
but will be appropriately dealt
the present case, the importance of the confidence of the public, including
relevant agencies, in the ability and willingness of
psychologists to perform
their public duties as regards protection of children at risk is manifest in the
complaints received by
the HCCC from both Cedar
Tamworth Joint Investigation Response
reinforces the importance of this Tribunal taking steps to maintain such
confidence.
HCCC also seeks an order that Dr Donnelly pay their costs in this matter.
HCCC v DENE & DONNELLY
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF DR JAMES DONNELLY
A Introduction and initial comments
is trite law in proceedings such as the present that due to seriousness of the
allegations and the gravity of their consequences
the Tribunal must be
comfortably satisfied
that the particulars of a complaint have been
established (
HCCC v Bryan
[2009] PSTNSW 1 at [11]). (emphasis added)
Donnelly agrees with the submission of the HCCC that the characterisation of the
initial disclosure (in October 2003) by Mr A to
Ms Dene is of
to the evaluation of the complaints as regards Dr
seriousness of the allegations made against Dr Donnelly cannot possibly be
understated.
speaking, on the initial disclosure, Dr Donnelly’s case is
(a) After Mr A
made the disclosure to Ms Dene in his therapy session on 21 October 2003, Ms
Dene relayed to him (Dr Donnelly) what
Mr A had said;
information given to him by Ms Dene
in the terms as the HCCC
alleges at paragraph 21 of the HCCC’s submissions; and
disclosure was to the effect that Mr A had massaged his daughter and sometimes
during that massage his hand had brushed or
moved over her pubic region.
HCCC’s case, or a vast proportion of it, is, effectively, that Mr A told
Ms Dene on 21 October 2003 that he had deliberately
touched his
daughter’s, Miss B, pubic region in a sexual way, regularly over the
previous years, ceasing only two weeks prior
to 21 October 2003. Further, Mr A
had inappropriate sexual thoughts about Miss B, including attraction to
that regard, the HCCC’s case against Dr Donnelly can be broadly distilled
as follows:
(a) Mr A told
Ms Dene that he had been sexually abusing (‘fondling’ or
‘massaging her pubic region’) his daughter;
(b) Ms Dene
relayed that information to Dr Donnelly;
(c) Despite Dr
Donnelly being told that information by Ms Dene , Dr Donnelly decided not to
report this conduct to DoCS, but rather
made the decision to allow two young
girls to remain under the care of Mr A;
(d) In doing
so, Dr Donnelly failed to appreciate that the young girls may be subject to
further sexual abuse if left with Mr A;
(e) Furthermore,
knowing that Ms Dene had been sexually abused in her past, he allowed Ms Dene to
continue to provide therapy to Mr
A who had disclosed that he was effectively a
paedophile;
(f) In light of
all of the above, Dr Donnelly decided not to become actively involved in the
treatment of Mr A or take more stringent
supervision of Ms Dene;
(g) Completely
disregarded his professional and legal obligations; and
(h) Ms Dene and
Dr Donnelly are lying about what Mr A said to Ms Dene on 21 October 2003.
only needs to consider the above distillation of the case to appreciate the
seriousness of the allegations
. In that regard, his Honour Dixon
J’s (as he then was) comments in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
at 362–363 assumes significant status in these proceedings,
particularly given the oral evidence of Ms Dene as to the initial
disclosure (of
which more is said below):
“The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent
unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of
consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must
affect the answer to the question whether the issue
has been proved to the
reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’
should not be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences
... This does not mean that some standard
of persuasion is fixed intermediate between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required
upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
a civil issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability.
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process by which
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
” (emphasis added).
is more so in this case in light of the HCCC’s concession, properly made,
that there was no contemporaneous record of the
disclosure made by Mr
said in her written evidence to the
repeated in her oral evidence in the
proceedings,
the notes of 21 October 2003 meeting with Mr A, made some 14 months after the
event, are an overstatement of what Ms Dene knew at
the time (and told Dr
Donnelly at the same time). The notes constitute a “bleed through”
of her own issues and one cannot
rely upon her notes as an accurate reflection
of her meeting with Mr A on 21 October 2003. Ms Dene gave sworn evidence that
her clinical
notes are “poor”, “appalling”,
“overstate what she was told by Mr A” and “cannot be relied
HCCC does not deal with this significant and fundamental evidentiary aspect in
its written submissions. Rather, it deals with
the evidence by referring to the
“likelihood”
of the disclosure occurring in the manner recorded in the notes written by Ms
Dene, or resorts to drawing “inferences”
based on other
Perhaps what is more disturbing, however, is the HCCC’s reliance upon
statements provided by Mr A as to what he is alleged
to have disclosed in
October 2003.
Mr A was not subject to cross-examination in these proceedings.
the end, such attempts merely seek to underscore what Dixon J warned against in
. These matters must be at the forefront of the
Tribunal’s deliberations in these proceedings.
issue that must be at the forefront of the Tribunal’s deliberations is
what was known about Mr A and his behaviour at
relevant times
Tribunal cannot decide this case on disclosures subsequently made by Mr A in
circumstances where he was receiving specialist
treatment at Cedar House, or in
admissions he subsequently made to NSW Police. The Tribunal must have regard to
what was known at
the times particularised in the Complaints (One and Two)
against Dr Donnelly, based upon the information at that time from the evidence
given in these proceedings.
do otherwise would involve a gross injustice to not only Dr Donnelly, but Ms
B The particulars of the complaints
dealing with evidentiary aspects of the proceedings, it is pertinent to deal
with what appears to be a change in the particulars
of the complaints against Dr
Donnelly regarding the Code of Conduct.
the HCCC particularised the specific allegation regarding the Board’s Code
of Conduct as a failure in October 2003
contrary to B5 of the...Code
... to communicate the fact of Mr A’s disclosures to appropriate
professionals or
organisations
On the first day of the hearing on 15 June 2009, the HCCC sought and was granted
leave to amend paragraphs 1(g) of Complaints One
and Two to read
“B3” of the Code of
the fourth day of the hearing, 18 June 2009, the HCCC sought leave to amend the
relevant particular(s) again to clarify that it
was relying upon the 1997 Code
of Conduct given that it was the Code that applied at that time on October
sought leave to amend the particulars to read “A(v) and (viii)”
instead of “B3”, Counsel for the
HCCC saying that the particular
related to the failure to communicate Mr A’s disclosure to appropriate
professionals or
organisations.
Ultimately, the HCCC was granted leave to amend the particulars to read
contrary to the Code of Conduct
” in circumstances where the
actual conduct said to support the particular (the failure to communicate the
disclosure to appropriate
professionals or organisations) was pleaded in the
particular.
is, the HCCC is limited to a case that the alleged failure by Dr Donnelly to
communicate the disclosure by Mr A in October 2003
to appropriate professionals
or organisations amounted to a breach of the 1997 Code.
the HCCC cannot, as a matter of procedural fairness, now purport to rely upon
other clauses of the 1997 Code (it being
accepted that it is the 1997 Code), or
the 2004 Code, to support the allegation referable to the disclosure in October
2003. Accordingly,
in Dr Donnelly’s submission, those parts of the 1997
and 2004 Code relied upon in para [41] of the HCCC’s submissions
taken into account by this Tribunal given the way that the HCCC particularised
the complaints against Dr Donnelly.
none of the other particulars of either Complaint One or Two relate to alleged
breaches of the Code. As the Chair of the
CHAIRPERSON: I have to say that, from the tribunal's
perspective, breaches of the Code of Conduct are important considerations
of the statutory status of that Code. So if there is to be a breach of
the Code alleged, then it would be my preference that it
be particularised, and
obviously particularised, if it's particularised at this particular time, and
that in a way that is different
to the way it has been in the past, then that
the remedy for that would be time to meet it
Dr Donnelly’s submission, to the extent that HCCC is now trying to make
out its case, or part of its case, based on provisions
of the 1997 and/or 2004
Code as it appears to be doing in paragraph 11 of its submissions, it cannot now
do so. None of those matters
were put to Dr Donnelly. Moreover, the HCCC did not
make any such allegation in the particulars of the Complaints against Dr
C Initial disclosure in October 2003
HCCC submits that the characterisation of the initial disclosure by Mr A to Ms
Dene, and of any subsequent disclosures, is of
critical importance to the
evaluation of the complaint as regards Dr
Donnelly generally agrees with this submission. It is therefore necessary to
consider the evidence as to the disclosure made
by Mr A on 21 October 2003.
HCCC submits that, having regard to all of the evidence, the likelihood is that
it was clear to both Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly
Mr A had deliberately touched Miss B’s pubic region
in a sexual way, regularly over the previous years, ceasing only two weeks
to his disclosure, and that he was aware that he had inappropriate sexual
thoughts about Miss B, including attraction to her
HCCC, in paragraph 23, then submits that the clinical records provide
considerable insights as to the nature and extent of the
initial disclosure,
and, at paragraph 22 submits that “
contemporaneous records are
inherently more likely to reflect an accurate picture of the nature and extent
of the initial disclosure
by Mr A to Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly in October
”. That, as a statement of principle in an ordinary or
unremarkable case, may be correct. This was not such a case. However,
importantly, is that the
author of the notes gave sworn evidence before the
Tribunal that the notes that she made are inaccurate and
“appalling”.
Accordingly,
in Dr Donnelly’s submission, the Tribunal should not accept that
of general principle, nor that the clinical records accurately
describe or record the disclosure made by Mr A to Ms Dene on 21 October
Tribunal should not do so because Ms Dene has given specific evidence that they
are not to be relied upon. In Ms Dene’s
When I read my notes early this year, for the first time I
realised how inaccurate they were. I knew they were inaccurate in relation
not saying the things that went wrong in terms of Dr Brechman Toussaint, and
what she was supposed to do that she didn't do.
I didn't write that. I was
compromised in not being able to put those in my notes. So I knew that there
was my notes were compromised
in that respect. Until this year I did not
realise how compromised my notes were by my own subjective impressions. They
were incredibly
poor. When I read them, I rang up my lawyer because I was so
distressed and shocked by it, and that was the first time I realised,
why in my statement of this year I say that there was overstatement and that
there was subjectivity. It was really incredibly
poor. It led through, not
[Regional University]
clinic notes, it was just absolutely there
even more in my private practice notes compared to what I objectively knew and
by the client. My notes are appalling.
(In Dr Donnelly’s submission, the reference to “led” should
be “bled”-see reference to use of word “bleed”
Dene’s oral
relation to the notes regarding the disclosure on 21 October 2003 written by Ms
Dene in late 2004, the following exchange occurred
under cross-examination by
Q. If we look at this, this is the notes that we know you wrote
late in 2004 reflecting what you'd been told in 2003, and it's quite
isn't it, in this record that what you describe under the heading "Progress
Notes", "Inappropriate once a week for a few years,
a light massage including
fondling the pubic area", you agree with me that that description is a
description of child sex abuse?
A. If that were if that description was what I knew, yes, it would have
Q. And then in the next paragraph it talks about what you focussed on,
and you ascertained there'd been no penetration, coercion
or physical violence.
That's because you were quite aware that this was something which was a form of
child sex abuse, wasn't it?
A. I was trying to understand whether it had become sexual.
Q. And that's not quite right, is it? You were trying to ascertain how
far it's gone, not whether it's become sexual, aren't you?
A. No. I was trying to ascertain whether it had become sexual.
Q. Meaning there'd been actual sexual intercourse; is that what you're
A. No. Touch of a sexual nature.
Q. Are you saying that fondling the pubic area is not touch of a sexual
A. Fondling of the pubic area is a totally subjective, emotive, really
poor terminology that I used.
Q. It's terminology which is almost word for word almost reflected from
the session in your teaching notes that I took you to which
had as possible acts
of sex abuse, fondling?
A. But it wasn't what I knew. It was my subjectivity going into that
terminology.
Q. It accurately reflected your conveyed impression, your subjective
impression of what you were told?
A. No. It's a bleed through of my own issues.
Q. If you then look at the next paragraph, there's discussion of what Mr
A reported and he said he was only attracted to touching
her. It was quite
clear to you, wasn't it, that he was touching her because of sexual
attraction?
A. No, it wasn't. It never was. When I received the report from the
complaint from Cedar Cottage, I was totally, totally shocked.
various other points in Ms Dene’s oral evidence she consistently disavowed
the accuracy of the recording of what was disclosed
to her on 21 October
evidence given by Ms Dene at the Tribunal hearing (and that of Dr Donnelly) was
given under oath. This is a significant factor
that should be considered by the
Tribunal in assessing the evidence given by Ms Dene regarding the clinical notes
that she prepared.
to what was disclosed by Mr A to Ms Dene, Ms Dene gave oral evidence, and so did
Dr Donnelly (limited to what he was told by Ms
Dene). On that disclosure, under
cross-examination from the HCCC, Ms Dene gave the following
Q. It's clear from this note that your view was that a risk of
harm would have been clear to you if someone else had told you that
touched, stroked, fondled his daughter's genital area during a massage. It
would have been clear to you there was a risk
of harm in those circumstances,
wouldn't it?
A. You've said three terms there.
Q. Let's just leave it with massage. It would have been clear to you
that there was a risk of harm if someone had said to you "Mr
A is massaging his
daughter's pubic area at night time"?
A. If they'd said that what you said is actually different to what he
said. He didn't say he was massaging her pubic area. He was
giving her a
massage and his hand moved over that area.
Q. Come on Ms Dene
A. You might think that I'm splitting hairs here, but for the way that I
conceptualised it back then, of which I'm critical of myself,
was that it was
different. If he'd said he was massaging her pubic area, there's focussed
attention on her pubic area. Why would
he do that?
Q. And you wouldn't think that when you think why would he stroke her
pubic area during a massage?
A. He didn't say he stroked it.
oral evidence in examination in chief, Dr Donnelly was asked to tell the
Tribunal what Ms Dene had told him was the disclosure
made by Mr A on 21 October
2003. Dr Donnelly’s evidence was to the
Q. Can I just stop you there, perhaps it is best if you explain
to the tribunal what Ms Dene said to you?
A. The disclosure was?
A. What she had disclosed she had said that Mr A disclosed to her that
after stating he had something to talk to her about and he
felt it was somewhat
taboo that he had mentioned that he had been using massage in the past at night
approximately once a week to
feeling uncomfortable about it. He had described it or demonstrated it as
her abdomen lying on her back, stroking this way with contact with her
pubic region with his wrist as he went by, and that based
on Ms Dene's report
she had queried whether it was any penetration and he denied any penetration.
He denied that any other kind
of touching behaviour and he had ceased the
massage behaviour.
Dr Donnelly gave
Q. But part of it was also inappropriate fondling of the pubic
A. I don't like the word "fondling". I still think that's an
overstatement.
Q. No, I will use your other word, inappropriate stroking of the
genitals, that was part of the
A. I think it's a light massage with contact occasional contact with
pubic region is what we should have written.
similarities of the description given by Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly in oral
evidence are striking. In this regard, the Tribunal will
note that Dr Donnelly
was not present when Ms Dene gave her
Donnelly was specifically asked to leave the hearing so that there could be no
suggestion that his evidence could be in anyway
coloured by Ms Dene’s
evidence. Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly have retained separate representation
throughout the proceedings. There
is no suggestion that Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly
have collaborated in giving their evidence. There was no suggestion that Dr
evidence was a recent invention.
fact is, Ms Dene disclosed to Dr Donnelly what Mr A told her on 21 October
the contact was described (brushed over or moved over), Ms Dene relayed to Dr
Donnelly what Mr A had said to her on 21 October
therefore come as no surprise to the Tribunal that the oral evidence of Ms Dene
and Dr Donnelly of the disclosure by Mr
A on 21 October 2003 is largely
consistent.
only was the oral evidence given by Dr Donnelly consistent with that given by Ms
Dene, it was consistent with the explanations
Dr Donnelly previously gave to the
HCCC in the investigation of the
complaints.
disingenuous suggestion by the HCCC otherwise should be
is, however, another matter that needs to be taken into account. Dr Donnelly
conducted a session with Mr A after the disclosure
in order to question Mr A
A’s disclosure in that meeting was consistent with what Ms Dene had told
Dr Donnelly.
Accordingly,
in light of the above, and taking into consideration what the High Court said in
, Dr Donnelly submits that the Tribunal should find that the
disclosure by Mr A to Ms Dene was that he had given his daughter a massage
night to help her relax in which sometimes when giving that massage his hand
moved or brushed over her pubic region.
Donnelly submits that the Tribunal should not find that the disclosure was in
the terms alleged by the HCCC, and set out in para
D References to “inappropriate” in clinical
Complaints against Dr Donnelly refer to “inappropriate” touching of
Miss B by Mr A. If the Tribunal were to find that
in fact Mr A had disclosed
that he had been fondling or massaging Miss B’s pubic region, there could
be no doubt that such
touch was inappropriate, indeed reprehensibly
inappropriate.
appears, however, that the reference to “inappropriate” arises from
the use of that word in the clinical notes prepared
by Ms Dene. To the extent
that it does, then the observations regarding Ms Dene’s clinical notes set
out above are
However, an entirely different and valid explanation for the reference to
“inappropriate” was provided by Ms Dene under
cross-examination by
the HCCC. Ms Dene explained that it was inappropriate to give his daughter a
massage because of his dependency
on his daughter, not because the massage was
had been distressed because Mr A had believed he had committed a “boundary
violation”, not something of a sexual
was recording the fact that Mr A was telling her that he was finding it more
difficult to parent his youngest
again is consistent with the evidence of Dr Donnelly. Dr Donnelly’s
evidence was that the case was conceptualised as an
adjustment reaction where
one of the features of Mr A’s presentation was that he was struggling with
how to be a parent to
daughters. Mr A did indeed speak about his difficulty in
how to be a parent to his
A’s lack of comfort surrounding the massage of Miss B was explained by Dr
Donnelly in his oral
And there was a lot of things in his presentation that talked
this is something and this is in the context of an absolutely horrific medical
situation for his wife, he being at risk for
major depressive disorder. We were
thinking about whether or not he would be suicidal or not. All of these things
were far more
salient than the mention of him using massage and the other thing
that I'm thinking about in dealing with Ms Dene in supervision
is also that the
massage is something that is actually quite common in dealing with kids with
psychosomatic disorders, so if you
go to the health psychology literature and
you go to talk to allied health staff working in hospitals and you ask them, if
mentions massage do you think paedophile.
It never comes up because it's actually recommended for parents to use
that to help kids deal with dying parents, chronically ill
parents, to deal with
things like gripey stomachs and tense muscle and headaches and things that come
up for small children who have
difficulty dealing with really complex emotions,
so massage in itself didn't automatically trigger either me to say, "Oh, hang on
a second we've got a hardcore sociopathic paedophile here, I'd better yank Ms
Dene from this case because she's in way over her head."
We have really been
dealing with very complex issues around this guy's presentation, very complex
interagency issues, things where
he was progressing well and Ms Dene was dealing
with him very effectively and now we had a presentation or mention of past
that was troubling to the client but was also in the context of him
experiencing guilt about a lot of other things that were also
behaviours that he
felt were taboo.
So for example, he had already talked with Ms Dene about using prostitutes
because he was feeling very frustrated sexually because
of the loss of his
sexual relationship with his wife. They were already talking about those kinds
of things, so this is in the context
of him feeling uncomfortable about seeking
comfort from his daughter, feeling guilty about getting comfort from his
daughter, from
having his daughter as a confidante. As she's getting older and
his wife is getting more and more unwell he's actually that was
that was my perspective on what the guilt was about, not about the kinds of
things that have actually come out since
then that are in the Cedar Cottage
report that have been referred to repeatedly as though we knew about those
things at the time.
only “inappropriate” feelings or thoughts that Mr A had disclosed to
either Dr Donnelly or Ms Dene was sexual thoughts
he had about young women in
references in the clinical notes prepared by Ms Dene need to be understood in
that light, and not as “red flags” of
indicators of Mr A’s
perversion, as Dr Banks suggests.
E Dr Banks’ evidence
is appropriate to make some general comments regarding the evidence of Dr Banks.
The vast majority, if not the entirety, of Dr
Banks’ Reports should be
rejected by the Tribunal.
Reports are compromised due to the basis upon which he formed his opinions. It
is clear from a cursory analysis of the Reports
that Dr Banks relied upon the
clinical notes written by Ms
fact, at page 12 of his Report dated 8 June 2007, Dr Banks expressly sets out
the basis of his “reasoning and opinion”
as follows:
From a detailed review of the file, it is clear that
there is a discrepancy between Ms Dene’s recall to Dr Donnelly’s
recall and also that of Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s recall. My reasoning and
opinion has therefore been derived from placing greatest
weight upon the client
file notes available (tab 11-Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s notes and tab 16-Ms
Dene’s notes); then in
descending order of weight and credibility-Ms
Dene’s and Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s recall via statements provided to
HCCC (equally), as both were responsible for the provision of services and
lastly Dr Donnelly’s recall...”
cross-examination, Dr Banks accepted that he applied the above reasoning to the
other questions asked of him in his
Reports were further compromised given the information that was provided to him
by the HCCC. It is clear that Dr Banks was provided
with information such as a
police brief and reports from Cedar Cottage which disclose matters not known to
either Dr Donnelly or
Ms Dene at the relevant time.
is no doubt (and it cannot be disputed) that the criticisms levelled at Dr
Donnelly by Dr Banks in his Reports were based upon
the “facts” as
disclosed by, primarily, in Ms Dene’s clinical notes; notes that Ms Dene
now calls “appalling”.
Accordingly,
Dr Donnelly submits that the Tribunal should give little or no weight to the
Reports of Dr Banks in its deliberations.
F Treating daughters
HCCC submits that Dr Donnelly was providing health or welfare services to Miss
B. Dr Donnelly submits that neither he nor Ms Dene
were treating any of Mr (or
Donnelly was treating Mrs A, and through supervision of Ms Dene, Mr A.
any event, the matter is likely to be moot. Dr Donnelly accepts that he is a
mandated reporter. Dr Donnelly has also accepted that
he had obligations under
the relevant legislation if he had current concerns for Mr A’s children at
the relevant time.
obligations under
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
HCCC submits that the reporting obligations under the Act are
Donnelly accepted that he was, and is, a mandated reported. He has not any stage
a statement that the reporting obligations under the Act “are clear”
does not justly deal with the subjectivity
inherent in the test of whether a
child is at risk of harm for the purposes of s.23 of the Act.
section provides:
“For the purposes of this Part and Part 3, a child or
young person is "at risk of harm" if
current concerns
exist for the
safety, welfare or well-being of the child or young person
presence of any one or more of the following circumstances:
(emphasis added)
is, the mere fact that one of the circumstances set in sub-paragraphs (a)
through (f) is not itself sufficient to give rise to
concern” for the safety, welfare or well-being of a child. To the extent
that the HCCC submissions at paragraph
[19(b)] suggest otherwise, then this, it
is submitted, is not an accurate interpretation of s.23 of the
can be no doubt, and Dr Donnelly accepts this, that if the disclosure by Mr A
was in the terms as contended by the HCCC in paragraph
21 above, then a
mandatory report should have been made. In that respect, much does turn upon the
Tribunal’s findings as to
what was disclosed by Mr A on 21 October
Dr Donnelly’s submission, what cannot be disputed is that he
fail to consider whether a report had to be made to
consider whether a report was required in the circumstances, but determined that
the circumstances did not warrant a report.
H Specific response to particulars of
Paragraph 1
has been submitted by the HCCC and Dr Donnelly, much turns upon the
Tribunal’s finding as to the disclosure made by Mr A
on 21 October 2003.
This is especially pertinent to particular 1(a)-(i) of the Complaints, but also
applies to the balance of the
particulars of the Complaints.
order for particular 1(a)-(i) of the Complaints to be made out, the Tribunal
comfortably satisfied
that Mr A made the disclosure for which the
HCCC contends in paragraph [
21 October 2003. The HCCC bears the onus in these proceedings.
the Tribunal is not comfortably satisfied that the disclosure by Mr A on 21
October 2003 is as has been alleged, then in Dr Donnelly’s
submission,
this particular cannot be sustained.
the reasons set out in Part C above, Dr Donnelly submits that the Tribunal will
not be comfortably satisfied.
the Tribunal is so satisfied, Dr Donnelly accepts that the disclosure should
have been reported to DoCS and a failure to do so
would satisfy particulars (a),
(b), (f) and (g).
the above, Dr Donnelly submits that the evidence does disclose that he, and Ms
Dene, did consider and discussed whether or
not a report had to be made in light
of the disclosure of Mr
The evidence
is that the decision was made not to report. This was because of the nature of
the disclosure made by Mr A, of massage,
in the context of Mr A’s
presenting problems. As described by Dr Donnelly under
cross-examination:
Q. But it predated the sexual difficulties that he'd had with
A. You see I didn't conceptualise him giving his daughter a massage
because he was getting off excuse the crudeness but that
wasn't how I
conceptualised it. I thought he was using massage to get some kind of comfort
because his wife was disabled and he
was losing his companion, he was feeling
a little girl who's got somatic complaints and the massage that his
wife was taught to use to help her calm at the end of the day
that's something
he was using to help her calm at night and he felt uncomfortable because he
started to feel like he was getting
comfort from that process. I didn't
understand it as him getting sexual gratification.
Q. But you put a lot of weight don't you on what you characterised or how
you conceptualised the behaviour as being massage and,
in effect, nothing
sexual, don't you?
A. I did at the time. I don't any more.
Q. But you did at the time?
A. Yes, because of the constellation of things we saw that supported the
primary diagnosis that we came up with.
it cannot be said that Dr Donnelly did not reassess whether a report should be
Donnelly’s submission, this of itself demonstrates an understanding of
one’s professional obligations in relation
to reporting.
regards the allegation that Dr Donnelly failed to appreciate the risk to Mr
A’s children (particular 1(e)), or failed to
take appropriate action to
protect the safety and welfare of the children (particular 1(f)), the HCCC
relies upon the evidence of
page 14 of his report dated 8 June 2007, Dr Banks says:
Dr Donnelly’s failure to report the information as
provided from his intern in October 2003, in and of itself, represents the
greatest failure of not ensuring the safety, welfare and wellbeing of Mr
children, and this failure then resulted in the subject child
being left in the position of abuse for a further 20 months. Taking
account the disclosure Mr
made to Ms Dene and subsequently reviewed
with her supervisor, for Dr Donnelly to then assume that the children were
without having had any direct contact with them represents
the next critical error of judgment and failure to ensure their
Dr Banks’ views, which he repeated in his oral
based solely on the disclosure that was made by Mr A on 21 October 2003.
Further, the HCCC’s case against Dr Donnelly
in respect of his failure to
protect the safety and welfare of Mr A’s children is all premised upon the
fact that the disclosure
made by Mr A was in the form and to the extent which it
now alleges.
Insofar as such criticisms of Dr Donnelly are based upon a disclosure that was
not made, then such criticisms cannot be sustained.
The HCCC does not advance
any other basis for sustaining of the allegations against Dr Donnelly on this
aspect of the particular.
regards the allegations (particulars 1(h) and (i)) that Dr Donnelly allowed Ms
Dene to continue with the treatment of Mr A beyond
her competence and because of
her past, the HCCC’s submission
Given then nature of the
[21 October 2003]
disclosure, the nature of the risk to Miss B and Miss C, the many
complications associated with managing and treating child sex abusers,
background and limited experience of Ms Dene, including her history of child sex
abuse...it was a serious error for Dr Donnelly
to allow her to continue treating
the assumed factual basis underpinning the HCCC’s case is that the
disclosure made on 21 October 2003 by Mr A was that
he deliberately and
regularly touched Miss B’s pubic region in a sexual way and that he had
sexual thoughts about his
allegation that Dr Donnelly permitted Ms Dene to provide therapy to Mr A over
the course of at least 42 sessions as being excessive
is also disputed. The
involvement of interns in long-term treatment is a matter on which different
Donnelly provided evidence in his oral evidence and provided examples of
literature on the topic. In particular, he noted that
some models of clinical
supervision require long-term supervision and view exposure to only brief
supervision as substandard. He
also provided clinical references that support
the view that helping an intern to work though countertransference issues is
is an essential part of their training.
Banks, at page 7 of his report dated 8 June 2007, says that allowing Ms Dene to
provide a therapy program over at least 42 sessions
is excessive for an intern.
He does not provide any justification for that statement. In contrast to the
evidence of Dr Donnelly,
Dr Banks’ justification simply appears to be
“the outcome” of the current case. The HCCC in its submissions
relies upon the statements by Dr
not advance any further basis as to why such practice would be hazardous to
intern and client. Dr Banks himself does not
give any justification for this in
his oral evidence. Dr Banks conceded that he did not have any training in
providing supervision
of students providing long term therapy to
best, Dr Banks’ evidence appears to simply be a matter of his personal
opinion, and not an opinion based on an expertise
in the supervision of students
providing long term therapy.
Dr Donnelly’s submission, in the absence of
evidence to
support or corroborate Dr Banks’ view, the Tribunal should not find that
allowing Ms Dene to provide therapy to
Mr A for 42 sessions, in the
circumstances presenting to Mr A and his wife, was hazardous or harmful to Ms
to Dr Donnelly’s decision to allow Ms Dene to continue treatment of Mr A
after his disclosure, Dr Donnelly submits that that
decision too needs to be
seen in the context of the case. Dr Donnelly was and has been subject to
stringent or vociferous criticism
by Dr Banks and Ms
Reports and the HCCC in these proceedings.
when the Tribunal comes to consider this decision by Dr Donnelly, it must
consider what was disclosed by Mr A on 21 October
2003, Mr A’s presenting
problem and what Dr Donnelly did immediately after Ms Dene came to him. However,
it is appropriate
to note Ms Dene’s oral evidence as to why she reacted
the way that she did on 21 October 2003. Ms Dene said, under questioning
Chairperson:
CHAIRPERSON
Q. So in that consultation on 21 October 2003 it was your view that what
Mr A said to you was that he had touched his daughter in
an inappropriate way,
is that correct, or what was it about what he disclosed?
A. What he'd said to me?
Q. Yes, what was it that upset you so much?
A. I suppose it was his level of distress and it felt to me that it had
been a boundary violation. He didn't say anything about
it being he never
said to me anything about it being sexual, that he was sexually attracted to his
daughter, that he had any sexual
thoughts about his daughter, it was to me it
was like a betrayal of trust as a father.
Q. If he didn't say he had feelings for his daughter, if he didn't say
there was something sexual about it, all those things you
have just said, what
was it about what he said that was so distressing to you?
A. It was probably about the it was probably not what he said it was
his probably his body language. It was his distress.
Q. So when he was talking about what was he talking about when he was
so distressed and had body language that you interpreted?
A. He didn't talk for a long time. Most of the session didn't have any
talking. He was upset.
Q. So he was upset and why was it that you became so distressed with this
A. I suppose it was it's very hard to explain. I suppose it was my a
body response to being with someone so upset and when he
said about the massages
and he said he'd said it was like he indicated that it was wrong.
Q. So he said that he had massaged his daughter and that he considered
his conduct was wrong, is that what you are telling us?
A. Yes, he didn't say it in those words though and I'm really sorry I
don't mean to he just said things in little bits.
Q. And he was very distressed?
Q. So in counselling previously you have counselled people who have been
very distressed?
A. No, not no, not really. Not like that.
Q. So this is the first occasion on which you came across someone who was
really distressed while they were in a counselling session?
Q. Then you became upset as a response to the distress that you saw in Mr
A and then you just made disclosures to him, is that correct?
A. Yes, unfortunately I did.
Dene went on to further give evidence that immediately after the session with Mr
A she went to see Dr
Dene does not have a good recollection of what was discussed at the meeting with
Dr Donnelly. She cannot recall much of the
However, after the meeting she was in a position to drive
Donnelly has a clear recollection of the
Donnelly gave the following evidence:
Q. Dr Donnelly, can I ask you to go to a supervision meeting at
this point, a supervision meeting with Ms Dene, on or shortly after
2003 and this is a supervision meeting after Mr A had made certain disclosures
to Ms Dene, can you tell the tribunal what
happened in the supervision meeting
between you and Ms Dene on that occasion?
A. I'm happy to do it. This was a session where I was getting caught
me outside the clinic and she was distressed and wanted to
meet with me
immediately regarding something that had gone on with her in a session with Mr A
I arranged as soon as possible to meet
with her in my office. At the time she
was tearful, she was distressed, she was sitting at the edge of the chair, her
a combination of sadness and anxiousness and she appeared agitated.
I felt like at the time, consistent with my training as a supervisor
the clinical literature, that I needed to create a safe place to discuss not
only the content of what went on in the session
but the process for her and her
emotional reaction.
To her credit Ms Dene, despite being distressed over the course of about
an hour was able to explain quite well what had gone on in
the sessions and was
quite insightful in terms of her own reaction to it. I think she was distressed
was she was most distressed about what she
considered to be a therapeutic error in revealing her history to Mr A She
explain that
she that in response to him disclosing that he had been using
massage with his daughter
Donnelly went on to further
A. Okay, so again as a supervisor my first thing is to try to
create a safe place for Ms Dene to talk about what went on and to follow
the issues that some of the issues that actually Ms Dene raised and again this
is to her credit because she was already thinking
difference between her reaction that may be related to her history and the
content of actually what was disclosed.
She had already started thinking about
is this something to report to DOCS and there was some discomfort about
reporting to DOCS
and we were trying to and talked about that, about what our
responsibility was because I don't think either one of us had a very
experience with DOCS at that time but we would try to go ahead and make an
objective decision based on a further conversation
with Mr A and this was all
happening in the context of a very complex case to start out with.
She obviously had an autonomic nervous system reaction to what was going
on but there is some very good literature, and I refer to
the panel to just a
recent article, but there is very good research on the use of autonomic nervous
reactions to judge whether or
not someone is having a countertransference
reaction to their patients and it absolutely does not preclude that person from
in therapy with that person with that client in fact it's an index that
in fact in the title of the paper it's called "Countertransference
Intersubjectivity: Golden opportunities in clinical supervision." It is
actually an index that that is the exact kind of case
that someone should be
supervised on during their internship as opposed to being yanked from the case
whereas Dr Banks suggested
be scolded for having that kind of reaction. It is
an unbelievably harsh approach and ineffective approach for training
psychologists.
...so at that time I had to think about was there evidence that she is
actually so traumatised by what went on that she was highly
avoidant, was there
any evidence of a disassociative state, was there any evidence that she couldn't
speak about what was going on,
that she couldn't think clearly and none of those
things existed. By the end of the session she was actually, like I said, she
articulately some very complicated constructs with respect to this
case as well as dealing very effectively with some very powerful
emotions that
are not unusual in dealing with the clinical psychological work and this is
consistent with my understanding of Ms
Dene's skills prior to this disclosure.
I thought that she was a very strong therapist and a very good clinician up to
and it was nothing that went on around this case that violated my
view of her in that way.
The distressed being tearful, being very upset by what went on in a case
does not mean that someone has some kind of pathological
condition like PTSD
where they are incompetent to continue with the case. It's very distress to me
to hear people comment and characterise
in that way and it was certainly
inconsistent with the facts that were available to all of the witnesses about
how she felt with
the situation so, for example, if she was so highly avoidant
and disassociated her behaviour in going back to the session with me
meeting with me for supervision that wouldn't make any sense at all. The fact
that she called me the next day, that's not
an avoidant response. The fact that
she was able to talk clearly about things and behave as a responsible therapist
is not consistent
with PTSD at all and all of those facts were ignored by the
experts looking at this case in hindsight.
to his decision to allow Ms Dene to
Ms Dene had a strong therapeutic relationship with this client
and I think part of her distress was her sense that her trust in this
been violated because of that initial reaction. One of the things that I pay
attention to in supervision are countertransference
issues, we already there
some attachment already between Mr A and Ms Dene which is expected and I can
talk about how this case was
conceptualised in general but we needed to think
the things that was noted in the testimony was that someone believed that Ms
Dene was actually experiencing PTSD at that point.
I found that to be a
dangerously inaccurate conceptualisation of what went on and it is one of the
things that I paid attention to.
Anyway, the other content that was in our discussions initially is we
looked at the pros and cons and I noted Ms Dene referred to
the fact that I
thought that this might be a perfect case for her training case for her and
it's a difficult decision to make
because you want to find cases that evoke
these responses in interns because it gives them the opportunity to work through
these unconscious processes and I think at an intellectual level Ms Dene
had done a lot of work to deal with her history. That's
one of the things that
I knew prior to that case and this suggests that there were some things that
were still unresolved and you
don't know those things until the person gets
exposed to those cases and, in my experience and in the literature, it suggests
you don't get to see those things in interns unless they have the
opportunity to do long term therapy because in short term therapy
the person can
do things to cope with reactions or you just don't deal as deeply with clients
and you don't have to deal with transference
and countertransference issues in
the same way in short term therapy.
Those are the things that I was thinking about as to kind of look at her
level of distress and whether there was still evidence of
competency and
capacity to deal with the case, talk about the pros and cons of it continuing.
Obviously if she was so distressed
that she didn't want to continue that was an
opportunity for her to bow out of that at that point and I would have been fully
if that was her choice. I did obviously mention that there were
benefits for her to continue but they were not in isolation. I
certainly didn't
put pressure on her to continue and I felt like we had a professional
relationship, supervisory relationship, where
she felt able to talk about
whatever she wanted to talk about in supervision with me and we had had some
complicated some discussion
previously about things of a personal nature and
things that were going on for her in the university that required her to have
courage to talk about things that were not necessarily flattering and that
didn't necessarily put her in a positive light and she
had always, I thought,
felt comfortable talking to me about those kinds of issues.
I certainly would not have held it against her if she decided to not
continue in the case but on the level I felt like this was a
case that was right
in the area where it wasn't so overpowering that she wasn't able to think
clearly about things but it certainly
was pushing her buttons. It was certainly
something where even in her own discussion of it was causing an overreaction to
in response to this disclosure even before we fully examined what the
content of the disclosure was. The other side of it is that,
if there was and
again this was an adjustment reaction adjustment disorder case. This is a
person that we conceptualised the
case as an adjustment disorder with mixed
emotional features and behavioural issues. That's the kind of case it
This was not a hardcore paedophile and one of the things that again is
very distressing to me is all of the people who have been talking
case and what I should have done in this case refer to, what do you do for
people who in offenders' programs, what are
these people likely to do; people
who are identified sex offenders, identified paedophiles who are trying to
justify getting of prison
or something like that, or to keep from getting into
prison. They weren't conceptualised in this case as a hardcore sociopathic
paedophile and my decision about allowing Ms Dene to continue was based on the
fact that this was conceptualised as an adjustment
reaction where one of the
features of his presentation is that he was struggling with how to be a parent
to daughters.
was nothing in Ms Dene’s outward appearance or her work that indicated
that she could not continue with the therapy of
Mr A. At the conclusion of that
meeting between Dr Donnelly and Ms Dene, Ms Dene was given the opportunity to
consider whether or
not she wished to continue treating Mr A. She took up that
opportunity.
Ms Dene’s inability to recollect much of what occurred in the supervision
session between her and Dr Donnelly on 21 October
2003, the Tribunal must, given
there is no other evidence of the event, and unless it makes a finding that Dr
Donnelly is being untruthful
in Dr Donnelly’s submission, the Tribunal must take that evidence as being
the reason for and surrounding his decision
“not to remove” Ms Dene
from the treatment of Mr A, as was strenuously suggested by Dr Banks as being
the only alternative.
light of the foregoing, Dr Donnelly submits that the Tribunal should find as
(a) Mr A did
not make the disclosure as is contended for by the HCCC at paragraph 21 of its
submissions;
disclosure made by Mr A to Ms Dene was to the effect set out in Part C
(c) In light of
that disclosure, and in the surrounding circumstances of the case, Dr Donnelly
properly considered whether there were
current concerns for the safety, welfare
and well-being of Mr A’s daughters;
Donnelly’s failure to report did not constitute a contravention of the
Child and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
or any other
professional obligation; and
(e) Dr Donnelly
appreciated and properly assessed the risks to Mr A’s children.
Dr Donnelly’s submission, based on the evidence in these proceedings, and
properly applying the
test, the Tribunal will not be
comfortably satisfied that this particular of the Complaint has been
established.
Paragraph 2
allegation against Dr Donnelly in this respect is that in or around November
2003, upon the occasion of making the referral to
Dr Brechman-Toussaint, Dr
Donnelly failed:
(a) to provide
all relevant information to Dr Brechman-Toussaint in relation to the risk of
harm to Miss B and Miss C;
(b) adequately
to reconsider the question of whether or not Miss B and Miss C were at risk;
(c) to make a
referral to DoCS.
bulk the HCCC’s submissions in relation to this particular of the
Complaints are based upon the opinions of Dr Banks as
expressed in his Reports.
For the reasons set out in Part D above, Dr Donnelly submits that the Tribunal
should give little weight
to those opinions.
HCCC has not further particularised what is meant by the “relevant
information” in the Complaints. Nor, significantly,
does the HCCC do so
in its written submissions. All that the HCCC says in its submission is that it
clear from the evidence that salient details were omitted in the
briefing to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint
is an entirely unsatisfactory position in the circumstances and nature of
proceedings such as these. Dr Donnelly is left to
guess as to the specific
nature of the allegations made against him.
best that can be done in these circumstances is to consider what information Dr
Brechman-Toussaint alleges she was not told by
Dr Donnelly. In her letter to the
HCCC dated 19 June
Brechman-Toussaint says:
Neither at the time of my involvement nor subsequently
was I informed that
had been the victim of sexual abuse. Rather
both at the time of my involvement, and as recently as March this year, Dr
stated to me that
had not been abused by her
“Thus contrary to Mr Tolliday’s belief, I was not aware that
had been abused by her father when I agreed with Dr
Donnelly’s request to provide
and her sister with brief
counselling.”
“However, after reading the complaint submitted by Mr Tolliday, it
would seem there is clear evidence that Dr Donnelly has not
been honest with me
either when he involved me in this case or subsequently. Needless to say I am
both disturbed and appalled to
read the evidence presented by Mr Tolliday. This
evidence indicates that according to file notes, Dr Donnelly was indeed aware
had been the victim of substantial long-term abuse by her
father, prior to his request that I become involved in the case. In fact
would seem that not only did Dr Donnelly fail to report this matter to DOCS but,
according to Mr A, Dr Donnelly agreed to collude
with his client to conceal the
disclosure of abuse. Consistent with this collusion it would seem that Dr
Donnelly then minimised
the information he held about Mr A and did not disclose
the true nature of the case when he asked another professional to provide
services which augmented the case management approach he had chosen to
Dr Donnelly’s submission, it is apparent from the above that Dr
Brechman-Toussaint believed that:
(a) Dr Donnelly
had information regarding the sexual abuse of Miss B by Mr A, in addition to
other information contained in the Cedar
Cottage, NSW Police file and clinical
notes prepared by Ms Dene;
(b) Dr Donnelly
had that information at the time that he briefed her in November 2003;
(c) Dr Donnelly
withheld that information from her; and
information was relevant to Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s treatment of Mr
A’s children.
cross-examination, Dr Brechman-Toussaint confirmed that this was her
the extent that the Tribunal has regard or gives
weight to the
opinions of Dr Banks on this aspect, it is noted that his opinions in a large
part are based on what he distilled from
Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s
correspondence.
is a significant dispute between the evidence of Ms Dene and Dr
one hand as to what they said to Dr Brechman-Toussaint in the briefing, and Dr
Brechman-Toussaint’s purported file note
of that discussion. It is also
pertinent to note that Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s file note is undated where
Dr Brechman-Toussaint’s
other file notes on the issue are
Donnelly’s submission, the Tribunal should seriously doubt whether the
file note was made contemporaneously, and therefore
the ability for it to stand
as corroborative evidence of the briefing session.
any event, the Tribunal has the sworn testimony of both Dr Donnelly and Ms Dene.
In that, they both gave consistent evidence that
they told Dr Brechman-Toussaint
what Mr A had told them. Under intense cross-examination by the HCCC, Ms Dene
Q. As regards the behaviour or feelings of Mr A towards Miss B,
what is your recollection of Dr Donnelly telling Dr Brechman Toussaint
attendance?
A. I recollect him telling her what I had told him, that Mr A, and I'm
not I can't say this is precise language, so please don't
then say use those
words. It's not precise that he'd given his daughter a bedtime massage, maybe
once a week over the last couple
of years, and at some of those times his hands
had traversed the pubic area.
Q. That's just not true, is it? You didn't ever tell Dr Brechman
Toussaint that these massages included the pubic area, did you?
A. I didn't; Dr Donnelly did. I lived it. You weren't there.
Q. And as regards Mr A's intention, desire or feeling, what was said by
Dr Donnelly to Dr Brechman Toussaint as regards that?
A. He did not say that Mr A was trying to engineer opportunities for
physical contact with his daughter. Mr A never told me that.
That was what I
believe is that when Dr Brechman Toussaint has read my file, she has
misinterpreted my imprecise language, and she
has fabricated information that
she was not told. She was not told that. She was not told that he had
inappropriate sexual thoughts
and feelings about any child.
Q. She was told there was inappropriate touch; "yes" or "no"?
Q. She was told that there had been inappropriate physical feeling; "yes"
A. That language just I don't understand that language, what you
Q. Was she told there was inappropriate desires from Mr A towards Miss
A. To me you're confusing what I'm saying. I'm saying that what I was
talking to him about was not putting himself, being so careful
with any physical
interaction he'd had he had with her, so that he was setting the boundaries
really clearly so there was no opportunity
for any mistaken anything, so that
he's got really respectful clear touch. So regardless of what he intended or
didn't intend, that
she her body is being respected any time he's anywhere
Dene gave further oral evidence as
Q. So in the 21 October session he said that he'd massaged his
daughter, he said that his hand had gone over the pubic area of his
daughter and
by his body language you appreciated that he was quite distressed by having
undertaken that conduct with his daughter?
Q. Was there anything else disclosed by Mr A during that session that
contributed to you seeking some assistance on mandatory reporting
guidelines?
Q. They are the aspects of it?
Q. That he said he had massaged, that he said that his hand moved over
the pubic region of the child and that he was extremely distressed
Q. And when you sought assistance from Dr Brechman Toussaint did you give
her those elements?
A. No, not then.
Q. When you saw Dr Donnelly on 21 October 2003 did you relate those
elements to him?
A. Yes, I did and Dr Donnelly related those to Dr Brechman Toussaint when
he called her in for the meeting.
Donnelly gave oral evidence as to the briefing to Dr Brechman-Toussaint as
The one where Ms Dene and I were meeting and Dr Brechman
Toussaint came down the hall and joined us for a little while and we talked
initially I think she was reluctant to take on more clinical
responsibility and
so I framed the case. I told her what we knew about the case. I told her about
the massage issue and I think
in one of her reports she says that she actually
questioned me about it to find out whether or not further assessment was
Later on she said she didn't hear anything about the massage issue. She
had some I didn't have any details at that time. I didn't
information about this idea of the dad orchestrating opportunities to touch the
children. I didn't have any information
kind of thing was never expressed to me and I don't think it was expressed to Ms
believe she probably got that from talking to Mr A about the behaviour.
She didn't report that information back to me. The first
time I heard that
information was when I looked at some of the reports from associated with this
tribunal but the information that
I provided to her was the information I got
from talking to Mr A and from the report from Ms Dene and I tried to put it in
of mum being sick and him coping with lots of other kind of things and I
really needed to hand it off. I didn't want to bias her
opinion at all.
set out above in paragraph 94 above, Ms Dene’s evidence to the Tribunal is
that she informed Dr Donnelly what she had been
told by Mr A on 21 October 2003.
Dr Donnelly
told Dr Brechman-Toussaint about the massage (which Dr Brechman-Toussaint
denies). Ms Dene was also present when Dr Donnelly
briefed Dr Brechman-Toussaint
regarding Mr A’s disclosure. Ms Dene’s evidence of that was as
Q. Your evidence earlier today is that whatever Mr A said to
you on 21 October 2003, you disclosed that information to Dr Donnelly?
Q. And Dr Donnelly in turn, in your presence, disclosed that information
to Dr Brechman Toussaint?
Q. And there are a number of matters identified in Dr Brechman
Toussaint's discharge summary that were never said by Dr Donnelly;
Q. And that's because they were never said to you?
Q. And therefore you never said them to Dr Donnelly?
A. That's right.
Ms Dene gave evidence
Q. You would agree with me that in the meetings when it was one
or two that you and Dr Donnelly had with Dr Brechman Toussaint, Dr
didn't leave anything out that you had told him?
Q. Because if he had, you would have corrected him, wouldn't you?
A. Yes, I would have thought so, or I would have said that if I didn't
correct him in front of Dr Brechman Toussaint, I imagine I
would have corrected
him later if I didn't have the confidence to do it then.
Q. But sitting here today, it's the best of your recollection that Dr
Donnelly left nothing out in that briefing with Dr Brechman-Toussaint?
A. As best as I recall.
light of the above evidence, it is submitted that the Tribunal should find the
following as regards the briefing by Dr Donnelly
to Dr Brechman-Toussaint in or
around November 2003:
“relevant information” that Dr Donnelly purportedly failed to
provide to Dr Brechman-Toussaint was information
contained in the Cedar Cottage
Report, NSW Police Files and the clinical notes written by Ms Dene;
(b) information
that Dr Donnelly had regarding the disclosure by Mr A was provided to him by Ms
(c) Dr Donnelly
gave Dr Brechman-Toussaint
all information
that he had been provided with
by Ms Dene in his briefing to her (Dr Brechman-Toussaint).
Accordingly,
in Dr Donnelly’s submission, the Tribunal will not and should not be
comfortably satisfied on the state of the
evidence that this particular of the
Complaints has been made out.
Paragraph 3
particulars allege that Dr Donnelly “encouraged and/or permitted” Ms
Dene to involve Miss B in the therapeutic process
on 15 September 2004:
(a) beyond her
competence;
(b) inappropriate
in the circumstances;
(c) without any
steps being taken to assess or to ensure Miss B’s welfare in relation to
this process.
is vitally important that the Tribunal understands and appreciates the
allegation in this respect. The particulars of this Complaint
that Dr Donnelly was aware of Ms Dene’s desire to involve Miss
B in a session with Mr A.
Donnelly does not dispute that he was
of Ms Dene’s desire to
involve Miss B in a therapeutic session. However, in Dr Donnelly’s
submission, that falls far
short of the allegation that he “encouraged or
permitted” Ms Dene to involve Miss B in the manner in which she did. Dr
Donnelly has consistently disavowed any knowledge that Ms Dene proposed to
undertake the session on 15 September 2004 without proper
steps being taken to
ensure Miss B’s welfare.
is one matter in which the Tribunal will have to come to a finding as to whose
version of the events between Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly
is to be preferred.
Donnelly’s evidence was that he did have discussions with Ms Dene about
the possibility of a joint session. Those discussions
were brief and general
counselling session. However, as
the treatment of the children was provided by
Dr Brechman-Toussaint, Dr Donnelly would want Dr Brechman-Toussaint to be
Donnelly says there was no discussion on any specific plan, and there was never
an agreement as to how and when the session was
to be conducted. Dr
Donnelly’s evidence is that he was surprised when Ms Dene conducted the
Donnelly’s further evidence is that he told Ms Dene to leave the treatment
of the children to Dr Brechman-Toussaint and
that she, Ms Dene, had to trust Dr
Brechman-Toussaint. Dr Donnelly’s evidence on this issue was not tested or
diminished in
any way under cross-examination.
Dene’s evidence by contrast was confusing and convoluted. On this last
matter, that Ms Dene was to trust Dr Brechman-Toussaint,
Ms Dene agrees with Dr
However, Ms Dene says that Dr Donnelly’s position on this issue changed.
Under cross-examination, Ms Dene gave the following
Q. When did that change?
A. It must have been some time between when she stopped seeing them and I
started preparing Mr A.
Q. Do you recall any conversation you had with Dr Donnelly where he
discussed his change of view with you?
A. The reasons for it?
A. No, he didn't give me any reasons for it.
Q. Can you tell the tribunal when you can recollect that you were first
given that direction to involve
A. I've just told you that, Mr Darams. It was some time. It would have
been probably close to the time when I started preparing
Q. Was a direction given to you in a supervision meeting?
Q. Can you recall what Dr Donnelly said to you?
A. Could I do it.
Q. Sitting here today can you tell the tribunal
A. I can't remember his exact words. I know what he said to me and I
know how I felt when he said it to me.
Q. What did he say to you?
A. I can't remember the exact words but it was me doing it me preparing
Q. What did Dr Donnelly say in relation to Miss B?
A. That I needed to prepare Mr A so that she could just come along. She
didn't have to emotionally care for her father. She could
just receive the
apology. That's why I was working so hard with Mr A to make sure that he didn't
have any emotional neediness.
Q. And after the initial discussion you say you had with Dr Donnelly, how
many other discussions did you have with him in relation
to involving Miss B in
a counselling session with Mr A?
A. I had a number of them because I was taking time to prepare
Q. When you say "him" you mean Mr A?
A. Mr A Yes.
Q. And where did these conversations with Dr Donnelly occur?
A. In supervision sessions.
Q. Can you recall today what Dr Donnelly said to you in those subsequent
A. He would check how Mr A was going, whether he was too stressed with
what was happening with his wife, how his emotional neediness
was going, whether
I felt it was good timing or not.
Q. So you were having general discussions about the treatment of Mr A and
that's what you have just described?
A. No, in relation to when he was ready to do the apology with his
daughter. Mr Darams, I know what happened, I know what he asked
Q. Yes, and I am asking you to tell the tribunal what Dr Donnelly said to
A. I've just told you.
Q. But you can't recall the words of Dr Donnelly.
A. Well, I could make some up to be specific but I'm being more honest by
saying I don't remember the specific words.
evidence that Dr Donnelly encouraged or permitted Ms
Dene to involve Miss B without steps being taken to assess or ensure Miss
welfare. Ms Dene does not say that Dr Donnelly did so. Dr Donnelly
denies that he did. The HCCC in its submissions does not point
to a scintilla of
evidence that supports this particular.
all likelihood, what appears to have occurred is that Ms Dene has made an
independent decision to involve Miss B in the therapy
session. Ms Dene was
clearly dissatisfied with what she believed was a failing in the counselling
provided by Dr
Brechman-Toussaint.
It is relevant to note that at the time that Ms Dene was considering involving
Miss B in the session, she had just completed a practicum
under the supervision
of Dr Brechman-Toussaint in which she had been involved in providing therapy to
a couple and another patient
in which 4 sessions were conducted with that
patient’s family
Accordingly,
in the circumstances, Dr Donnelly submits that the Tribunal will not be
comfortably satisfied to the requisite standard
that he encouraged or permitted
Ms Dene to involve Miss B in the therapeutic process with Mr A in the manner
particularised in the
Paragraph 4
Donnelly conceded in cross-examination that he was not checking Ms Dene’s
clinical notes regularly by October 2003. He also
accepted that if he had looked
at Ms Dene’s notes (or those that were written at the time) he would have
seen that Ms Dene
On his supervision of Ms Dene, Dr Donnelly gave evidence as follows:
Q. How in the process of supervision of Ms Dene can you
effectively supervise Ms Dene without ever reading her clinical notes? How
you do that?
A. I relied on my conversations with her.
Q. But her conversations plainly are completely different to her notes,
as you have been taken, I don't want to retake you. She
is recording things
that are alarming people using phrases like "inappropriate" and "previous
inappropriate desire" and "genital
fondling", using those phrases in her notes,
and you are relying on just face to face discussions. Do you
understand?
A. That's correct.
Q. One look at the notes, one single look at any clinical record where
those phrases appear or Ms Dene's observations appear where
they differ from
your face to face discussions would have alerted you to the fact that the
process of therapy had derailed?A. Or
at the very least the process of Ms
Dene's reporting to me was no longer valid.
Q. That the fact that her reporting to you is no longer valid would be an
indication, if that's an appropriate terminology in the
first place, would be an
indication that she was not performing.
A. Correct.
Q. So how are you effectively supervising Ms Dene in this situation post
the disclosure in October, how are you effectively supervising
her when you are
not reading for anything else?
A. By having face to face discussions with her that in my history with Ms
Dene were actually more informative than her written notes
and were highly
consistent with what was in videotapes and what was in her notes in the
Q. This situation where you have these face to face conversation and
which you based your assessment of her performance you have
no record of any of
those face to face meetings.
A. Correct.
Q. You cannot produce a single document and never have produced a single
document that you can say you based your recollection of
these conversations
A. That's correct.
Q. So when you say, "I thought she was effectively managing this case
based on what she said," that is a recollection of a conversation
of which you
have no record.
A. Correct.
Q. Do you take any responsibility for the situation Ms Dene was
A. I do. I do.
Q. What responsibility do you take now for the situation Ms Dene is
A. I think that at the time I should have stuck with my own model of
supervision.
Q. You didn't do any supervision if you're not reviewing the day to day
or week to week impressions of the therapist treating the
A. Okay. I disagree with that. If you have face to face supervision in
some cases reading the notes can be seen as redundant to
it's another check
that's for sure and I certainly did that early on with other cases, earlier
placements, but on this case, you're
right, I relied and I've admitted that.
That was one of things as she moved through the program and I had what I
believed to be
sufficient evidence that she was managing that part of the role
as an intern.
There many things that she used over time. I wasn't in the room with her
any more either. There were other things that changed over
time but I admit
that was one of the things that, in hindsight, when I was talking before about
being hyper vigilant about the supervision
process I would sit I mean the most
extreme version of that is to sit with the person and to go through frame by
frame a videotape
of every session.
Donnelly has conceded that he should have checked Ms Dene’s clinical notes
more regularly. Dr Donnelly’s explanation
for not doing so was that he had
full confidence in Ms Dene’s ability to write very detailed typed notes.
He was also confident
that what Ms Dene was reporting to him in their regular
supervision session was a reflection of what she was going to put in her
Dene’s evidence was that during the period July 2003-September 2004,
whilst the supervision meetings between her and Dr Donnelly
during were
irregular, and although not recorded in the log, they did in fact take place.
Further, she reported to Dr Donnelly in
these meeting what Mr A was reporting to
her in the therapy
Donnelly’s reasons for his change in supervision method of Ms Dene at the
time was balanced by the following factors:
(a) Ms Dene was
enrolled in the doctoral program at the [Regional University] and was
accordingly a provisionally registered psychologist;
(b) Ms Dene had
already undertaken clinical practicums under the supervision of Dr Donnelly and
Dr Brechman-Toussaint. Each of them
had rated Ms Dene extremely highly in
relation to her various areas of competency, including her note-taking
fact, her assessment was judged as against Master’s degree level
Donnelly was not cavalier in this approach. He moulded his supervision of Ms
Dene based upon his previous experiences in supervising
Brechman-Toussaint agreed in cross-examination that it would be appropriate, and
sensible, for a supervisor to change the
level of supervision of an intern based
upon the skills that the intern had developed in previous practical
Dr Donnelly’s submission, although comment may be necessary about his
failure to review Ms Dene’s clinical notes, the
Tribunal will not be
comfortably satisfied that this alone warrants a finding that the Complaint is
made out based on this particular.
Paragraph 5
only justification in support of this particular is that Dr Donnelly was aware
of Ms Dene’s history of child sex abuse and
that her disclosure to Mr A in
October 2003 made her more vulnerable to
underlying premise of that submission is that Dr Donnelly knew or considered Mr
A to be a paedophile. This is vehemently and
strenuously denied by Dr Donnelly.
Donnelly relies upon the matters submitted above in paragraphs 70-81 in the then
known circumstances of the case in further support
of this particular.
Paragraph 6
Donnelly agrees that he did not make a report to DoCS during the period January
2005-August 2005. Dr Donnelly was not providing
treatment to Mr A after late
November 2004. He was not responsible for the treatment of Mr A during this
Donnelly accepts that he signed the discharge summary. The evidence of Ms Dene
is that the discharge summary was not signed until
June 2005. The discharge
summary also suffers from the same defects as other notes made by Ms Dene and Dr
Donnelly relies upon his
submissions made above regarding the reliance that can
be placed by the Tribunal on Ms Dene’s notes.
Paragraph 7
Donnelly concedes that he did not maintain a clinical record regarding his
provision of treatment to Mr A on 27 October 2003. This
was a joint session,
started by Ms Dene in which Dr Donnelly joined and was thereafter present with
Ms Dene. Dr Donnelly relied upon
Ms Dene to keep records of the therapy sessions
with Mr A. The obligation to keep the records was part of Ms Dene’s
requirements
in the Regional University course. Dr Donnelly was operating under
the assumption that Ms Dene did keep such records. In fact, the
evidence in the
Tribunal hearing is that Ms Dene did in fact prepare a clinical record of this
Banks’ observations that there were no notes kept of that session is
criticism of Dr Donnelly by Dr Banks in this regard must surely be tempered by
the fact that notes of the session were kept,
however not by Dr Donnelly
personally.
the extent that the HCCC purports to rely upon Dr Donnelly’s act in
signing the discharge summary as establishing this particular
Complaints,
is noted that this was not relied upon by the HCCC in its particularisation of
the Complaints. It cannot run that case now in
closing submissions. However, and
without in anyway diminishing his failing in that regard, Dr Donnelly submits
that the discharge
summary suffers from the same defects as the other notes
maintained by Ms Dene.
Paragraph 8
Donnelly relies upon paragraphs 70-72 above on this particular of the
Complaints.
I. Concluding comments on particulars of Complaints
conclusion, Dr Donnelly submits that when the Tribunal comes to consider the
allegation made by the HCCC as to the nature of the
initial disclosure by Mr A
on 21 October 2003, in light of the sworn oral evidence of Ms Dene and that of
Dr Donnelly, it will not
be comfortably satisfied that the allegation has been
made out. Whilst the Tribunal is not required to apply the criminal standard,
is required to follow the test promulgated by Dixon J in the High Court in
. If there is a paradigmatic case for the application of that
principle, this is it.
J. Complaint 1
Dr Donnelly’s submission, whilst it may be appropriate to make some
comment regarding Dr Donnelly’s failure to review
Ms Dene’s clinical
notes more regularly, and his signing of the discharge summary, the HCCC did not
rely upon these matters
as particulars of the Complaints. That was a forensic
decision made by the HCCC. Therefore, if comment was made, those matters could
not found a basis for finding Complaint 1 to have been made out.
Donnelly has conceded that he himself did not maintain clinical notes of his
treatment session with Mr A on 27 October 2003. This
was a joint session in
which both Ms Dene and Dr Donnelly provided therapy to Mr A. Dr Donnelly did not
keep a clinical note as he
was relying upon Ms Dene to do so, and Ms Dene did in
fact do so.
Dene was required as a part of her practical requirements to keep notes of the
therapy sessions which she conducted. As set out
in paragraph 113(b) above, Ms
Dene’s note taking ability was assessed by both Drs Donnelly and
Brechman-Toussaint and it was
determined against a Master’s degree level
Dr Donnelly had been the only participant in the therapy session with Mr A on 27
October 2003, then he accepts that a failure by
him to keep a record of that
clinical session would be conduct “significantly below” the standard
reasonably expected
Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC) v Guilfoyle
[2007] NSWPST 1).
However, and whilst still inviting some criticism by the
Tribunal, in Dr Donnelly’s submission, in the circumstances then known
Dr Donnelly, and Ms Dene, in light of the other matters touched upon in these
submissions including the nature of the initial
disclosure made by Mr A, the
failure by Dr Donnelly to either check Ms Dene’s notes or make his own of
the session of 27 October
2003, it should not invite strong criticism nor should
it be seen to be conduct “significantly below” the requisite
Dr Donnelly’s submission, the HCCC should not find Complaint 1 to be made
out against Dr Donnelly.
K. Complaint Two
Donnelly repeats his submissions regarding those particulars of Complaint One in
respect of Complaint Two.
Dr Donnelly’s submission, even if the Tribunal was to find, contrary to
his submission, that Complaint One is made out on
the ground that he failed to
keep a clinical note of the therapy session with Mr A on 27 October 2003, such
conduct, in all of the
then known circumstances, would not be professional
misconduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or
cancellation
of his registration.
Two should be dismissed.
Donnelly notes that the HCCC has submitted various wide ranging orders
consequent on its assessment and articulation of the case
against Dr Donnelly.
is clear that there are many matters in dispute between Dr Donnelly and the HCCC
factual matters
the subject of these proceedings. Further, both
parties accept that the characterisation of the initial disclosure by Mr A on 21
October 2003 has significant consequences for the Complaints against Dr
light of the above, and given the significant discrepancy between Dr
Donnelly’s position and that of the HCCC on the various
factual matters,
in Dr Donnelly’s submission it is not possible at this time for him to
make detailed submissions on whether
any orders should be made and, if any
orders are appropriate, the scope of those orders.
the Tribunal was to find for Dr Donnelly on the matters he sets out above, in
his submission, the Complaints should be dismissed
and the HCCC ordered to pay
if the Tribunal were to make some findings against him as submitted by the HCCC,
although not all, then the appropriate approach
is for Dr Donnelly (and the HCCC
if necessary) to be granted leave to make further submissions based upon the
Tribunal’s findings
HCCC v DENE & DONNELLY
HCCC SUBMISSIONS IN REPLY RE: DONNELLY
Introduction
HCCC has already served lengthy and detailed submissions in this matter.
the extent that the submissions served on behalf of Dr Donnelly take issue with
those submissions, those matters remain in issue.
It is not proposed in any way
to repeat matters by way of reply.
reply submissions deal only with discrete points upon which it may assist the
Tribunal for the Commission to respond to matters
raised on behalf of Dr
The HCCC’s case
if the disclosure by Mr A to Dr Donnelly, and the information provided by Ms
Dene, was of a lesser nature than the HCCC’s
primary case as set out in
the HCCC’s closing submissions, it is submitted that the complaint is
proved and that the protective
orders should be as set out in those submissions.
It is clear from the evidence that massage behaviour is potentially abusive, and
in the present case the circumstances of that behaviour including the pubic
region and being felt to be somewhat taboo (17/8/09 at
77.35-41) would have been
sufficient to give rise to the professional requirements upon Dr Donnelly as set
out in the HCCC’s
closing submissions.
it would be open to the Tribunal to find that Dr Donnelly has minimised the full
extent of the initial and subsequent disclosures,
albeit without any awareness
that he was doing so. It would equally be open to the Tribunal to find that his
recollection was incomplete.
Reliance upon the Code
has been clear to Dr Donnelly and his representatives that he is subject to the
Code and that the Code, without any particularisation
by reference to individual
paragraphs, is relied upon in these proceedings. It was made clear to Mr Darams
that if he sought to do
so he could recall witnesses to ameliorate any
perception of unfairness on his part. He undertook to consider that, but chose
to recall any witness (18/6/09 98:21-45). Further, the whole of the code may
be relevant in determining whether or not the particularised
breach as set out
in the relevant subparagraph of the complaint is made
Reliability of the notes
context for the Tribunal’s consideration of the reliability of the
clinical notes, as reported by Ms Dene, includes:
likelihood that the more contemporaneous the record the more likely that it
would be accurate; and
discrepancies such as those between the current and historical characterisation
of the disclosure are not credibly explicable
on the basis of
“inaccuracy”, or “appalling” note taking as contended by
Information to Dr Brechman-Toussaint
behalf of Dr Donnelly it is suggested that the nature of the relevant
information which it is alleged that Dr Donnelly should have
provided to Dr
Brechman-Toussaint is unclear ([87]). That suggestion is rejected.
Brechman-Toussaint gave evidence and the Tribunal has her detailed notes. Dr
Donnelly is well aware of the statement by Dr Brechman-Toussaint
that she was
unaware that the touching involved the pubic region. At its lowest, this
particular relates to that information, and
to the information that Mr A felt
that he had broken a taboo in massaging Miss B. Beyond this, the extent of the
failure to disclose
relevant information will depend upon the Tribunal’s
findings as to Dr Donnelly’s knowledge as at this time. There is
unfairness in the particular being framed in that way, and Dr Donnelly has at
all times been well aware of the nature of the complaint
against him in this
Record Keeping
complaint against Dr Donnelly relies upon his failures in keeping clinical
records. Dr Donnelly was cross-examined as to the discharge
summary. There is no
unfairness in relying upon this as an instance of a failure in record keeping
within the particulars of the
Transcript 19/06,
HCCC vol 2/2 at
Banks’ evidence in response to a question from Dr Tong, Transcript 17/06
accepted that at all times up until June 2005, when the November 2004 Code was
sent to all Registered Psychologists,
the relevant Code of Professional
Conduct (the Code) of the NSW Psychologists Registration Board (the Board) was
that dated 3 November
As accepted
by Ms Boland, Transcript 18/06,
accepted by Ms Boland, Transcript 18/06,
responding to questions from Dr Tong, Transcript 17/07 at
vol 2/1 at p.7.
Transcript 17/08,
November 2005, HCCC vol 2/1 at
February 2004, HCCC vol 2/1 at
2006, HCCC vol 2/1 at
2/1 at p.29.
HCCC vol 2/1 at
2/1 at p.17.
HCCC vol 2/3 at pp.19 &
19/06, 3:1-17.
Transcript 16/06,
vol 1/17.6 and the discharge summary at
Transcript 18/06,
Transcript 19/06
Transcript 18/06, 109:10-50 & 19/06,
Transcript 19/06,
Report of Dr Banks, 8 June 2007 HCCC vol 1/10(b) at
Transcript 18/06,
Transcript 18/06,
Transcript 18/06,
Transcript 18/06 68:22 –
Transcript 19/06,
vol 2/1 at p.21 and Transcript 19/06,
out in the Australian Psychological Society Guidelines HCCC vol 3//2 at
Transcript 19/06, 27:42-4 & HCCC vol
Dr Banks, 8 June 2007, HCCC vol 1/10(b) at
of Dr Banks, 8 June 2007, HCCC vol 1/10(b) at
Dr Banks, 8 June 2007, HCCC vol 1/10(b) at
Dr Banks, 8 June 2007, HCCC vol 1/10(b) at p.4. See also Transcript 15/06,
Transcript 16/06, 14:17-45 &
Transcript 18/06, 15:33 –
Transcript 18/06, 16:40 –
Transcript 18/06,
Transcript 19/06,
Transcript 19/06, 41:43 –
Boland accepted that Ms Dene’s risk assessment was flawed and that she
should have stopped seeing Mr A altogether: Transcript
18/06, 51:5 –
Transcript, 17/08
Transcript 19/06,
2/1 at p.121.
Transcript 18/06,
Transcript 18/06, 27:37 –
of Dr Banks, 8 June 2007, HCCC vol 1/10(b) at
of Dr Banks, 8 June 2007, HCCC vol 1/10(b) at
Boland accepted this: Transcript 18/06,
Transcript 18/06, 23:47 –
evidence in response to a question from the Chairperson Transcript 17/06,
Transcript 19/06,
Transcript 17/08,
Report of Dr Banks, 11 June 2009, HCCC vol 1/10(c) at
Transcript 18/06, 54:30 –
Transcript 17/08,
Transcript 17/08,
2/1 at pp.5-9.
Transcript 18/06,
of Dr Banks, 11 June 2009, HCCC vol 1/10(c) at
Boland, Transcript 18/06,
101:20-102:45.
19/06, 5:21.
Clyne v. NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
Bar Association v. Meakes
[2006] NSWCA 340
Transcript 18/06, 67:42 –
Transcript 18/06,
Law Society of NSW v. Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Letter dated 9 May 2006 from Dale Tolliday to the NSW HCCC, HCCC Vol
from Rebecca Morrison to NSW HCCC: HCCC Vol
accepted that at all times up until [date when sent around as per judgment of
HCCC] the relevant Code of Professional Conduct
(the Code) of the NSW
Psychologists Registration Board (the Board) was that dated 3 November
qns from Dr Tong, 17/07 at
Donelly R4 at
1/6 at p.6.
HCCC vol 1/4 at
vol 1/15.5 &
Donnelly R4 at 6 &
56:33, see also Dr Brechman Toussaint at 16/06,
vol 1, 15.5 & 15.6, Dene/Donnelly Discharge Summary HCCC vol 2,
16/06, 29:25 &
HCCC vol 2, p
vol 1 4/3 &
HCCC vol 1 at 6/1. See also HCCC vol 1
Bank’s evidence in response to a question from the Chairperson: 17/06,
As set out in the Australian Psychological Society Guidelines HCCC vol 3//2 at
p.2. See also Banks, 15/06,
HCCC vol 3/2 at
Donnelly R4 at
of Dr Banks 8 June 2007, HCCC vol 1/9(b) at
Banks’ evidence, 15/06, 61:23-28 &
Report of Dr Banks 8 June 2007, HCCC vol 1/9(b) at
HCCC Vol 1/6 at
Banks Report 9 June 2007 HCCC Vol 1/9(b) at
Banks evidence in response to a question from the Chairperson 17/06,
HCCC vol 2 at p.55.
Banks report 8 June 2007, HCCC vol 1/9(b) at
report 8 June 2007, HCCC vol 1/9(b) at
out by Dr Donnelly in his letter dated June 16 2006 to the HCCC: HCCC vol 1/6 at
of Dr Banks June 11 2009, HCCC vol 1/9(c) at
of Dr Banks June 8 2007 HCCC vol 1/9(b) at
Donnelly described it in his letter dated 16 June 2006 to the HCCC: HCCC vol
Clyne v. NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
NSW Bar Association v. Meakes
[2006] NSWCA 340
Report of Dr Banks 8 June 2007: HCCC vol 1/9(b) at
of Dr Banks 8 June 2007: HCCC vol 1/9(b) at
Society of NSW v. Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Letter dated 9 May 2006 from Dale Tolliday to the NSW HCCC, HCCC Vol
Complaint from Rebecca Morrison to NSW HCCC: HCCC Vol
HCCC submissions at para
submissions at para
Statement EX RA at para
example see 19/06/09 TR32.16-27; TR44.21-29 and
See HCCC submissions at paras [21], [24] and [26].
submissions at para
HCCC submissions at para
Complaints One and Two, paragraph
15/06/09 TR16.24-35;
18/06/09 TR97.19-23;
TR97.46-50.
HCCC Submissions at para
Submissions at para
19/06/09 TR32.27; TR37.23;
TR31.45-32.34
See 19/06/09 TR11.28-31; TR12.16-19; TR35.36-40; TR36.27-29;
TR26.16-27.04
HCCC. Vol 1, Tab 6, p6; Vol 1, Tab 8, paras [1] and
Submissions at para
TR31.10-34.05
See also 19/06/09
TR49.46-50.26
TR56.43-57.40
TR29.40-49.
TR29.44-30.31
19/06/09 TF36.27-29; 17/08/09 TR40.41-50;
See for example HCCC Vol 1, Tab 9(a) documents provided to Dr Banks under cover
of letter dated 9 May 2009; Peer Review Report dated
8 June 2007, HCCC Vol 1,
Tab 9(b) at pages 3, 4, 12, 14,
HCCC Submissions at
Vol 1, Tab 8, page
of the Special Commission of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in NSW (The
Wood Inquiry)
at para 6.67
http://www.dpc.nsw.gov.au/publications/news/stories/?a=33796
17/08/09 TR27.28-34; TR56.35-45; TR57.21-31;
17/08/09 TR27.25-34;
TR10.39-11.30
HCCC submissions at paras
HCCC submissions at para
Submissions at para
Submissions at para
TR41.49-42.43
HCCC Submissions at para
TR84.22-85.05
Noting the Tribunal’s ruling that it would not take into account in its
deliberations of the Complaints made against Dr Donnelly
the evidence of Ms
Boland 19/06/09 TR2.35-40;
TR15.48-16.47
TR89.43-91.30
TR27.23-28.37
17/08/09 TR27.36-46;
TR28.39-29.42
HCCC Submissions at para
Vol 1, Tab 14 at page
TR56.23-57.21
HCCC Vol 1, Tab 14, page
TR59.31-60.15
TR18.27-19.04
TR36.47-37.16
17/08/09 TR56.47-50-although Dr Donnelly disputes that he was told
“massaging the pubic region”. The reference to “massage”
being used by Mr A being the salient part of this
See paragraphs 105-112 of written statement dated 11 June 2009; HCCC Vol 1, Tab
8, paragraph 19.
TR9.19-23; Letter dated 22 June 2006 HCCC Vol 1, Tab 6, paragraph
TR9.29-30.45
Letter from Ms Dene dated 23 August 2006, HCCC Vol 1, Tab 7, page
TR54.48-55.01
TR2.48-3.37
16/06/09 TR52.16-20; EX
TR52.31-53.03
HCCC submissions at para
documents vol 2,
Banks’ Report dated 11 June 2009,
Submissions at para
Vol 2 p119.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.87 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter