URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2018/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Murray [2018] NSWMHRT 1; (26 June 2018)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO JONES AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
TRIBUNAL ON
19 JANUARY 2017
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2018] NSWMHRT 1
s 46(1) Review of forensic patient
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Judge Richard Cogswell SC
Dr Raphael Chan
Psychiatrist
Ms Diana Bell
Other Member
DATE OF HEARING:
24 April 2018
Hearing Room 2, MHRT
APPLICATION:
Unconditional release
1. Having reviewed Mr Murray on 24 April 2018 pursuant to
sections 46
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
, the Tribunal orders
that Mr Murray
be unconditionally released.
His Honour Judge Richard Cogswell
Dated this day
1. This is the 32
review of Mr Murray
who is currently released to the care of [X Community Mental Health Service] on
an order of the Tribunal made
in 2017. Mr Murray’s treating team is
seeking unconditional release at this review.
2. In 2000 the District Court found Mr Murray not guilty by reason of mental
illness of several charges of robbery armed with an offensive
weapon, robbery
armed with a dangerous weapon and intent to commit robbery armed with an
offensive weapon. Mr Murray was ordered
to be detained. In reaching its decision
in this matter, the Tribunal has had regard to, and accepts as accurate, this
information which is maintained by the Tribunal’s
TRIBUNAL REQUIREMENTS
3. This is a review pursuant to
section 46(1)
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(“the Act”). Under
Tribunal is required to review the case of each forensic patient every six
months. On such a review the Tribunal may make orders
as to the patient’s
continued detention, care or treatment or the patient’s release.
4. The Act has special evidentiary requirements in relation to leave or
release which must be satisfied before the Tribunal can grant
leave or release.
In view of this, the Tribunal requires notice of applications for leave or
release to ensure that the necessary
evidence is available. This process also
enables the Tribunal to provide notice of such applications to the Minister for
the Attorney General, and any registered victims who are entitled to
make submissions concerning any proposed leave or release. A
notice was provided
to the Tribunal prior to this review for an application for unconditional
5. The Tribunal must be satisfied pursuant to section 43 of the Act
(a) the safety of the patient or any member of the public will not be
seriously endangered by the patient’s release, and
(b) other care of a less restrictive kind, that is consistent with safe
and effective care, is appropriate and reasonably available
to the patient or
that the patient does not require care.
6. Without limiting any other matters the Tribunal may consider, the Tribunal
must consider the principles set out in section 40 of
the Act and
Mental Health Act 2007
as well as the following matters under
when determining what order to make:
(a) whether the person is suffering from a mental illness or other mental
(b) whether there are reasonable grounds for believing that care,
treatment or control of the person is necessary for the person’s
protection from serious harm or the protection of others from serious
(c) the continuing condition of the person, including any likely
deterioration in the person’s condition, and the likely effects
such deterioration;
(d) in the case of a proposed release, a report by a forensic psychiatrist
or other person of a class prescribed by the regulations,
who is not currently
involved in treating the person, as to the condition of the person and whether
the safety of the person or any
member of the public will be seriously
endangered by the person’s release, and
(e) in the case of the proposed release of a forensic patient subject to a
limiting term, whether or not the patient has spent sufficient
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
7. The Tribunal considered the documents listed in the Forensic Patient
Exhibit List dated 24 April 2018.
8. Mr Murray attended the hearing and was represented by Ms Emma Bathurst
Counsel, Ms Kathryn Boyd, Solicitor and Ms Jennifer Darmody,
Also in attendance were:
telephone), Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist;
telephone), Clinical Nurse Consultant;
telephone), Consultant Psychiatrist;
Lewer, Counsel for the Minister for Mental Health;
Buchan, Crown Solicitor’s Office for the Minister for Mental Health;
Psychologist and Case Manager from Community Mental Health Service;
Mother, and
Stepfather.
PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES
Notice of Intent
9. There is a Notice of Intent signed by Ms Kathryn Boyd, Mr Murray’s
solicitor. It is dated 27 March 2018 and seeks unconditional
release for Mr
10. There is a joint report from Dr C, Consultant Psychiatrist and Clinical
Director of Mental Health Drug and Alcohol at Y Hospital
and Dr D, Psychologist
and Care Coordinator at X Community Mental Health Service. The report is dated
19 March 2018.
11. They refer to diagnoses on Mr Murray’s file which include
Antisocial Personality Disorder, Severe Polysubstance Use Disorder
(complicated
by atypical seizure symptoms), Substance Induced Psychotic Disorder (in
remission) and Major Neurocognitive Disorder
due to multiple aetiologies
(traumatic brain injury). They refer to Mr Murray’s conditional discharge
into the community on
4 December 2017 and his twice daily visits from the X
Community Mental Health Services Outreach Team. They note one Emergency
presentation two days after his release followed by some days as an
inpatient at Y Hospital. They refer to the
“context of being found by
police displaying confused and agitated behaviours in a school playground”
with fluctuations in consciousness. They believed the behaviour “
related to the ingestion of unknown substance of abuse”
although that
is denied by Mr Murray.
12. Since then, however, Mr Murray
“has shown good
engagement”
with the community health service and treating
psychiatrist. They do, however, note that
“the motivation for his
attendance and encouragement has been to demonstrate compliance to the Tribunal
rather than a genuine
desire to engage or a view that this engagement in any way
benefits his health or wellbeing.”
His drug screens are negative but
might not detect atypical synthetic substances of
” They doubt his attendance at Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. He
engaged with X Drug and Alcohol Service “
and requested that a
supportive report be written to the Tribunal.”
Again, they say that
the sole motivation for him to have had the assessment was to secure a
letter of support for an unconditional discharge
.” Mr Murray
acknowledged as much as well, by reference to Alcoholics Anonymous attendance.
13. The opinion of the X Community Mental Health Service is that
presents with a long-term significant risk of relapse into
substance use.
” This is “
increased risk for serious medical episodes (seizures) and potential for loss of
He has recently exited the HASI support program “
currently has minimal community based supports
.” As a voluntary
patient, the team thinks that
“he would cease all contact with his
support services, including
[X Outreach Team]
There would
therefore be no active follow-up or monitoring of his wellbeing and substance
use and risk.
14. On the other hand
“there has not been any level of community
based support identified that could suitably mitigate
[patient’s]
substance use.”
He is seen twice a day and even in a high secure
facility his substance use could not be managed effectively. Abstinence from
“must be managed independently
“would only truly be effective if he shows the willingness to engage
voluntarily”.
While under the care of X Community Mental Health
Service, “[patient]
has demonstrated no features of a psychotic illness
or major mood disorder outside the context of substance use
15. The treating team supports the unconditional release application despite
concerns regarding the ongoing risk in relation to substance use and
the potential for medical episodes or death
”. The grounds of support
that he does not present with symptoms of an enduring mental
The treating team’s opinion is that
“[patient’s]
problematic behaviours are related to his poor
insight and impulsive nature, this in turn leads to his increased risk of use of
substances,
medical episodes and high risk of mortality
.” They note
the reference in the Tribunal’s last reasons to the behaviour of concern
related to a condition acquired since the index
16. There is a report from Dr E, Consultant Psychiatrist. It is dated 10
April 2018. It seems that Dr E was qualified for an opinion
rather than being a treating psychiatrist. He interviewed Mr Murray in his
rooms on 26 March 2018. He noted the context
his desire for
unconditional release
17. Dr E notes that Mr Murray “
said he has not used illicit
drugs since
[the index event]
but has used phenobarb which he got online
to help sedate him.
” Dr E noted the traumatic brain injury from the
2011 car accident and
“the key deficits ... around frontal lobe injury
which have led to marked impulsivity, poor judgment and a degree of mood
dysregulation.”
He noted the multiple diagnoses from Dr F’s
reports. He notes
“from the correspondence that
not satisfy the criteria for a mood or psychotic disorder
“key deficit is related to the brain injury leading to impulsivity
and poor judgment.”
This does not reach the
threshold of a mental illness in the legal or medical definition.”
18. He expressed the opinion that “[patient]
does clearly suffer a
traumatic brain injury associated with frontal lobe deficits which are primarily
related to poor impulse control,
worsened further by use of prescription
insight around the broad significance of this
injury remains mixed, but he does display insight into the reasons for his
treatment and has a clear desire to cooperate with suggested
treatments.”
“satisfies the criteria for
polysubstance abuse
” but psychiatrically “
he does not display
any signs of a clear mood or psychotic illness
.” Mr Murray
does not in my opinion pose a threat either to himself or
retains some significant vulnerabilities as a
result of his traumatic brain injury,”
these do not meet
the test in the mental health legislation for someone requiring an ongoing
restrictive treatment order to avoid
harm to themselves or others.
E says he is “
in agreement with the treating team that an unconditional
release is appropriate.
” He notes Mr Murray’s agreement to
cooperate but that his “
insight with regards to the impact of his
traumatic brain injury remains mixed and he requires ongoing disability
19. There is a report from Mr Murray’s treating neurologist, Dr G. It
is dated 16 April 2018. Dr G thought that Mr Murray’s
... probably were not epileptic, rather being an unusual reaction to stimulant
drugs taken for ADHD
”. The EEG “
single sharp wave
probably related to an injury incurred to his brain in a car
anti-epilepsy drugs that we tried did not
prevent his attacks which always included deep unconsciousness but sometimes
included violent
struggling as he came out of the attack.”
the last attack was around 23 May 2017 and that Mr Murray “
has remained
since then on Lamotrigine 20 mgs daily”.
Dr G does not want to
change that medication
“which is his only drug and which suits him
quite well.”
The examination was normal and Dr G’s opinion from
“the neurological point of view”
is that Mr Murray
is doing well and doesn’t need more supervision, thinking here
of yearly visits to myself, than anyone else with well controlled
episodes as he
Mr Murray is “
quite capable of independent living from
the neurological point of view
20. There is a note from a Community Services Worker with HASI. It is dated 9
March 2018. She has been working with Mr Murray since
December last year and he
exited from their service on 7 March 2018
[patient’s]
developed independence and lack of need for our
” She noted during the months of supervision that
has been independent, mostly relying on the social aspect of
the HASI program, interacting with us out of courtesy in his attempts
support could be given.”
displayed adequate living skills
to maintain his tenancy and independence in the community during the past few
. Because of his independence
“in addition to Mr
Murray’s own insistence,
has been exited from our
service, due not fulfilling the requirements of need by HASI.”
Community Services Worker thinks that
will be able to
maintain his tenancy, and the cleanliness of his unit, maintain his social
connections, continue to generate and
pursue his own goals, and live
independently in the community.”
She acknowledged these observations
had been made while
is in a period of
. She is confident he will continue to recover and
21. There is a report from Dr A, Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, and Dr B,
Clinical Nurse Consultant, both with the NSW Community
Forensic Mental Health
Service (CFMHS). It is dated 26 March 2018. They noted the file references to
some over familiarity and deodorant
spray odour in Mr Murray’s unit
earlier this year. He apparently left the HASI service in order to demonstrate
his independence
in living to the MHRT. He left Alcoholics Anonymous after a
facilitator declined his request for a report for the MHRT. He denied
of disinhibition and behaviour of over-familiarity.
22. The authors observed during a mental state examination that “
Murray continues to evidence poor insight and judgment.”
did not appear to appreciate the significance of the multiple factors
likely to have contributed leading to his prolonged period of
disturbance of physical and mental health.”
23. They say that Mr Murray
“meets criteria for Antisocial
Personality Disorder”
and he has a major neurocognitive disorder due
to a traumatic brain injury and a recurrent delirium
“likely due to
multiple aetiologies including epilepsy and use of substances
“the criteria for Substance Use Disorder (Phenibut)”
He is in remission although meeting the criteria for Alcohol Use Disorder,
Stimulant Use Disorder and Cannabis Use Disorder. There
was one episode of Major
Depressive Disorder following the car accident in 2011 but that is in full
remission. He has “
evidenced mood disturbance characterised by elevated
mood, pressured speech and disinhibited behaviour
.” Differential
diagnostic considerations
“may include Bipolar Disorder, a substance
related and psychotic mood disorder (including Phenibut withdrawal) as well as
possibility of a post-ictal state
24. They think that diagnostic clarification “
will require
longitudinal observation
.” He has not presented with generalised
anxiety symptoms for some two years.
25. His problem behaviour is a history of reactive aggression. They review
his static and dynamic risk factors and factors which “
precipitate another episode of reactive aggression”.
They review his
strengths and protective factors. They note his recurrent episodes of altered
consciousness associated with medication
non-compliance and substance use and
underlying vulnerabilities to develop delirium. The car accident left him with
structural brain
damage. His cognitive performance and EEG suggest deficits and
abnormalities respectively and they expressed the view that these
structural and dysfunctional deficits render him more susceptible to
triggers that could then lead to global cerebral dysfunction
(seizures, delirium
or a combination).”
They say that the “
observation that
periods of elevated mood have occurred will require clarification to determine
whether such features reflect an underlying
mood disturbance or features
associated with fluctuations of an organic presentation.”
clinical vulnerability,
“there is a need for completion of clinical
investigations (such as ambulatory EEG) and the need for continuing close
observation to ensure that recently reported improvements are
maintained.”
26. Turning to
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act
they express the opinion that Mr Murray “
suffers from mental
conditions of Antisocial Personality Disorder, Substance Use Disorder and
Neurocognitive Impairmen
ts.” They note that Mr Murray “
suffered from mental illnesses of depression and substance induced psychosis
characterised by a disturbance of mood, delusions
and hallucinations
They express the “
opinion that there are reasonable grounds that care,
treatment and control is necessary for his own protection from serious harm and
the protection of others from serious harm.”
Mr Murray’s and the
public’s safety are “
unlikely to be seriously
” if Mr Murray remains on conditional release
provided he complies with conditions and adheres to his management
plan and the direction of the treating team
.” That is the least
restrictive environment for his safe and effective care.
27. However they do not support unconditional release
”. There has “
been only a relatively short time since his
last episode of altered consciousness and mental state instability.”
They note the history “
evidences such
disturbed behaviour, his safety/or the safety of the public has been placed at
significant risk
.” They say that if Mr Murray is not “
with a mandated level of oversight, the risk of harm to self or others
They make recommendations for treatment, placement,
restrictions and monitoring.
At the hearing
28. Mr Murray said that he was good and doing really well. He was in a good
place physically and mentally and had a support network
which includes his GP,
oncologist, neurologist, supporting friend, the drug and alcohol counsellor and
his family. Dr C added that
he has agreed to see Mr Murray if Mr Murray wants
to. Mr Murray said he got on quite well with and was happy to still see him
he was not forced to. He is confident with the Drug and Alcohol
counsellor. They are working on his anxiety and she is knowledgeable
29. Dr C was asked if he supported unconditional release. He said that while
he has been treating Mr Murray (since December 2017),
he has seen no evidence of
a functional illness (no psychosis, mood disorder or anxiety). He thought it
unlikely that Mr Murray falls
within the terms of the
Mental Health Act
He has seen no deterioration in Mr Murray’s mental state. He acknowledges
the opinions of Dr A and Dr B but emphasises that
he himself has seen no
evidence of ongoing mental illness. He is happy to still see Mr Murray who,
he says, does not meet the statutory
criteria for a mental illness. He accepts
he has an historical mental condition and a substance use disorder but has seen
no evidence
of the use of illicit substances. The traumatic head injury caused a
mental condition as well. The urine drug screens have been negative
although Dr
C acknowledges they cannot pick up synthetic drugs. He is willing to keep seeing
Mr Murray but acknowledges that Mr Murray
does not think that he suffers from a
mental illness and he is unlikely to see the benefit of the consultation.
30. Mr Murray’s Case Manager was asked about Mr Murray’s ability
to live independently and responded that he needs a strong
network. He needs
proactive relapse prevention rather than reactive. His Case Manager would like
to see Mr Murray continuing with
his community supports including his various
doctors and counsellors. His more recent interactions have been more meaningful
he is pleased to see Mr Murray seeking help but “
31. Dr A noted the recent history of a hospital admission and behaviour and
posed the rhetorical question of what is the best way
to manage the risk to the
community. Dr A thought it was
“quite early
unconditional release and some more months were needed.
32. Dr B said, based on past information, that Mr Murray needed constraint
because he was combative when he was in an altered state
of consciousness. She
noted that kind of presentation at Emergency Departments.
33. Dr A acknowledged that Mr Murray expressed that he “
” but for the forensic order but that he was still concerned
Mr Murray needed a longer time frame. He was concerned that Mr Murray had
stopped the HASI support and really needed to
demonstrate that he could cope.
34. Mr Murray confirmed that his dose of Lamotrigine was 200 mgs rather than
the 25 mgs mentioned in the report of Dr E.
35. Dr A preferred to see if the improved insight carried on for a longer
period of time.
36. Dr C under cross examination acknowledged that Mr Murray could pose a
risk if he was intoxicated and that he needed “
” in Emergency Departments in the past, although Dr C thought
the risk to himself was of greater concern. But the risk is not
the result of
any mental illness. He acknowledged the relatively short period of time before
the proposed unconditional release and
that longer would provide a better view
but there has been stability over the last six months. He acknowledged that he
would be more
confident if it was over a longer period of time. He acknowledged
the risk of harm to Mr Murray by substance abuse and a risk to
others if Mr
Murray was abusing substances. It was, he said, a predictive exercise. Mr
Murray’s history suggested he may relapse
but that he is doing a lot to
present favourably at the moment. The longer he does that the more confident Dr
C would be.
37. Dr A emphasised his concern about a relapse and his behaviour when unwell
in Emergency Departments.
38. Mr Murray’s mother said she had seen a “
” in her son over the last six months which she had never seen
before. She is in daily contact and has seen no evidence of intoxication
seems to have turned his life around. She has seen a “
He has done enough time under the forensic order
which she thinks was of little use. She supports him. If he stays under the
it will do him more harm than good because his life is on hold and better
treatment might be available elsewhere. The order is holding
39. Mr Murray’s support person referred to Mr Murray’s supports
within the community and she was reassured also in speaking
to him. She thought
it unjust that he should stay under the forensic order, indeed possibly illegal.
She thinks he presents very
little risk to the public.
40. Dr A thought that a Community Treatment Order would be of no benefit but,
more to the point, was not available because Mr Murray
does not have a mental
illness but a mental condition. A mental illness remains open as a possibility
but it is more likely to arise
in the context of intoxication. A mental
condition is a better description.
41. Mr Murray’s stepfather said it was time to bring an end to the
order which his stepson no longer needs. He has strong family
42. Mr Murray acknowledged that the order was originally productive but is
now counterproductive. He feels like a child that is being
sheltered and wants
to be given the opportunity to live his life. He acknowledged that he was using
illicit substances during index
events and will not go near them again. Phenibut
is OK but it affects his seizures and medication. He feels stronger than he has
43. Dr A said that the brain injury presented difficulties in decision making
and reasoning as well as providing some affective instability.
There is a lack
of clarity about behaviour coming from the acquired brain injury or the
substance abuse. The head injury is likely
to contribute to his ability to plan
and make decisions.
44. Mr Murray’s Case Manager confirmed that they were not asking for a
Community Treatment Order because there was no evidence
of mental illness.
45. Dr A and Dr B did not support the unconditional release because the time
frame was too short. They thought Mr Murray needed about
12 months of
46. Mr Murray’s Case Manager could not see any difficulty with a period
of 12 months of stability rather than six months but
it would provide stress for
Mr Murray. They would continue to support him. The twice daily visits from the
Assertive Outreach Team
have mostly worked out. There are a couple of instances
of elevated mood but no significant concerns which needed intervention. His
medication is supervised. Observations of behaviour do of course have their
subjective elements. There was nothing alarming. They
keep a board about their
patients documenting concerns but there was nothing alarming concerning Mr
47. Mr Murray said his mood fluctuates like any other person’s. This
does not mean that there is a chemical imbalance.
48. Dr A and Dr B acknowledged that there is currently a framework of support
around Mr Murray. A longer period would be better with
relapse less likely. He
needs a longer period of stability. They still think he presents a significant
risk and a significant clinical
Submissions
49. The Tribunal received significant assistance from written submissions
prepared by Ms Lewer for the Minister and from Ms Bathurst
and Ms Boyd for Mr
50. Ms Lewer, in her submissions, argued that “
there are a number of
cogent factors in
[patient’s]
case that warrant the Tribunal
adopting a cautious approach to his management and not granting him
unconditional release at this
51. She argues that the opinion of Dr A and Dr B should be preferred and that
even the current report of Dr C and Mr Murray’s
Case Manager pointed to
risks. She pointed to the recency (December 2017) of symptoms of Mr
Murray’s mental condition and evidence
of Mr Murray’s mental
condition as well as evidence of observations by visiting community workers
earlier this year. In particular
she pointed to his hospitalisation in December
last year. She pointed to the risk Mr Murray poses to himself and to the opinion
Dr C and his Case Manager that there is a
“high risk of
mortality”.
She points to instances of police removing him wandering
through a school in an altered state of consciousness and to the seriousness
the index events.
52. Ms Lewer further points to “
a poor history of compliance with
medication (leading to hospitalisations) and non-compliance with Tribunal orders
and treating team
.” His recent better compliance is
motivated by his desire for unconditional release argues Ms Lewer. He lacks
insight, and,
she argues, “
the removal of all conditions from
is likely to result in reduction or cessation of treatment and
an associated deterioration of his mental condition with an increased
serious harm to himself and others
.” She points to Mr
severe substance use disorder
” and links
between illicit drugs or non-prescription drugs and mental illness or mental
conditions. She says that “
Mr Murray has effectively engaged in no
treatment for his substance misuse.”
She points to his use of drugs in
the hospital ward.
53. She argues that Mr Murray
“would likely relapse into alcohol and
illicit, synthetic and/or prescription drug use
” increasing the risk
to himself and others. She argues that he lacks community supports including
clinicians in the community.
Finally she argues that there is no application for
a Community Treatment Order therefore no mandated treatment or supervision which
likely means he will choose “
to have no treatment
54. At the hearing, Ms Lewer acknowledged the evidence of recent good
progress by Mr Murray, but emphasised that the application remains
premature. It is too early for the level of confidence needed for release
without compulsory treatment. Two major concerns were a
lapse into substance
misuse and the possible absence of continuing treatment. She points to Dr
C’s opinion that Mr Murray is
unlikely to see the need to continue to see
him including, she argued, his demonstrated animus towards the forensic system.
She pointed
to the conditional release granted in November last year but then
his hospitalisation the following month.
55. She argued that Dr E did not address the relevant statutory test under
section 43 and to the evidence, she argued, that Dr C was
in general agreement
with Dr A and Dr B regarding the question of risk.
56. The real issue was risk not whether release was
”. She pointed to the history of the use of illicit
drugs leading to psychosis and the misuse of alcohol leading to the car
which caused the brain damage. Without oversight, she argued, there is a real
chance that Mr Murray will relapse into alcohol
and illicit drug use. There is a
history of conditional release followed by repeated hospitalisations. More time
is needed before
there can be a sufficient degree of confidence. She also
pointed to a history of deceit and relapse. There is a risk of violence
associated with seizures and Mr Murray needing restraint in Emergency
Departments.
57. She argued that Dr A from the CFMHS clearly fell within the required
terms of section 74(d) of the Act whereas Dr E did not. She
acknowledged that
the Tribunal can have regard to Dr E’s report but it should be accorded
less weight.
58. In their written submissions, Ms Bathurst and Ms Boyd argued, by
reference to section 74(a), that Mr Murray “
is not suffering from a
mental illness
” nor taking any medication for such an illness.
Although it does not form part of the statutory test for release, the question
of whether or not Mr Murray has a mental illness “
is a mandatory
consideration in the context of the present application.”
acknowledge that their client “
does have various mental
conditions”.
But he has insight and motivation to remain well.
59. By reference to section 74(b) they acknowledge Mr Murray needs continuing
treatment but not control for his own or others’
protection from serious
harm. They argue that the CFMHS opinion about control is not supported by the
evidence which is insufficient
to conclude that their client’s
unconditional release would seriously endanger the public.
60. By reference to section 74(c) they argue that there was only one episode
of diminished mental health in the last six months and
that Mr Murray’s
condition is “
currently stable
”. His neurologist says these
episodes are well controlled. Mr Murray is seeking drug and alcohol counselling
and they pointed
to a report from HASI about Mr Murray living independently.
61. By reference to section 74(d) they point to Dr E’s report. They
argue that the brain injury challenges do not mandate restrictive
(relying on Dr E) and point to the evidence from Dr C and Mr Murray’s Case
Manager that the risk of substance abuse
arises from his impulsivity. Occasions
of elevated mood do not point to a disorder and the need for control.
62. They argue that there is no proper basis for concluding that Mr
Murray’s unconditional release will seriously endanger any
member of the
public and they point to the Tribunal’s conclusion to that effect in the
context of his conditional release in
November last year and argue that nothing
has changed since then.
63. They say the suggestion of misuse of aerosol cans is not soundly based in
evidence. They argue that he is not at sufficient risk
himself because the last
seizure was in August last year and he has the support of family and friends.
His living conditions have
been satisfactory over the last six months. Even if
he lapsed into substance abuse it does not follow that it would produce a real
risk to the community because “[patient]
has not committed any crimes
since 2011 (and the index offences occurring some 20 years ago), notwithstanding
deteriorations (and
subsequent recoveries) in his mental health since that
He has willingly engaged with his medical practitioners and has
another appointment with the drug and alcohol counsellor. He has
no desire to
change his medication regime and has engaged with home visits which can be quite
onerous. Mr Murray’s continued
adherence to his medication regime and
avoidance of substances “
can be achieved through appropriate engagement
with and monitoring by his general practitioner, psychologist and
neurologist
” who are all available to him. He can still also obtain
support from the Community Mental Health Service. He has enough insight
himself safe.
64. At the hearing, Ms Bathurst argued that her client has no current mental
illness. He may have a mental condition from the brain
injury in 2011 but this
was not associated with the index events. He has shown a lot of insight despite
ticking the boxes
”. He has used the services he has been
offered and is ready to move forward. The hospitalisation in December 2017 was
an isolated
event and drug screening has been negative.
65. Ms Bathurst acknowledged that the highest she could put Dr E’s
qualifications under section 74(d) was that the Clinic where
he practises has a
forensic unit.
66. There has been no risk to the public over the last six months and the
Tribunal was satisfied on the last occasion that there was
an insufficient risk
to refuse a conditional release. The index event was some 20 years ago and
the only other suggestion is some
violent interaction with another patient
recently. Conditions are not necessary to protect their client or the public
from serious
danger to their safety.
67. His support network will ameliorate any risk of a seizure while living
alone. She pointed to the letter from the Community Services
Worker of HASI and
Mr Murray’s Case Manager’s evidence that most of the last few months
have been without incident. Observations
by visitors can be subjective. She
pointed to the evidence of Dr C and Dr G and his support person who
supported her client’s
conditional release.
68. She pointed to her client being at the end of his tether and pointed to
the evidence demonstrating, in accordance with section
43(b) of the Act, that
other care of a less restrictive kind, that is consistent with safe
and effective care, is appropriate and reasonably available
Consideration
69. Current treating psychiatrist Dr C and case manager both support
unconditional release. It is fair to say their reasoning is qualified
are not completely confident, but they appear to remain committed to that
70. Dr E supports unconditional release.
71. Neurologist Dr G says that Mr Murray does not need supervision
from a neurological point of view”.
72. However Dr A and Dr B do not support unconditional release at this stage.
They maintain their support for conditional release.
73. Turning to the matter for the Tribunal’s consideration posed by
section 74(a) of the Act, the diagnoses of Dr A and Dr B
do not include any
mental illness. Also, Dr D is of the view that Mr Murray’s condition
does not reach the threshold of a mental illness in the legal or
medical definition”
and Dr C and Mr Murray’s Case Manager say
Mr Murray has demonstrated no features of a psychotic illness or
major mood disorder outside the context of substance use
74. The Tribunal is comfortable in concluding that Mr Murray does not
currently suffer a mental illness.
75. However Drs A and B diagnose “
the mental conditions”
of Antisocial Personality Disorder, Substance Use Disorder and Neurocognitive
Impairments. It seems clear to the Tribunal that it
was the traumatic brain
injury from the car accident in 2011 that has produced
impulsivity, poor judgment and a degree of mood dysregulation
poor insight and impulsive nature
” (Dr C and Mr
Murray’s Case Manager) and made Mr Murray “
more susceptible to
triggers that could lead to global cerebral dysfunction
” (Dr A and Dr
76. The Tribunal is of the opinion that the impulsive and problematic
behaviour demonstrated by Mr Murray for some years now is clearly
related to his brain injury (and perhaps underlying personality). These are
mental conditions.
77. Mr Murray was found not guilty by reason of mental illness in 2000 and
referred to the Tribunal. Since that finding, Mr Murray’s
mental illness
has effectively come into sustained remission (although liable to provoked
re-emergence). During Mr Murray’s
detention as a forensic patient he
suffered an acquired brain injury in a car accident. That produced a mental
condition resulting
in the impulsivity and poor judgment and other symptoms
described by the doctors. Those symptoms have resulted, it seems clear to
Tribunal, in increased risk-taking behaviour including aggravating a
pre-existing drug abuse condition. The danger posed by Mr
Murray to himself and
others is related to drug taking and risky disinhibited behaviour.
78. The Tribunal must be satisfied that his behaviour will not seriously
endanger his or the public’s safety (section 43(a)
of the Act).
79. It is apparent to the Tribunal that having more time (for example another
6 or 12 months) is unlikely to produce a change in Mr
Murray’s underlying
conditions. They are related to a brain injury.
80. Danger to Mr Murray himself is by misadventure (accidental overdose or an
accident occurring whilst he is under the influence
of illicit substances). The
Tribunal acknowledges that Mr Murray is obviously behaving appropriately at
present because he is motivated
to secure unconditional release from the
Tribunal. Even given that, he has good family support and support from a friend,
whom attended the Tribunal hearing and demonstrated their support. He
himself said that he has a support network which includes his
GP, oncologist,
neurologist and a drug and alcohol counsellor as well as his family and friend.
The Tribunal thinks it reasonable
to conclude that any erratic or inappropriate
behaviour of Mr Murray is likely to be noticed by his family and friends who
will remind
him of his need to see his GP or drug counsellor. There are also
available to him his neurologist and of course hospital emergency
departments
which Mr Murray has used regularly before. In other words, care of a less
restrictive kind consistent with safe and effective
care is appropriate and
reasonably available to Mr Murray (section 43(b) of the Act). It must also be
borne in mind that the Tribunal
granted conditional release in November last
year. Mr Murray was given supervision but only by visits from the community
a day and his own safety has not been seriously endangered since then
(section 43(a) of the Act). Although Dr C and Mr Murray’s
Case Manager
refer to a high risk of mortality, Mr Murray has been an illicit substance user
for some time. Continued use will put
his safety in some danger but his own
experience and survival over years will mitigate that danger so that it drops
below serious.
81. The Tribunal is also satisfied on the evidence that an unconditional
release of Mr Murray will not pose serious endangerment to
the safety of the
public. The index events were some 20 years ago and the only evidence of
criminal behaviour since then was the
drunk driving resulting in his accident in
2011. Again this (drink driving) is obviously a potential danger, but the risk
public is no greater than that posed by all the other members of the
community who drive under the influence of alcohol or illicit
drugs. Drink
driving has been detected only once over the years. The Tribunal notes the
intended deterrent effect of conviction and
losing of licence in ameliorating
risk. Mr Murray has demonstrated some aggression in emergency departments,
again, probably no more
than other drug addicted patients. Such behaviour occurs
in the presence of professionals trained to anticipate it. In other words
are risks to the safety of the public but they are significantly and
sufficiently ameliorated by these circumstances.
82. Clearly Mr Murray has mental conditions but risks associated with those
conditions have not become apparent over the last six
or seven months.
83. The problem behaviour (mostly related to brain-injury-induced
impulsivity) produces no greater public danger than that generated
by thousands
of other members of the community with drug or alcohol problems.
84. Considering the opinion of Dr A and Dr B (the persons qualified under
section 74(d)), they were comfortable with a conditional
release because Mr
Murray’s and the public’s safety are unlikely to be seriously
endangered “
provided he complies with conditions and adheres to his
management plan and the direction of the treating team
”. But it must
be borne in mind that his opportunity to misbehave has existed for close on 24
hours a day on conditional release.
It is acknowledged that his good behaviour
is no doubt driven by his desire for unconditional release but, again, any
misbehaviour
is likely to pose no greater risk than the community currently
faces. The Tribunal acknowledges that there has been a relatively
short period
of stability but thinks that any further period is unlikely to improve Mr
Murray’s prospects or risk to himself
or others. There is a concern, as Ms
Lewer points out, of a lapse into substance misuse but the subsequent risks to
himself or the
public are no greater than those posed by other illicit drug
users. Again, the Tribunal thinks that more time is not going to make
difference.
85. The Tribunal accepts the submissions of Ms Bathurst and Ms Boyd that Mr
Murray clearly needs continuing care and treatment but
not control for his or
others’ protection from serious harm (section 74(b) of the Act). Mr
Murray’s continuing condition
is unlikely to change and will deteriorate
with illicit drug use (section 74(c)) but the effects of the deterioration do
not warrant
ongoing control under the Act.
His Honour Judge Richard Cogswell
Dated 26 June 2018
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (466 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter