URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/47.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sydney Local Health District (Department of Forensic Medicine) v ANU (EOD) [2013] NSWADTAP 47 (23 October 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Sydney Local Health District (Department of Forensic Medicine) v ANU
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 47
Hearing Date(s):
22 July 2013
Decision Date:
23 October 2013
Appeal Panel - Internal
Judge K P O'Connor, President
R Wright SC, Judicial Member
Antonios, Non-judicial Member
Interlocutory appeal dismissed
Catchwords:
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY - Complaint of unlawful discrimination because of
disability of relative who was deceased at time of conduct in
respondent's application to dismiss for want of jurisdiction refused by Tribunal
- interlocutory appeal - statutory interpretation
- meaning of 'relative' not
confined to a person who is alive at the time of the discriminatory conduct -
'disability' may refer
to a condition affecting the body of a dead person -
appeal dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Anti-Discrimination (Amendment) Bill 1994
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Corporations Act 2001
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
Interpretation Act 1987
Cases Cited:
ANU v State of New South Wales (Sydney Local Health District)
[2013] NSWADT
CUNA Mutual Group Ltd v Bryant
[2000] FCA 970
(2000) 102 FCR 270
General Steel
Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR
Re C and the
Adoption of Children Act
(1992) 27 NSWLR 388
Local Health Network v QY and QZ
[2011] NSWCA 412
Principal judgment
Sydney Local Health District (Department of Forensic Medicine) (Appellant)
ANU (Respondent)
Representation
D Thomas (Appellant)
Dr C S Ward (Respondent
- Solicitors:
Curwoods Lawyers (Appellant)
HALC Inc. (Respondent)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
Equal Opportunity Division
- Date of Decision:
15 February 2013
- Citation:
ANU v State of NSW (Sydney Local Health District)
[2013] NSWADT 38
- Court File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW) (ADA) an 'aggrieved person' may
make a complaint of unlawful disability discrimination in connection with their
own disability
or in connection with 'the disability of a relative or associate
of the aggrieved person' (see
s 49B(1)(a)).
is the second case to reach the Tribunal in recent years raising the issue of
whether post mortem procedures followed by the
Department of Forensic Medicine
of the Sydney Local Health District (SLHD) infringe the ADA in the way they deal
with the bodies
of persons who die HIV positive. The other case is
Local Health Network v QY and QZ
[2011] NSWCA 412
), to which we
will return later in these reasons.
this case a mother, Ms 'ANU', gave consent for her son's body to be the subject
of a post mortem. He had died on 19 August 2010.
But she later withdrew the
consent when she learnt that it would not be reconstructed after the post mortem
examination.
made a complaint under the ADA to the President of the Anti-Discrimination Board
that SLHD had unlawfully discriminated against
her on the ground of disability
by refusing to provide her with a service or in the terms on which it provided
the service to her,
in contravention of
s 49M(1)(a)
or (b) of the ADA because of
her son's HIV positive status. It was alleged that SLHD's conduct amounted to
direct disability discrimination
s 49B(1)(a)
of the ADA.
applied to have the complaint summarily dismissed under
s 92(1)(a)(ii)
of the ADA. The Tribunal (Hennessy DP) refused that application - see
State of New South Wales (Sydney Local Health District)
[2013] NSWADT 38
; and SLHD appealed. As the appeal was an interlocutory one, it required
leave, which was granted. The grant of leave was confined
to the issues raised
by the first three grounds of the notice of appeal:
Did the Deputy President err in failing to conclude that, at the
time of the alleged discrimination (which is alleged to have occurred
deceased died):
(1) the deceased was not a "
" of Ms ANU, within the meaning of
of the ADA;
(2) the deceased was not a "
" within the meaning of
of the ADA or otherwise a "
purposes of
of the ADA;
(3) the deceased did not have a "
" within the meaning of
that word in
of the ADA.
three grounds are interrelated. The definitions of "
of the ADA both employ the word "
as do the substantive provisions found in
. In addition, Young JA
has expressed the view that the question of whether a dead person
" under the ADA should be answered "No" (at [128] and see
generally [110] to [128]).
Accordingly,
it appears to the Panel to be appropriate to look first at the construction of
the various provisions which are relevant
to this matter and which employ the
". Next we shall consider whether the deceased was a
" of Ms ANU as defined in
and within the meaning of
Finally, the Panel will address the question of whether the deceased had a
" as defined in
and within the meaning of
is one other matter. The Tribunal referred to the general principles governing
the consideration of summary dismissal applications
General Steel Industries
Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
related cases) and how they are applied in the equal opportunity jurisdiction of
the Tribunal. As the reasons which follow deal
with the questions raised, we
will not consider one aspect of the appellant's submissions, i.e. the challenge
to the Tribunal's adoption
General Steel
principles in declining
to dispose of a question of law going to jurisdiction where there are agreed
facts capable of disposing of
the question.
dealing with the three issues the subject of the grant of leave, we will set out
the statutory provisions which are directly
relevant to this matter.
Relevant Statutory Provisions
of the questions the subject of this appeal turns upon the proper construction
of the ADA. The provisions which are directly
engaged in the circumstances of
this case are as follows.
of the ADA renders it unlawful to discriminate against a person on the
ground of disability and provides:
(1) It is unlawful for a person who provides, for payment or not,
goods or services to discriminate against a person on the ground
disability:
(a) by refusing to provide the person with those goods or services, or
(b) in the terms on which he or she provides the person with those goods or
(2) Nothing in this section renders it unlawful to discriminate against a
person on the ground of the person's disability if the provision
of the goods or
services would impose unjustifiable hardship on the person who provides the
goods or services.
of the ADA establishes what constitutes discrimination on the ground of
disability and provided (at the relevant time) as follows:
(1) A person ("the perpetrator") discriminates against another
person ("the aggrieved person") on the ground of disability
the ground of the aggrieved person's disability or the disability
of a relative
or associate of the
aggrieved person, the
perpetrator:
(a) treats the
aggrieved person less favourably than in the same circumstances, or in
circumstances which are not materially different,
perpetrator treats or would treat a person who does not have that disability
or who does not have such a relative
or associate
who has that disability,
(b) requires the
aggrieved person to comply with a requirement or condition with which a
substantially higher proportion of persons
who do not have that disability,
or who do not have a relative
or associate
who has that disability,
comply or are able to comply,
being a requirement which is not reasonable having
regard to the circumstances of the case and with which the
aggrieved person does
not or is not able to comply.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1) (a), something is done on the ground
of a person's disability
if it is done on the ground of
the person's disability,
a characteristic that appertains generally to persons who have that disability
or a characteristic that
is generally imputed to persons who have that disability.
(3) For the purposes of, but without limiting, this section, the fact that a
person who has a disability
of or relating to vision,
hearing or mobility has, or may be accompanied by, a
dog which assists the person in respect of that disability,
is taken to be a
characteristic that appertains generally to persons who have
that disability,
but nothing in this Act affects the liability of any
such person for any injury,
loss or damage caused by the dog.
(3A) For the purposes of, but without limiting, this section, the fact that a
person who has a disability:
(a) is accompanied by, or possesses, a palliative or therapeutic device, or
other mechanical equipment, that provides assistance to
the person to alleviate
the effect of the disability,
(b) is accompanied by an interpreter, a reader, an assistant, or a carer, who
provides interpretive, reading or other services
the person because of the disability,
or because of any matter related to that fact,
is taken to be a characteristic that appertains generally to persons who have
that disability.
(4) A reference
in this section to persons who have a disability
("the particular disability")
is a reference
to persons who have
the particular disability
or who have a disability
that is substantially the same as the particular disability.
is defined in
of the ADA in the following way:
' of a person means any person to whom the
person is related by blood, marriage, affinity or adoption, or the de facto
the person.
is defined in
of the ADA to mean:
(a) total or partial loss of a person's bodily or mental functions
or of a part of a person's body, or
(b) the presence in a person's body of organisms causing or capable of
causing disease or illness, or
(c) the malfunction, malformation or disfigurement of a part of a person's
(d) a disorder or malfunction that results in a person learning differently
from a person without the disorder or malfunction, or
(e) a disorder, illness or disease that affects a person's thought processes,
perception of reality, emotions or judgment or that
results in disturbed
concept of disability is relevantly expanded in
of the ADA as follows:
A reference
in this Part [
which includes
] to a person's disability
is a reference
to a disability:
(a) that a person has, or
(b) that a person is thought to have (whether or not the person in fact has
the disability),
(c) that a person had in the past, or is thought to have had in the past
(whether or not the person in fact had the disability),
(d) that a person will have in the future, or that it is thought a person
will have in the future (whether or not the person in fact
will have the disability).
Was the Deceased a "
" for relevant purposes?
answer to the question whether the deceased was a "
" within the
meaning of that word in
turns upon the proper construction
of those sections of the ADA.
is no definition of "
" in the ADA but this is not surprising given
that it is defined as one of the "
commonly used words and expressions
Interpretation Act
(NSW). That definition is:
' includes an individual,
a corporation and a body corporate or politic.
is defined in the same subsection of the
Interpretation Act
a natural person
Interpretation Act
also provides in subss (2), (3) and (4):
(2) This Act applies to an Act or instrument
except in so far as the contrary intention appears in this Act or in the Act or
(3) Wherever appropriate, this Act applies to a portion of an Act or instrument
in the same way as it applies to the whole of an Act
or instrument.
(4) Nothing in this Act excludes the application to an Act or instrument
of a rule of construction applicable to it and not inconsistent
Accordingly,
" as used in the ADA will include natural persons,
corporations and bodies corporate and politic, except to the extent that the
intention appears in the ADA. If appropriate, this inclusive definition
" will apply to a portion or section of the ADA in the same way
as it applies to the whole of the ADA. Furthermore, other rules of
construction
can be applied, provided they are not inconsistent with the
Interpretation
question of whether the deceased was a "
" within the meaning of
, 49A and 49B raises the issue of how the ADA applies in respect of persons
who are dead. Some general observations can be made. It
is a characteristic of
natural persons as well as artificial persons, such as corporations or bodies
politic, that once they have
come into being they can also cease to be. In the
case of natural persons, this is a certainty and occurs on death (putting aside
for present purposes philosophical and theological questions). In the case of
corporations incorporated under the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) and its
predecessors, it occurs on deregistration but is not a certainty. In the case of
other bodies corporate and bodies
politic it occurs when they no longer function
and meet the criteria for legal existence.
an Act establishes that a "
" must do something or refrain from
doing something or has a right or entitlement, this would naturally be taken as
applying only
to those persons capable of complying with the law or of taking
advantage of the right or entitlement at the relevant time. In the
natural person, this would be while that person is alive. For an artificial
person, it would be while the corporation,
body corporate or body politic is in
existence and legally capable of complying or taking advantage. To take a
different approach
would involve an element of absurdity.
is not to say, however, that a statute cannot operate by reference to, or in
respect of, a natural person who is no longer alive,
a corporation that has been
deregistered or a body politic that no longer exits. For example, a statute
could provide that all living
children of any person who died while on active
service in the Korean War would be entitled to receive a memorial badge.
an Act could confer on all unpaid creditors of a deregistered
corporation a right of action against former directors of that corporation
losses suffered as a result of certain conduct of the corporation. An essential
element that is required to be satisfied in those
two examples is that there
should be a natural person, now dead, who was alive during some period of active
service in the Korean
War and that there be a corporation, now deregistered,
which had been incorporated and not deregistered when the relevant conduct
occurred. Statues are capable of operating, and commonly do operate, by
reference to or in respect of "
" who are dead or no longer in
additional general points should also be noted. First, as a matter of ordinary
English usage, the description "
natural person
" can only be applied to an
individual who has been, is or will be alive (putting aside for present purposes
fictional characters
who are unlikely to be directly relevant to legal issues of
this nature). Likewise, "
corporation
body corporate
body politic
" can only be applied to an artificial person which has come
into, is in or will come into existence in a manner recognised by law.
for the purposes of construing a provision that employs the word
", it will be important to identify both:
(1) the manner in which the provision applies in respect of the
" in question; and
(2) the periods or points of time which are relevant for the application of
the statutory provision.
the present case, in order to understand how the word "
" is used in
, 49A and 49B and whether it can refer to the deceased it is necessary to
look also at s 49M. Section 49M(1) is the substantive provision
relied upon by
the appellant and it defines the field in which
, 49A and 49B operate in
addition, in addressing the first ground of appeal it is helpful to identify in
the context of ss 49M and 49B the ways in which
the drafter of the legislation
has used the one word "
" to refer to a variety ... entities which
are involved in or associated with the discriminatory conduct.
Section 49M
far as s 49M is concerned, there are two entities identified in subs (1) using
". The first is "
a person who provides, for payment or
not, goods or services
". This person is the "
perpetrator
uses the terminology of s 49B(1). The second is the "
refused services or to whom services are provided on certain terms, the
aggrieved person
" under s 49B(1).
language, context and scope and purpose of the ADA all provide good reasons to
" in the phrase "
a person who provides ... goods or
" as referring to an individual,
a corporation or a body corporate or politic, in accordance with
Interpretation Act
. All of those types of persons can and frequently do
provide goods or services. In doing so, each of those types of persons may
discriminate
against another person. There does not appear to be any justifiable
reason to distinguish between discrimination by a provider of
goods or services
who is a natural person and discrimination by such a provider which is a
corporation or a body politic. Given the
vice to which the section was directed
and the other provisions of the ADA, it is most unlikely the Parliament intended
corporations or bodies corporate or politic from the operation of this
legislation.
can be noted that although paragraph 49M(1)(b) identifies one of the forms of
unlawful discrimination as being: "
in the terms on which
provides the person with those goods or services
" (underlining added), the
use of the masculine and feminine pronouns, "
not have the consequence that the "
" being referred to must be a
natural person, that is, a person who is either male or female.
Section 8(a)
Interpretation Act
In any Act or instrument:
(a) a word or expression that indicates one or more particular genders shall
be taken to indicate every other gender,
although the masculine and feminine pronouns are used, those words should be
taken to indicate every other gender, namely masculine,
feminine and neuter.
Accordingly, the word "
" as it first appears in s 49M, referring to
the perpetrator, should be taken to refer to a natural person, a corporation or
corporate or politic.
terms in which s 49M(2) is expressed do not suggest that "
used in respect of the perpetrator should be given any more restricted
as s 49M refers to the perpetrator as "
a person who provides
natural and grammatical implication is that the "
" must have been
in existence and at least capable of performing acts of providing at the
relevant time, namely the time when the
alleged discrimination occurred.
Consequently, if a natural person, the perpetrator must have been alive at the
time of the discrimination
and, if an artificial person, the perpetrator must
have been legally in existence at that time.
to the second use of "
" in s 49M(1), this identifies the person
discriminated against, the person aggrieved, not the perpetrator. In s 49M(1)
" is identified as one who is discriminated against by the
perpetrator "
refusing to provide the person with those goods or services
in the terms on which he or she provides the person with those goods or
in the words of s 49M(1) (putting aside for the moment the implications flowing
from the word "
" in the light of its definition in
gives any grounds for reading down those uses of the word "
natural persons only. Corporations and bodies corporate and politic are equally
capable of being supplied with goods or services
as are natural persons.
Artificial persons as well as natural persons can, depending on the definition
" (which is dealt with separately below), be said to have a
disability. Given, however, that the "
" must be refused goods or
services or supplied with goods or services on terms, this forcefully suggests
that that person must be
capable of seeking and obtaining the provision of goods
or services at the time of the discriminatory conduct falling within the
section. In other words, the second "
" referred to in s 49M(1) must
be alive or legally in existence at the time of the relevant conduct.
49M(2) contains the words "
Nothing in this section renders it unlawful to
discriminate against a person on the ground of the person's disability ...
The phrase "
the person's disability
" indicates that it may be necessary
to read down "
" in this context to those persons who are capable of
having a relevant disability. Whether or not such a reading down is necessary
does not turn upon the wording of s 49M but rather upon the meaning of
" as defined in
Accordingly,
the terms and application of s 49M do not require that either the perpetrator or
the person aggrieved, both referred
to by the word "
section, should be construed as limited to natural persons and excluding
corporations and bodies corporate and politic.
The terms and application of s
49M do, however, indicate that both the perpetrator and the person aggrieved
must be in existence
at the time of the discriminating conduct. It follows from
this conclusion that the deceased would not have fallen within the meaning
" used in s 49M to refer to either the perpetrator or the
aggrieved person at the time of the alleged discrimination by the refusal
services or the provision of services on terms in the present case.
the sake of completeness it can be noted that if an aggrieved person dies after
the discriminatory conduct but before the complaint
is finally determined, s 93
of the ADA provides that the complaint survives and the legal personal
representative of the complainant
may continue the complaint including any
referral, review or appeal. The estate of the complainant is entitled to the
any monetary sum order to be paid in respect of the complaint.
light of the context provided by s 49M it is now necessary to consider the
construction of s 49B and the role that the word "
" plays in that
section and in related, definitional sections.
Section 49B
s 49M(1), s 49B identifies 3 potentially relevant entities: the perpetrator; the
aggrieved person; and "
or associate of
aggrieved person". It is appropriate to look at each of these 3 potentially
relevant persons in turn.
to the perpetrator, s 49B(1) provided that "
A person ("the perpetrator")
discriminates ... on the ground of
if, on the ground of disability of the aggrieved person or the
or associate of
aggrieved person
perpetrator ...
[the aggrieved person in a certain way]
or requires
[the aggrieved person to do certain things]".
again, there is nothing in this wording that indicates that the word
" in so far as it is used in respect of the perpetrator should not
include natural persons, corporations and bodies corporate and
politic. The use
of the verbs "
discriminates
the present tense indicates that the perpetrator must be in existence and
capable of so acting at the time of the alleged discrimination.
Nothing in s
49B(2) to (4) suggests to the contrary.
to the aggrieved person, s 49B(1) states that the perpetrator "
discriminates
against another person ("the aggrieved person") on the ground of
if, on the ground of the aggrieved person's disability or the
or associate of
aggrieved person
perpetrator
[the aggrieved person in a certain way]
[the aggrieved person to do certain things]".
things follow from this. First, the aggrieved person must be capable of having a
" within the meaning of the ADA and must be capable of having
relative or associate
" within the meaning of those words in the
statute. Depending on the meanings of those words, "
" in so far as
it applies to the aggrieved person may be limited to natural persons. Secondly,
the aggrieved person must be in existence
at the time of the alleged
discrimination so as to be capable of being treated in a certain way or, more
importantly, so as to be
capable of being required to do certain things at the
relevant time. The other subsections of s 49B, which use the present tense
phrases such as "
persons who have that disability
a person who has
a disability
" and elsewhere, confirm the conclusion that the aggrieved
person must be in existence, that is, alive if a natural person, at the
the alleged discrimination.
these reasons, unless there is some additional provision in the ADA or principle
of law which effectively extends the operation
of ss 49M and 49B to a dead
person as the person aggrieved, it can be concluded that the deceased would not
fall within the meaning
" when used to designate the
perpetrator or the person aggrieved in those sections because those persons were
required to be in existence
and capable of acting or being required to act in
the manner specified in those sections at the relevant time or times. No
provision giving ss 49M and 49B an extended operation in respect of a
dead person, as the aggrieved person, was brought to the Panel's
attention in
submissions. Nor does the Panel believe that any provision of the ADA has that
Furthermore,
it can be noted here that a case involving discrimination alleged to have
occurred after the death of the aggrieved person
has arisen under the
Disability Discrimination Act
CUNA Mutual Group Ltd v
[2000] FCA 970
(2000) 102 FCR 270.
Notwithstanding the opening words of the judgment
This proceeding raises the forensically fascinating issue of the
possibility of discrimination against a person already dead
", no assistance
can be gained from this decision because the "
forensically fascinating
" was not decided. The case relevantly turned upon whether s 69(1)(c)
of the Commonwealth Act authorised the dead person's brother,
who was the
administrator of his estate, and his sister, who together with the brother were
the beneficiaries of the estate, to lodge
a complaint on his behalf. Branson J
held that s 69(1)(c) did not. As a result, it was unnecessary for her Honour to
decide whether
the alleged perpetrator's conduct involved discrimination against
a person who was dead at the time of the alleged discrimination
- see [51].
third type of person referred to in s 49B is the "
". The conclusions reached above in relation to the meaning of
" when used to designate the perpetrator and the person aggrieved
do not determine or have any necessary bearing on the question of
what the words
" in s 49B refer to or the content
of the word "
" in the definitions of "
" in s 4(1) of the ADA.
appropriate understanding of the words "
in s 49B cannot be attained without having regard to their definitions in s 4(1)
of the ADA. Accordingly, it is necessary to turn
to consider the definitions of
" in s 4(1) of the ADA.
, the Court of Appeal considered the question whether a dead person
could be an "
" within the definition of that term in s 4(1) of
the ADA. That case was similar to, but not the same as, the present. In that
the deceased was HIV positive when he died. After a post mortem
examination, Sydney Local Health Network's Department of Forensic
refused to reconstruct the deceased's body, because of the deceased's HIV
status, before returning it to Ms QY, a long term
friend of the deceased, and Mr
QZ, the deceased's homosexual life partner. Mr QZ and Ms QY claimed that they
were associates of the
deceased who were treated less favourably than in not
materially different circumstances to the way the Department would treat a
person who did not have an associate who has the same disability
as the deceased, in contravention of s 49M of the ADA, read with
was not in dispute in that case that neither Ms QY nor Mr QZ was a
" of the deceased, as the definition of that term in s 4(1)
stood at the relevant time.
Court of Appeal's decision depended, therefore, upon whether a dead person could
" of an aggrieved person for the purposes of s 49B(1)(a)
of the ADA in light of the definition of "
" in s 4(1). In that
regard, it was held by Campbell JA (see eg at [2]) and by Young JA (see eg at
[145]) (Macfarlan JA agreeing at
[75] and [76]) that an "
within the meaning of ss 4(1) and 49B(1)(a) of the ADA must be a person who was
living at the time of the alleged discrimination.
A person who was dead could
not be an "
" within s 49B and similar provisions of the ADA in
light of the specific phrasing of the definition in s 4(1) which required there
to be a subsisting association at the relevant time.
decision has no direct application in the present case. It is accepted that the
deceased in this case was not an "
" of Ms ANU at the time of the
discrimination alleged because he was not alive and thus could not satisfy the
requirements of the
definition in s 4(1).
the question of whether a dead person could be a "
within the definition of that term in s 4(1) was touched upon, the Court of
Appeal did not decide, nor was it called upon to decide,
addition, although not necessary for the decision in
, their Honours
did make some observations on whether a "
" as that word was used in
the ADA included a dead person. Campbell JA's conclusion was that he was "
persuaded that it is only a living person who can be a '
the meaning
" of the ADA (at [2]).
JA said at [77]:
As this conclusion [as to the meaning of "
sufficient to dispose of the proceeding on appeal, I do not consider it
appropriate to express a view on the second issue dealt
with by Young JA, namely
whether a deceased person can be a "person" under the Act. For the reasons that
Campbell JA gives, this
is an issue of some complexity, which may be resolved in
different ways depending upon the context in which it occurs.
JA dealt with the issue at [110] to [128] and concluded that the question of
whether a dead person is a "
" under the ADA should be answered "No"
(at [128]). In addition to being obiter dicta, his Honour's comments are focused
the issues of whether anti-discrimination legislation is primarily
concerned with protecting living persons against discrimination
rather than dead
persons and the need for clear words to extend the operation of such legislation
to protect relatives and associates
in respect of post mortem discrimination -
see generally [125] - [128].
has already been noted above, the Court of Appeal was not called upon to
consider in detail the definition of "
" in s 4(1) of the ADA and
consequently, the Panel must consider this matter for itself.
definition of "
" in s 4(1) states: "'
' of a person
means any person to whom the person is related by blood, marriage, affinity or
adoption, or the de facto partner of
the person".
this definition,
" is used to refer to both parties to the
relationship which leads to one being the "
" of the other. Given
the nature of the relationship required between the two persons, namely, blood,
marriage, affinity, adoption
or a de facto relationship, it can only be the case
that the word "
", whichever side of the relationship is being
referred to, is to be construed as referring to a natural person, not a
corporation
or body corporate or politic.
next observation that can be made is that the use in the definition of the verb
in the present tense in "
" indicates that the relationship must
exist at the relevant time. The relevant time at which the relationship must
exist, in the
case of discrimination under s 49M and s 49B, is the time when the
discrimination occurs. This latter conclusion follows from the
present tense in the expression "
a person ... who does not have such a
or associate who has that
disability"
in both s 49B(1)(a) and (b) and the use of the present tense in s 49M.
should also be observed that there are two types of relationships included in
the definition of "
" in s 4(1). One type is those relationships
that come, or can be brought, to an end. These are marriage, relationships of
and de facto relationships. The traditional marriage vow establishes
that the marriage is "
until death us do part
", and the marriage
relationship ends on death of one of the parties. This is demonstrated by the
fact that once one party to a marriage
dies, the other can remarry without
committing bigamy. Further, once a married couple is divorced, their marriage is
dissolved and
they are no longer married. A relationship of affinity, which
arises as a consequence of marriage, will also cease when the marriage
an end - as to relationships of affinity see
Re C and the
Adoption of
Children Act
(1992) 27 NSWLR 388
at 389. Similarly, a de facto relationship
ends when the parties to it cease to live as husband and wife in a bona fide
relationship. In the case of this type of relationship, death of one
party will also necessarily end the relationship.
other type of relationship referred to in the definition of "
is different in that these other relationships cannot be terminated and
continue notwithstanding the death of one of the parties.
These are blood
relationships and relationships by adoption (unless the relevant law permitted
adoptions to be terminated). For example,
Queen Victoria is and will always
remain King Edward VII's mother even though she is dead.
a person can be said to be related to another person who is dead if it is a
blood relationship or a relationship by adoption.
By way of contrast, a person
cannot be married to, related by affinity to or in a de facto relationship with,
a dead person.
has already been noted above, the present tense is used in the definition of
". As a consequence, the relationship relied upon to establish
that the person in question is a "
" must be in existence at the
time the definition is to be applied, which is the time of the discrimination in
" is used to define "
" by reference to
any person to whom the
person is related by ... marriage,
affinity ...
or the de facto partner of the person
", the nature of
these relationships and the use of the present tense have the consequence that
this use of "
" can only refer to a living natural person. If the
person is dead, it could not be said that the other person "
to that person "
by marriage
" or that the person
the de facto partner of the
situation is different for blood relationships and relationships of adoption. In
those cases, it is appropriate and in accordance
with common English usage to
refer to the relationship continuing in the present tense even thought one of
the parties to the relationship
is dead. As Campbell JA observed in
[43] it is grammatically and factually correct to say that everyone is related
by blood to their great grandfather, whether he
is alive or dead. Thus, where
" is used to define "
" by reference to
any person to whom the
person is related by blood ... or
", that word "
" can apply to natural persons who are
alive or dead. In other words, a person can correctly and legitimately be said
to be related
by blood or adoption to another person at a particular time, even
though that other person is dead.
conclusions in this regard illustrate the truth of Macfarlan JA's observations
quoted above that whether a deceased person can be a "person" under
is an issue of some complexity, which may be resolved in different
ways depending upon the context in which it occurs.
Summary - ss 49M and 49B and "
" as defined in
summary, our conclusions in relation to whether a dead person can be a
" for the purposes of ss 49M, 49B and the definition of
of the ADA can be summarised as follows:
" is used to refer to the perpetrator of the
discrimination in ss 49M or 49B, it includes natural persons, corporations and
corporate or politic, but only to the extent that those persons were
alive or in existence at the time of the discrimination in question.
' is used, in ss 49M or 49B and in the definition of
, to refer to the person the subject of the
discrimination, the aggrieved person, it applies only to natural persons who are
at the time of the discrimination in question. This flows in part from the
definitions of "
" but principally from the
definition of "
". The definition of "
addressed below.
" is used in the definition of "
to refer to the person with whom the aggrieved person has a relationship by
blood or adoption, "
" in that case includes natural persons who are
living or dead at the relevant time;
" is used in the definition of "
to refer to the person with whom the aggrieved person has a relationship by
marriage or affinity or who is the de facto partner of
the aggrieved person,
" in that case includes only natural persons who are living at the
relevant time.
these reasons, the Panel concludes that, for the purposes of
the ADA, the deceased was a "
" within the meaning of the definition
in so far as the relative relationship was based
upon Ms ANU and the deceased being related by blood.
Consequently,
Ms ANU's complaint should not be summarily dismissed as not disclosing a
contravention of the ADA on the basis that
the deceased was not a
" within the meaning of s 49B or the definition of
of the ADA. This issue was the subject of the second
ground of appeal.
Was the deceased a "
" of Ms ANU for relevant
follows from what we have concluded above that the issue the subject of the
first ground of appeal should also be resolved in favour
of the respondent to
this appeal, Ms ANU. The deceased, being Ms ANU's son and thus related to her by
blood, was a "
" of Ms ANU within the meaning of that word in
and 49B of the ADA as at the date of the alleged discrimination, even
though he was dead.
being so, Ms ANU's complaint should not be dismissed summarily as not disclosing
a contravention of the ADA because the deceased
was not a "
Ms ANU at the time of the alleged discrimination.
this regard, the appellant, SLHD, drew attention to the words of Macfarlan JA in
s 49B does not extend to discrimination in connection with
disabilities of persons who have been in the past, but are not at the time
the discrimination,
or associates of the aggrieved person."
(underlining added)
Panel accepts that this statement is correct. It does not, however, assist the
appellant as we have found that the deceased was,
on the proper construction of
s 49B and the definition of "
", a relative of the aggrieved
person at the time of the discrimination.
the words "
relative or associate
" appear together in s 49B and in a
number of other sections, these words are defined separately in
fact that "
" does not include a dead person in no way determines
whether or not a dead person can be a "
" for the purposes of the
conclusion does not involve impermissibly construing the definition of
" in the abstract. That definition is of general application
throughout the ADA. Whether and to what extent s 49B and the corresponding
provisions of the ADA, such as
, 49T, 49ZG and 49ZYA, apply in
respect of a dead person who falls within the definition of "
at the relevant time will depend upon the proper construction and
application of those sections and, in particular, whether a dead
person can have
the relevantly required characteristic at the time of the alleged discrimination
in question. The wording and context
of each of those sections may dictate
different outcomes in the various circumstances to which they apply.
this reason in this case, we now turn to consider the issue raised by the third
ground of appeal in relation to which leave to
appeal was given.
Did the deceased have a "
" for relevant
issue which was the subject of the third ground of appeal was whether the
deceased, assuming he was relevantly a "
" of Ms ANU, the
aggrieved person, had a "
" for the purposes of s 49B.
operation of s 49M of the ADA, it is unlawful for a perpetrator to discriminate
against an aggrieved person on the ground of disability
circumstances. Section 49B establishes that the perpetrator discriminates
against an aggrieved person on the ground of
the disability
if, among other things, the perpetrator:
(1) treats an aggrieved person who has a relative with a disability
differently from how it would treat a person "
who does not have a relative
... who has that disability
" - s 49B(1)(a); or
(2) requires an aggrieved person who has a relative with a disability to
comply with a requirement or condition with which a substantially
proportion of persons "
who do not have a
... who has that
comply or are able to comply
" - s 49B(1)(b).
to s 49A which is discussed below, the use of the present tense in the
expression "
... who has that
disability"
requires the relative to have the disability at the relevant time, being the
time at which the discrimination occurs.
thus becomes important to consider in a case such as the present whether a dead
person can be said to have a "
" as that word is defined in the
ADA at the time of the alleged discriminatory conduct.
definition of "
provides that it means:
(a) total or partial loss of a person's bodily or mental functions
or of a part of a person's body, or
(b) the presence in a person's body of organisms causing or capable of
causing disease or illness, or
(c) the malfunction, malformation or disfigurement of a part of a person's
(d) a disorder or malfunction that results in a person learning differently
from a person without the disorder or malfunction, or
(e) a disorder, illness or disease that affects a person's thought processes,
perception of reality, emotions or judgment or that
results in disturbed
a preliminary observation it should be noted that each of the types of
disabilities listed in paragraphs (a) to (e) is defined
by using the word
". Given the nature of each type of disability identified, the
" in each paragraph can only apply to a natural person.
Moreover, under s 49B the only persons who relevantly have disabilities are
person aggrieved or a relative or associate of the person aggrieved.
Accordingly, the word "
" when used in ss 49M and 49B to refer to
the person aggrieved or a relative or associate of the person aggrieved only
includes natural
persons. This provides further support for the conclusions
expressed above in relation to the first issue.
49B(1) is predicated upon the fact that a "
" can have a
" within the meaning of the ADA. The Panel's conclusion that a
dead person can be a "
" within the meaning of s 49B(1) if the
relationship relied upon to satisfy the definition of "
relationship by blood or adoption, therefore, gives rise to the question whether
on the proper construction of the definition
person can have a disability for the purposes of s 49B of the ADA.
of the paragraphs in the definition of "
" by their nature
preclude their operation in relation to dead persons. For example, paragraph (d)
a disorder or malfunction that results in a person learning differently from
a person without the disorder or malfunction
", especially given the use of
the present tense of the verb "
", requires that the person must be
presently capable of learning. This is not true of a dead person. Accordingly,
this paragraph
(d) of the definition cannot apply to dead persons and thus the
" in that paragraph should be taken not to include a dead
person. Substantially the same reasoning leads to the same conclusion in
relation to paragraph (e).
(b) and (c) are different. They each refer to "
a person's body
living and dead persons can legitimately be said to have a body. In the case of
paragraph (c), a dead person as well as a
living person can have a
malformation or disfigurement of part
" of the body even if it be correct
that a dead person cannot have a "
malfunction
" of a part of his or her
body. There is no necessity to read "
" in that paragraph down to
include only living persons in respect of malformation or disfigurement.
Similarly, in relation to paragraph
(b) a dead person can have present in his or
organisms ... capable of causing disease or illness
again, there is no necessity to treat "
" in that paragraph as not
including a dead person. In our view, these specific definitions take the
concept of "
" which is relevant for the purposes of the ADA
beyond the ordinary English meaning of that word to the extent that such a
assumes the existence of life in the person with the disability.
Furthermore,
if a person can be discriminated against because a living blood relative has a
disfigurement of part of his or her body
or because of the presence in his or
her body of organisms capable of causing disease or illness, there does not
appear to be any
reason having regard to the terms of the ADA or its scope and
purpose why a person could not be discriminated against because a dead
relative has, at the relevant time, a disfigurement of part of his or her body
or because of the presence in his or her body
of organisms capable of causing
disease or illness.
(a) of the definition of "
" is less clear. It can be argued
total or partial loss of a person's bodily or mental
or of a part of a person's body
" is satisfied by every dead person. Thus all
dead persons should be taken to have a disability within the meaning of the ADA,
by being dead. Alternatively, on a close reading of the paragraph, it can
argued that what is being referred to is total loss of
a person's bodily but not
mental functions, total loss of a person's mental but not bodily functions,
partial loss of a person's
bodily functions (with or without loss of mental
functions) or partial loss of a person's mental functions (with or without loss
of bodily functions) but not total loss of both bodily and mental functions,
which would be death.
the repeated use of "
" in paragraph (a) and the absence of "
bodily ... functions
mental functions
" we think the
grammar and syntax of the paragraph support the view that the
" described in that paragraph does not include total loss of
both bodily and mental functions and thus does not include death. To
that it may be relevant when considering a word which has been given an explicit
statutory definition, in ordinary English
usage a disabled person is different
from a dead person and a person with a disability would not normally be taken to
include a dead
person. We would be unwilling to reach a conclusion that was
contrary to both a close reading of the statutory words and ordinary
usage in construing this paragraph.
Accordingly,
in our view, "
person's ... functions
person's body
paragraph (a) of the definition of "
do not include
the functions or body of persons who are dead.
has been noted above, s 49A of the ADA gives the word "
extended operation for the purposes of
of the ADA (ss 49A to 49R), which
deals with discrimination on the ground of disability.
49A provides:
A reference
in this Part to a person's disability
is a reference
to a disability:
(a) that a person has, or
(b) that a person is thought to have (whether or not the person in fact has
the disability),
(c) that a person had in the past, or is thought to have had in the past
(whether or not the person in fact had the disability),
(d) that a person will have in the future, or that it is thought a person
will have in the future (whether or not the person in fact
will have the disability).
references in
a person's disability
" includes a relative's
disability referred to in various places in s 49B.
49A(a), (b) and (d) refer to present or future disabilities. Paragraph (a) does
not appear to us to add, or subtract, anything
from the definition in
". As to paragraphs (b) and (d), to the extent that a dead
person can have a "
" as we have found above in relation to the
definition of that term in
, these paragraphs have the effect of extending
disability discrimination to cover situations where, at the time of the
discrimination,
discrimination occurred because the dead person:
(1) was thought to have such a disability;
(2) would have such a disability in the future, or
(3) was thought would have such a disability in the future.
(c) of s 49A appears to us to have a more radical effect in respect of the
" that might be relevant for a dead person who was a
" of the person aggrieved. This is because a dead person can
have had in the past, or can be thought to have had in the past, all
of disabilities set out in paragraphs (a) to (e) of the definition of
" and not just those in paragraphs (b) and(c). Thus, there is
nothing in the wording of ss 49M and 49B and the definition of
", when s 49A(c) is also engaged, which would require or
suggest that this extended concept of "
", including actual or
supposed past disability, could not be applied in respect of an aggrieved
person's relative by blood or adoption
who was dead at the time of the
discriminatory conduct. In other words, discriminating against a person on the
ground of the disability
of a relative
within the meaning of s 49B can include discriminating against a person on the
ground of the past disability, actual
or supposed, of a relative by blood or
adoption who was dead at the time of the discrimination.
the Second Reading Speech to the
Anti-Discrimination (Amendment) Bill
as a result of which s 49A was introduced (NSW Legislative Assembly
Hansard 12 May 1994 page 2464) gives some examples (at page 2465)
designed to be caught as a result of the amendment, it does not appear to us to
be an attempt to set out a comprehensive
statement of the effect of the section.
We do not believe that this Second Reading Speech provides any basis for
reaching a conclusion
different from what we have set out above.
Accordingly,
our conclusion is that it is possible for a dead person to have a disability
falling within paragraphs (b) and (c) of
the definition of "
Further, by operation of s 49A, it is possible for a dead person to have had in
the past or to be thought to have had in the past
all of the types of disability
listed in the definition in s 4(1).
conclusions, however, do not provide an answer to the question of whether the
deceased had a relevant disability in the present
we understand it, it is paragraph (b) of the definition of "
in s 4(1) which is alleged to be relevant. It is said that the deceased, being
HIV positive when he died, had present in his body
organisms capable of causing
disease or illness, at the relevant time and it was because of this that SLHD
told Ms ANU that it would
not reconstruct the deceased's body after a post
mortem examination. We do not understand that Ms ANU put her case on the basis
the alleged discrimination occurred as a result of a past disability which,
at the relevant time, the deceased had or was thought
to have had.
are not in a position, nor was the Tribunal on an interlocutory application to
strike out the complaint in a position, to determine
whether the deceased, being
HIV positive when he died, had present in his body organisms capable of causing
disease or illness, at
the relevant time. Whether this is or is not so will be a
matter for expert evidence at any substantive hearing. It will also depend
the proper construction of paragraph (b) of the definition of
" and in particular the words "
organisms capable of causing
disease or illness
" and whether those words are applicable on the facts as
they are proved.
these reasons, it is not possible for us to conclude that the deceased did not
" within the meaning of that word in ss 4(1), 49A, 49B
and 49M of the ADA at the relevant time. All that can be concluded is that
possible for a dead person to have a disability falling within paragraphs (b)
and (c) of the definition of "
" and it is possible for a dead
person to have had in the past or to be thought to have had in the past all of
the types of disability
listed in the definition in s 4(1).
the Panel has concluded that it is possible for the deceased to have had a
" within the meaning of that term in s 4(1) and in s 49B, with
or without relying on the extension of the concept of "
49A, Ms ANU's complaint should not be dismissed summarily as not disclosing a
contravention of the ADA because the deceased
did not have a "
at the time of the alleged discrimination.
Consistency of Construction
could be thought that in reaching these conclusions we have construed the word
" in the definition of "
" in s 4(1)
inconsistently, excluding dead persons in some paragraphs and including dead
persons in others. Similarly it might be
thought that we have been inconsistent
in treating the word "
" in the definition of "
including dead persons in some instances and excluding them in others. This
would be a misapprehension. It is the whole provision
which is being construed
not a single word. When the word "
" is used in conjunction with the
other words constituting the description of the disability or the meaning of
", the word "
" is not to be construed in isolation.
As a result of the other words used, the natural or artificial persons in
respect of whom the
provision could apply may be limited by the circumstances or
criteria invoked by those words.
the definition of "
", there are some relationships which can be
said to subsist even after one or both parties to the relationship dies. Other
relationships
referred to in that definition come to an end on the death of one
party to that relationship. As a result, a dead person can be said
to be in one
definition of "
" does not have a constant application in that
provision. It varies with the type of relationship being described.
Furthermore,
where we have concluded that the word "
" includes corporations and
bodies corporate and politic as well as individuals, for example in relation to
the perpetrator in ss
49M and 49B, this is not a case of inconsistent
construction of the word "
". The conclusion on construction flows
from the wording of the provision, its context and the scope and purpose of the
Act as a whole.
Campbell JA said in
at [10] that "
my own reading of the Act
suggests that the term '
' is used with a consistent meaning
throughout the Act
", we do not understand his Honour to have meant that the
other words and phrases that qualify or modify the word "
used in particular contexts cannot change or limit the entities (to use a
neutral term) to which the word "
" extends. Indeed, his Honour
notes at [21] "
There are many provisions in the Act in which the word
'person' is used that could apply only if 'person' referred to a living
" but also says at [60] "
There is no reason why 'person' in s
119(2) should not extend to a corporation (necessarily not alive) that pays the
Board for services
or materials. The objectives of the Act would be furthered by
reading 'person' in that way.
" See also Campbell JA's comments at [62] -
is no inconsistency in construing ss 49M and 49B and the s 4(1) definitions so
that the word "
" in some instances includes and in other instances
excludes dead persons as well as including and excluding corporations and bodies
corporate and politic, depending on what is being referred to in the provisions
in question. Individual words in a statutory provision
cannot be construed
independently from the provision as a whole, from their context or from the
scope and purpose of the Act in which
they are found.
these reasons, in our view:
(1) the deceased was a "
" to whom Ms ANU, as an
aggrieved person, was related by blood within the meaning of the definition of
" in s 4(1) at the time of the alleged discrimination;
(2) thus, notwithstanding that he was dead at the time of the alleged
discrimination, he was a "
" of Ms ANU for the purposes of s
(3) it is possible for a dead person to have a disability falling within
paragraph (b) or (c) of the definition of "
" in s 4(1) of the
ADA and it is possible for a dead person to have had in the past or to be
thought to have had in the past all of
the types of disability listed in the
definition in s 4(1);
(4) whether the deceased had a "
" falling within the meaning
of that term for the purposes of the ADA at the relevant time cannot be
determined in this appeal and
should be determined at the substantive hearing of
the matter.
follows that each of the grounds of appeal in relation to which leave to appeal
was granted should be rejected. There was no basis
for summarily dismissing Ms
ANU's complaint under s 102 read with s 92(1)(a)(ii) of the ADA and the Deputy
President's decision not
to do so was correct. Accordingly, the appeal should be
dismissed. The matter should proceed to a substantive hearing.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (351 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter