URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/73.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lirantzis v Calligas [2025] NSWCATCD 73; (18 August 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Lirantzis v Calligas
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 73
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Date of Orders:
18 August 2025
Decision Date:
18 August 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
D Robertson, Principal Member
(1) A hearing of the applicants’ reinstatement
application filed on 11 August 2025 is dispensed with pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
An extension of time to file the applicants’ reinstatement
application is refused.
applicants’ reinstatement application filed on 11 August 2025 is
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE — Civil and Administrative Tribunal —
Application for reinstatement —
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
— proceedings dismissed for non-appearance —
previous application for reinstatement refused — second reinstatement
application filed — extension of time to file reinstatement application
— abuse of process — no new material to
justify fresh consideration
of second application — no basis for extension of time for filing of
application
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Administrative Tribunal Regulation 2022
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Rules 2014
Cases Cited:
Bobolas v Waverley Council
[2016] NSWCA 139
GMT Construction Pty Ltd v
[2024] NSWCATAP 68
Harmony Stone Gallery Pty Ltd v Ajuria
NSWCATAP 80
Jackson v NSW Land and Housing Corporation
[2014] NSWCATAP
JKB Holdings Pty Ltd v de la Vega
[2013] NSWSC 501
MPP Property
Pty Ltd v Soliman Hospitality Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWCATAP 90
Sesay v Duran
NSWCATAP 124
Wallace v Price
[2017] NSWCATAP 151
Ward v Nand
NSWCATAP 14
Texts Cited:
Procedural rulings
Angela Lirantzis (First Applicant)
Maria Lirantzis (Second
Peter Lirantzis (Third Applicant)
Petty Lirantzis (Fourth
Christina Calligas (First Respondent)
Anastasios Calligas
(Second Respondent)
Representation:
Applicants (self-represented)
Minas & Associates (Respondents)
File Number(s):
2024/00327812
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
matter before me requiring determination is an Application for Reinstatement
filed by the applicants in these proceedings on 11
August 2025. This is the
second reinstatement application filed by the applicants. I will refer to the
application filed on 11 August
2025 as the Second Reinstatement
Application.
power of the Tribunal to reinstate proceedings arises from
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act).
55 Dismissal of proceedings
(1) The Tribunal may dismiss at any stage any proceedings before it in any
of the following circumstances—
(a) if the applicant or appellant (or, if there is more than one
applicant or appellant, each applicant or appellant) withdraws
the application
or appeal to which the proceedings relate,
(b) if the Tribunal considers that the proceedings are frivolous or
vexatious or otherwise misconceived or lacking in substance,
(c) if the applicant or appellant (or, if there is more than one
applicant or appellant, each applicant or appellant) has failed
to appear in the
proceedings,
(d) if the Tribunal considers that there has been a want of
prosecution of the proceedings.
(2) The Tribunal may reinstate proceedings that have been dismissed under
subsection (1)(c) if the Tribunal considers that there
is a reasonable
explanation for that failure
applicants commenced these proceedings in the Consumer and Commercial Division
of the Tribunal on 4 September 2024, seeking the
sum of $46,372.22 in respect of
the respondents’ alleged liability for “outstanding rent, water
charges, balustrade cost
and fire safety” said to have arisen pursuant to
a retail lease between the applicants as landlords and the respondents as
and guarantor.
19 May 2025, the parties were sent a notice of hearing in person for 23 June
17 June 2024, the applicants wrote to the Tribunal requesting that the decision
be made on the papers and not at a formal hearing.
20 June 2025, in response to a communication from the Tribunal, the applicants
stated in an email to the Tribunal, “an immediate
family member and a
party to the case suffered a cardiac arrest and is currently in hospital.”
The applicants stated that they
were unable to attend the hearing on 23 June
2025. The applicants indicated that they relied upon on seven folders of
evidence submitted
to the Tribunal.
23 June 2025, Senior Member Bluth dismissed the application because the
applicants failed to appear. The Tribunal recorded that
the applicants had been
advised on that day that attendance for the hearing was mandatory and noted that
the applicants had had sufficient
notice to attend the hearing.
Tribunal noted “in passing” that
Retail Leases Act
(NSW) states that proceedings must be commenced within 3 years of a
liability arising and that the amounts claimed by the applicants
were beyond 3
26 June 2025, the applicants filed an application to reinstate the proceedings
(the First Reinstatement Application). The parties
were given the opportunity to
file evidence and submissions concerning the First Reinstatement Application. On
5 August 2025, Senior
Member Hennings refused the First Reinstatement
Application. The reasons for that decision were relevantly as follows:
“1). The applicants seek that the matter be reinstated because they failed
to attend the Tribunal on 23 June 2025 for the final
hearing. They say that they
could not attend due to a cardiac arrest suffered by an immediate family member
and party to the proceedings
who was in hospital. They sought a decision on the
papers which was rejected by the Tribunal Member, who dismissed the application
when none of the four applicants attended as required.
applicants’ application and submission largely fails to focus on the core
elements to a reinstatement application.
The applicants had been sending
correspondence to the Tribunal in the lead up to the hearing attempting to be
excused and to have
the matter determined on the papers. The Tribunal rejected
all those attempts and clearly the applicants were on notice that they
required to attend. Much of the applicants’ submission focuses on the
Member and/or the respondent’s legal representative
which are largely
irrelevant. The Tribunal considers that the applicants have largely failed to
focus on the requirements and issues
for consideration in a reinstatement
application.
4). The respondent submits that the applicants
have provided no supporting evidence whatsoever to substantiate the claims of
medical emergency or any contemporaneous or subsequent documentation to
support their explanation for non-attendance. The respondent
also identifies in
the lead up to the hearing the applicants wrote to the Tribunal on a number of
occasions requesting to be excused
and for the matter to be determined on the
papers. The respondent submitted that this was not possible because the
applicants had
not submitted proper evidence, and they were required by the
respondent at the hearing for the purpose of cross-examination. The
rejected all applications prior to the hearing and made it clear that the
applicants were required to attend for such reasons
- which they failed to
5). The respondent also submitted that even if one of the applicants
were unavailable, the alleged cardiac arrest occurred six days
hearing, and it could not explain or justify the failure of any of the remaining
three appearing at the hearing.
6). The Tribunal accepts the respondent’s submission in finding that the
applicants’ explanation for non-attendance is
unsupported and also
inherently insufficient. The Tribunal finds that there is no reasonable
explanation for their non-attendance
and consequently the power to reinstate is
not enlivened. The reinstatement application is dismissed.”
11 August 2025, the applicants lodged the Second Reinstatement Application.
note that on 16 July 2025 the applicants filed an appeal against the decision to
dismiss the proceedings.
Applicants’ submissions
far as I can tell, the Second Reinstatement Application differs from the First
Reinstatement Application only in the following
(1) The addition of five sentences as set out below to the second paragraph of
the submissions in support; and
(2) The inclusion of two additional documents in the attachments to the
submissions.
additional sentences added to the submissions are:
“Peter Lirantzis’s condition was deteriorating whilst he was in
hospital. He also developed other life threatening conditions
whilst he was in
hospital eg pneumonia. He also had to be operated on. All the immediate family
was on standby whilst Peter Lirantzis
was in hospital and we were called
multiple times throughout his hospital stay to come immediately to the hospital
due to his deteriorating
condition. A cardiac arrest is an extremely serious
health event.”
two additional documents included in the Second Reinstatement Application
(1) A “Nursing Discharge Checklist” recording the discharge of the
Third Applicant from hospital on 18 July 2025. The
document records the date of
admission as 2 June 2025; and
(2) An invoice for ambulance services rendered to the Third Applicant involving
transport to hospital on 2 June 2025.
applicants have sought that the Second Reinstatement Application be dealt with
on the papers, that is without a hearing. I am
satisfied that the questions for
determination can be adequately determined on the basis of the written
submissions and without a
hearing. Accordingly, I will dispense with a hearing
of the Second Reinstatement Application pursuant to s 50 of the NCAT Act.
I have determined, for the reasons which follow, that the Second Reinstatement
Application should be dismissed, I do not consider
it necessary to seek
submissions from the respondents.
Consideration
are two preliminary issues raised by the Second Reinstatement Application which
must be resolved in the applicants’ favour
before the merits of the
application can be considered:
(1) The application has not been filed within the time prescribed in the
and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW) (NCAT Rules); and
(2) The application is the second application seeking the same relief and as
such is potentially an abuse of process.
will deal with these issues in turn.
Should the time for filing
of the Second Reinstatement Application be extended?
36 of the NCAT Rules 2014 provides:
36 Applications to reinstate dismissed proceedings for failure to
Unless the Tribunal grants an extension under section 41 of the Act, an
application made to the Tribunal to reinstate proceedings
that were dismissed
under section 55(1)(c) of the Act must be made within 7 days after the Tribunal
dismissed the proceedings that
are sought to be reinstated.
days after the decision of the Tribunal dismissing the application was 30 June
2025. The Second Reinstatement Application was
filed on 11 August 2025. That is
six weeks out of time.
41 of the NCAT Act empowers the Tribunal to extend the time for filing the
application. The Tribunal may do so of its own
motion regardless that the
applicants have not themselves explicitly sought an extension of the time for
filing the Second Reinstatement
Application.
principles applicable in the consideration of an application to extend time were
set out by the Appeal Panel in
Jackson v NSW Land and Housing Corporation
[2014] NSWCATAP 22
. To grant an extension of time, I must be
satisfied that strict compliance with the rules will work an injustice on the
applicants.
Relevant factors are:
(1) the length of the delay,
(2) the reason(s) for the delay,
(3) the applicant’s prospects of success, i.e. whether there is a fairly
arguable case, and
(4) the extent of any prejudice suffered by the respondents.
applicants have not made any submissions directed to the late filing of the
Second Reinstatement Application. Their submissions
concern the dismissal of the
original application in the first instance and why the application should be
reinstated.
delay in lodging the Second Reinstatement Application, being six weeks, is not
insignificant. It is clear that the reason for
delay is that the applicants are
seeking a second consideration of their application. Other than in exceptional
circumstances, I
would not consider that to be a legitimate reason to justify an
extension of time: see
Sesay v Duran
[2023] NSWCATAP 124
there substantial merit in the applicants’ case for reinstatement and good
reason for the filing of a second reinstatement
application, I may have
considered it appropriate to grant an extension of time for the filing of the
Second Reinstatement Application.
However, as, for the reasons outlined below, I
do not consider that either is the case, I decline to extend time for the filing
the second application.
Is the Second Reinstatement
Application an abuse of process?
there is no prohibition on multiple reinstatement applications (see
[2021] NSWCATAP 14
), the filing of a second or subsequent
application may nevertheless constitute an abuse of process. In
JKB Holdings
Pty Ltd v de la Vega
[2013] NSWSC 501
, Lindsay J
considered the principles applicable to the bringing of a second interlocutory
application seeking the same relief:
“60 The plaintiffs contend that principles of res judicata or issue
estoppel stand in the way of the defendants’ present
motion. I think not.
His Honour’s decision was considered, but interlocutory in character. The
fact that it followed closely
upon, or was associated with, other orders of a
final character does not render it final. The decision not to order that the
funds be paid out to the defendants was not consequential upon, and
merely working out, a principal order from which it could take
on the colour of
a final judgment ... Each order must be assessed in terms of its legal effect.
Principles governing res judicata
and issue estoppel are predicated upon the
existence of a final judgment or order ...
61 That said, principles governing abuses of the process of the Court may be
called in aid of opposition to repetitive interlocutory
applications ...
62 There is no absolute bar on the renewal of an interlocutory application
absent a change in circumstances ...
64 ... I do not overlook the practical reality that a change in circumstances
bearing upon the justice or otherwise of adherence
to an interlocutory decision
is generally looked for on renewal of an application for a different decision
... And care needs to
be taken to guard against repetitive applications that
might be characterised as ‘judge shopping’ - an endeavour to seek
from one judge what another has refused, in order to circumvent limitations on
the availability of appeals from interlocutory decisions
... [citations
accept that the judgment of Lindsay J in
JKB Holdings Pty Ltd v de la
is authority for the proposition that a second interlocutory
application seeking the same order after an initial application has
been refused
is not automatically an abuse of process, even in the absence of a change in
circumstances. Nevertheless, a second application,
which could be seen to be
merely an attempt to get a better result from a Tribunal Member likely to be
more sympathetic to the application,
would constitute an abuse of process. As
Lindsay J noted in
JKB Holdings
at [64], “care needs to be taken to
guard against repetitive applications that might be characterised as
‘judge shopping’”.
my view, the Second Reinstatement Application is an abuse of process. The
additional material filed with the Second Reinstatement
Application does not
alter in any material way the case for reinstatement from that dismissed by
Senior Member Hennings on 5 August
2025. The two additional documents included
with the Second Reinstatement Application provide no evidence of the Third
Applicant’s
medical condition. More particularly, they provide no evidence
to support the proposition that by reason of the Third Applicant’s
admission to hospital three weeks before the hearing, none of the other three
applicants was able to attend the hearing. The additional
sentences included in
the applicants’ submissions lack detail and are mere submission, and not
evidence of the matters asserted.
In the absence of a detailed statement of the
circumstances relied upon and supporting evidence, the Tribunal can give the
sentences no weight.
this context, I refer to the judgment of the NSW Court of Appeal in
Waverley Council
[2016] NSWCA 139
which addressed the requirements
for medical certificates justifying non-attendance at hearings. McColl JA, with
whom Simpson JA
and Sackville AJA agreed, stated:
“A medical certificate relied upon to demonstrate a litigant is unable to
attend court must address the ‘critical question
whether, and if so why,
the medical condition would prevent the [litigant] from travelling to the Court
and participating effectively
in a court hearing’”.
statement has been applied in relation to the Tribunal in decisions of the
Appeal Panel: see, for example,
GMT Construction Pty Ltd v Keshavarz
[2024] NSWCATAP 68
MPP Property Pty Ltd v Soliman Hospitality Pty
[2021] NSWCATAP 90
Harmony Stone Gallery Pty Ltd v
[2017] NSWCATAP 80
accept that the additional material established that the Third Applicant was in
fact in hospital on the hearing date on 23 June
2025 and had a reasonable
explanation for failing to attend the hearing. However, I am not persuaded that
the applicants have provided
a reasonable explanation supported by evidence of
why the other applicants could not attend the hearing.
the Tribunal reinstate the proceedings?
because I have determined not to extend time for the filing of the Second
Reinstatement Application, and because I have
determined that the Second
Reinstatement Application is an abuse of process, it is not necessary to
consider the merits of the Second
Reinstatement Application, I note the
(1) Section 55(1)(c) of the NCAT Act empowers the Tribunal to dismiss
proceedings if (relevantly to these proceedings) “each
applicant ... has
failed to appear in the proceedings”. The power to reinstate proceedings
that have been dismissed under s
55(1)(c) may be exercised only if there is a
reasonable explanation for the applicants’ failure to appear in the
proceedings.
(2) Senior Member Hennings explained in his reasons for refusing the First
Reinstatement Application why the applicants had failed
to meet the requirement
that they demonstrate a reasonable explanation for their failure to attend the
hearing on 23 June 2025. The
applicants failed to provide evidence to establish
that the Third Applicant had suffered any medical issue, or the nature of any
medical issue. They further failed to provide any evidence to justify the
assertion that none of the other three applicants was able
to attend the
(3) The additional evidence provided with the Second Reinstatement Application
may, as noted above, indicate that the Third Applicant
was in hospital on 23
June 2025, but it does not provide any support for the propositions, relied upon
by the applicants, that “all
the immediate family was on standby”
while he was in hospital or that they “were called multiple times ... to
the hospital” either at all or specifically on 23 June 2025.
(4) For the foregoing reasons, I could not be satisfied that the applicants have
provided a reasonable explanation for their failure
to appear at the hearing on
23 June 2025.
(5) As the Appeal Panel stated in
Wallace v Price
at [30]-[31], even if
an adequate explanation is provided for the applicants’ failure to attend
the hearing, the question remains
“whether an order to reinstate the
proceedings should be made as a matter of discretion” and:
“Factors relevant in exercising this discretion include:
(1) The nature of the [application] and the issues raised;
(2) The strength of the [application] and its likelihood of
(3) Any injustice to the opposing party.”
(6) Even if the Second Reinstatement Application were not an abuse of
process, the fact that it is a second application following
the dismissal of the
First Reinstatement Application would be relevant in considering whether to
exercise the discretion to reinstate
the proceedings. I would also take into
account the fact that the applicants have filed an appeal against the decision
2025 to dismiss their application.
(7) In this context it is relevant to note reg 9 of the
Administrative Tribunal Regulation 2022
(NSW) (NCAT Regulations), which provides
“the Tribunal may order that a decision it has made that determines
proceedings be set aside or varied if ...
(b) the decision was made in the absence of a party and the Tribunal is
satisfied that the party’s absence has resulted in
the party’s case
not being adequately put to the Tribunal.”
Subsection 9(5)
provides that a party may not make an application for an
order under reg 9 to set aside or vary a decision of the Tribunal if:
“(a) an internal appeal or appeal to a court against the decision has been
lodged or determined”.
(9) Although the lodgment of an appeal against a decision dismissing
proceedings is not a bar to the filing of an application pursuant
to s 55(2) of
the NCAT Act, the fact that it would be a bar to an application pursuant to reg
9 of the NCAT Regulations, suggests
that the fact that an appeal had been lodged
before the filing of the Second Reinstatement Application is a factor weighing
the exercise of the discretion to reinstate the proceedings.
(10) Moreover, the fact that an appeal has been lodged makes it inappropriate
that I should express any view concerning the merits
of either the
applicants’ substantive application or the decision of 23 June 2025 to
dismiss the application by reason of the
applicants’ failure to
orders are:
(1) A hearing of the applicants’ reinstatement application filed on 11
August 2025 is dispensed with pursuant to
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(2) An extension of time to file the reinstatement application is refused.
(3) The applicants’ reinstatement application filed on 11 August 2025 is
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (272 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter