URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Harding v Transfield Pty Ltd [2003] NSWCC 3 (10 March 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Harding v Transfield Pty
[2003] NSWCC 3
Mark Harding
Transfield Pty
CASE NUMBER: 967 of 2002 of 2003.00
CATCH WORDS:
Elements of Workers Compensation; Statutes & Delegated
Legislation
LEGISLATION CITED:
CORAM: Armitage
DATES OF HEARING: 10th March 2003
EX TEMPORE DATE:
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT: Mr M J
Bleasel instructed by Firths - the Compensation Lawyers
FOR RESPONDENT: Mr D
G Saul instructed by Hunt & Hunt Solicitors.
1. This is an application by Mark Harding against his former employer,
Transfield Pty Ltd in which he claims injury in that employ
as a fitter, on 21
August 1999, when he was working on a truck and a component landed on his left
leg and injured it. He claims
in consequence weekly payments of compensation
under s 36, s 37, s 38 and s 40 in the alternative (although in addresses only s
was relied upon by his counsel) from 21 June 2000 to date and continuing,
together with s 60 expenses, the appropriate s 66 lump
sum for 22 per cent
permanent loss of use of the left leg at or above the knee and a s 67 lump sum
for pain and suffering in a maximum
of $25,000. He claims interest but I was
not addressed on that by either counsel and it is, as I understand it, precluded
by legislative
amendment so far as s 66 and s 67 lump sums are concerned. The
question of interest can always be brought back to me by way of Notice
should any dispute break out on that front, but I do not reserve formal liberty
to apply as I was not asked to do so by
either counsel.
2. The issues were kindly defined to me by Mr Saul of counsel who appeared
for the respondent at the commencement of proceedings on
24 October last as
being incapacity and the quantum of the applicant’s s 66 and s 67 benefits
including, I apprehend, the existence
of any entitlement to the latter.
3. The applicant gave evidence and despite considerable defects in
recollection, he struck me as an honest man who did his best to
give an honest
and accurate account of his injuries and disabilities. Unless I indicate to the
contrary, I accept his evidence on
the issues to which it is relevant.
4. The applicant was born on 21 October 1958. He is thus, to my ageing eyes
at least, a relatively young man and that will be reflected
in the s 67 lump sum
I propose to award him. He has two children, for one of whom he still pays
maintenance but for the second
of whom he also paid maintenance until 7 November
2001. The issue of dependency is not relevant, as the weekly payment award I
is less than the maximum appropriate to an adult male without
dependents. The applicant, I should add for completeness, is separated
divorced from his former wife, the mother of his children.
5. The applicant had a previous left foot injury in 1983 but it is not
suggested in the medical evidence, nor was it suggested to
cross-examination, that this contributed to any permanent loss of use now
existing of his left leg, although that was the
leg involved in the earlier
injury in 1983. It would appear that he was without problem from a physical
point of view when he joined
the respondent on 26 July 1999. Before that time,
he left school at the age of 16 and became an apprentice fitter, subsequently
qualifying in that trade, in which he subsequently worked, predominantly though
not exclusively, until he joined the respondent.
From time to time he also did
truck driving work, it would appear, and indeed that was the last job he had,
for a firm named Hymix
on the Gold Coast in Queensland, some time before he
joined the respondent.
6. The applicant conceded in cross-examination that the reason for him
obtaining that work was in order to see his children who were
on the Gold Coast,
although it paid considerably less than he was usually accustomed to earn as a
fitter, predominantly in the maintenance
area. He also conceded that he had
some months of unemployment after the job at Hymix finished and before he joined
the respondent
on this occasion on 26 July 1999, and he said that was because he
had accumulated funds and had decided to spend more time with his
children in
the Gold Coast area where they were residing.
“on this occasion”
in relation to the
applicant’s commencement of his employment with the respondent on 26 July
1999 because in fact he happened
to have worked with the respondent on an
earlier occasion for a period in similar work, and on a similar basis to that
in relation to the work after 26 July 1999 which he performed for the
respondent, mainly on contract doing maintenance fitting underground
in tunnels.
The applicant had worked for some years, it would appear from the evidence, for
various employers on a contract basis,
often earning considerable sums of money
as a maintenance fitter in oil refineries and on tunnelling projects, as well as
maintenance fitting work elsewhere.
8. Physically, the applicant’s work for the respondent after 26 July
1999 until the subject injury seems to have been reasonably
arduous. He was
required to work mainly but not exclusively underground, although he had a
workshop above ground. Working underground
involved negotiating tunnels which
had potholes in them which were filled with water, with the ever present danger,
which is reasonably
obvious, of falling over. In addition to that, he had to
work in crouched positions and in confined spaces for long periods, and
occasions had to lift and carry heavy objects in the course of dissembling and
reassembling machinery in order to repair it, which
was his job. That work he
seems to have done without problem until the subject injury occurred on 21
August 1999, as I have said.
9. This injury, which is not disputed by the respondent, as distinct from its
consequences, happened much as I have described above.
Apparently a hydraulic
strut which was supporting a truck did not have sufficient oil in it, and in
consequence, as the applicant
described it, it
“came down”
his legs. He was transported to Concord Hospital. Further detail about that
admission is not forthcoming from the evidence, but
I assume the applicant was
examined and allowed to leave. One way or the other, he worked on for a few
days, and experiencing ongoing
pain in the left knee, it would appear, consulted
a general practitioner who put him off work and sent him on to a Dr Peter Gray,
an orthopaedic surgeon.
10. The applicant came to operation on his left knee in reasonably short
order at the hand of Dr Gray on 2 August 1999. He had his
left knee in a brace
for eight weeks following that surgery. He returned to work, he said rather
early, on 15 November 1999 because
his employer wanted him to do so in order to
avoid lost time for work injuries. For some considerable time after his return
on this date, the applicant did nothing until he himself found work
repairing a truck, by something he had not particularly been
asked to do by his
employer. It is consistent with my assessment of his character in the witness
box as an industrious person that
he found sitting around doing nothing at work
boring, as indeed he said.
11. The applicant seems to have returned to what was essentially his
pre-injury employment after that time with the respondent, performing,
appear, work initially at West Ryde on a tunnelling project, that being the
location where he was initially injured. Apparently
some difficulties of an
organisational kind occurred with that, as well as some difficulties on the
applicant’s part physically
performing the work, which involved the
features which I have described above when detailing his pre-injury work,
because he was
then sent to White Bay where he continued to work for the
respondent, apparently performing somewhat lighter work until he was made
redundant by it on 20 March 2000.
12. The applicant’s evidence in chief was at one stage a little
confused as to what occurred after that. Eventually, at my
suggestion, it was
clarified by a further conference which I suggested the applicant’s
counsel Mr Bleasel have with his client.
It proved that in fact what occurred
was that after the applicant’s redundancy on 20 March 2000 he was
initially successful
in gaining employment for a firm called P S Services Pty
Ltd trading as Pavement Salvage. The applicant’s period of employment
not known to him, nor was it disclosed in any other evidence, but as an estimate
the applicant thought that he was with that
firm for about 2 months. The total
of his earnings according to his evidence on a gross basis there were
13. In very rough terms, it can be seen that the applicant’s average
weekly earnings there if calculated over nine weeks would
amount to a little
over $200 per week. Apparently the work was not constant, as I understood the
applicant’s evidence, in
that he did not work there every day. His work
with that firm apparently involved shifts of 18 hours at a time on occasions.
said the firm dug up pavements on roads, but that his job was measuring and
designing a skirt which fitted beside a machine, and
also doing a difficult job
removing a conveyor. One way or the other, he said that job was too much for
his leg eventually, and
that was why he left after approximately two months.
14. The applicant then worked for a firm known as The Construct Group. It
was drawn to his attention that his group certificate indicated
that he worked
there from 15 August to 5 September 2000, but the applicant said that he thought
he was there for six weeks. His
job was fitting conveyor systems into a
warehouse. That also seems to have been arduous and physical, for he said that
he was obliged
to leave it at the end of his period of employment abovementioned
because it was too much for his knee.
15. The applicant then worked for a firm named Technomill PLC Pty Ltd and he
disagreed with the contents of a group certificate put
to him suggesting that he
worked there between 12 and 15 September 2000, indicating that he thought he
only worked there for five
days. He said it was work he was well able to do,
because all he had to do was walk around and look at machinery, but he said he
found it boring and that he then left.
16. The applicant obtained further employment in short order with a firm
named Pirtek where he worked between 3 October and 6 December
2000. That work
involved working behind a counter serving customers and making hoses for them,
as well as repairing hoses on site.
He said he was well able to do the work but
had personal issues, as he put it, with the proprietor who was not a nice man,
so eventually
he left that employment.
17. Shortly after that the applicant started his own business, doing
maintenance fitting on pieces of equipment such as trucks and
machines which
were either delivered to him or which alternatively he fixes on site. That work
he clearly conceded involves a good
deal of bending and lifting and working in
confined spaces and for long hours. It resembles the tunnelling work he did
injury, but he was astute to say that the tunnelling work would be
too difficult for him because of the necessity to negotiate tunnels
potholes in them filled with water, with the consequent and obvious danger of
falling over and reinjuring his leg.
18. I accept the applicant’s evidence as to this, as it seems
reasonably supportable on the parts of the medical evidence which
I accept, to
which I shall come later. However, his treating orthopaedic surgeon, Dr Gray
who is as I shall reveale, optimistic
surgery, firstly says that he will suffer increasing osteoarthritic changes
limiting activity,
and secondly that it is appropriate to put working
restrictions on him based on discomfort, that being one of the things he said
would experience if he returned to tunnelling work with the features described
above, and I can well understand that.
19. The applicant said that he still surfs as he used to before the injury,
but had not played golf or squash, but readily conceded
in cross-examination
that on the basis of the hours he was working each week for the respondent he
did not have much time for sport,
and I can well imagine that this was the case.
He also claimed ongoing discomfort in his knee mediated by activity, and said
by way of medication from time to time he took proprietary pain-killers as
needed. He does not have any ongoing treatment from Dr
Gray, his treating
orthopaedic surgeon, apart from check-ups, the last of those having taken place
late last year. He said and I
can readily accept that he is reminded of his
injury by pain and restricted movement on a daily basis, although by the same
he is well able, it would appear, to do work which resembles his
pre-injury work, but without the more extreme features of it such
underground.
20. The applicant was cross-examined skilfully by Mr Saul for the respondent
and I trust I shall be forgiven if I do not refer to
every aspect of that but
only to those which particularly affect my determination of the
applicant’s rights.
21. Mr Saul’s cross-examination was mostly concerned with the
applicant’s pre and post injury employment. He clearly
established that
the applicant’s work pattern immediately before joining the respondent was
that for some months he was unemployed
as indicated above, and that as also
indicated above that he did truck driving work in the Gold Coast area for Hymix
earning less
money than he would have earned as a maintenance fitter.
22. Tax Returns as to the applicant’s pre and post injury employment
are in evidence as Exhibit C in the applicant’s case,
and Exhibit 1 in the
respondent’s case, and they undoubtedly establish what Mr Saul adduced
from the applicant in cross-examination.
Mr Saul also had the applicant admit
that in his business at the moment, not all of the limitations on his earning
capacity are
due to his injury, and that some are due to whether trade is good
or otherwise. The applicant also told me this, and it seems a
assumption.
23. Mr Saul also established in cross examination that from time to time
since the applicant’s injury, he has earned very high
weekly sums indeed,
particularly when employed by Pirtek as discussed above. However I do not think
it is appropriate in a case
like this to judge the applicant’s capacity to
earn by reference to the very high figures he has earned sometimes. I think
is more appropriate to look at the pattern of his earnings overall since the
injury as compared to before it. I shall deal with
that matter later in greater
24. Mr Saul established in cross-examination that the applicant had been well
able to walk when he last saw Dr Gray, but the applicant
protested that he had
only walked about five steps in Dr Gray’s surgery, and I can well imagine
that in other circumstances
when the applicant walks further, he is more
affected by pain, and he may then be affected in his gait in the way that he was
when he saw Dr Gray, the latter indicating that the applicant did not walk
with a limp.
25. Dr Gray also obtained a history in his last report, which I shall shortly
discuss, that the applicant did not experience giving
way in his knee, but the
applicant said in cross examination on this history that lately since he last
saw Dr Gray that tendency
has entered the picture and I accept what he says,
there being no reason to doubt it to my mind, the applicant being a witness of
truth in my view.
26. Mr Saul also put to the applicant that his agreed hourly rate with the
respondent was $17.10, as indeed was established by a letter
sent to the
applicant when he commenced employment with the respondent. The applicant said
that he did not know whether $17.10 per
hour was the award rate for fitters, but
he said that that was indeed the agreed rate, but concurred with a suggestion in
cross-examination
that he earned a higher rate than this in respect of overtime,
and that would seem to be the case having regard to the high probable
but for injury with the respondent in the applicant’s wage schedule,
Exhibit B, to which I shall come later.
27. The medical evidence consists firstly of Exhibit A, the applicant’s
medical reports. The first from Dr Neil Berry, a consultant
surgeon, dated 20
November 2000, offers the opinion that as a result of a knee injury consisting
of torn ligaments and a damaged
meniscus, for which he came to surgery at the
hands of Dr Gray, the applicant has 20 per cent permanent loss of use of the
at or above the knee, of which 5 per cent is due to pre-existing
changes in the knee, apparently of an osteoarthritic kind, and the
remaining 15
per cent is due to the applicant’s work injury.
28. Dr Berry thought that the applicant was permanently unfit for work
requiring prolonged crouching and squatting and kneeling, and
climbing up and
down stairs and ladders. He does perform such work in his own business at the
present time on occasions, and it
obviously cannot be said that he is entirely
unfit for it, but I think his capacity to perform work of that kind has been
by the subject injury which, after all, is of a very objective kind, it
having required surgery to correct it.
29. Dr Raymond Wallace wrote a report of 31 May 2001, he being an orthopaedic
surgeon and being qualified, like Dr Berry, by the applicant’s
solicitors.
He thought the applicant unfit for his full pre-injury duties as a fitter in the
long term, and best fitted to continue
in what Dr Wallace thought were his
current light duties at work, with due consideration being given to restrictions
on his activity,
which Dr Wallace expressed as being unfitness for activities
requiring repeated bending, squatting, crouching or kneeling on the
left leg, as
well as sitting or standing at one position for prolonged periods, repetitive
lifting above 10 kgs, working in confined
spaces or heights or on ladders,
prolonged driving of motor vehicle with manual transmission and prolonged
periods of stair climbing.
30. As I have already said, the applicant performs many of these sort of
activities in his current work on a self-employed basis,
and has indeed done so
for other employers since the subject injury. I think his capacity to perform
them however has been somewhat
reduced by the subject injury, and I certainly
think he is not fit, as indeed he himself avers, for his pre-injury work as a
maintenance
fitter in tunnels. Dr Wallace expressed a permanent loss of use of
the left leg at or above the knee of 22 per cent, entirely attributable
subject injury.
31. A certificate but not a report from Dr Chernin, the applicant’s
treating general practitioner, is part of Exhibit A and
it does not assist me in
my current task, because it does not describe the
for which it assesses the applicant as fit from 22 June 2000,
the certificate being dated 19 November 2001, well after the event,
the extent that it says “no ladders or tunnelling” on the following
page, which confirms in my view that the
applicant is not fully fit for his
pre-injury work in tunnels, as the opinion comes from his treating general
practitioner and his
specialist report.
32. A report of 23 January 2002 to the applicant’s solicitors from Dr
Peter Gray, orthopaedic surgeon, the applicant’s
treating surgeon,
completes Exhibit A. Apparently he found at operation on 2 September 1999 a
bucket handle tear involving the posterior
horn of the lateral meniscus, as well
as a torn medial collateral ligament and a tear of the anterior cruciate
ligament with an avulsion
from the femur, in consequence of which partial
meniscectomy was performed. It is not surprising that Dr Gray is of the view
the applicant will suffer ongoing and increasing degenerative changes in
his knee as a result of that injury, by way of post-traumatic
osteoarthritis.
He thought that the applicant had no restrictions on his activity other than
those imposed by discomfort, but those
would seem to me to involve a ruling out
of the applicant’s pre-injury work in tunnels, for reasons already
expressed. Dr
Gray did not in that report express a permanent loss estimate.
33. However, in a report dated 4 September 2001 tendered by the respondent
which became part of Exhibit 3, Dr Gray expressed a 10
per cent permanent loss
of use of the left leg at or above the knee as at 4 September 2001, following a
visit on 20 August 2001,
but qualified this by saying that percentage impairment
would increase over time as osteoarthritic changes supervene, which may be
reason why the applicant is currently experiencing giving way in his knee,
although no doctor says that and I therefore cannot
come to any firm conclusion
34. A further report of Dr Gray of 13 January 2003, again addressed to the
respondent, like that just discussed, is also part of Exhibit
3, and he did not
then express a further s 66 assessment, although he saw the applicant on 17
December 2002 before writing the report.
He repeated what he said earlier about
the risk of earlier than normal osteoarthritic changes in the knee, although he
express any definite time frame. He again said he would not impose
any restriction on activity other than any which may be imposed
by discomfort
which, as I have said, would seem to rule out the applicant’s tunnelling
work which he was doing before the injury,
and to which after all he attempted
to return after the subject injury with, he said, unacceptable consequences so
far as pain was
35. Finally, by way of medical evidence, there is a report from Dr David
Bornstein, an orthopaedic surgeon, which is also part of
Exhibit 3 and dated 22
May 2002 and addressed to the respondent’s solicitors. Dr Bornstein
assesses in that report a 5 per
cent permanent loss of use of the left leg at or
above the knee and simply says the applicant is fit for work apparently without
restriction. I accept that the applicant does have some ongoing restrictions of
the kind I have summarised above in relation to
his ongoing ability to work, and
that he has a somewhat higher s 66 assessment than Dr Bornstein suggests.
Comparing the applicant’s
ongoing complaints in his evidence with what is
said in the various medical reports I think, notwithstanding its antiquity, that
the report of Dr Berry best assesses the applicant’s permanent loss. I
think that against the background of pre-existing degenerative
changes in the
knee to which Dr Berry attests, the applicant has suffered a considerable
permanent loss of use of the left leg at
or above the knee, taking into account
the fact that he had an injury in it sufficient to require surgery, and the fact
pathology found at operation by Dr Gray was in multiple areas, as
summarised above.
36. There will therefore be an award in respect of 20 per cent permanent loss
of use of the left leg at or above the knee, which will
be the subject of a s
68A deduction as suggested by Dr Berry to the extent of 5 per cent, leaving the
applicant with a compensable
15 per cent permanent loss of use of the left at or
above the knee under s 66.
37. In consequence, the applicant passes the s 67 threshold. I think his
pain and suffering has been moderate rather than severe,
taking into account his
that, the applicant has
an ongoing problem with his left knee which causes him
daily pain and suffering. Without summarising what I have already said in
summary of his evidence about this, I think the appropriate level at which to
determine his pain and suffering in proportion
to a most extreme case is 20 per
cent or 1:5. I do not include in that assessment any pain and suffering which
may result from any
increased percentage loss of use of the left leg at or above
the knee because of advancing osteoarthritic changes, as that is a matter
future application if ever it is made.
38. This brings me to loss of earning capacity. I have already said that the
appropriate way to assess the applicant’s ability
to earn in suitable
employment is not to examine microscopically, as it were, his earnings at
different times, but rather to look
at them in a global way over the entire
period since the injury occurred. Over that period he earned on occasions
figures somewhat
higher than the figure I have decided to determine to be his
ability to earn in suitable employment, but for much longer periods
considerably less than this figure.
39. The reasons for the latter include, as I have said, slackness of trade on
occasions in his own business rather than his injuries.
I do not think in this
case that the prima facie approach, that the applicant’s actual earnings
are his true ability to earn
Pira Pty Ltd v Tucker
[1996] NSWSC 569
(1996) 14 NSWCCR
, is correct. I think, employing the knowledge of industrial awards and
such matters said to be posessed by this Court in such authorities
H Timbers Pty Ltd v Nelson
[1972] HCA 12
(1972) 126 CLR 625
, the applicant is in fact able
to earn in suitable employment the sum of $800 per week and has been so able
since the commencement
of his claim for weekly compensation on 22 June 2000.
40. Exhibit B, the applicant’s wage schedule, which was not the subject
of a competing wage schedule from the respondent, discloses
applicant’s probable earnings but for injury in the employ of the
respondent at all times from 22 June 2000 to date and
continuing at $1,863.90 a
week. It shows the applicant’s actual earnings as being nil until 30 June
2000, and from 1 July
2000 to 30 June 2001 $169.15 per week, from 1 July 20001
to 30 June 2002, $211.45 per week, and from 1 July 2002 to date and continuing
$211.45 per week. I do not know how those figures were derived, and presumably
it was the result of simple averaging over the entire
period, but they do not
give a correct picture of the applicant’s earnings with his post-injury
employers, particularly Pirtek,
where he earned very high figures indeed for a
short period, as indeed he admitted in cross-examination. As I have said, I do
think the applicant’s earnings in his own business are entirely
reflective of his full capacity to earn either.
41. Coming to the applicant’s probable earnings but for injury,
however, Mr Saul submitted that the proper course was to take
account of the
fact that the applicant’s contract would have concluded a matter of months
after the subject injury in any event,
something he readily conceded in
cross-examination, and that therefore he would not have worked for the
respondent on the probabilities
after that, even had he remained uninjured,
which is obviously the case.
42. I did not understand exactly how Mr Saul based this submission, but he
submitted that the proper level at which to find the applicant’s
earnings but for injury on an ongoing basis after he left the respondent was at
a level of $800 to $900 per week. He suggested
that the applicant’s
ability to earn in suitable employment should be set at a relatively high level,
which was a matter for
the Court, but he submitted the applicant should not
receive under s 40 the whole of the difference between that figure and his
earnings but for injury, but rather only some part of it, because of
discretionary factors, which he said included the fact that
applicant’s business earnings were depressed on occasions by slackness of
trade rather than his injury, and because the
applicant had not engaged in
full-time employment for a substantial period before joining the respondent, as
well as other matters,
which he said should lead me to award the applicant a net
sum of $50 to $100 per week under s 40 by way of weekly payments.
43. Mr Bleasel contented himself with reminding me that the applicant had
been in full employment since he left school, and suggested
that the way to
compute the applicant’s ability to earn in suitable employment was by
taking the $17.10 per week which the
applicant admitted was the hourly rate at
which he was remunerated for 38 hours per week by the current respondent under
his contract,
and multiplying that by 38 for a 38 hour week to arrive at the
figure of $649.80 per week, which he said was the applicant’s
earn in suitable employment. I do not understand the basis of that submission
fully either, but I have not accepted
it because I think the applicant’s
ability to earn in suitable employment is considerably higher than that, namely
week at set out above.
44. Mr Saul’s submission, as I reminded him at the time, seems to me to
be contrary to what was said in
Australian Wire Industries Pty Ltd v
(1985) 1 NSWCCR 50
by the Court of Appeal, and indeed possibly
contrary also to what was said by that Court in
Australian Wheat Board v
(1984) 1 NSWCCR 1.
Those authorities, particularly
Wire Industries
, appear to me to point to a necessity to hypothesise that
the applicant’s probable earnings at the time of injury with the
respondent would have continued, for purpose of the top line under the s 40
calculation. That approach seems to me to be mandated
by the terms of s 40
itself, which in this respect correspond largely with those of s 11(1) of the
Workers Compensation Act 1926,
which was being considered in
Australian Wire
. That is because the top line of the s 40
calculation as set out by s 40(2)(a) is:
The weekly amount which the worker would probably have been earning as a
worker but for the injury and had the worker continued to
be employed in the
same or some comparable employment.
45. The sum of $1,000 per week is included in the section after the words
“not exceeding” in brackets, that that sum has
been updated and the
statutory cap past which probable earnings but for injury are not to be
considered varies in this case considerably
from 22 June 2000. Until 30
September 2000 the maximum is $1,197.20 per week, from 1 October 2000 until 31
March 2001 it is $1,210.20
per week, from 1 April 2001 until 30 September 2001
it is $1,237.80 per week, and from 1 October 2001 to 31 March 2002 it is
per week, and from 1 April 2002 to date and continuing it is $1,281.30
per week. I asked Mr Saul whether he disagreed with the last
mentioned figure
on an ongoing basis and he indicated that he did not. The result is that I may
not include in the s 40 calculation
any probable earnings but for injury in the
applicant’s wage schedule exceeding the above statutory maxima, and I have
observed that prohibition.
46. Mr Saul drew my attention to s 43(1)(a) which reads
Average weekly earnings shall be computed in such manner as is best
calculated to give a rate per week at which the worker was being
remunerated,
except that if, because of the shortness of the time during which the worker has
been in the employment of the employer
or the terms of the employment, it is
impracticable at the date of the injury to compute the rate of remuneration,
regard may be
had to the average weekly amount which during the 12 months
previous to the injury was being earned -
(i) by a person in the same grade, employed at the same work, by the same
employer; or
(ii) if there is no person so employed, by a person in the same grade
employed in the same class of employment, and in the same district.
47. That section does not seem to me appropriate here because the
applicant’s injury took place on 21 August 1999, a little
less than a
month after he joined the respondent on 26 July 1999. It is perfectly possible
to compute what his earnings would have
been had he remained employed by the
respondent for as long as he would have been employed by them, namely the figure
of $1,863.90
per week set out in the applicant’s wage schedule which, as I
have said, was not contested by a competing schedule by the respondent.
48. The holding of the Court of Appeal in
Australian Wire Industries
would seem to me to oblige me to assume, for purposes of the calculation of
probable earnings but for injury, that the applicant
would have continued to
earn this last mentioned sum (observing the statutory caps mentioned above) on a
continuing basis until the
present time had he not been injured, because that
was the approach taken in that case, notwithstanding that the applicant retired
compulsorily at a time before his weekly payments fell for decision. The Court
of Appeal said that the appropriate course was to
extrapolate the
applicant’s probable earnings but for injury forward hypothetically until
the time weekly payments were to
be assessed at hearing, notwithstanding that
they would in fact not have so continued because of what was then compulsory
before that time: see McHugh JA (as he then was) at 54D. As his
Honour said there, this approach was required by
Australian Iron & Steel
Pty Ltd v Elliott
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 87.
I can see no reason in principle
why this same approach should not be taken in cases such as the present where
the employment would
have ceased, even had injury not supervened, because of the
duration of the contract. This would seem to be required indeed by the
terms of s 40(2)(a) quoted above. The position is the same with persons
imprisoned after injury and then unable to be employed:
despite strong
by Handley JA in
State Rail Authority v Davies
at 325D (his Honour acknowledged at 324E-F English authority to the
contrary) in the event even imprisonment was held in that case
discretionary matter relevant only at the third stage of the s 40 calculation.
Remembering that in the present case, unlike
Australian Wire Industries
State Rail Authority
, there was no absolute legal bar to the
applicant’s continued employment by the respondent after his contract
expired, had
he remained uninjured - it may, for example, have found him work
elsewhere - the authorities seem to me to indicate the approach
I have taken.
49. The Court of Appeal said in
Australian Wire Industries
that it was
at the third stage, namely the discretionary stage where the Court had to decide
whether the applicant should receive
the whole of the difference between his
probable earnings but for injury and ability to earn in suitable employment or
of it, that the fact that the employment would not in fact have
continued, should be taken into account (see McHugh JA at 55A).
That seems to
me to be the correct approach here and rules out the submission which Mr Saul
50. The alternative approach Mr Saul suggested would have involved
implementation of the matters suggested by him as discretionary
factors in the
determination of the applicant’s probable earnings but for injury, that is
to say, the first stage of the s
40 calculation mandated by s 40(2)(a). In fact
the result of that calculation, had I adopted Mr Saul’s approach, would
been that I would have determined that the applicant’s probable
earnings but for injury were at a level a little higher than
Mr Saul suggested,
namely $1,000 per week, estimating what the applicant would have been likely to
earn in his trade as a maintenance
fitter after his contract with the respondent
expired and using the information I have about his actual earnings in that trade
the present time, but increasing them somewhat because he would not have
had the disabilities which required him to leave some jobs
but not others as
described in his evidence. Deduction from that figure of the applicant’s
ability to earn in suitable employment
as I have found it, namely $800 per week,
would have resulted in a difference of $200 per week, which I would then have
awarded the
applicant in its entirety had I accepted Mr Saul’s submission,
because the matters suggested by him as discretionary factors
would then already
have been taken into account in determining the probable earnings but for
51. As it is, I think the proper approach is to take the statutory maxima
from time to time in relation to the probable earnings but
for injury mentioned
above, and to deduct from those the applicant’s ability to earn in
suitable employment of $800 per week.
That results in a difference slightly
less than $400 per week until 1 October 2000, and one someone above $400 per
week thereafter.
That is of course above the applicant’s maximum
entitlement, even taking into account his dependants, but I think it is a
exercise of discretion, applying the factors urged upon me by Mr Saul, and set
out above, to find a net weekly entitlement
under s 40 of $200 per week, and
there will be an award accordingly under the section from 22nd June 2000 to date
and continuing.
It will be seen that this is in the event the same result as I
would have reached had I accepted Mr Saul’s submissions.
52. I make the following findings:
1. Injury to applicant arising out of and in course of employment of
respondent on 21 August 1999.
2. Resulting from above injury, applicant has permanent loss of use of left
leg at or above knee of 20 per cent from which an appropriate
deduction under s
68A in respect of pre-existing degenerative changes in left knee to which such
loss is also due is 5 per cent.
3. Resulting from net compensable s 66 loss of 15 per cent as determined
above applicant has experienced and does and will experience
pain and suffering
of a proportion of 1:5 or 20 per cent to a most extreme case.
4. Resulting from above injury, applicant partially incapacitated for work
from 22 June 2000 to date and continuing.
5. From 22 June 2000 to date and continuing applicant able to earn in
suitable employment $800 per week.
6. From 22 June 2000 to date and continuing applicant’s probable
earnings but for injury $1,863.90 per week.
53. I make the following award in the applicant’s favour:
1. $200 per week from 22nd June 2000 to date and continuing under s 40.
2. Respondent to pay applicant’s medical and like expenses under s
3. $11,250 under s 66 for a 15 per cent permanent loss of use of left leg at
or above knee.
4. $10,000 under s 67 for pain and suffering.
5. Respondent to pay applicant’s costs. I recommend applicant’s
costs incurred second conference fee of $250 fee and
fee for advice on evidence
for counsel.
Mr M J Bleasel instructed by Firths - the Compensation Lawyers
appeared for the applicant.
Mr D G Saul instructed by Hunt & Hunt
appeared for the respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (44.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter