URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2017/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ramanathan, Anantha [2017] NSWMPSC 12 (20 December 2017)
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE INQUIRY
Constituted under Part 8 of
the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
to hold an Inquiry into a Complaint in relation to:
Dr Anantha Kumarasamy Ramanathan MED0001528572
Date/s of Inquiry:
27 - 30 November 2017
Committee members:
Mr Robin Handley (Chair)
Dr Anthony John Grabs (Vascular surgeon) Dr Upeksha Irani De Silva
(Vascular surgeon) Dr Catherine Berglund, PhD (Lay member)
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Ms Angela Petrie, instructed by Mr Feneil Shah, Legal Officer of the
Appearance for Dr Ramanathan:
Mr Stephen Barnes, instructed by Mr David Brown, of Browns Legal &
Date of decision:
20 December 2017
The Committee found unsatisfactory professional conduct in respect of
particulars 7(c) and (d), 8 and 9(a) of Complaint 2 and, therefore,
to impose conditions on Dr Ramanathan’s registration, set out below,
should he apply to be re-registered in Australia.
The Committee did not find unsatisfactory professional conduct in respect
of Complaints 1, 3 and 4.
Publication of decision:
Refer to paragraph 98 of this decision for details of non- publication
directions.
r Ramanathan, who qualified as a doctor in Sri Lanka, was first registered to
practise medicine in Australia in 2010. He has practised
as a vascular surgeon
in Queensland and on the Central Coast of New South Wales. In April 2014, the
Medical Council of NSW received
notification that, following a review by the
Royal Australasian College of Surgeons (RACS) at the request of the Central
Coast Local
Health District, restrictions had been placed on the scope of Dr
Ramanathan’s practice as a vascular surgeon. The RACS report
concerns with Dr Ramanathan’s surgical approach, skills and techniques,
and with his communication with other team
n 16 September 2014, the Medical Council convened proceedings under s 150 of
the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(the National Law).
These proceedings resulted in conditions being placed on Dr Ramanathan’s
registration limiting his performing
aortic surgery or endoluminal aortic
surgery and requiring that his practice be subject to supervision and monthly
reporting to the
Medical Council. On 23 September 2014, the Council also
referred the matter to the Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC) for
investigation
as a complaint. On 18 November 2014, after a review, the
conditions imposed on Dr Ramanathan’s registration were varied to
reporting on a quarterly rather than a monthly basis. In June 2015, the
restrictions on his performing surgery were relaxed.
n 28 January 2016, the Medical Council received a further report detailing
complications arising from surgery performed by Dr Ramanathan.
On 18 April 2016,
the Council received a mandatory notification from Dr Brian Bourke, the Head of
the Department of Vascular Surgery
at Gosford and Wyong Hospitals, raising
concerns about Dr Ramanathan’s clinical performance following surgery
performed by
him in February 2016. The Council therefore again convened s 150
proceedings and, following a hearing on 11 May 2016, Dr Ramanathan’s
registration was suspended. On 13 May 2016, the Council referred this further
matter to the HCCC for investigation as a complaint.
In September 2016, Dr
Ramanathan sought a review of the decision to suspend his registration and,
following a hearing on 28 October
2016, the suspension was lifted and conditions
imposed on Dr Ramanathan’s registration. The principal conditions limited
practice to working as a surgical assistant and only under the direct
supervision of a consultant surgeon.
n 3 May 2017, following its investigation of the 2016 incident, and with
reference to its investigation of the other incidents which
had been the subject
of the earlier s150 proceedings, the HCCC lodged four complaints with the
Medical Council alleging that Dr Ramanathan
was guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. On 15 August 2017, the Council convened this Professional
Standards Committee
to inquire into those complaints which, prior to the
hearing, were the subject of further minor amendments.
aving examined the evidence, the Committee found that Dr Ramanathan’s
conduct in respect of one of the four complaints constituted
unsatisfactory
professional conduct and made orders for the protection of the health and safety
of the public.
r Ramanathan, who is now aged 55, graduated with the degrees MBBS from the
University of Colombo in 1990. He became a fellow of the
College of Surgeons in 1995 and of the RACS in May 2010, having worked in Sri
Lanka, England and New Zealand. He was first registered
as a medical
practitioner in Australia on 23 September 2010. From October 2010, Dr Ramanathan
practised as a vascular and general
surgeon at Cairns Base Hospital in
Queensland and, from January 2012 until May 2016, when his registration was
suspended, as a vascular
surgeon on the Central Coast of NSW. He did not
practise between then and September 2017, although between April and September
he was an “observer” at the East Tremont Vascular Centre in the
Bronx, New York. Since 2 October 2017, he has been employed
as a vascular
surgeon at Nassau University Medical Center in New York.
he four complaints which are the subject of this inquiry arise from Dr
Ramanathan’s treatment of six patients, referred to here
as Patients A to
F, at Wyong and Gosford Hospitals.
he first complaint relates to Dr Ramanathan’s surgical planning and
decision making for Patients A, E and F, alleging that Dr
Ramanathan is guilty
of unsatisfactory professional conduct as defined in s 139B(1)(a) of the
National Law in that he:
“engaged in conduct that demonstrates the judgment possessed or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of medicine
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience”.
he second complaint relates to Dr Ramanathan’s clinical decision making
and surgical technique for Patients B, C, D, E and F
and alleges that Dr
Ramanathan is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct as defined in s
139B(1)(a) of the National Law in
“engaged in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in
the practice of
medicine is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience”.
he third complaint relates to Dr Ramanathan’s post-operative care and
management for Patients C and F and alleges that Dr Ramanathan
is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct as defined in s 139B(1)(a) of the National
Law in that he:
“engaged in conduct that demonstrates the judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of medicine
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience”.
he fourth complaint alleges that Dr Ramanathan is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct pursuant to s 139(1)(b) of the National
Law in that he
failed to ensure the operation report for Patient B’s surgery contained
sufficient detail regarding the quality
of the vessels in the region of the
aortic bifurcation, and failed to document adequate directions for hospital
staff to follow for
Patient A’s post-operative care and management,
contravening clause 7 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation (NSW)
Regulation 2010
(now repealed) (the 2010 Regulation).
he relevant provisions of the National Law and the 2010 Regulation are set
Attachment 1
n reaching our decision, the Committee had regard to oral evidence given in
person by Dr Ramanathan, and by Dr John Crozier and Professor
John Fletcher (the
HCCC’s expert witnesses), and by telephone by Professor Sir Peter Bell and
Dr Ammanulla Bolio (Dr Ramanathan’s
expert witnesses). The Committee also
had regard to the documents produced by the parties. We applied the standard of
proof of reasonable
satisfaction and in doing so we were mindful of the gravity
of the allegations and the consequences for Dr Ramanathan if we were
them proven.
he four complaints and particulars or details of the complaints are set out
Attachment 2
. The allegations raised in the complaints raise a
number of issues that we will consider in turn with reference to the
particulars,
stating our findings based on the evidence before us and having
heard submissions on the evidence from the parties.
he issues in respect of each complaint are as follows:
Complaint 1
. Did Dr Ramanathan’s surgical planning and decision
making for Patients A, E and F demonstrate that his judgment or the care
exercised in the practice of medicine were significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or
experience?
Complaint 2.
Did Dr Ramanathan’s clinical decision making and
the surgical technique he exercised during vascular surgery for Patients B,
D, E and F demonstrate that his knowledge, skill or judgment, or the care he
exercised in the practice of medicine were significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience?
Complaint 3.
Did Dr Ramanathan’s post-operative care and
management of Patients C and F demonstrate that his judgment, or the care he
in the practice of medicine were significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or
experience?
Complaint 4
. Did the operation report completed by Dr Ramanathan in
respect of Patient B’s surgery on 24 February 2013 - in particular,
in respect of the quality of vessels in the region of the aortic bifurcation -
and the directions to hospital staff for Patient
A’s post-operative care
and management meet the required standard for medical record keeping?
aving made our findings on these issues, we will consider whether Dr
Ramanathan’s conduct amounts to unsatisfactory professional
conduct and,
if so, what orders or directions we should make.
Complaint 1. The First Issue
Did Dr Ramanathan’s surgical planning and decision making for
Patients A, E and F demonstrate that his judgment or the care
he exercised in
the practice of medicine were significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or
experience?
atient A was a 32 year old man who had cardiothoracic surgery at the Royal
North Shore Hospital (RNSH) on 4 March 2013. Patient A
was referred to Dr
Ramanathan by Dr Gabrielle O’Kane, an Infectious Diseases consultant on
the Central Coast. In his statement
dated 23 August 2017, Dr Ramanathan said
that his understanding was that the vascular surgeons at the RNSH had requested
patient’s mycotic aneurysm be managed on the Central Coast. Dr
Ramanathan was concerned that the aneurysm had doubled in size
within a short
period of time, that the patient had presented to Gosford Hospital on multiple
occasions complaining of abdominal
pain, and that delaying the required surgery
would result in a burst aneurysm and catastrophioc bleeding, given that the
was on Warfarin. Although his preference was to operate at Gosford
Hospital, no emergency operating time was available and staff
at Gosford offered
to arrange for the operation to be conducted at Wyong Hospital. Dr Ramanathan
also requested that an experienced
general surgeon, Dr Adrian Cohen, be present
throughout the operation.
Particulars:
n 3 April 2013, Patient A consulted the practitioner in his rooms for his
infective aneurysm. On 3 April 2013, the practitioner inappropriately
to operate on Patient A’s aneurysm at Wyong Hospital on 5 April 2013 in
circumstances where:
he practitioner had limited time for a perioperative workup of Patient
A’s medical and surgical history.
he Committee found that the perioperative workup was adequate. There was an
echocardiogram in the Perioperative Chart (exhibit 8)
and computed tomography
angiography (CTA) images showing the position of the Patient’s mycotic
aneurysm (Attachment B to Dr
Ramanathan’s statement dated 23 August 2017).
We reject Dr Crozier’s opinion, noting Dr Ramanathan’s evidence of
his concern that the aneurysm had doubled in size since the patient’s
cardiothoracic surgery at the RNSH (as shown in a CT
scan arranged by Dr
O’Kane) and therefore might rupture. He considered the situation an
emergency. We note Professor Bell’s
evidence that given this concern, the
investigations carried out by Dr Ramanathan were adequate.
he practitioner was uncertain of the exact location of the presumed
infective aneurysm and he considered it may have involved paraduodenal
he Committee is satisfied, as Professor Bell recognised, that the CT images
available to Dr Ramanathan and examined by the Committee
show the location of
the aneurysm in a distal branch of the superior mysenteric artery.
We reject Dr Crozier’s evidence on this issue. In our view, the
particular is not made out.
n operation on the vessels in the region of Patient A’s infected
aneurysm was likely to be very challenging;
iven Dr Ramanathan’s knowledge of the location of the aneurysm, the
Committee disagrees with this statement and the opinion
expressed by Dr Crozier.
Dr Ramanathan said that on viewing the images from the CT scan at Wyong
Hospital, he concluded that the
aneurysm was located in a teriary jejunal branch
of the superior mesenteric artery. He said the surgical repair, undertaken on 5
April 2013, was uneventful, the aneurysm proving to be in the exact location he
had identified. Professor Bell’s oral evidence
was that since the aneurysm
was in a branch of the artery, this was “not too big a procedure and the
chances of it going wrong
were relatively small”.
atient A underwent surgery at Royal North Shore Hospital on 4 March 2013.
Post-operatively, Patient A’s cardiothoracic surgeons
made arrangements
for Royal North Shore Hospital vascular surgeons to further manage Patient
A’s infective aneurysm involving
the superior mesenteric artery;
he Committee noted that the RNSH discharge paperwork (exhibit 9, pp 12-
13) shows the follow up identified was with cardiothoracic surgeons and not
vascular surgeons. Dr Ramanathan said Dr O’Kane,
who referred the patient
to Dr Ramanathan because she was concerned at the doubling of the
patient’s aneurysm shown in the
CT scan, told him that the patient had
been discharged into the care of the Central Coast Local Health District
vascular surgeons.
Dr Ramanathan thought the patient’s aneurysm needed
urgent attention. Given the degree of difficulty of the surgery, Professor
considered it reasonable for Dr Ramanathan to undertake the surgery at Wyong
Hospital. The Committee is not satisfied on the
evidence that Dr
Ramanathan’s conduct was below the required standard.
he practitioner should have referred Patient A back to Royal North Shore
n hindsight, Dr Ramanathan agreed that he should have referred the patient
given the referral
from Dr O’Kane, and the fact that the patient had a growing mycotic
aneurysm, the Committee is satisfied
that expedient surgery was not unreasonable
and Dr Ramanathan’s conduct in operating on the patient without reference
RNSH was not significantly below the required standard.
he Committee also notes that in his report dated 8 September 2017, Professor
Bell said that because the aneurysm was in a branch of
the artery and not the
main artery itself, “it was perfectly reasonable to do it [to operate] at
Wyong Hospital”. The
CT angiogram indicated that the main mesenteric
artery was normal and there was enough room between the aneurysm and the main
to ligate it safely. He said the sutures used were those used by vascular
he Committee concludes that none of the particulars relating to Patient A
discussed above establish that Dr Ramanathan’s conduct
was significantly
below the required standard.
atient E, an 82 year old man, was admitted to Gosford Hospital for repair of
a 100mm abdominal aortic aneurysm. Dr Ramanathan performed
an endovascular
aortic repair on 2 December 2013.
Particulars
n 3 December 2013 at the angiography room at Gosford Hospital, the
practitioner inappropriately planned to perform surgery on Patient
circumstances where:
he practitioner performed Patient E’s surgery with the assistance of
a junior nurse who had not assisted with this type of procedure
he Committee accepts Dr Ramanathan’s evidence that two senior nurses
also assisted with the surgery. He said it was unfortunate
that a junior nurse,
who happened to be nearest to the table where the Lunderquist wire was located,
dropped it in the course of
passing it to him.
he practitioner performed Patient E’s surgery in a poorly lit
radiology facility which required him to wear a head lamp.
he Committee notes Dr Ramanathan’s evidence that elective endovascular
aortic repairs were performed in the radiology room at
Gosford Hospital. He said
that lighting in the room was adequate but it was his practice to wear a head
lamp. While Dr Crozier was
critical of Dr Ramanathan operating with the
assistance of a junior nurse in a poorly lit radiology facility, Professor Bell
He said in oral evidence that in a radiology suite the lighting is
often not as good as in an operating theatre but it is only if
things go wrong
that additional lighting is required.
he Committee is not satisfied that the particulars in either paragraph (a)
(b) establish that Dr Ramanathan’s conduct was significantly below the
required standard. We note that the circumstances in
which he operated on
patient E were largely outside his control.
atient F was a 73 year old man when Dr Ramanathan performed varicose veins
surgery on Patient F in November 2015. His plan was also
to perform a
“minimally invasive arterial procedure” in February 2016 to address
an arterial blockage in the patient’s
right leg. Prior to the surgery on
25 February 2016, Dr Ramanathan said he warned the patient that there was a risk
that the arterial
clearance might not be successful and could lead to problems
such as compromise of distal circulation. Ultimately, the surgery was
unsuccessful because, after several attempts, “re-entry back into the
lumen could not be achieved”. Dr Ramanathan therefore
decided to stop the
procedure. He said
“The patient followed routine angiogram post-operatve care and
was discharged home.”
pproximately three weeks after the operation, when the patient’s post-
operative pain had subsided, Dr Ramanathan planned to
perform a scan of the
ectatic aorta. He said that on 2 March 2016, he saw the patient in his rooms,
and did not find him to be unwell.
While the patient had some pain in his right
thigh, he said it was getting better on Panadol. However, in the evening of the
day – 3 March 2016 - having first attended his GP, the patient
presented at Wyong Hospital Emergency Department (ED) “very
The ED doctor phoned Dr Ramanathan that evening and Dr Ramanathan explained the
treatment the patient had undergone,
that he had seen him the previous day, and
that he could not visit him at Wyong Hospital because he had no privileges
there. Dr Ramanathan
told the ED doctor he was planning to see the patient the
following week. The ED doctor “did not raise any degree of concern
would have necessitated an earlier review”. Dr Ramanathan said his
understanding at that time was that the main concern
under consideration at
Wyong Hospital was gastroenteritis and that, subject to addressing that issue,
the patient would be sent home.
he following morning – 4 March 2016, another doctor from the Hospital
phoned to say the patient had been kept in overnight.
Dr Ramanathan discussed
the patient’s condition and treatment with the doctor. That evening, Dr
Ramanathan received a series
of calls from the Hospital, the first from the ED
consultant who said there had been a sudden increase in the swelling of the
right leg. Dr Ramanathan suggested review by a general or
vascular surgeon. The general surgical registrar subsequently phoned Dr
Ramanathan several times and he endeavoured to assist her, again recommending
that the patient should be seen by another consultant
given his inability to see
the patient in Wyong Hospital. Later, an ICU doctor phoned about the possibility
of transferring the patient
to Gosford Private Hospital. Dr Ramanathan
considered this unsatisfactory, given that it was a Friday evening, Gosford
Private Hospital’s
Intensive Care Unit was small and the supporting staff
limited. The patient was later transferred to Gosford Public Hospital.
r Ramanathan said he then recieved a phone call from Dr Bourke’s
registrar, Dr Chandra, enquiring about the patient, which Dr
understood to be at Dr Bourke’s request, Dr Chandra finishing the call
saying Dr Bourke would call him if he needed
further information. It appears the
patient underwent further surgery, a CT angiogram having revealed an infected
pseudoaneurysm.
Dr Ramanathan said he was in touch with Dr Chandra by phone both
before and after the surgery and also tried to contact Dr Bourke
both by phoning
his rooms and sending him an email, receiving no response. Dr Ramanathan said he
very much regretted this outcome
for the patient and it was regrettable that he
was unable to visit him as he would have liked.
Particulars
n January 2016, the practitioner inappropriately planned to perform
arterial revascularisation surgery on Patient F on 25 February
circumstances where:
atient F’s peripheral arterial disease was asymptomatic;
atient F was experiencing no symptoms suggestive of intermittent
claudication;
atient F had no evidence of critical limb ischemia;
he practitioner’s surgical plan was to attempt to revascularise
Patient E’s right superficial femoral artery using a contralateral
approach passing an access sheaf from the left common femoral artery over the
aortic bifurcation to the right common femoral artery.
The practitioner’s
contralateral approach carried an increased risk of procedural
complications;
he practitioner had not arranged scans pre-operatively to assess Patient
F’s abdominal aortic aneurysm;
he practitioner failed to first trial compression stockings for management
of the venous insufficiency.
r Ramanathan said he did not accept that planning to perform arterial
revascularisation on Patient F on 25 February 2016 was inappropriate.
he agreed with the statements in paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (e) and the first
sentence of paragraph (d). With regard to paragraph
(e), as Professor Bell
indicated, not all vascular surgeons arrange for such scans pre- operatively.
Professor Bell said that while
a scan is prudent, not all specialists would
arrange one. With regard to the second sentence of paragraph (d), Professor
gave oral evidence that the contralateral approach is standard practice
for Australian vascular surgeons. With regard to paragraph
(f), the Committee
accepts Dr Ramanathan’s evidence that he had trialled (TED) compression
stockings on the Patient who was
obese and could not tolerate them.
he Committee concludes that none of the particulars relating to Patient F
discussed above establish that Dr Ramanathan’s conduct
was significantly
below the required standard.
n summary, the Committee is not satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that the particulars for Complaint 1 establish that Dr Ramanathan’s
surgical planning and decision making demonstrate that his judgment or the care
he exercised in the practice of medicine were significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience.
Complaint 2. The Second Issue
Did Dr Ramanathan’s clinical decision making and the surgical
technique he exercised during vascular surgery for Patients B,
C, D, E and F
demonstrate that his knowledge, skill or judgment, or the care he exercised in
the practice of medicine were significantly
below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience?
r Ramanathan stated that Patient B, a 77 year old man, presented as an
emergency at Gosford District Hospital on 24 February 2013
with a ruptured
abdominal aortic aneurysm. Dr Ramanathan was on call and therefore
TTCC11,,11
ITDtttPPPIDTAPTTtTtOPTTItTPGaTtTtOPHTTITTTTTTDHOOOD
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (744 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter