URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWLEC/2025/1788.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:00:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
101 Keira Street Pty Ltd v Wollongong City Council [2025] NSWLEC 1788 (11 November 2025)
Land and Environment Court
New South Wales
101 Keira Street Pty Ltd v Wollongong City Council
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWLEC 1788
Hearing Date(s):
Conciliation conference on 31 October 2025
Date of Orders:
11 November 2025
Decision Date:
11 November 2025
The Court orders that:
(1) The request pursuant to clause 4.6 of the
Wollongong Local Environmental Plan 2009 (LEP) to vary the development standard
building height contained in clause 4.3 of the LEP as prepared by MMJ
Planning dated August 2025 is upheld.
(2) The request pursuant to clause 4.6
of the LEP to vary the development standard for building separation contained in
of the LEP as prepared by MMJ Planning dated August 2025 is
(3) In accordance with section 8.15(3) of the Environmental Planning
& Assessment Act 1979 (NSW), the Applicant is to pay the
Respondent's costs
thrown away as a result of the amendments made to the application for
development consent, in the agreed sum of
$12,000.00, payable within 28 days
from the date of the order.
(4) The appeal is upheld.
(5) Development
Application DA-2024/818 for the demolition of existing structures, lot
consolidation and construction of a 7-storey
shop top housing development over 1
level of basement parking at 101-113 Keira Street, Wollongong is determined by
the grant of consent
subject to conditions contained in Annexure A.
Catchwords:
DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION: residential apartment development – shop top
housing development in MU1 Mixed Use zone – conciliation
– agreement between parties - orders
Legislation Cited:
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation 2021
State Environmental Planning Policy (Housing) 2021,
State Environmental Planning Policy (Resilience and Hazards) 2021,
State Environmental Planning Policy (Sustainable Buildings) 2022,
State Environmental Planning Policy (Transport and Infrastructure) 2021,
Wollongong Local Environmental Plan 2009, cll 2.1, 4.3, 4.4A, 4.6,
7.5, 7.6, 7.18, 8.4, 8.6, 8.7
Texts Cited:
NSW Government, Apartment Design Guide, July 2015
Principal judgment
101 Keira Street Pty Ltd (Applicant)
Wollongong City Council
(Respondent)
Representation:
M Bawden (Solicitor) (Applicant)
E Kilpatrick (Solicitor)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Mills Oakley (Applicant)
Wollongong City
Council (Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
COMMISSIONER
This Class 1 appeal is brought under
Environmental Planning and
Assessment Act 1979
(NSW) following the deemed refusal by Wollongong City
Council of development application DA-2024/818 seeking development consent
the demolition of existing structures, lot consolidation and construction of a
7-storey shop top housing development over 1 level
of basement parking (the DA)
at 101-113 Keira Street, Wollongong, identified formally as 101 Keira Street -
Lot A DP 89130; 103-107
Keira Street - Lot C DP 398161; and 109-113 Keira Street
- Lot D DP 398161.
DA was lodged by the Applicant in these proceedings, 101 Keira Street Pty Ltd
(101 Keira) on 12 November 2024 and was publicly
notified by the Council from 14
November 2024 to 28 November 2024 in response to which three submissions were
10 March 2025, 101 Keira filed an appeal in Class 1 of the Court’s
31 October 2025, the Court arranged a conciliation conference between the
parties in accordance with
Land and Environment
Court Act 1979
(NSW) (LEC Act), at which I presided.
the conciliation conference, the parties reached agreement
on the matters in contention, and a signed agreement was filed with
the Court on 28 October 2025, in accordance with s 34(10) of the LEC Act.
parties ask me to uphold the appeal and grant conditional development consent to
the development application according to terms
set out in the s 34 agreement
before the Court. In general terms, the agreement approves the development
subject to amended plans
that were prepared by 101 Keira, and noting that the
final detail of the works and plans are specified in the agreed conditions of
development consent annexed to the s 34 agreement.
s 34(3) of the LEC Act, I must dispose of the proceedings in accordance with the
parties’ decision if the parties’
decision is a decision
that the Court could have made in the proper exercise of its functions. The
parties’ decision involves
the Court exercising the function under s
4.16 of the EPA Act to grant consent to the development application. There
are jurisdictional
prerequisites that must be satisfied before this function can
be exercised.
the reasons set out below, I am satisfied that the parties’ decision
is a decision that the Court could have made in the
proper exercise of its
I note the site is located within a zone designated by the Land Use Table at cl
2.1 of the Wollongong Local Environmental
Plan 2009 (WLEP) as MU1 Mixed Use in
which shop top housing development is permitted with consent, where consistent
with the following
objectives of development in the zone:
• To encourage a diversity of business, retail, office and
light industrial land uses that generate employment opportunities.
• To ensure that new development provides diverse and active
street frontages to attract pedestrian traffic and to contribute
to vibrant,
diverse and functional streets and public spaces.
• To minimise conflict between land uses within this zone and
land uses within adjoining zones.
• To encourage business, retail, community and other
non-residential land uses on the ground floor of buildings.
• To support adjacent and nearby commercial centres and
minimise adverse impacts on the viability of the centres.
• To encourage development that is compatible with the
centre’s position in the centres hierarchy.
The height standard is exceeded
to the relevant map at cl 4.3(2) of the WLEP, a height standard of 24m applies
to the site. As the proposal is for development
with a maximum height of 24.63m,
101 Keira sets out grounds to justify the contravention of the standard in a
Clause 4.6 Variation
Statement prepared by MMJ Planning dated August 2025
(Height Request).
exceedance is described on p 3 of the Height Request as arising due to two
“roof window pop ups”, as well as the leading
edge of the parapet
and lift overrun.
Height Request asserts compliance with the height standard is unnecessary or
unreasonable because the objectives of the height
standard at cl 4.3 of the WLEP
are achieved notwithstanding the non-compliance.
objectives are as follows:
(a) to establish the maximum height limit in which buildings can be
designed and floor space can be achieved,
(b) to permit building heights that encourage high quality urban
(c) to ensure buildings and public areas continue to have views of
the sky and receive exposure to sunlight.
am satisfied that compliance with the development standard is unreasonable or
unnecessary pursuant to cl 4.6(3)(a) of the WLEP because
the development is
substantially within the height standard but for isolated elements depicted with
Reduced Levels (RLs) on Figure
11 of the Height Request and because the areas of
exceedance do not give rise to additional floor space or intensification of the
development, and arise largely due to the fall of the land and the desire to
achieve sunlight and cross ventilation in a manner that
is consistent with the
Apartment Design Guide (ADG).
respect of objective (c), the height exceedance does not impose additional
overshadowing beyond those generated by a compliant
building envelope due to the
particular location of the exceedances on the rooftop.
am also satisfied that there are sufficient environmental planning grounds to
justify the non-compliance for the reasons set out
in the Height Request,
summarised as follows:
(1) The exceedance is minor in scale and extent, does not generate additional
habitable floor space, bulk or density and will be
perceived from the public
domain as complying with the height standard.
(2) The exceedance arises, in part, due to the topography of the site that falls
to the south, while needing to retain flush finish
to upper floors over.
(3) The roof window pop ups serve the function of ensuring natural daylight and
cross ventilation into apartments, consistent with
guidance found in the ADG.
(4) The proposal optimises the use of a site that is well located within the
Wollongong City Centre, is consistent with the objectives
of the height standard
and delivers housing that is in the public interest.
I am satisfied the Height Request demonstrates those matters required to be
demonstrated at cl 4.6(3) of the WLEP, I find the Height
Request should be
The building separation standard
proposed development is within an area having a street frontage height of two
storeys to both Keira Street and Smith Street. The
proposal provides no
separation within this street frontage height, consistent with cl 8.6(2)(a) of
the WLEP. However, the separation
between the proposal and adjoining buildings
at 69 Smith Street and 6 Thomas Street above the street frontage height is less
16m, as required by cl 8.6(3)(b) of the WLEP.
Keira sets out grounds to justify the contravention of the standard in a Clause
4.6 Variation Statement for Building Separation
prepared by MMJ Planning dated
August 2025 (Separation Request).
proposed horizontal separation is tabulated on p 15 of the Separation Request
showing separation distances from 69 Smith Street
of between 1m and 10m, and
between 10.9m to a complying distance of more than 16m to 6 Thomas Street.
Separation Request asserts compliance with the Building Separation standard is
unnecessary or unreasonable because the objectives
of the standard at cl 8.6 of
the WLEP are achieved notwithstanding the non-compliance.
one objective of the standard is to ensure sufficient separation of buildings
for reasons of visual appearance, privacy and solar
am satisfied that the proposal is consistent with the objective for the reasons
that follow:
(1) The objective of achieving sufficient separation for reasons of visual
appearance is achieved by the development above street
frontage height appearing
slender when read from Smith Street. The reduced separation at the interface
with 69 Smith Street occurs
primarily between non-habitable spaces used for
circulation and communal areas where landscape planting and screening visually
the interface, rather than sensitive habitable rooms.
(2) The objective of achieving sufficient separation for reasons of privacy is
achieved by orienting living spaces in the proposed
development toward the
public domain or internal communal areas to avoid or reduce overlooking of
adjoining buildings. Where there
is non-compliance with the building separation
standard to 6 Thomas Street, the proposal mitigates the potential for
overlooking
through screening, balustrade treatment, ensuring that any
overlooking is oblique.
(3) The objective of achieving sufficient separation for reasons of solar access
to apartments within the proposed development is
demonstrated by 100% of the
apartments achieving at east 2 hours of direct sunlight to living areas and
private open space in mid
winter. In respect of solar access to adjoining
buildings, the development at 69 Smith Street is non-residential and the parties
agree that there is no requirement for solar access. In respect of the
residential development at 6 Thomas Street, the separation
tabulated at [
] ensures that no
overshadowing occurs before 1pm, as demonstrated by Sun Eye Diagrams in the
architectural drawings Dwg No. 32-33.
am also satisfied that there are sufficient environmental planning grounds to
justify the non-compliance for the reasons set out
in the Separation Request,
summarised as follows:
(1) The proposal ensures sufficient separation for reasons of residential
amenity in terms of privacy and solar access, notwithstanding
non-compliance. Those uses at the interface where compliance is not achieved are
either non-habitable spaces or secondary balconies
where privacy and
overshadowing impacts are negligible.
(2) The site is a prominent corner within Wollongong City Centre with Controls
found in Chapter D13 that prioritise continuity at
the podium level.
(3) The proposal conforms to Part 3F of the ADG, and the distribution of
building mass across the site creates a balanced built form.
(4) The redevelopment of a consolidated site is an orderly and economic use of
land with impacts described at [
] mitigated.
I regard a number of the environmental planning grounds advanced above to
promote the development as a whole, I note the Council
is satisfied that the
Separation Request demonstrates the matters required to be demonstrated by cl
4.6(3) of the WLEP. Accordingly,
the Council raises no issue regarding cl 4.6
and accepts that a variation of the height development standard under cl 8.6 is
I am also satisfied the Separation Request demonstrates those matters required
to be demonstrated at cl 4.6(3) of the WLEP, I find
the Separation Request
should be upheld.
Wollongong Local Environmental Plan 2009
floor area of the proposed development, when expressed as a floor space ratio
(FSR) is 2.58:1, according to the calculation shown
on architectural drawing No.
22, which complies with the FSR permitted by the relevant formula at cl 4.4A of
site is identified within an area of Class 5 Acid Sulfate Soils (ASS) according
to the relevant map at cl 7.5(2) of the WLEP,
and within 250m of another class
of ASS. While excavation is proposed, I am satisfied that when regard is had to
the Reduced Levels
(RLs) on the survey prepared by Jonathan Keen dated 21 March
2024, the depth of excavation is unlikely to lower the water table.
the excavation proposed is considered by the Preliminary Geotechnical
Investigation report prepared by Douglas Partners,
dated 28 June 2024, noting
that groundwater levels are substantially below the depth that is proposed to be
excavated. Support for
the proposed excavation, the disposal of excavated
material, monitoring and further investigation are matters for comment and
recommendation,
that I note are the subject of agreed conditions of consent and
which satisfactorily address those matters for consideration at cl
8.4 of the WLEP, at the time of lodgement of the DA, provides for minimum street
frontage to at least one frontage of 20m with
which the proposal complies.
area of the ground floor retail spaces complies with the provision at cl 8.7 of
The design of residential apartment development
the proposed development is residential apartment development, the Court is
required by s 147 of State Environmental Planning Policy
(Housing) 2021 (Housing
SEPP) to consider the quality of the design of the development, evaluated in
accordance with the design principles
am assisted by a statement dated 31 October 2025 and prepared in accordance with
Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation 2021
Regulation) that attests Mr Peter Couvaras (Arch Reg No. 7344) directed the
design of the proposal, and sets out the means
by which the design principles
have been applied in the proposed development, and how the objectives in
of the ADG are addressed.
Council’s Design and Sustainability Advisory Panel has considered the
proposal and provided advice on the design. Whether
or not that Panel is a panel
constituted in a manner to which
s 147(1)(c)
is directed, the parties agree that
the proposal demonstrates design excellence in accordance with cl 7.18 of the
WLEP, for reasons
that are set out in the statement prepared by Mr Couvaras and
on the basis of which the Court is able to form an opinion of satisfaction
the proposed development exhibits design excellence.
the basis of the statement at [
], I am also satisfied the development as proposed
meets the requirements set out in
of the Housing SEPP.
State Environmental Planning Policy (Transport and
Infrastructure) 2021
access is proposed via Keira Street, which is a classified road. The width of
the site’s frontage to Smith Street,
as the alternative location for
access, precludes access within an acceptable distance of the intersection. A
Traffic and Parking
Impact Assessment prepared by McLaren dated 22 August 2024
concludes that any driveway connection to Smith Street would be unsafe
the proximity of the signals at the intersection and interaction with the Smith
Street bicycle path. Transport for NSW require
a median to be installed in Keira
Street to direct vehicles entering and exiting the site, and impose Condition
172, accompanied
by Attachment 2 of the agreed conditions of consent. On this
basis, I am satisfied that the operation of Keira Street will not be
affected by the development as a result of vehicular access, emissions or dust,
or the nature, volume or frequency of vehicles
using Keira Street, in accordance
with s 2.119 of State Environmental Planning Policy (Transport and
Infrastructure) 2021 (Infrastructure
Acoustic Report prepared by Pulse White Noise Acoustics dated 2 August 2024
(Acoustic Report) proposes design mitigation measures
to address potential
impacts from traffic noise, and the potential impact of noise from other sources
such as plant and equipment
on neighbouring properties. I note the Acoustic
Report concludes that acceptable levels will be achieved, although I regard
to the rail line to the north of the site to be erroneous as it is
clearly not. Those conclusions are subject to measures that are
incorporated
into the agreed conditions of consent. On this basis I am satisfied that the
development includes measures of a kind
likely to ameliorate traffic noise in
accordance with s 2.119(2)(c) of the Infrastructure SEPP.
Environmental Planning Policy (Resilience and Hazards) 2021
have considered whether the land is contaminated in accordance with
State Environmental Planning Policy (Resilience and Hazards) 2021.
the basis of the Preliminary Site Investigation authored by Douglas Partners
dated 22 August 2024, and the Detailed Site Investigation
prepared by EI
Australia dated 28 October 2025 (the DSI), and its addendum of the same date and
author, I am satisfied that the site
represents a low risk of contamination and
is suitable for the development proposed, subject to the recommendations
contained in
the DSI that are incorporated in the agreed conditions of consent
at Conditions 25 and 165).
State Environmental Planning Policy
(Sustainable Buildings) 2022
application is accompanied by a BASIX certificate for 27 dwellings (Cert No.
1760733M_02 prepared by Jensen Hughes Pty Ltd and
dated 11 September 2025) in
accordance with State Environmental Planning Policy (Sustainable Buildings) 2022
(Sustainable Buildings
SEPP), supported by NatHERS Certificate prepared by
Cadence Efficiency dated 11 September 2025.
embodied energy report is a part of the BASIX Certificate, such that the Court
can be satisfied that the embodied emissions attributable
to the proposed
development have been quantified in accordance with
of the Sustainable
Buildings SEPP.
note that in addition to the notification cited at [
], the amended proposal
was publicly advertised from 12-16 September 2025, in response to which two
further objections were received,
and filed with the Court on 31 October
the parties’ decision is a decision that the Court could have made in the
proper exercise of its functions, I am required
under s 34(3) of the LEC Act to
dispose of the proceedings in accordance with the parties’ decision.
making the orders to give effect to the agreement between the parties, I was not
required to, and have not, made any merit assessment
of the issues that were
originally in dispute between the parties.
(1) The Court notes that Wollongong City Council, as the relevant consent
authority, has approved, under
section 38(1)
Environmental Planning and
Assessment Regulation 2021
(NSW), the amendment of Development Application
DA-2024/818 to incorporate the documents listed below:
Drawing Title
Prepared By
Architectural Plans
Couvaras Architects
Basement 1 Plan
Couvaras Architects
Ground Floor Plan
Couvaras Architects
Ground Floor mezzanine floor plan
Couvaras Architects
Level 1 Floor Plan
Couvaras Architects
Level 2 Floor Plan
Couvaras Architects
Level 3 Floor Plan
Couvaras Architects
Level 4 Floor Plan
Couvaras Architects
Level 5 Floor Plan
Couvaras Architects
Level 6 Floor Plan
Couvaras Architects
Couvaras Architects
Liveable Plans
Couvaras Architects
Couvaras Architects
Elevations – Keira Street
Couvaras Architects
Couvaras Architects
Couvaras Architects
Streetscape Elevation
Couvaras Architects
Couvaras Architects
Couvaras Architects
Couvaras Architects
Couvaras Architects
External Finishes Plan
Couvaras Architects
Detailed Façade Section
Couvaras Architects
Demolition Plan
Couvaras Architects
Commercial Signage Strategy
Couvaras Architects
Landscape Plans
Cover Sheet
General Arrangement Plan : Level 1
General Arrangement Plan : Level 2
General Arrangement Plan : Level 3
General Arrangement Plan : Level 6
General Arrangement Plan: Level 1
General Arrangement Plan: Level 2
General Arrangement Plan: Level 6
GRC specs : Level 6
Planting Plan : Level 1
Planting Plan : Level 2
Planting Plan : Level 3
Planting Plan : Level 6
Planting Palette
Details and Specification Notes
Stormwater Plans
Notes & Legend
JN Responsive Engineering
Typical Details
JN Responsive Engineering
Typical Details
JN Responsive Engineering
Typical Details - Misc
JN Responsive Engineering
Typical Details - Misc
JN Responsive Engineering
Water Sensitive Urban Design
JN Responsive Engineering
Basement 1 Stormwater Plan
JN Responsive Engineering
Erosion & Sediment Control Basement Plan
JN Responsive Engineering
Ground Stormwater Plan
JN Responsive Engineering
Erosion & Sediment Control Ground Plan
JN Responsive Engineering
Ground Mezzanine Stormwater Plan
JN Responsive Engineering
Site Catchment and OSD Drains Model Summary
JN Responsive Engineering
Site Catchment & DRAINS Model Result for Pipe
JN Responsive Engineering
Notes & Legend
JN Responsive Engineering
Supporting Documentation
Prepared By
Design Verification Statement and ADG Compliance Checklist
Peter Couvaras
Clause 4.6 Request (Building Height)
MMJ Planning
Clause 4.6 Request (Building Separation)
MMJ Planning
Hazardous Material Survey
EI Australia
Detailed Site Investigation
EI Australia
Detailed Site Investigation - Addendum
EI Australia
BASIX Certificate No. 1760733M_02
Jensen Hughes Pty Ltd
BASIX stamped plans certificate #HR-YDUU7B-01
Jensen Hughes Pty Ltd
Amended BASIX Report
Jensen Hughes Pty Ltd
Amended NaTHERS certificate #HR-YDUU7B-01
Jensen Hughes Pty Ltd
Preliminary Historical Archaeological Assessment and Research Design
Austral Archaeology
Owners Consent Letter
101 Kerira Street Pty Ltd
(2) The amended plans and other documents were filed with the Court on 29
October 2025.
Court orders that:
(1) The request pursuant to clause 4.6 of the Wollongong Local Environmental
Plan 2009 (LEP) to vary the development standard for
building height contained
in clause 4.3 of the LEP as prepared by MMJ Planning dated August 2025 is
(2) The request pursuant to clause 4.6 of the Wollongong Local Environmental
Plan 2009 (LEP) to vary the development standard for
building separation
contained in clause 8.6 of the LEP as prepared by MMJ Planning dated August 2025
(3) In accordance with section 8.15(3) of the
Environmental Planning &
Assessment Act 1979
(NSW), the Applicant is to pay the Respondent's costs
thrown away as a result of the amendments made to the application for
development
consent, in the agreed sum of $12,000.00, payable within 28 days
from the date of the order.
(4) The appeal is upheld.
(5) Development Application DA-2024/818 for the demolition of existing
structures, lot consolidation and construction of a 7-storey
shop top housing
development over 1 level of basement parking at 101-113 Keira Street, Wollongong
is determined by the grant of consent
subject to conditions contained in
Annexure 'A'.
Commissioner of the Court
A (568 KB, pdf)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (486 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter