URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v 465 Leichhardt Pty Ltd [2025] NSWIC 5 (2 July 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v 465 Leichhardt Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 5
Hearing Date(s):
29 May 2025
Date of Orders:
02 July 2025
Decision Date:
2 July 2025
Taylor J, President
(1) I impose a fine on 465 Leichhardt Pty Ltd of
(2) 465 Leichhardt Pty Ltd is to pay the
prosecutor’s costs of the proceedings in the amount of $42,762.77 as
(3) Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be paid to the prosecutor.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW — Work health and safety — Offences —
Category 2 — Sentencing — Gate overrunning its supports
and falling
— No adequate end stop — Faulty design and installation of gate
— Low to mid-range of objective seriousness
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Cases Cited:
Inspector Lancaster v M L Colturi Sawmills Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWIRComm
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd [2017] NSWCCA 96
(2009) 195 A Crim R 1
[2009] NSWCCA 102
R v Cartwright
R v Thomson (2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
266 A Crim R 132
[2017] NSWCCA 90
R v Youkhana
[2004] NSWCCA 412
NSW v Ceerose Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWDC 313
SafeWork NSW v Chris Darby Strata Pty
[2024] NSWDC 360
SafeWork NSW v Hibernian Contracting Pty Ltd
SafeWork NSW v Maluko Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC 274
SafeWork NSW v The
Owners – Strata Plan No 93899
[2024] NSWDC 277
Texts Cited:
Australian Standard AS 2601-2001 “The Demolition of
Structures”
SafeWork NSW, “Code of Practice: Demolition
Work” (August 2019)
SafeWork NSW, “Code of Practice: Managing the
Work Environment and Facilities” (August 2019)
SafeWork NSW,
“Industrial gate fatality – 12 June 2020” (Incident
information release, 27 August 2020)
WorkSafe Western Australia, Safety Alert
08/2018 (August 2018)
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
465 Leichhardt Pty Ltd (Defendant)
Representation:
M Moir (Prosecutor)
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
File Number(s):
2024/320298
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to the order of Taylor J, President made on 29 May 2025 and
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(NSW), there is to be no publication of the
names and other identifying details of the four victims in these
proceedings.
2 September 2022 a woman and her three young children were walking home along a
footpath on Parramatta Road, Leichardt when a 200-kilogram
sliding gate (Gate)
was opened, overran its supports and fell onto them, causing them to be injured.
NSW as the prosecutor instituted proceedings against the company that had
arranged for the Gate to be installed, 465 Leichhardt
Pty Ltd, the defendant in
these proceedings. The defendant subsequently entered a plea of guilty to a
Category 2 offence under
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(NSW) (WHS Act), namely that it failed to comply with its duty pursuant to s
20(2) of the WHS Act to ensure, so far as is reasonably
practicable, that
the workplace, the means of entering and exiting the workplace and anything
arising from the workplace are without
risks to the health and safety of any
person by exposing the woman and her three children to a risk of serious
nature of the risk to which the defendant pleaded guilty was:
“10. ... the risk to persons in the vicinity of the Gate, in particular
[the primary victim] and her three children, suffering
death or serious injury
as a result of being struck by the Gate falling on them.”
defendant by its plea accepted there were reasonably practicable steps that it
failed to take that would have eliminated or minimised
the risk arising. The
particulars to which it pleaded guilty were:
“a) Undertaking a workplace inspection of the Site which identified
hazards associated with the Gate, including hazards arising
from the manual
operation of the Gate due to the absence of a Gate motor, the lack of physical
end stops on the metal track of the
Gate, the lack of a stopper post at the end
of the track, the inadequately fitted metal track, and the loosely fitted guide
b) Conducting a risk assessment to identify that the Gate presented a risk to
members of the public using the footpath, and to workers
manually opening and
closing the Gate to access the Site, and to identify the control measures to be
implemented to manage the risk,
including the measures set out below;
c) Providing and installing, or arranging for a competent person to provide and
install, an adequate physical stop at the end of
the metal track to prevent the
Gate from overrunning past its guide rollers;
d) Providing and fitting, or arranging for a competent person to provide and
fit, to the Gate an adequate stop mechanism at the top
and/or bottom of the Gate
to prevent the Gate from overrunning past its guide rollers;
e) Providing and installing, or arranging for a competent person to provide and
install, a stopper post at the end of the metal track
of the Gate to prevent the
Gate from overrunning past its guide rollers;
f) Erecting hoarding, or security fencing, with an inward-opening Gate along the
full length of the Site adjoining the external footpath;
g) Installing an inward-opening gate which opened into the Site instead of one
opening upon or immediately next to the external footpath;
h) Taking the Gate immediately out of service unless an adequate physical end
stop and/or end post was installed at the end of the
metal track to prevent the
Gate from overrunning past its rollers;
i) Prohibiting the Gate from being touched, and keeping it open and unlocked so
as to allow access to the Site, pending installation
of an adequate physical
stop and/or stop post at the end of the metal track;
j) Placing signage on or near the Gate to warn persons in its vicinity of the
risk that the Gate might fall.
k) Developing and implementing a safe work method statement or safe work
procedure for the safe operation or use, inspection and
maintenance of the
the parties came before me on 29 May 2025 for the sentencing hearing, I
convicted the defendant on the basis of agreed facts.
This decision concerns the
penalty to be imposed.
woman and her children who were injured are not identified in this decision
consistent with a non-publication order made at the
hearing. I will refer to her
as the primary victim.
Further Facts
defendant was engaged by Premier Construction Capital Pty Ltd, the principal
contractor, in respect of demolition and construction
work at 465 Parramatta
Road, Leichhardt, New South Wales (the Site). At all material times the Site was
under the management and
control of the defendant.
Site was in the process of being redeveloped. There was a driveway leading to
the Site and its entrance was situated on the public
footpath on Parramatta
defendant engaged Star Professional All Metal Work Pty Ltd (Star Professional)
to manufacture, supply and install the Gate at
that entrance for a cost of
$5,000. Star Professional is the subject of separate proceedings instituted by
the prosecutor arising
out of the same incident that are not concluded.
Gate was installed across the driveway entrance on or about 18 June 2022. It was
2.4 meters high and 5 meters wide, made from
76mm steel tubing and weighed
approximately 200 kilograms.
Gate could only be opened and closed manually, rolling sideways along the
building side of the footpath. It moved on wheels along
a metal track, guided by
two rollers. The rollers were loose, and the track was poorly secured to the
uneven ground. Importantly,
it lacked an end stop at the end where the gate was
fully opened. Instead of a fixed end stop, a small piece of angled iron was
to the top of the Gate which was intended to prevent the Gate overrunning
the track. The angled iron had been poorly designed or
installed such that it
did not contact the horizontal metal bar and so was ineffective. As a result,
there was nothing to stop the
Gate when opened being pushed beyond the end of
the metal tracks at which point it would no longer be
2 September 2022, a scaffold worker parked his utility truck across the
footpath in front of the Gate to collect mobile scaffold
components from the
primary victim and her three children, aged 6, 4 and 3, were walking home along
Parramatta Road and found their way blocked by
the ute. Seeing that they wanted
to pass, the scaffold worker pushed open the Gate to enable him to
drive the ute into the Site.
pushed it open, the 200-kilogram Gate travelled past the point where the angled
metal was supposed to stop it, overran its
supports and fell onto the primary
victim and her three children who were trapped underneath the fallen Gate until
passers-by lifted
it off them.
primary victim sustained compound fractures to her left tibia and fibula,
requiring open reduction and internal fixation surgery.
She also suffered
bruising from her right shoulder to elbow and her hips. It was also an agreed
fact that she says she experienced
ongoing anxiety when walking past the Site.
She has been receiving counselling including as to ways to help the children
their trauma from the incident.
6-year-old daughter sustained bruising and a minor head injury and was admitted
to hospital for observation. Her second child
suffered a laceration to the right
lip and also bruising. Her third child also suffered bruising.
Nature of the defendant
defendant described itself as a small husband and wife company. Amanda Jane
Eleter was the sole director and secretary of the
defendant and her spouse
George Eleter was the manager of the defendant and its
Knowledge of the defendant
the agreed facts in this matter, the Gate was inadequately designed and
installed, since it did not have any means of ensuring
that it could not be
opened in a manner that would prevent it overrunning the end point of the metal
prosecutor did not allege that the defendant was aware of the design flaw prior
to the incident. The defendant led uncontested
evidence that no such flaw had
come to the attention of the Eleters in the two and a half months that the Gate
had been in use.
the defendant known of the flaw and done nothing to address it, that would have
significantly increased the culpability of the
offence. However, the fact that
the defendant did not know of the flaw serves to emphasise the defendant’s
primary failure:
the defendant did not know because it had not taken the basic
step of inspecting the Gate after installation. If the defendant had
step, consistent with its statutory duty, it would have discovered that there
was nothing preventing the Gate from being
opened beyond the point where it
could be supported.
Guidance material
the defendant sought to look for it, there was ample guidance material available
at the time of the incident:
(1) “Code of Practice: Demolition Work”, published by SafeWork NSW
on August 2019, specifically Pt 2 on the risk management
(2) Australian Standard AS 2601-2001 “The Demolition of Structures”,
specifically at cl 1.5.1.5 providing that where
the demolition site adjoins a
public thoroughfare, the common boundary between them shall be fenced for its
full length with a hoarding,
unless the least horizontal distance between the
common boundary and the nearest parts of the structure is greater than the
of the structure. It further provides that the hoarding shall be
constructed of solid materials to a height of not less than 1.8
metres adjacent
to the thoroughfare;
(3) “Code of Practice: Managing the Work Environment and
Facilities”, published by SafeWork NSW on August 2019;
(4) Safety Alert 08/2018, published by WorkSafe Western Australia in August
2018, providing that where an incident occurs resulting
in damage to a gate or
where a gate is not working correctly, the gate should immediately be
tagged-out; and
After the incident
the incident, SafeWork NSW issued a prohibition notice which required the
defendant to cease operation and use of the Gate.
It is an agreed fact that the
Gate was subsequently removed and temporary fencing installed at the Site.
defendant informed the Court that a hoarding has been placed across the entrance
and that no further building activity has been
carried out on the Site since the
incident. Since the incident it has taken steps to put in place appropriate
workplace health and
safety systems and arranged appropriate inspections to
identify any potential hazards or risks when work recommences, through its
Project Manager Mr Patrick Sprych.
Consideration
maximum penalty for this offence is a fine of 17,315 penalty units
($1,860,843.05).
Objective seriousness
principles to be applied in determining objective seriousness are helpfully set
out by Paingakulam J in
SafeWork NSW v Hibernian Contracting Pty
and can be summarised as
(1) That having regard to the objective circumstances, the sentence should be
proportionate to the gravity of the crime;
(2) Objective seriousness is to be determined by reference to the nature of the
offending and not matters personal to the offender;
(3) The conduct that should be taken into consideration should extend not only
to the conduct which constituted the crime but also
the surrounding
circumstances that were directly related to that crime and could be regarded as
circumstances of aggravation and
mitigation;
(4) The reasonably foreseeable risk to safety that is likely to result in
serious injury or death should be determined objectively
and is a factor
relative to the gravity of the offence;
(5) The appropriate sentence should be arrived at through a process of
instinctive synthesis which entails identifying all factors
relevant to the
sentence, discussing their significance and making a value judgment as to the
appropriate sentence;
(6) Greater culpability will attach to the failure to guard against an event
that is more probable than one which is extremely unlikely.
However, this will
be affected by how serious the harm could be, whether there was a way to
mitigate the risk and how difficult or
inconvenient those safety steps are; and
(7) The risk to be assessed is the risk arising from the failure to take
reasonably practicable steps to avoid the injury occurring.
defendant’s primary failure to meet its statutory duty was the failure to
inspect the Gate after installation to identify
any hazards, as set out in
particular (a).
regard to all the facts, and in particular the following matters, that failure
gave rise to an offence that was objectively
serious, falling between the low
and mid-range of overall seriousness.
the Gate was installed alongside a footpath of a major thoroughfare. That meant
the defendant needed to take particular care
to ensure members of the public,
untutored in workplace safety and unaware of the risk, were not placed in
the risk of the Gate falling was foreseeable. As the photos recorded, a cursory
inspection of the gate would have identified
that there was no end stop fitted
at the end of track to prevent the Gate travelling past the point where the
guide rollers would
stop it falling. Even though the defendant parties were not
builders, they ought to have attempted to discern, given the absence
end-stop, if there was any effective method to stop the Gate from travelling too
the risk was a risk of causing serious injury or death, as has occurred in like
incidents discussed below.
I accept that in light of the extensive guidance material available a person
with day-to day management of and control of
a workplace using such a Gate ought
to have been aware of the dangers posed by heavy, manually operated sliding
matters are balanced by two considerations. First, the defendant had engaged and
relied upon a licensed company specialising
in the design and installation of
such gates to design and install the Gate. Second, there was uncontested
evidence that there had
been no incidents to alert the defendant to the risk.
While the prosecutor is correct to say that consistent with its duty the
should have tested the Gate and so identified the flaw in its design,
it is nevertheless the case that for people who are not builders,
such as the
Eleters, the flaw in design would not have been obvious.
turn to the other particulars. As is unfortunately too common in SafeWork NSW
prosecutions, in addition to the primary particular
of failure there were a
series of further particulars which either effectively repeated the same failing
or otherwise made no significant
difference to the overall culpability. As to
the latter I place little to no weight on the fact that the defendant:
(1) could have installed a different fencing mechanism, such as one that opened
inward (particulars (f) and (g)) – any gate
if not properly installed and
inspected could give rise to a risk;
(2) could have placed signage on or near the Gate to warn persons of the risk
that the Gate might fall (particular (j)) – in
the absence of any
knowledge that the Gate might fall, there was no reason why such signage would
be installed. If there was such
knowledge there were more fundamental steps that
would need to be taken. In any event, it is unclear that such a sign could make
a significant difference to the risk given that pedestrians using the public
footpath had no other option but to walk alongside the
Gate when using the
footpath; and
(3) should have developed and implemented a safe work method statement
(particular (k)) – this would have been redundant if
the Gate was safe to
place significant weight on general deterrence in determining the penalty to be
imposed, given that failings in respect of sliding
metal gates are not uncommon
and create a very serious risk.
27 August 2020 SafeWork NSW published an incident information release titled
“Industrial gate fatality – 12 June 2020”,
documenting an
incident where a manual sliding gate weighing 260 kilograms fell on a worker,
killing him. The publication noted it
was similar to two previous incidents in
NSW, one involving a further fatality and another which gave rise to serious
injury. The
June 2020 fatal incident led to three successful
prosecutions.
that such gates are generally constructed at a location where members of the
public might pass, who are not employees or contractors
of the worksite trained
in identifying relevant risks, additional care and attention needs to be taken
to ensure their safety.
place minor weight on specific deterrence given that the defendant continues to
operate the Site, but is unlikely to install gates
in the future and has
taken steps to put in place appropriate workplace health and safety systems.
Aggravating factors
is an aggravating factor if the injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by
the offence was substantial within the meaning
of s 21A(2)(g) of the
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(Sentencing Act).
order for this aggravating factor to be established, the Court must be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the harm was greater
or more deleterious than may
ordinarily be expected for the subject
only was there a risk of serious injury, but the primary victim suffered actual
serious injury in the form of compound fractures
to her left tibia and fibula,
requiring open reduction and internal fixation surgery, as well as ongoing
anxiety and psychological
trauma. Her three children also suffered bruises, head
injuries and lacerations. In light of those agreed facts, I am satisfied that
the injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by the offence was substantial
within the meaning of s 21A(2)(g) of the Sentencing
impact statement
primary victim provided the Court with a victim impact statement describing the
effect the incident has had on her and her children.
acknowledge that drafting such a document would have been a difficult task for
her and appreciate her clear statement as to the
very significant impact
the offence has had on her. The fear and shock of being trapped and injured
while walking on a public street
and the ongoing effect of that event in the
form of ongoing physical and psychological injuries was eloquently
hearing the defendant sought to question whether the Court could rely on aspects
of the victim impact statement that went beyond
the agreed facts, namely, the
description of the nature of the ongoing psychological impact of the incident on
the primary victim.
In response, the prosecutor indicated a capacity to tender
further evidence if an adjournment were obtained.
parties misunderstood the purpose of a victim impact statement in circumstances
where the Court otherwise receives evidence establishing
the impact of the
offence on a person. A victim impact statement allows the Court to hear directly
from a victim on the impact that
the offence has had on the victim and their
family. It also allows the victim to be heard by the defendant.
absence of a victim impact statement cannot give rise to any inference that an
offence had little or no impact on a
Similarly, in circumstances
where on the admitted evidence there was a particular impact on a victim, the
sentence is not to be increased
because the victim provides a victim impact
Accordingly, it is
not the role of the court to make factual findings based on a victim impact
statement. There should never be a
need, for example, for a victim to be
cross-examined to test the content of a victim impact statement. In this case
the agreed facts
were sufficient to establish that the harm caused was
“substantial” within the meaning of s 21A(2)(g) of the Sentencing
Act, as already noted. As a consequence, it was neither appropriate nor
necessary for the defendant to call into question the victim’s
understanding of the ramifications of the offence to her and her family as
expressed in her victim impact statement, nor was it a
matter the prosecution
needed to address by further evidence.
Mitigating factors
take into account the following mitigating circumstances.
defendant has no prior convictions.
defendant is otherwise of good
This has been
demonstrated by the acceptance of its failures and the steps taken after the
incident, including to ensure appropriate
workplace health and safety systems
and arranging appropriate inspections to identify any potential hazards or risk
when work recommences,
through its Project Manager Patrick Sprych. Subsequently
to the incident, the defendant arranged for the removal of the Gate and
installed temporary fencing at the site.
find that the defendant is unlikely to reoffend and has good prospects of
rehabilitation.
Amanda Eleter,
director of the defendant, through her affidavit dated 21 May 2025 has deposed
that she is aware of her duty to ensure
that contractors who are engaged are
suitably qualified to conduct the work but also that there should be further
measures in place
for ensuring that works are completed to the requisite
defendant, through the evidence of the Eleters, has shown remorse for the
By their affidavits, they
expressed how deeply upset they were by the incident and conveyed their
defendant entered a plea of guilty on 7 April 2025 to the charge particularised
in the original summons. The plea of guilty was
entered at the third mention of
the proceedings, being the stage that ordinarily attracts the maximum discount.
The prosecutor accepts
that a discount of 25% would be considered appropriate to
reflect the utilitarian value of that early
I accept that a discount
of 25% is appropriate in the said
circumstances.
given to the prosecutor
defendant submitted that assistance given to the prosecutor should be a further
matter which mitigates the sentence
It relied on what it
describes as George Eleter’s repeated indication to the prosecutor that he
was prepared to provide whatever
assistance would be requested in respect of the
prosecution of Star Professional. The defendant cited
and sought the
“Cartwright discount”.
Beech-Jones J noted in
, the rationale for the enactment of s 23(1)
of the Sentencing Act is “the ‘public interest’ in encouraging
to supply information to the authorities which will assist them to
bring other offenders to justice and provide
prosecutor submitted evidence to establish that the offer of assistance had been
limited to a statement to a paralegal who called
to check dates on which George
Eleter would be unavailable to be called in the proceedings against Star
Professional.
the hearing, the defendant indicated that George Eleter may be willing to
provide a written undertaking of assistance, and
subsequent to the hearing the
Court was provided with a written undertaking provided by George Eleter to the
effect that he will
provide the prosecutor with a full and frank signed witness
statement setting out all information relevant to the prosecution of
Professional.
prosecutor submitted that in circumstances where, by use of its compulsory
powers, it had already obtained what it believes to
be the extent of all
relevant information that George Eleter might provide pertaining the matter
involving Star Professional, such
an undertaking would provide no additional
utility which would attract a further discount on penalty.
SafeWork NSW v Hibernian Contracting Pty
Paingakulam J noted in
relation to the principles applicable to an offer for assistance that:
“(1) The provision of assistance, even when provided in response to a
regulatory notice, may be variable in its completeness
and reliability (noting
that the provision of untruthful information is a matter that would attract a
criminal sanction).
(2) Assistance provided by an offender which is limited to bare compliance with
a regulatory notice, the absence of which would render
the offender liable to
prosecution, is not a matter that would ordinarily attract a discount on
(3) Assistance provided by an offender who takes proactive steps in response to
a regulatory notice, and embraces the opportunity
which it presents, should not
be viewed as favourably as assistance which is entirely voluntary (but can be
contrasted with unwitting
assistance which has been construed to fall outside
(4) The time and financial commitment required by an offender to comply with
regulatory demands (for example, where multiple notices
are served on a
corporate offender and its officers) is a relevant consideration.
(5) The ease with which an offender is able to implement remedial measures in
response to an improvement notice served upon it assists
the prosecution to
prove the reasonably practicable nature of such measures in any subsequent
prosecution.
(6) The timeliness of compliance with regulatory requirements benefits the
prosecution in the context of a statutory limitation period
for the bringing of
proceedings for an offence pursuant to the WHS Act.”
offer for assistance by George Eleter, while commendable, is not one that
attracts a s 23 discount. I accept the prosecutor’s
contention that the
undertaking does not amount to the supply of information to the prosecutor which
will provide additional assistance
to bring another offender to justice. While
the defendant’s counsel is no doubt correct to say there is a difference
a “willing witness” and a compelled one, in this case there
is no reason to think that George Eleter would not, if summonsed,
give evidence
consistent with the information he has already provided to the prosecutor in the
course of its investigation, regardless
undertaking.
Capacity to pay a fine
defendant has not submitted that it has any incapacity to pay a fine. The
evidence of Amanda Eleter attached a bank account balance,
but I place no weight
on that evidence. There was no attempt to establish the defendant’s
overall assets and liabilities to
allow the Court to understand the net worth
and financial position of the defendant.
it was uncontested that the defendant was a small company, and the prosecutor
accepted that I should take that into account
in determining the penalty.
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty
Basten JA placed
relevance on the size of the operation of the respondent in determining the
resentencing:
“Two factors would indicate that, objectively speaking, the fine should
not be at or above the half-way point of the range
available. The factors are
related. First, the fine will apply to corporate employers of wide-ranging size
and ability to absorb
a fine. That which would hardly be noticed in the balance
sheet of a large corporation may push a smaller corporation to the verge
insolvency, or over. Secondly, it is possible to be satisfied in the case of a
small corporation that changes in management practice
may diminish significantly
the need for individual deterrence. That may not be so powerful a factor with a
large corporation which
will rely upon general systems and the quality and
diligence of its supervisory officers.”
Comparable Cases
prosecutor drew my attention to two cases that it said were comparable and so
relevant in determining the quantum of the penalty.
NSW v Maluko Pty Ltd
arose from an incident where an employee was fatally crushed by a damaged gate
at the entrance to the defendant’s premises.
The maximum penalty was
$1,731,500 and the penalty imposed before discount was $500,000.
NSW v Ceerose Pty Ltd
arose from an incident where a female worker employed as a traffic controller at
a construction site was required to manually operate
a large steel gate which
came off the track and landed on her, fracturing her lower spine and pelvis. In
that instance, the maximum
penalty was a $1,500,000 fine and the penalty imposed
before discount was $400,000.
defendant noted that in each of those cases the principal of the building sites
where the incidents took place was aware that
there were faults and issues with
the gates prior to the incidents but had not then taken steps to ensure their
safety, which meant
they were cases involving a higher culpability.
gate in question had been hit by a motor vehicle a
week prior to the incident. The impact of the accident had caused the gate to
off its rails. The gate had to be operated manually thereafter but it had
not then been inspected to identify the danger.
the power to the site had been disconnected, leading to the
manual handling of the gate after this time. The offender had not properly
instructed the victim on the correct method of manually opening the gate and the
victim had informed the project coordinator that
she was having increasing
difficulty in opening the gate.
accept that each of those cases is relevantly different to this case, since in
the current situation the defendant was not aware
of any issues or faults with
the operation of the Gate during the two and a half months prior to the
incident. I also note the relatively
small size of the defendant as a further
distinguishing factor.
Leichhardt Pty Ltd was convicted pursuant to an order I made on 29 May 2025.
appropriate fine is $240,000 which will be reduced by 25% to reflect the plea of
make the following orders:
(1) I impose a fine of $180,000.
(2) 465 Leichhardt Pty Ltd is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of the
proceedings in the amount of $42,762.77 as agreed.
(3) Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is
to be paid to the prosecutor.
02 July 2025 - Removed name from [13]
17 July 2025 - Correct legislation section number.
[2025] NSWIC 4
SafeWork NSW v
Maluko Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC 274
; SafeWork NSW v The Owners – Strata Plan
[2024] NSWDC 277
; SafeWork NSW v Chris Darby Strata Pty Ltd
R v Youkhana
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Inspector Lancaster v M
L Colturi Sawmills Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWIRComm
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
R v Thomson
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
; R v Borkowski
(2009) 195 A Crim
[2009] NSWCCA 102
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
ss 21A(3)(k)
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
ss 21A(3)(m)
(1989) 17 NSWLR
(2017) 266 A Crim R
[2017] NSWCCA 90
[2025] NSWIC 4
[2017] NSWCCA 96 at
[2023] NSWDC
[2017] NSWDC 313.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (299 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter