URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2007/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rodger [2007] NSWPB 3 (12 September 2007)
[2007] NSWPB 3
12 September 2007
Kym Ayscough v Graham Bruce Rodger
The complaints concerned a conviction for a contravention of Clause 22(a)
of the Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 1994 and
a complaint alleging
professional misconduct regarding the supply of pseudoephedrine products from
the pharmacist’s pharmacy.
The circumstances of conviction complaint related to the supply by the
pharmacist on three occasions in 2005 of multiple packs of
pseudoephedrine based
products to a police undercover operative. In the period from 1 May 2004 to 27
May 2005 the pharmacist had
purchased 1,956 packs of various pseudoephedrine
based products from his pharmaceutical wholesaler.
It was alleged that the pharmacist had regularly supplied pseudoephedrine
based products (up to 110 packs) to the same person when
he knew, or ought to
have known that they were being purchased for purposes other than therapeutic
purposes. The supplies of the
pseudoephedrine based products were made in
circumstances where the pharmacist could not be satisfied that such supplies
a quantity or for a purpose in accordance with recognised therapeutic
standards. During the relevant period the pharmacist also
supplied up to three
other persons in addition to the police undercover operative with
pseudoephedrine products in circumstances
where he could not be satisfied that
each supply was in a quantity or for a purpose in accordance with recognised
therapeutic standards.
With respect to the pseudoephedrine products alleged to
have been supplied by the pharmacist’s pharmacy, it was alleged that
supply occurred in circumstances where the pharmacist knew or ought to have
known that pseudoephedrine was an active ingredient
of such products and that
pseudoephedrine is a precursor substance used in the illicit manufacture of
amphetamines. It was also alleged
that during the relevant period that the
pharmacist did not record a substantial number of single ingredient
pseudoephedrine products
that were supplied to the public, contrary to clauses
23 and 54 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
. The pharmacist
appeared in person at the hearing and admitted all the particulars of the
complaint. No witnesses were called to
give evidence and the pharmacist chose
not to give evidence.
The pharmacist was the sole proprietor of the same pharmacy for about 25
years. He had sold the pharmacy in November 2005. At the
time the complaint was
made the pharmacist was still registered. On 10 January 2007 his name was
removed from the register of pharmacists
for failure to pay the registration
renewal fee.
Both complaints are proven and
the pharmacist is guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of
section 19A(a)
Pharmacy Act 1964
The pharmacist supplied
pseudoephedrine products to over five different people and made a financial gain
from supplies to two people
in the form of a mark up of the regular price of
such products. The pharmacist did not contact any relevant authorities about
supplies and only stopped supply such products in excessive quantities when
he received a
section 35(1)
Notice from the Health Department.
There were mitigating
personal factors concerning stress related to the pharmacist’s health and
that of his wife, and financial
problems. No inference in drawn from the
pharmacist declining to give evidence in view of recent significant stresses,
have affected his ability to give evidence at the Inquiry.
Although no current medical
evidence was available to the Board, it appears that the pharmacist’s
ability to practise during
the relevant period was in part affected by personal
and health issues.
Mr Rodger is reprimanded and
in the event of him making a restoration application he is required to undertake
an ethics course, undergo
a forensic assessment, undertake continuing education
and prepare a paper on the effects of methylamphetamine on society, which paper
is to be delivered to the Board. Mr Rodger was also required to maintain certain
pharmacy professional association memberships whilst
ever he is registered as a
pharmacist. The costs of complying with these orders is to be borne by Mr
Findings of a Board of Inquiry held on 29 March 2007 into a complaint of
professional misconduct made under the provisions of the
Pharmacy Act,
") by Kym Ayscough, Nominal Complainant ("the
Complainant"), against Graham Bruce Rodger ("the Respondent"), formerly a
pharmacist in New South Wales.
The Respondent appeared in person.
THE COMPLAINT
The Complaint dated 25 May 2006 ("the Complaint"), alleges that the
Respondent:
Complaint 1
Has been convicted in New South Wales of an offence under clause 22(a) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation,
Complaint 2
Has been guilty of professional misconduct in that he has:
engaged in conduct that demonstrates a
lack of adequate knowledge, judgment and/or care in the practise of pharmacy,
pursuant to
section 19A(a)
engaged in improper and/or unethical
conduct relating to the practise of pharmacy, pursuant to
section 19A(g)
PARTICULARS OF THE COMPLAINT
The particulars of the complaint are:
Complaint 1
During the period from 6 January until 21
May 2005, the Respondent supplied a police undercover operative named "Brad" the
of pseudoephedrine products set out in Annexure "A" to this complaint,
contrary to clause 22(a) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation,
On 28 July 2005 the Respondent was
convicted of an offence under clause 22(a) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation, 2002
at Parramatta Local Court.
Complaint 2
The Respondent was at all relevant times
the pharmacist in charge and the sole proprietor of the Late Night Chemist, 785
Road, Ryde, New South Wales 2112 ("the Pharmacy").
During the period 1 May 2004 to 27 May
2005 ("the relevant period"), the Respondent ordered from and was supplied by
pharmaceutical
wholesaler Sigma Company Limited a total of 1956 packs of various
Pseudoephedrine based products, including 444 packets of Sudafed
Sinus and Nasal
tablets, 30 pack size; 396 packs of Logicin Sinus tablets, 30 pack size; 435
packets of Actifed tablets, 30 pack
size; 150 packets of Demazin 6 hour tablets,
30 pack size; 40 packets of Clarinase tablets, 10 pack size; 292 packets of
Decongestant tablets, 10 pack size; 199 packets of Zyrtec Plus
Decongestant tablets, 10 pack size and; 24 packets of Chemist Own
Sinus Relief
tablets, 30 pack size.
At 27 May 2005 the Respondent’s
Pharmacy had;
No stock of: Sudafed Sinus and Nasal
tablets, 30 pack size; Logicin Sinus tablets, 30 pack size; Actifed tablets, 30
pack size; Telfast
Decongestant tablets, 10 pack size; Demazin 6 hour tablets,
30 pack size and Zyrtec Plus Decongestant tablets, 10 pack size in the
2 packets of Demazin Sinus tablets, 30
pack size and 3 packets of Clarinase tablets, 10 pack size in the
During the relevant period the
Respondent’s Pharmacy supplied Mr Omar Hussein on a fortnightly basis with
multiple packets of
Sudafed Sinus and Nasal Decongestant tablets, 30 pack size
and/or Logicin Sinus tablets, 30 pack size and/or Actifed tablets, 30
a total of about 110 packets, 30 pack size, in circumstances
the Respondent knew or ought to have
known that pseudoephedrine is the sole active ingredient in Sudafed Sinus and
Nasal tablets and
Logicin Sinus tablets and an active ingredient of Actifed
the Respondent knew or ought to have
known that pseudoephedrine is a precursor substance used in the illicit
manufacture of amphetamines.
the Respondent could not be satisfied
that such supplies were in a quantity or for a purpose in accordance with
recognised therapeutic
the Respondent knew or ought to have
known that Mr Hussein was obtaining the supplies for purposes other than
recognised therapeutic
On the dates specified in column 1 of
Annexure "A" to the complaint the Respondent supplied an undercover police
officer named "Brad"
with a quantity of pseudoephedrine based products appearing
opposite in column 2 of Annexure ‘A’ to the complaint in
circumstances where:
the Respondent knew or ought to have know
that pseudoephedrine is an active ingredient in all the tablets referred to in
the Respondent knew or ought to have know
that pseudoephedrine is the primary precursor used in the illicit manufacture of
amphetamine;
the Respondent failed to make appropriate
inquiries and counsel "Brad" in respect of such supplies.
the Respondent failed to ascertain that
each supply was in a quantity or for a purpose in accordance with recognised
therapeutic standards.
During the period May 2004 to February
2005 the Respondent supplied to Mr Mark Grover and/or Mr Daniel Grover, twice a
week, 2 packets
of Telfast Decongestant tablets, 10 pack size and/or Zyrtec Plus
Decongestant tablets, 10 pack size and/or Actifed tablets, 30 pack
On the date specified in Annexure "B" to
the complaint the Respondent supplied Mr Ambrose Russ or Mr Ambrose Russ on
behalf of his
mother, Mrs Doris Russ, Sudafed Sinus and Nasal Decongestant
tablets, 30 pack size and/or Logicin Sinus tablets, 30 pack
OtherwiseThis does not appear to be the
correct word. Should it be conduct? referred to in paragraph 6 and 7 above
occurred in circumstances
the Respondent knew or ought to have
known that pseudoephedrine is the sole active ingredient of Sudafed Sinus and
Nasal Decongestant
tablets and Logicin Sinus tablets and an active ingredient in
Telfast Decongestant tablets, Zyrtec Plus Decongestant tablets and
the Respondent knew or ought to have
known that pseudoephedrine is the primary precursor used in the illicit
manufacture of amphetamine.
the Respondent could not be satisfied
that each supply was in a quantity and/or for a purpose in accordance with
recognised therapeutic
During the relevant period the
Respondent’s Pharmacy did not record, in a manner approved by the Director
General, the supply
of single ingredient pseudoephedrine products, namely 789
packets of Sudafed Sinus and Nasal Decongestant tablets, 30 pack size and/or
Logicin Sinus tablets, 30 pack size and/or Chemist Own Sinus Relief tablets, 30
pack size and/or Demazin Sinus Tablets, 30 pack size
in accordance with clauses
23 and 54 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
The following documents were submitted to the Board in evidence:
On behalf of the Complainant a folder of documents (Exhibit 1) including the
complaint, a certificate as to registration details,
a local court certificate
of conviction, statements and certificates concerning the police under cover
operative’s activities
and documents concerning the health department
investigation including, a health department stock check of pseudoephedrine
products, Mr Rodger’s response to Notices issued under
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
, a taped record on interview
with Health Department employees, professional literature and Board bulletins
regarding pseudoephedrine
based products and details of Mr Rodger’s
professional memberships.
There were no witnesses called to give evidence at the hearing by either
THE RESPONDENT
The Respondent was first registered as a pharmacist in New South Wales on
16 June 1970 and remained registered until 10
January 2007
name was removed from the register pursuant to
section 19(3)
The Respondent was the sole proprietor of the Pharmacy for approximately 25
years. The Respondent disposed of his interest in the
Pharmacy in November
During the relevant period the Pharmacy traded 7 days per week from 10 am to
10 pm. The Respondent worked 30 hours per week in the
Pharmacy, and the balance
of the trading hours were covered by employed pharmacists who generally staffed
the Pharmacy in the evening
hours with an assistant.
The amount of pseudoephedrine products supplied to the public during the
relevant period resulted in the Respondent being the eleventh
largest supplier
of pseudoephedrine-based products in New South Wales in circumstances where the
Pharmacy he operated was a relatively
small one and not one which would be
expected to supply that amount legitimately to the public.
The Respondent has admitted professional misconduct and all particulars of
Complaints 1 and 2.
The Board has also satisfied itself that the conduct in question gives rise
to professional misconduct. Accordingly, the issue for
the Board is what orders
should then be made. However, this raises an issue in relation to the scope of
the Board’s jurisdiction
to make orders pursuant to
in circumstances where the pharmacist is no longer registered, as is the case
SCOPE OF THE BOARD’S JURISDICTION TO DEAL WITH NON-REGISTERED
The Complaint is dated 25 May 2006 at which time the Respondent was still
registered as a pharmacist. However, as noted earlier, the
Respondent’s
name was removed from the register pursuant to
section 19(3)
January 2007 when he failed to pay the requisite fee. Accordingly, he did not
appear at the hearing before the Board as a registered
pharmacist. There are a
number of matters that flow from that.
Section 19(4)
provides that:
(4) If the name of any pharmacist is or has been removed from the register
under this section or section 8 of the Pharmacy Act 1897–1957
, the Board
shall upon application in writing and if it is satisfied that the pharmacist is
of good character restore the pharmacist’s
name to the register upon
payment of the fee fixed by the Board. The regulations may provide for the
waiver of such part of such
fee as the Board may in any particular case deem
It is therefore available to the Respondent to seek to have his name restored
to the register at some time in the future. The criteria
the Board must then
apply to that application is to be satisfied that the Respondent is of good
character and on obtaining that satisfaction
restore his name.
Section 19B of the Act states:
19B Complaints about former pharmacists
A complaint may be made under
this Act about a person who, although not a pharmacist when the complaint is
made to, or lodged with,
the Health Care Complaints Commission or the registrar,
was registered as a pharmacist not more than 5 years before that
For the purposes of this Act,
a reference to a pharmacist against whom a complaint has been made includes a
reference to a person
against whom a complaint has been made pursuant to this
Counsel for the Complainant submitted that a strict literal reading of
section 19B might initially suggest that the Respondent is
not a pharmacist for
the purposes of section 20 because he was registered at the time of the
complaint, but is no longer registered.
However, in the Complainant
counsel’s submission section 19B should be read purposively and
consistently with the objects of
the Act and the Act as a whole. It was
submitted by counsel for the Complainant that if one does that and takes into
account the
protective nature of the Board in section 5 of the Act then section
19B can be interpreted so as to include reference to a pharmacist
Respondent’s position, that is, that even though he is not currently
registered and was so at the time of the complaint,
the intention of that
section is that pharmacists registered up to five years prior to the complaint
are nevertheless subject to
the powers exercisable by the Board under section
20. The Board agrees with this interpretation of the Act.
Section 20 of the Act provides the consequences of a Board making a finding
that the subject matter of a complaint of misconduct is
The Complainant in this matter, in light of various mitigating factors which
are discussed in more detail below, suggested that the
Board consider making an
order reprimanding the Respondent.
Section 22A of the Act provides that where the name of the pharmacist has
been removed from the Register under the Act the pharmacist
shall be deemed not
to be registered as a pharmacist under that Act. However, this section needs to
be read in conjunction with section
19B of the Act. As noted above, the Board
has accepted that the Respondent is a person against whom a complaint has been
made pursuant
to section 19B and is therefore a pharmacist for the purpose of
section 20 of the Act.
Pursuant to section 24 of the Act where the name of a person has been removed
from the Register, otherwise than pursuant to section
19, the name shall not be
restored except by direction of the Board.
The Act therefore contemplates that the process by which restoration to the
Register will be obtained differs according to the reason
why the name has been
Accordingly, in cases where there has been administrative removal of a
person’s name the Board needs to be satisfied as to good
character before
restoring the name and where a person’s name has been removed for other
reasons, including a finding of misconduct,
the direction of the Board is the
precondition to being registered.
The Board is satisfied that Complaint 1 is proved and in relation to
Complaint 2, that Graham Bruce Rodger is guilty of professional
within the meaning of section 19A(a) of the Act in that he has engaged in
conduct that demonstrates a lack of adequate
knowledge, judgment and/or care in
the practise of pharmacy, pursuant to section 19A(a) of the Act and that he has
engaged in improper
and/or unethical conduct relating to the practise of
pharmacy, within the meaning of section 19A(g) of the Act.
In determining what orders might be appropriate, the Board has taken into
account a number of matters.
Pursuant to section 19D(1)(a) of the Act a complaint may be made against a
pharmacist that has been convicted in New South Wales of
an offence.
In this matter, the Respondent was convicted by the Local Court at Parramatta
on 28 July 2005 of an offence under clause 22(a)
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation,
that between 6 January 2005 and 21 May
2005 he supplied pseudoephedrine products to an undercover police operative
named "Brad" in
a quantity not complying with the standard and was fined
Pursuant to section 20(3) of the Act:
The Board is not to suspend a person’s registration or remove a
person’s name from the register for having committed an
offence if, having
regard to the nature of the offence or circumstances under which it was
committed the Board is of the opinion
that it does not render the person unfit
in the public interest to be registered as a pharmacist.
In considering whether the Respondent is unfit in the public interest to be
registered as a pharmacist as a result of having committed
the offence referred
to in Complaint 1 there are a number of factors that need to be taken into
account that are also relevant to
Complaint 2 (particularly as the supplies of
pseudoephedrine the subject of Complaint 1 form the basis of the particulars in
5 of Complaint 2). Accordingly, they are dealt with together
The conduct complained of occurred over an extended period of just over 12
The Respondent provided the pseudoephedrine products to five different
people: the undercover police operative named "Brad", as well
as Mark Grover,
Stephen Grover, Omar Hussein and Ambrose Russ.
In relation to Mr Hussein, the Respondent’s evidence as contained in
the record of interview ("ROI") on 26 October 2005 with
Martin Power and Alex
Gavrilovec, officers of the Pharmaceutical Services Branch ("PSB"), New South
Wales Health Department , was
that he was aware at least half-way through the
period of supply that "
[Mr Hussein]
was trying to make
amphetamines from it
". The Respondent, in further explanation for supplying
pseudoephedrine to Mr Hussein, answered that he thought the supply was
appropriate
for Mr Hussein "
" to cook up amphetamines, but he
did not think that Mr Hussein would ever succeed. The Respondent was
therefore aware that Mr Hussein
was at least "
" to use the
products for the illicit manufacture of amphetamines. Further, when asked about
pseudo-runner
" by Mr Power (ROI P-19) the Respondent said
Oh I thought it was just a backyard thing where they knocked about with it
". Even if the Board were to accept that the Respondent genuinely
believed that the use of the products would be limited to Mr Hussein’s
use, the Board remains most concerned that the Respondent would supply in such
circumstances.
The Respondent also made a financial benefit from the sales of
pseudoephedrine to at least Mr Hussein and Mark Grover. In this regard,
up the price from the regular local customer price from $19.95 to around $22.00
(ROI PP-23 and 32). This was not a large increase,
but nevertheless enough to
make a further profit from selling to them.
The Respondent did not contact any of the relevant authorities, such as the
Police or the PSB. He only stopped supplying the products
in excessive
quantities and not for a recognised therapeutic purpose when he received the
notice from the PSB (ROI P-21).
All of the supplies, the subject of Complaints 1 and 2, with the exception of
the first supply to "Brad", drew the strong disapproval
of Jocelyn Bussing in
her peer review report .
The Respondent has failed to keep up to date with Continuing Professional
Education ("CPE"). According to records held by the Pharmaceutical
Australia, the only CPE activity in which the Respondent has been involved since
January 2000 is the Pharmacotherapies
Project on 8 September 2005. Ms Bussing
states in her peer review report:
[the Respondent’s]
continuing education attendance record
supplied in the documents reflects this lack of participation. After reading the
of the interview with Mr Rodger by the Pharmaceutical Services
Branch, this lack of up to date knowledge was evident and would incur
disapproval of his reputable and competent colleagues. Whilst I appreciate Mr
Rodger’s personal circumstances during the
time were stressful, his
obvious disregard for professional standards, even predating the complaint,
strongly contravenes the above
mentioned principles as stated in the code of
ethics for responsible professional practice.
The Respondent is 63 years of age and has been a pharmacist for over 25
years. On the one hand, it could be said that the Respondent,
with such years of
experience, should have known better. However, on the other hand, this conduct
has taken place during a period
of approximately one year during which the
evidence suggests that Respondent was experiencing difficulties financially,
and health-wise, which are discussed in more detail below. There is
also no evidence before the Board to suggest that the Respondent
has engaged in
any other misconduct over his many other years in practice. So, to this extent,
the conduct in issue could be viewed
as an isolated period of around a year
during which the pharmacist was "affected", in an otherwise reputable career as
a pharmacist
spanning over 25 years.
Mitigating Personal Factors
When interviewed by officers of the PSB on 26 October 2005, the Respondent
advised that he was diagnosed with chronic fatigue in or
was still suffering from that condition and had done so continuously for 4
years. He further stated that
first he thought it was depression and he
tried some antidepressant tablets, but all they did was make him sleepier. At
he went to see a psychiatrist and was prescribed medication, which the
Respondent took for about 6 months, but the Respondent said
that it did not
work. That was in or about 2002.
The Respondent also told the officers from the PSB that about 6 or 7 years
ago he and his wife bought a café in a specialist
medical centre at the
corner of Carillon Avenue and Missenden Road. The Respondent’s wife and
son ran that business. The business
apparently failed because "
the rent went
up massively and the – also the outgoings were huge
". The Respondent
stated that the failure of the business upset him because he felt that he made
the failure. When asked by Mr Power
of the PSB whether that placed a financial
burden on the Respondent, the Respondent answered "
No, but it was –
it’s a huge loss of money
". He was then asked as to whether what he
was doing [concerning the matters in the Complaint] was in part to recoup that
loss, to which the Respondent replied that he did not think so.
The Respondent also discussed the disappointment he felt when a former
employee of 14 years brought a workers compensation claim against
However, the over-riding issue affecting the Respondent was his wife’s
health. The Respondent’s wife was diagnosed with
breast cancer shortly
after the café business closed. She was also later diagnosed with bone
The Respondent was asked by an officer of the Pharmaceutical Services Branch
whether he believed that he had some level of impairment,
to which he
Respondent: I do feel because of all these things – these things I
think yes, I think that I’m under a huge amount of
The transcript of interview later continues:
Power: So you’ve had a lot of stress.
Rodger: I think that – yes, I think that this type of thing was sort
of a release of tension or some stupid thing. I –
I don’t know. I
– I don’t do anything else at the pharmacy. I’ve always played
it properly and to do this
honestly don’t. So I can only put these things in as –
mitigation.
Power: So you accept that these people were coming in, that you really
didn’t know as regulars, when they were coming in regularly,
getting one
packet at a time, you accept that’s an issue now?
Rodger: Yes, well yes.
Power: Right, because you – you’re saying that your judgement
was impaired and therefore you didn’t make proper
inquiry, is that –
is that where you’re heading with this?
Rodger: I think I was just overwrought, so much so, I think my wife has
A number of these mitigating factors were also raised in submissions by the
Respondent’s counsel in the Local Court proceedings
(Exhibit 1 Tab 5).
Other mitigating factors
Ambrose Russ was a customer of the Pharmacy for about 10 years prior to the
supply of pseuodephedrine, the subject of these complaints
(ROI P-42). The
Respondent also considered Mark Grover and Daniel Grover to be local customers
because they occasionally bought other
things (P-41). In this regard, the
Respondent did have a commercial relationship similar to a patient relationship,
other than in
relation to the supply of the pseudoephedrine to them.
The Respondent has sold his pharmacy and is no longer registered.
Failure to give evidence at the hearing
The Respondent did not give evidence at the hearing. The Board is therefore
entitled to draw the inference that there is nothing the
Respondent can say in
his own favour and that the inference is to be drawn from him not giving sworn
Bowen-James v Walton
unreported, Court of Appeal 5 August 2001.
This was clearly pointed out to the Respondent at the hearing by counsel for the
Complainant
before he made his decision not to give evidence.
However, the Respondent submitted at the hearing :
...I don’t want to have the stress of cross-examination, I think
[counsel for the Complainant]
very good at her job and I feel
that it would be too much strain on me. I feel that what I did was because of
the strain that I had
with my health, and also my wife’s, and I feel that
I now avoid any type of thing – I mean it was a great thing for me
here and I feel that I just do not want to have any cross-examination.
Further, irrespective of the above submission, it is clear from the evidence
before the Board that the Respondent has experienced
significant stresses in
recent years that may have affected his ability to give evidence at the hearing
or his judgement generally.
He was also unrepresented at the hearing. In the
circumstances, the Board is not inclined to draw such inference.
The Board’s concerns in relation to the Respondent’s
fitness to carry on business as a pharmacist
When the Respondent was interviewed by officers of the Pharmaceutical
Services Branch, he was also asked questions directed at his
fitness to carry on
business as a pharmacist:
The Board notes the following extract from the transcript of interview:
Power: ...one of the things I am concerned about is that you’re
indicating to me that you’re concerned that you were judgement
Rodger: No, I think that at the time I was – I was only temporarily
– what I’ve tried to do, I’m now going
to exercise class and I
go to yoga and I think that I’m – I’m back part of the way
Power: So you don’t have any concerns about your practise as a
pharmacist today?
Rodger: No, no.
Power: Okay, even with all this going on in the background, with your wife
and her sickness and with the sale of the pharmacy?
Rodger: No, no. I think I can still function as a pharmacy
actually pharmacist?
, I mean I’ve been doing it for 25 years. I think
there was a temporarily (sic) thing that I cannot account for.
Power: But the supplies to Hussein, they’re not really in that
category, are they? That’s a repeat action, isn’t
Rodger: No, that was something incredibly stupid and I feel that that was
a singular stupid thing that should never have happened
don’t know how it sort of happened. It – as you mentioned it sort of
built, I can’t tell how it
built or what it was...
As noted above, the Respondent also told Mr Power that he thought he was
suffering from depression at one stage and started seeing
a psychiatrist and was
prescribed medication for his condition. The Respondent later felt that it may
have not been depression, but
chronic fatigue.
There is no current medical evidence available to the Board and the
Respondent did not give evidence at the hearing. However, it does
that his judgement and ability to practise as a pharmacist was at least in part
affected by personal and health issues
over the relevant period. The Respondent
also continues to care for his very ill wife. That in itself could continue to
place a lot
of pressure on the Respondent. Further, in the event that his wife
passes on as a result of her illness, this could also have an
impact on the
Respondent’s fitness to carry on business as a pharmacist.
Whilst a strike-off or period of suspension are orders available to the
Board, the Board does not consider that there is any useful
public purpose in
making such orders. The Respondent has sold his pharmacy and is currently not
registered. Should the Respondent
seek to apply for his name to be restored to
the register of pharmacists in New South Wales at some time in the future, he
to satisfy the Board at that time that he is of good character.
Further, pursuant to section 20A of the Act, the Board has the power to
refuse or suspend the Respondent’s registration on the
unfitness, should he be assessed at such time by reason of infirmity, injury or
illness, whether mental or physical, as
being unfit to carry on the business of
a pharmacist.
The Board also has the power to make orders pursuant to section 20 of the Act
that address its concerns in relation to the Respondent’s
knowledge of the effects on society of drugs and other matters appropriate for a
registered pharmacist. However, the Board
is of the view that to make such
orders effective during such time as the Respondent is not registered in his
particular circumstances
would be unduly onerous. Accordingly, the Board is
minded to only make such orders effective in the event that the
Respondent’s
name is ultimately restored to the register of pharmacists in
New South Wales.
The Board makes the following orders pursuant to section 20 of the Act:
Graham Bruce Rodger is
reprimanded.
Should Graham Bruce Rodger apply for
restoration of his name to the register, and have his name restored, he shall be
required by
the Board to:
a. Undertake an Ethics Course from St James Ethics Centre. This course is to
be an individual program of not less than 20 hours contact
and documents
evidencing satisfactory completion are to be provided to the Board.
b. Undergo an oral assessment of his current knowledge of matters appropriate
for a registered pharmacist, such assessment to be carried
out by a panel of two
pharmacists from the pool used to assess graduate pharmacists after their intern
year, with such assessment
to take place on a date to be nominated by the Board,
but not more then two months after the date of restoration of Graham Bruce
Rodger’s name to the register.
c. Prepare a paper of not less than 1000 words on the effects on society of
drugs such as methylamphetamine and other similar drugs
diverted from legitimate
pharmaceutical drugs, such paper to be delivered to the Board not more than two
months after the date of
restoration of Graham Bruce Rodger’s name to the
d. Complete at least 20 hours of Board approved Continuing Professional
Education ("CPE") per year, for two years from the date of
restoration of Graham
Bruce Rodger’s name to the register, at least 10 hours per year of which
must be face to face contact
activity. Graham Bruce Rodger is to provide the
Board with documents evidencing completion of the CPE activities undertaken at
end of every 6 months over the relevant two year period.
While ever Graham Bruce Rodger is
registered as a pharmacist he is to do all things necessary to obtain and
maintain membership of
the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia. Proof of
membership is to be provided to the Board within 28 days’ of his
registration
as a pharmacist being restored and on renewal of membership each
subsequent year.
While ever Graham Bruce Rodger holds a
pecuniary interest in the business of a pharmacist he is to do all things
necessary to obtain
and maintain membership of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia.
Proof of membership is to be provided to the Board within 28 days’
obtaining any such pecuniary interest in a pharmacy and on renewal of membership
each subsequent year.
The Board directs that a copy of these
findings and orders is to be retained in the registration file of the Respondent
to which reference
will be made in the event that the Respondent should make
application for the restoration of his name to the register in the
Orders 2, 3 and 4 are to be completed at
Graham Bruce Rodger’s own expense.
The effective date of these orders is one
month after Graham Bruce Rodger has been notified by registered post of these
his address as it appears on the register of pharmacists in New South
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter