URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/853.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Al-Obaidi v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited [2025] NSWPICMP 853; (4 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF REVIEW
Al-Obaidi v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited [2025] NSWPICMP
Taghreed Al-Obaidi
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
REVIEW PANEL
Elizabeth Medland
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Himanshu Singh
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Christopher Canaris
DATE OF DECISION:
4 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS –
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; review of
medical assessment of single Medical Assessor (MA); whether psychological
injuries caused by the motor accident give rise
to a whole person impairment
(WPI) of greater than 10% and whether certain treatment and care is related to
the accident and reasonable
and necessary; diagnosis made of persistent
depressive disorder and somatic symptom disorder with predominant pain; direct
relationship to the accident and onset of symptoms;
–criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder not met; all treatment
for assessment found to be not reasonable and necessary;
WPI assessed at 7%;
original MA found 6% WPI certificate therefore revoked and new certificate
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
ASSESSMENT OF WHOLE PERSON IMPAIRMENT
TREATMENT AND CARE
Certificate issued under
Accident Injuries Act 2017
The Review Panel:
the certificate of Medical Assessor Gerald Chew dated 12 April 2024;
that the following injuries caused by the motor accident give rise to a
permanent impairment of 7% and is not greater than
depressive disorder
somatic symptom
that the following treatment and care:
Sertraline and
Diazepam, and
12 weeks of
fortnightly cleaning assistance
relates to the injury
caused by the motor accident;
the following treatment and care:
does not relate to the injury caused by the motor
that the following treatment and care:
Sertraline and
12 weeks of
fortnightly cleaning assistance, and
is not reasonable and necessary in the
circumstances.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
Taghreed Al-Obaidi (the claimant) alleges injury from a motor accident occurring
6 March 2021.
subsequently lodged a claim under the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
(MAI Act) upon Allianz Australia Insurance Limited (the insurer), the compulsory
third party insurer of the vehicle considered
insurer is liable for payments of statutory benefits and/or damages under the
dispute has arisen between the parties as to whether a psychological injury
caused by the accident gives rise to a whole person
impairment (WPI) greater
further dispute remains as to whether certain treatment is causally related to
the motor accident and is reasonable and necessary.
medical assessment matter is determined in accordance with Division 7.5 of the
MAI Act. This means that the matter is determined
at first instance by a Medical
dispute about whether the injury caused by the motor accident gives rise to a
WPI of greater than 10% is a medical dispute and
whether treatment is causally
related to the motor accident and is reasonable and necessary are medical
disputes, as defined by s
7.17 of the MAI Act, and is a medical assessment
matter: schedule 2, cl 2of the MAI Act.
threshold injury dispute was originally determined by Medical Assessor Chew who
issued a certificate dated 12 April 2024, which
certified the claimant as
suffering a persistent depressive disorder, giving rise to a WPI of 6% which is
not greater than 10%.
further found that the following treatment and case related to the motor
Sertraline and
Diazepam, and
12 weeks of
fortnightly cleaning assistance.
the following treatment and care did not relate to the motor accident:
addition, he found that the above was not reasonable and necessary in the
circumstances.
claimant sought a review of the medical assessment of Medical Assessor Chew in
accordance with s 7.26 of the MAI Act. On 14 June
2024 the President’s
delegate determined that there was reasonable cause to suspect the medical
assessment was incorrect in
a material respect. As such the review application
was accepted and referred to a Review Panel (the Panel).
7.26(5A) of the MAI Act provides that a Review Panel consists of two Medical
Assessors and a Member assigned to the Motor
Accidents Division of the Personal
Injury Commission (Commission).
review of the medical assessment is not limited to a review of only that aspect
of the assessment that is alleged to be incorrect
and is to be by way of a new
assessment of all the matters with which the medical assessment is concerned: s
7.26(6) of the MAI Act.
127 and 130 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (Rules) are made
pursuant to
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
A Review Panel determines how it conducts and determines the proceedings and may
determine the proceedings solely based
on the written application: Rule 128 of
Panel met via video conference on 3 June 2025 and determined that a
re-examination of the claimant was required. A medical examination was
arranged to take place on 13 August 2025 with Medical Assessors
Canaris via MS Teams.
Panel reconvened via video link for a teleconference on 27 August
MEDICAL ASSESSMENT THE SUBJECT OF REVIEW
Assessor Gerald Chew examined the claimant on 8 April 2024. In his certificate
dated 8 April 2024 the Medical Assessor found
a 6% WPI due to a persistent
depressive disorder caused by the motor accident.
also found that treatment of Sertraline and Diazepam and 12 weeks of fortnightly
cleaning assistance relates to the injury caused
by the accident and the
treatment of Valerian was not related to the injury caused by the motor
accident. He found that the treatment
was not reasonable and necessary.
Medical Assessor found that the main current problem was lower back pain. He
noted a history that the claimant was employed full
time as a registered nurse
at Liverpool Medical Centre and had resigned around four to five weeks prior
from Cecil Hills Medical
assessed a class 2 impairment for self-care and personal hygiene, a class 3
impairment for social and recreational activities and
social functioning. A
class 2 impairment was assessed for travel. A class 1 impairment was found for
concentration, persistence and
pace as well as adaptation.
Medical Assessor found that Valerian has no significant evidence base for
treatment of psychological injury and is not causally
related. Sertraline was
noted to be indicated for the injury, however is not reasonable and necessary as
it has been trialled with
little effect and is now taking Pristiq which should
not be taken with Sertraline.
respect of Diazepam it was noted to be causally related however, should only be
used in the short term and is not reasonable and
necessary given the chronicity
of her condition.
assistance was found to be related to functional impairment caused by the
psychological injury, however, was not reasonable
and necessary given that she
can function at work on a full-time basis.
SUBMISSIONS
Claimant’s review submissions dated 14 May 2024
claimant submits that the findings of Medical Assessor Chew in respect of the
psychiatric impairment rating scale (PIRS) categories
is not consistent with the
evidence and is not compliant with the assessment criteria set out in the AMA 4
Guides and the Guidelines.
It is submitted that the Medical Assessor failed to
take an adequately detailed pre- and post-accident history of symptoms from the
is submitted that a “primary example” is the Medical Assessor
“...not taking anything close to an adequate history
is the fact that he
failed to ask and to properly record that the claimant was no longer working at
the time of the subject assessment.”
is submitted that in respect of “self-care and personal hygiene” a
class 3 impairment ought to have been assessed given
that she showers once a
week prompted by her husband and struggles with energy and motivation. In
addition, her husband had taken
over the performance of chores and childcare
respect of concentration, persistence and pace it is submitted that a class 2
impairment ought to have been found, noting that
the claimant was not in fact
working at the time of the assessment and she struggled with concentration and
her work performance
had declined.
respect of adaptation, it is submitted that the Medical Assessor recorded an
incorrect history that the claimant was working.
submissions also suggested that the Medical Assessor failed to put his
“inconsistent PIRS assessment findings” to
the claimant and
therefore failed to afford procedural fairness.
review submissions dated 4 June 2024
insurer submits that the claimant’s submissions regarding the fact the
claimant as no longer working was the first they
had heard of such situation and
there was no information as to why she ceased work. It was noted the claimant
had been the subject
of a management issue in 2023 with no suggestion this had
anything to do with the motor accident.
is submitted that “the claimant’s solicitors do not say whether she
told Medical Assessor Chew that she had ceased
working. If she had and it was a
permanent situation, then presumably she would have informed him of that
fact.” The insurer
notes there is no independent evidence to show the
claimant had ceased work, and it is noted the Medical Assessor took a history
the claimant driving to work.
insurer submits that if the review is to proceed, the assessment of a class 3
impairment for social and recreational activities
is too high on the evidence.
DOCUMENTATION
SUMMARY OF DOCUMENTS CONSIDERED
Panel made interim directions requiring the parties to lodge a single bundle of
all documents relied upon. The Panel has considered
the material within the
bundles lodged in compliance with these directions. This includes a bundle
lodged by the claimant on
9 May 2025 consisting of 500 pages –
“250530-026103” and a bundle lodged by the insurer on 30 May 2025
of 77 pages – “insurer’s final review
not every document has been referenced within these reasons, the certificate and
reasons have been prepared in the context
of all material having been
considered.
have noted the report by Kerry Watson, psychologist, dated 17 August 2024.
Throughout the course of counselling, Ms Al-Obaidi has
consistently demonstrated
significant and increasing psychological symptomatology without any notable
resolution which developed
following the motor vehicle accident in which she was
involved on 6 March 2021. She was of the opinion that Ms Al-Obaidi's
demonstrated
psychological symptomatology is consistent with a diagnosis of a
post-traumatic stress disorder and a major depressive disorder with
distress. Ms Al-Obaidi's psychological treatment has incorporated a cognitive
behavioural therapeutic approach.
report of Kasim Abaie, psychologist, of 26 April 2021 is noted. The claimant is
recorded as suffering severe physical pain and during
sessions she displayed
symptoms of severe anxiety with panic attacks. It was noted the claimant is
suffering from anxiety disorder,
anger management problem, learning difficulties
and low confidence in addition to post-traumatic stress disorder and sleeping
disturbance.
have noted the independent medical examination report by Dr Aman Suman,
consultant psychiatrist dated 1 August 2022. He diagnosed
a post-traumatic
stress disorder with persistent depressive disorder caused by the accident. He
felt that the injury had not stabilised
at that time. In a further report of 21
March 2024, Dr Suman assessed a 17% WPI as a result of a post-traumatic stress
disorder with
persistent depressive disorder caused by the motor accident.
have noted the reports by Dr Rajneesh Singh, consultant psychiatrist. In a
report dated 23 May 2023 stating that Ms Al-Obaidi has
been diagnosed with
following mental health conditions, post-traumatic stress disorder, major
depressive disorder with anxious distress.
In relation to the functional
neurological disorder diagnosis, he wrote:
“Please note that
the diagnosis of functional neurological disorder was made by neurology team at
Bankstown Hospital. Functional
neurological disorder is a disorder that has
biological, psychological and social risk factors and events that trigger it...
Al-Obaidi's case, the diagnosis of functional neurological disorder (FND)
reflects her worsening mixed anxiety depressive illness
that she has developed
since the time of MVA.”
a further report dated 4 December 2023, symptoms were noted to be ongoing and
the option of trialling SNRI class of antidepressants
was discussed in view of
the lack of therapeutic effect with other classes of antidepressant medications.
His plan is noted to be:
Zoloft to 100 mg daily for three days & cease;
once Zoloft
stopped, commence of tab Pristiq – 50mg daily, after breakfast –
consider increase dose to 100mg in next two
to four weeks;
tab Diazepam
– 5mg/day PRN for anxiety for short term use over next four to six weeks,
tab Prazosin
– 1 mg nocte (monitor BP) as before. “
the most recent report of 4 February 2025 to the claimant’s general
practitioner (GP), Dr Singh, reports that not a lot had
changed with the
claimant “continuing stalemate around her work cover issues.” She
was noted to be continued to remain
employed in a nursing job as before but
certainly has experienced ongoing negative and anxious ruminations along with
evidence of
enduring low mood. The claimant is noted to think that her work
offered her some level of healthy distraction.
Sidrak, GP, in a report dated 14 October 2023 to Ms Watson, notes the claimant
as suffering from ongoing depression and could not
manage work related stress
and may lose her job.
Fairfield Hospital ED Discharge
documents the claimant presenting to the hospital with chest pain, dizziness and
weakness when driving to the physiotherapist
having had a panic attack. The
subject motor accident was noted. She was discharged with a recommendation to
continue taking regular
medications and follow up with her GP in a few days.
Other medical assessments/certificates
claimant’s injuries allegedly caused by the motor accident have been the
subject of a number of previous medical assessments/certificates
through the
Commission. The Panel has considered all such certificates. It is noted that a
Review Panel on 19 December 2024 revoked
a certificate of Medical Assessor
Cameron and found a 9% WPI due to soft tissue injuries to the cervical and
lumbar spine and a left
shoulder injury. It was found that injuries to the arms
and foot, hands, knee. legs, right shoulder, wrists and stomach were not
by the motor accident.
have noted the certificate by Medical Assessor Louis Izzo, dated 14 March 2024.
The following treatment and care: Whether the request
for reimbursement for IUD,
gynaecologist, termination of pregnancy, and associated costs related to the
injury caused by the motor
vehicle accident, does not relate to the motor
vehicle accident. Injuries that
Ms Al-Obaidi complained of, appeared to be
very exaggerated considering that it was a minor accident, minimal damage of the
no X-ray or other evidence of any trauma. There appears to have been a
great deal of distress with depression and anxiety consequent
termination of pregnancy.
have noted the medical assessment certificate by Medical Assessor Alan Home
7 June 2023. The certificate stated the diagnosis was aggravation of
the underlying symptomatic lumbar discopathy with chronic back
pain. It further
found that a request for reimbursement of ambulance costs on 19 June 2023 did
not relate to the injury caused by
the motor accident and was not reasonable and
necessary in the circumstances.
have noted the review of medical assessment certificate of determination by the
medical review panel. The certificate dated 8 April
2025 stated the review panel
affirms the certificate of Medical Assessor Izzo dated 14 March 2024.
Accordingly, on the basis of the
certificate and reasons provided by the review
panel in the related review, the Panel is not satisfied, on the balance of
probabilities,
that the claimant's lumbar spine injury caused by the motor
accident is of such a severity that it can be found that the treatment
dispute to be causally related to the motor accident, particularly in light of
pre-existing lumbar spine complaints. Further,
the Panel finds that the disputed
treatment is not reasonable and necessary in the circumstances. The review panel
certified the
claimant to have suffered soft tissue injuries to the cervical and
lumbar spine and a left shoulder injury.
Panel noted the certificate by the Commission’s Medical Review Panel dated
19 December 2024.
certificate of Medical Assessor Mason dated 2 September 2024 found that certain
psychological treatment was not related to an injury
caused by the motor
accident and is not reasonable and necessary in the circumstances. Medical
Assessor Mason stated
“In my opinion, Ms Al-Obaidi does not
have a genuine psychiatric illness as a consequence of the subject motor
accident. Because
of this, she does not require the prescription of
anti-depressant medication Pristiq (desvenlafaxine) and does not require a
admission to the anxiety and mood disorder treatment programme at
South West Sydney Private Hospital.”
RE-EXAMINATION
following is the clinical examination findings of the Medical Assessors
following their examination of the claimant on 13 August
Who attended the assessment
assessment was conducted by Medical Assessors Christopher Canaris and Himanshu
Singh. The assessment was done over a video conference.
Ms Al-Obaidi was present
at her home and attended the appointment through a MS Teams meeting. The Medical
Assessors were present
in their respective offices.
Psychosocial history and pre-accident history
Al-Obaidi was born in Iraq. She grew up with her parents and three sisters and
two brothers. She has a twin sister. Her other sister
is three years older to
her and has two brothers one is six years older and the other one is nine years
older to her. She had a very
good childhood. She left Iraq when she was 14 to 15
years of age. She studied in Iraq up until Year 9 or 10. She then moved to Syria
and finished Year 12 in Syria and was there for around four years as a refugee.
She denied any trauma. She denied negative experience
in Iraq and Syria and
denied being exposed to a war situation. Her oldest brother lives in Sweden and
the other brother lives in
Australia. Her twin sister lives in Australia and the
oldest sister lives in Sweden. She met her husband in Syria and they got married
Al-Obaidi stated a happy childhood. When they moved to Syria they lived in
Damascus for four years and she enjoyed her life there.
She met her husband in
Al-Obaidi stated that her father was quite older than her mother, and he was
often sick and was a heavy drinker. He was on medications
and died of heart
attack. Her father died when she was 11 to 12 years old. She then grew up with
her mother.
Al-Obaidi stated that she moved to Australia in 2014. She initially studied
language and then did a foundation in nursing and gained
entry to the University
of Western Sydney. She was accepted into a Bachelor of Nursing degree which
started in February 2017 and
completed in October – November 2019 and got
her AHPRA registration. She started to work at a medical centre in Liverpool in
2020 and worked there more than a year. She stated then the accident happened.
After the accident she wanted to change to another
medical centre so she moved
her job to Cecil Hills Medical Centre from 2021 and was there for almost two
years. She stated that there
were two other nurses with her, to help her and the
work was more manageable. She then started to work at Fairfield Heights in the
GP Clinic and worked all through the last year, 2024 in a full-time position.
She took a lot of breaks. She stated that she cannot
leave work due to the
financial reasons. She also at times reduced her hours and days on the advice of
her GP, psychologist and psychiatrist.
Al-Obaidi denied any previous mental health issues. She did not give a history
of consulting a psychologist or a psychiatrist before
the motor vehicle
Al-Obaidi stated that she has history of back pain in 2015-16 when she saw her
GP and had to see a neurologist which did not cause
any impairment. She was good
and she later travelled to Iraq and Dubai without any issues. She did not have
any surgeries and was
not taking any regular medication.
Al-Obaidi denied any family history of psychiatric illness.
Al-Obaidi denied a history of smoking cigarettes. She would drink alcohol very
occasionally when she would go out. She denied use
of illicit substance use. She
had started to vape in the last year.
Al-Obaidi stated that her husband joined her in Australia in 2019 though they
got married before this and she used to travel to
see him to Iraq. She had her
first child in 2019. Before her husband joined, she used to live by herself. She
managed her studies
and worked on her own. She was working and studying. She was
initially studying and later working full-time and had an amazing relationship.
She was living by herself. She denied any issues with her physical or mental
health. She was able to drive freely. She would regularly
socialise and go out
and see her friends and had a happy life.
History of the motor
Al-Obaidi stated that the accident was in March 2021. She could not remember the
date of the accident. She stated that she did
not want to talk about the
accident. On being told by the Panel that it is important to know what happened
in the accident, but again
it is her choice and her decision as to if she wants
to talk about the accident, to which Ms Al-Obaidi stated that she does not want
to talk about the accident and it is all mentioned in the documents.
noted from the previous documents and certificates Ms Al-Obaidi was involved in
a motor accident on 6 March 2021. She was stationary
behind another vehicle
waiting for traffic lights to change to turn right when she was hit from behind
by a big car a four-wheel
drive. She was not pushed into the car in front. The
vehicle behind did move off and collided with the rear of her car. This was
low-speed, low impact collision, seat belts were worn but airbags did not
deploy. There was no head strike or loss of consciousness.
Police and ambulance
were not called. She took photos of the other vehicle and other driver's
licence. After moving off the road
she said she stopped 30 minutes to rest
because she was shocked. She then drove home but then 30 minutes later, she
developed pain
in the lower back and both shoulders. She said the back pain
radiated down into her left leg and she developed headaches. She attended
GP, Dr Sidrak, two days later who ordered X-rays and an MRI scan and referred
her for physiotherapy. She was also referred to
a neurosurgeon Dr Abraszko and
consulted with her on three or four occasions. She requested another MRI scan
and at the last consultation
surgery was suggested. Ms Al-Obaidi said she was
too distressed to listen but her husband was with her and was able to follow
she said. She went back to her GP who referred her to another neurosurgeon
Dr McKechnie. She said he advised against surgery, in
the end she did not
undergo surgery.
Al-Obaidi said that by the time she had become pregnant and, on the advice of Dr
Abraszko, decided to have a termination because
she did not believe she would be
able to cope with the back pain involved. We questioned Ms Al-Obaidi about the
fact that there was
no such recommendation in the documents provided by Dr
Abraszko. She said she has seen the documents and knows this is the case but
nonetheless insisted that she had been advised to have a termination of
pregnancy. Her GP referred her to obstetrician Dr Nadir Bakhit
who performed the
procedure. At this point in the interview Ms Al-Obaidi became extremely
distressed and said she felt very guilty
distressed.
History of symptoms and treatment following the motor
Al-Obaidi stated that she had injuries in the accident and developed low back
pain, pain in both the shoulders, both wrists and
neck. The pain goes down to
her left leg. She also has numbness and heaviness in her legs. She stated,
“no one believes I have
pain, I am incontinent of urine and have urge
incontinence. I lost control of my urine. After the accident I never realised
I had mental issues until my husband told me.”
Al-Obaidi corroborated that she did not go to the emergency department and went
pain and saw her GP after two
Al-Obaidi stated she saw her GP later for her mental health and told her GP that
she was not feeling well. She was not engaging
and feeling angry. She was having
a lot of nightmares which have been less with the medications. She could not
remember the nightmares.
It was not clear for her. One of them was about the car
accident, pregnancy and having birth in the car. She would wake up screaming
crying. The nightmares may or may not be related to the accident. She was very
easily agitated. She would feel depressed and go
to her room and close her room.
She would close the light and stay alone in the room and does not enjoy
anything. She would often
be anxious and worried about everything and was not
the same person as before. She also started to have panic attacks. She was not
able to drive, as she would have palpitations, heart pain and restrictions in
her movement. She would think that there was something
inside her. She did not
want to go anywhere. She had thoughts of suicide. She had a plan. She wanted to
take all her pills, so she
does not have her medications with her now. She did
not make any attempt to end her life.
Al-Obaidi stated that her husband tried to take her to Kiama once but it was the
worst experience. She was anxious and had to often
go to the toilet and felt
worse after that. She can hear and see the things around her after the accident.
She could hear someone
talking to her or calling her and she would go and ask
attack in the doctor's room where she saw someone in the room. Following the
panic attack, she was checked at the practice and then
her ECG and blood
pressure were fine. She was unable to sit and she could not feel her legs. She
tried to get off the bed and fell.
The doctor said that she needed to go to the
hospital but she phoned her twin sister who came and put her in the car and took
to see her GP, Dr Sidrak. He was shocked, called an ambulance and arranged
for her to go to Bankstown Hospital. She did not know
what happened but
confirmed that she did recover over four days at Bankstown Hospital with only
physiotherapy. She attributed the
event to panic attacks and stated that the
neurologist said it has a psychological basis.
Al-Obaidi was working after the accident at the medical centre as a registered
nurse. She stopped driving for few months. The medical
centre was close by and
her husband used to pick her up and drop her off. She would go with her husband
if she was going anywhere
else as well. She later started to drive once she
received psychological therapy from her psychologist Kerry Watson.
Al-Obaidi stated that she continued to feel depressed and was unable to enjoy
anything. She also stopped reading and would not
go out. The relationship with
her husband became quite strained and she started to feel frustrated and
irritated all the time. Her
mother was involved at one point where she was
and cooking. She started to drive around six to seven months after the
accident with the help of her husband and her psychologist.
She would mostly
drive in the local area.
Al-Obaidi continued treatment under the care of her GP and was referred to
psychologist Kerry Watson. She would mostly use her
mental health care plan and
would see her every two to three weeks. She was referred to psychiatrist Dr
Rajneesh Singh and saw him
every two to three months. Her psychiatrist wanted
her to get her admitted to the hospital but it was declined by the insurance
Her medications were also changed.
Details of any
relevant injuries or conditions sustained since the motor accident
Al-Obaidi denied any relevant injuries or conditions sustained since the motor
Current symptoms
Al-Obaidi stated that she took Diazepam today before the appointment to help her
with her anxiety. She is in pain all the time.
The pain goes everywhere in her
body. She reported numbness and heaviness and burning sensation. She often has
to take breaks. She
needs to stand up or sit down or change her posture to the
right or left. She needs help in the shower as she cannot reach her legs.
being asked about her symptoms if she was not in pain, she stated, “I do
not know how I will function if I was without pain.”
Al-Obaidi stated that she takes Olanzapine 2.5mg on alternate days as it makes
her tired. It does help her to sleep and she may
sleep for six to seven hours
and wakes up mostly by
7.00 – 7.30 in the morning. Her appetite is
also low. If she will remember, then she will eat once a day and she may feel
and vomit. Her weight has increased she does not know why and has gained
around 10kg since the accident. On some days, she may not
eat the whole day. She
does not feel hungry and forgets to eat. She may drink water. She does not enjoy
anything. She moved to Tasmania
and people say it is beautiful, but nothing
looks beautiful to her.
Al-Obaidi stated that she has stress incontinence and urge incontinence and she
is always wearing pads. She also got assessed for
her incontinence and got a WPI
rating. She has been told she had a urinary tract infection and has taken
antibiotics for it. She
is in constant feeling of anxiety. She feels aggression
at times and cannot handle the stress.
Al-Obaidi stated that she continues to feel low and has low motivation and
energy. She is currently working. She is employed full-time
but she will take
days off. She is not able to do any housework. She will spend time with her
daughter but does not do much and her
husband will do most of the things. She
will sit next to her and watch her play. She does not give her daughter food or
shower her.
She will give her water or juice when she asks. She may sit with her
daughter when she studies.
Al-Obaidi stated that she moved to Tasmania to live with her husband. She moved
around three to four months ago. Her husband used
to work in security, and he is
now a GP at a medical centre. They had separated at one point and were living
separately. She did
not have a sexual relationship with her husband for more
than one and a half years. While they were living in Liverpool, they were
same house but they had separated for almost eight months and by the end of last
year, they moved to different houses. She
moved out to live at her mum's house
and left her daughter to stay with her husband as she is quite close to her
father. Since moving
to Tasmania, they are living in the same house but they
live in different rooms. She was at her mum's house from roughly
October-November
2024 until April 2025. Her GP Dr Sidrak advised her to go with
the family and to work full-time as a trial period to help with her
health. Her husband is currently a GP at a medical centre in Tasmania and she is
a registered nurse in a full-time contract
at the same
Current and proposed treatment
Al-Obaidi continues to receive treatment under the care of her GP, psychologist
and psychiatrist. She has psychology sessions with
Ms Watson under the mental
health care plan every two to four weeks. The psychologist bulk bills her, and
Allianz does not pay for
it. She also sees psychiatrist Dr Rajneesh Singh every
six to eight weeks now online and that is also not supported by the insurance
company, and her psychiatrist will bulk bill her. She continues to take
following medications:
(a) Pristiq 200 mg;
(b) Lamotrigine 25 mg;
(c) Hiprex and Oxybutynin 5mg twice a day for incontinence;
(d) Minipress 1mg for nightmares;
(e) Panadeine Forte for pain;
(f) Diazepam for panic attack;
(g) Gaviscon;
(h) Voltaren gel;
(i) Stemetil, and
(j) Olanzapine 2.5mg every alternate day and that helps her to sleep.
Clinical examination
Mental state examination
Al-Obaidi was seen over a video conference. She attended the appointment on her
own. She was dressed appropriately and well-presented.
She was identified from
her Tasmanian driver licence. There were no signs of agitation or retardation.
She had a spontaneous speech
with normal rate, tone and volume. She described
her mood as low and anxious. Her affect was reactive and she was teary at times
when talking about the accident. She had full range of emotions which were
appropriate to the situation. She would cry talking about
the accident and about
her inability to function. She reported nightmares but was not able to remember
them. She did not describe
any grandiosity, racing thoughts or increased energy
levels. She denied having any active or passive suicidal thoughts, intents or
plans and there were no thoughts, intents or plans of harming others. There was
no evidence of formal thought disorder, no delusional
pattern of thinking and no
perceptual abnormalities. She was orientated to time, place and person and there
was no cognitive dysfunction.
She struggled with recall and was only able to
recall two or three words and was not able to do serial subtractions after two
Her judgement was intact though she appeared to have limited insight into
Comments on consistency
Medical Assessors noted the seeming inconsistency in her report of showering
twice a week and working every day pointing out that
she would need to have
acceptable self-care and hygiene to be working. She insisted that she had
provided us with an accurate history
of her functioning. The Medical Assessors
also noted that her vulnerable background of losing her father at the age of 11
going as a refugee to Syria due to the threat of her life in a high
traumatic environment pointing out that all this could have had
impact on her. She again insisted that this had not impacted on her mental
Medical Assessors raised the issue of her previous work situation as Medical
Assessor Chew had apparently failed to note that
she was in fact not working.
She responded saying that she was not working at the time of examination by
Medical Assessor Gerald
Chew for a period of four to six weeks but that her
employers paid her. She then changed her job from Cecil Hills Medical Centre
Fairfield Heights GP clinic in April 2024. She said that did not work for that
period of around four to six weeks however she
was working most of the last year
but would take days off often from work.
Medical Assessors also noted the inconsistency between her report of her
concentration, persistence and pace in that she stated
she cannot reply to
emails and her husband or her sister will write for her. She cannot do her CPD
and her husband will help her
or will do on her behalf which was inconsistent
with her ability to work as a registered nurse in a medical centre. She
by denying that she had had denied any issues or limitations in her
work at the medical centre or in her previous role and denied
any notification
to the nursing board. The Medical Assessors also noted the inconsistency between
her performance on simple test
of memory and concentration and her capacity to
work full-time albeit with days off and making mistakes at work again, when this
was put to her, she contended that she had accurately represented her
difficulties and limitations with concentration.
Al-Obaidi is currently living with her husband and her daughter working as
registered nurse at a medical centre. She was involved
in a motor accident on 6
March 2021. It was a minor motor accident in which her vehicle was rear-ended
while stationary. She was
not pushed into the vehicle in front. She did not
require to go to the emergency department and there were no police or ambulance
in attendance. She drove home from the site of accident. She developed pain
symptoms following the accident for which she has received
treatment in the form
of medications and physiotherapy. Ms Al-Obaidi continues to present with
symptoms which meet the DSM-5-TR criteria
of a persistent depressive disorder
and somatoform pain disorder. Ms Al-Obaidi meets the criteria of persistent
depressive disorder
as per the DSM-5-TR:
(a) she represented with depressed mood for most of the day for more than days
than not for at least two years;
(b) she presented with following symptoms, poor appetite, insomnia, low energy,
poor concentration and feelings of hopelessness while
being depressed;
(c) during the two-year period, she never been without symptoms in criteria A
and B for more than two months at a time;
(d) while criteria for major depressive disorder may be continuously present,
this is not essential to the diagnosis;
(e) there has never been a manic or hypomanic episode and she has never met
criteria for cyclothymic disorder;
(f) the disturbance is not better explained by psychotic disorder;
(g) the symptoms are not attributable to physiological effects of a substance or
another medical condition, and
(h) the symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational or other important areas of functioning.
presented with somatic symptom disorder with predominant pain as per the
DSM-5-TR as:
or more somatic symptoms, in her case pain, that are distressing or result in
significant disruption of daily life;
thoughts, feelings or behaviours related to pain symptoms or associated health
concerns due to disproportionate and persistent
thought about seriousness of her
symptoms, persistently high level of anxiety about health symptoms and excessive
time and energy
devoted to these symptoms or health concerns,
state of being symptomatic is persistent and has been more than six months with
predominant pain.
Degree Of Permanent Impairment Psychiatric Impairment Rating
determination as to permanent impairment is made in accordance with the
American Medical Association’s Guides to the Evaluation of Permanent
(Fourth Edition) (AMA 4 Guides).and Part 6 of the Motor Accident
Guidelines.
Psychiatric diagnoses
1. Persistent depressive disorder
2. Somatic symptom disorder with predominant pain (not assessable for whole
person impairment)
Psychiatric treatment description
Reason for Decision
Care and Personal Hygiene
Ms Al-Obaidi showers around twice per week. She changes clean clothes
daily. She tried to make a tea but she burned herself. She forgets
to turn off
the gas. She is not cooking. Her husband will cook or her sister going to come
to help her to cook. She used to cook
before. She is not vacuuming and not
cleaning the house. She does not have a motivation and no energy and feel tired
and exhausted
and just sits in the room. She is not good with her self-care and
her husband will complain about it.
The Panel noted that there is inconsistency on her account and her ability
to work daily with the amount of dysfunction she reported
in her self-care while
noting her response when this inconsistency was pointed out to her. The Panel
was of the opinion that she
will be able to live independently and look after
herself adequately though may look unkempt occasionally.
The Panel excluded limitations attributable to pain which are not
assessable for whole person impairment.
and Recreational Activities
Ms Al-Obaidi stated she does not have many friends in Tasmania. She does
not go out to see her friends. She did not use to go to see
her friends and
would not speak to them even while she was in Sydney. She does not go to school
events of her children.
Her husband will drive her daughter to school. She has cut off all her
friends. Her husband has friends here in Tasmania and invited
her but she did
not go. She will make excuses not to go out. She went to her husband's nephew's
wedding once and was there for an
hour and left. She has been mostly staying at
Ms Al-Obaidi stated that she has been driving. she drives only locally
busy. She has not
been on any holidays. The only holiday she had when her husband tried to take
her to Kiama but it did not go well.
She has not been on any overseas travels
since the accident, and she came to Tasmania to stay with her husband.
Functioning
Ms Al-Obaidi stated that her relationship is not good. She is dependent on
her husband and earlier on her mother. She is not intimate
with her husband and
they are living in separate rooms and they had separated for a while last year
up until now when she moved to
Tasmania. She denied any periods of domestic
Concentration,
Persistence and Pace
Ms Al-Obaidi stated that she is not good with focus.
She could not write emails, and her husband will help her or assist her.
She cannot do her CPD. Her husband will assist her on behalf
of her and open her
login and will do the webinar instead of her to meet her basic CPD requirements.
At work as well she tends to
make mistakes and often forgets things. She does
not watch TV at all. When asked to do the serial sevens test, she started with
then 93 then started to make mistakes.
She could only recall two out of three words. She was not able to do simple
calculations like 22 – 15.
The Panel considered her apparent impairment in this category as
incompatible with being able to work as a nurse in a medical centre
reportedly making mistakes and having days off while noting her response when
this inconsistency was put to her. It concluded
that there was evidence of
symptom amplification. Using clinical judgement, it rated her as Class 2.
6. Adaptation
Ms Al-Obaidi is currently working in a new medical centre in Tasmania after
she moved. She forgets a lot. She has to have stickers
around her to help her
remember tasks. She may forget to take the blood pressure and just gives
injections when asked by the doctor.
She is not allowed to give vaccines unless
the doctors are around and have checked her.
She has not made any serious mistakes so far causing any serious incident
or harm to the patient. There has been no AHPRA complaint.
She will often check
her schedule to make sure that she does not get too overwhelmed with work. She
was working last year apart from
a month when she changed her job but would take
The Panel is of the opinion that she is able to work full-time but in a
different environment from that of pre-injury job requiring
comparable skills
and intellect as those of the pre-injury job. She is working as a registered
List classes in ascending order: 2 2 2 2 3 3
Median Class Value: 2
Aggregate Score: 14
% Whole Person Impairment: 7%
= Percentage Whole Person Impairment
is no pre-existing impairment or subsequent impairment, hence no apportionment
Psychiatric Impairment Rating Scale –
Pre-existing/subsequent impairment
applicable.
Effects of treatment
is no significant effect from the treatment received so far hence no
apportionment is made for the effects of treatment.
Conclusion – Permanent Impairment
of permanent impairment caused by the motor accident is 7%.
impairment ratings take symptoms into account, however the percentage permanent
impairment is not a direct measure of disability.
PANEL FINDINGS
Panel discussed the above clinical examination findings at the preliminary
conference of 27 August 2025, along with the documentary
evidence, and it was
collectively agreed by all Panel members that the clinical examination findings
would be adopted as part of
these reasons.
Causation and
is a direct temporal relationship to the accident and onset of the psychological
symptoms. Her ongoing pain from the accident
has maintained her psychological
distress and pain symptoms. She attributes her pain to the accident and the
injuries as per has
sustained in the accident. Her symptoms have been ongoing
and are directly and temporarily related to the motor accident. Her symptoms
have continued despite her receiving treatment from a GP, psychologist and
psychiatrist. She has received sufficient psychological
sessions and has been on
combination of various psychotropic medications.
Al-Obaidi does not present with post-traumatic stress disorder. She does not
meet Criterion A of post-traumatic stress disorder
as she was not exposed to
actual or threatened death or serious injury in the accident. It was a minor
collision which did not require
attendance by police or ambulance and did not
require her to attend the emergency department immediately. The symptoms of
experienced by her such as nightmares, repeated thoughts about the
accident and the initial avoidance of driving could be explained
by the ongoing
depressive disorder which has resulted following the accident.
following injuries were caused by the motor accident:
depressive disorder, and
somatic symptom
Treatment and Care – Causation
Panel noted that there were no submissions in relation to Medical Assessor
Chew’s findings in relation to treatment and
care. It finds, however, that
Valerian does not have a significant evidence base for treatment of her
psychological injury and is
therefore not causally related. The Panel finds that
Sertraline was indicated for treatment for the claimant’s psychiatric
injury and therefore causally related. It agreed also that Diazepam was causally
related, as was cleaning assistance.
Treatment and Care –
reasonable and necessary
Panel finds that Sertraline was not reasonable and necessary as the claimant had
trialled this with little effect and was now
on Pristiq (desvenlafaxine) and
that the two drugs should not ordinarily be taken together. It agreed also that
Diazepam was indicated
only for short term use and was not reasonable and
necessary for treatment of a chronic condition. Similarly, cleaning assistance
was not considered reasonable and necessary given the Panel’s assessment
of mild impairment in self-care and personal
Panel’s findings on diagnosis and the percentage assessment of WPI differs
from that of Medical Assessor Chew. Accordingly,
the original medical
certificate is revoked and a new certificate is provided at the beginning of
these reasons.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (628 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter