URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/567.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Papagelou v AAI Ltd t/as AAMI [2025] NSWPIC 567; (21 October 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION OF MEMBER
Papagelou v AAI Ltd t/as AAMI [2025] NSWPIC 567
Angelo Papagelou
AAI limited t/as AAMI
Hugh Macken
DATE OF DECISION:
21 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS - Damages assessment; injuries exceed 10% whole person
impairment (WPI); credibility and veracity of claimant; requirement
fusion; psychological injury; post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD);
– claimant retains significant transferable skills; claimant able to
continue in employment with some restrictions; scope for
significant further
improvement; overpayment by insurer; claimant not accepted in respect of payroll
management assertions; claimant
credibility; claimant able to pursue business
and development opportunities; uncertainty as to calculations of past and future
loss; requirement for buffer to reflect loss of earnings.
ASSESSMENT CONFERENCE REPORT
Papagelou (the claimant) is a 55-year-old man who was injured in a motor
vehicle accident on 15 August 2022. He was the driver
of a car which was struck,
on the driver’s side, by the insured vehicle as the insured driver was
making a right-hand turn
into a driveway.
insurer admitted breach of duty of care on the part of its insured with no
allegation of contributory negligence.
parties have agreed that the claimant’s injuries are non-threshold
injuries and that his injuries exceed 10% whole person
impairment (WPI).
Accordingly, the matters requiring assessment are the claimant’s economic
loss and non-economic loss. The
parties have agreed that allowance ought to be
made for tax paid on the payments to the claimant (Fox v Wood) of
insurer submitted that the claimant ought not be accepted in respect to his
allegations of loss as there are matters which cast
significant doubt on his
credibility and veracity of his contentions of economic loss consequent on his
post-accident disabilities.
parties also had differing submissions in respect to the medical material, and
more relevantly the prognosis of the claim. This
will, affect the assessment of
both the claimant’s impaired earning capacity to date and his future
earning capacity or, as
relevantly, his residual earning capacity. Accordingly,
this is appropriate to deal with these matters at first instance given the
effect that they have on both the assessment of non-economic loss and economic
MEDICAL MATERIAL
claimant sustained injuries on 15 August 2022 when the insured vehicle made a
right hand turn across the path of the claimant’s
vehicle thereby causing
a collision. The claimant sustained injuries to his cervical and lumbar spine,
his shoulders, right hip and
claimant was taken to Westmead Hospital and discharged the following day.
Following the accident, he had significant and ongoing
problems with his
cervical spine which ultimately led to him undergoing a cervical discectomy and
fusion between his fourth and seventh
cervical vertebrae on 15 May 2023. The
insurer’s submissions note that the accident being the cause of the need
for the fusion
had the consequence of the insurer conceding that the claimant is
entitled to damages for non-economic loss.
claimant is still troubled by the injury to his cervical spine. The report of Dr
complaints and
disabilities being neck pain, associated cervicogenic headache and right hip
pain. Of these injuries, Dr Homes suggests
that it is only the neck injury which
has its origin in the motor vehicle accident.
report of Dr Bentivoglio dated 31 March 2023 states that the claimant is going
to need to have a fusion because of the motor vehicle
accident. He
"I do believe that the surgery at the C4/5, C5/6 and C6/7
level as recommended by
Dr Kam is reasonably necessary and related to an
exacerbation of pre-existing degenerative disease, which was previously
asymptomatic,
the exacerbation being caused by the accident."
the degree of impairment, consequent on the claimant’s physical injuries
is in dispute between the parties what is not
in dispute is that as a
consequence of the injuries sustained in the motor vehicle accident, the
claimant has significant physical
restrictions in undertaking his day-to-day
activities.
my view what is more debilitating for the claimant is the psychological sequalae
of the accident. The report of Dr Rastogi dated
30 October 2024 outlines some of
the psychological problems which the claimant suffers from. He makes a diagnosis
of post-traumatic
stress disorder with arousal, hypervigilance, being triggered
on the road, fear and avoidance behaviours with driving, poor emotional
regulation and loss of confidence. The effect of these is quite significant. He
"His sleep is poor, and he has fatigue and low
motivation. He has marked anhedonia. He gets angry and irritable and displays
stress coping and has lost patience. He avoids confrontation and conflict.
Has stopped contact sports due to fear of injury. He avoids
social networks and
large crowds as he gets startled and overstimulated."
it is clear that the claimant suffers significant and debilitating physical and
psychological impairment the medical material
does not suggest that there is no
possibility of improvement.
I have outlined above the claimant is troubled significantly by his cervical
spinal injury but it does not prevent him from undertaking
lighter tasks or
working in a sedentary occupation. The report of Professor Bright dated 2 May
2025, suggesting the claimant was
self-limiting and not an entirely
reliable historian, does identify a capacity for work and noting the claimant
has significant transferable
skills derived from many years working in the
hospitality industry, mainly in managerial and ownership roles. He noted the
of the claimant’s treating psychologist, Nick Cherrie dated 28
September 2023, which states:
"It is my understanding that Angelo
has shown some improvement with his driving, but he is still experiencing
symptoms of anxiety
and depression around his physical recovery."
goes on to state:
"Angelo's capacity to return to work is largely
dependent upon his physical recovery, which is outside my scope of practice to
a prognosis for. However, it is my intention to assist Angelo with his
mental health recovery in the meantime."
claimant is 55 years old I do not accept that the condition, both physical and
psychological, is of such severity as to prevent
him from undertaking any
gainful type of employment. I do not accept that the medical material is of such
nature as to suggest significant
improvement is not possible. Indeed in, in my
view, the medical material supports the insurer’s contention that there is
for significant further improvement in the claimant’s physical and
psychological condition.
THE CLAIMANT
insurer admitted that the claimant will not be accepted in his contentions of
either injury or consequential loss. That is that
there are significant issues
relating to the credibility of the claimant particularly in so far as they
relate to his assertions
of his pre-injury earnings, his actual losses or the
veracity of his assertion of ongoing loss.
insurer identified that the claimant had stated that from 24 August 2022, he was
working only 20 hours per week.
claimant continued to work 38 hours per week notwithstanding that he was
receiving payments as though he was only working 20 hours
per week. The
overpayment was continued between 26 October 2022 until May 2023, about the time
of the claimant’s surgery, when
the claimant’s hours were identified
as 20 hours per week but his hourly rate was doubled so that he continued to be
full wage as well as weekly compensation from the insurer.
the claimant admits that he was unaware of this overpayment as his pay went
straight into a mortgage offset account and he
was not responsible for the
payroll, the statement given by the claimant’s business partner
contradicted this assertion.
the assessment conference, George Georgaklis stated that this payroll was indeed
the claimant’s responsibility. In answer
to a question, he confirmed that
the claimant was doing the pays before and after the motor vehicle accident. He
stated that the
claimant compiled the business activity statement, collated the
material and figures required for accounting purposes and that he
was setting
do not accept the claimant’s contention that he was unaware that he was
being overpaid during this period. I do not accept
that he never checked his
account to see how much was going into it. I do not accept his answer at the
assessment conference indicating
that he was not responsible for the preparation
of the business activity statement. I do not accept his assertion that he didn't
need to know wages. At the assessment conference, the claimant conceded that
payslips have been emailed to the insurer and that the
claimant knew that he was
being paid. This is contrary to his assertion in his statement dated 7 August
2025 in which he stated that
he did not receive payslips from work, he stated
position that:
"The accounting software picked up and paid my
pre-agreed superannuation; it needed to reflect the previous wage."
accept the insurance submission that the claimant was seeking to avoid any
responsibility for the overpayment. I accept the insurance
submission The
claimant lacks credibility in respect to his assertions of loss of earnings
consequence on the motor vehicle accident.
insurer raised the property acquisition and development application which the
claimant is involved with on the New South Wales
South Coast. The claimant also
has asserted that he had very limited input in respect to the proposal
surrounding the land owned
at Sanctuary Point. This is notwithstanding that the
claimant was integral in the purchase of the land and was an investor with his
wife in that land. He stated that it was an investment about which he knew
little and that: "The town planner does everything".
was also refused by Mr Georgie Georgaklis. He stated that the investment at
Paradise Road was one third owned by the claimant.
The claimant is involved in
the redesigning of it. That he met with the town planner and was integral to the
process. That he was
participating in a rational and sensible way in respect to
the proposal to develop the land into townhouses.
would be a limited significant other than the fact that it was involvement which
the claimant had originally denied although
the material and the witnesses to
support the insurer’s contention that this was an attempt by the claimant
to downplay his
involvement what is planned to be a significant property
development to bring profits to all concerned.
insurer submitted that significant doubt is cast on the claimant’s
credibility. I accept this submission. This, in turn,
will affect the manner in
which the remaining heads of damage are assessed.
his statement dated 27 June 2024 the claimant stated:
and I had planned on buying more property to renovate and sell, however since
the accident this is no longer possible
as she has to be the burden of
supporting me.”
was outlined at the assessment conference the claimant has invested in property
for development following the accident. The cafe
which employed the claimant was
purchased in 2017 for $390,000 and sold in 2023 for $1.6 million. The claimant
has been investing
in the land at Sanctuary Point to facilitate its rezoning and
allow development by the building of apartments. The claimant agreed
payments had been made for this purpose in August 2023 and March 2024. These
business and development opportunities being undertaken
by the claimant, since
the motor vehicle accident, contradict his assertion in his statement that this
is no longer possible.
NON-ECONOMIC LOSS
claimant submitted that an allowance for non-economic loss would be made in the
sum of $475,000 submitted an appropriate economic
cost with 300,000.
into account both the physical and psychological impacts of the accident,
together with the significant impairment for the
climate to enjoy pre-accident
social sporting domestic and recreational activities together with the Davies
associated with the breakdown
of relationships consequence on the psychological
injury he sustained. I assess non-economic loss in the sum of
PAST ECONOMIC LOSS
claimant submitted that past economic loss would be allowed, as a buffer, in the
amount of $225,000.
insurer’s original submissions were that the past economic loss would be
allowed in the sum of $45,446.
insurer provided updated documents noting that total weekly benefits paid by EML
(the workers compensation insurer) to either
the claimant or his employer come
to $228,242.66 which includes $39,076 of taxation payments made. The CTP
insurer, AAI limited t/as
AAMI, has paid $77,049.63 by way of payments for loss
of pre-accident weekly earnings.
calculation of past economic loss falls into a number of periods and subject to
a number of factors.
from the date of the accident until about May 2023 the claimant worked reduced
hours however did not suffer any wage loss
during this period because he was in
receipt of payment from the insurer.
in the period of 15 May 2023 to about 23 June 2024 the claimant worked further
reduced hours noting that he underwent spinal
surgery in May 2023 and further
noting that the cafe which the claimant operated was sold in about 23 June
and there is the period from 23 June 2024 to date where the claimant states that
he has not been able to work.
I have outlined above there is considerable uncertainty in respect to the
precise loss sustained by the claimant. In this regard
I consider it appropriate
to provide for a buffer in respect to the claimant’s past economic loss
loosely based on a calculation
of wage loss of in the order of $900 per week
from the time of the accident to the time of the sale of the cafe, and
thereafter a
loss of in the order of $1,200 per week. This is reflective of, for
the first period, and an impairment on earning capacity of roughly
pre-accident capacities and, since the sale of the business, a loss of earnings
and earning capacity loosely based on
pre-accident earnings and earning capacity. Whilst the claimant was,
essentially, self-employed he
was receiving some superannuation payments from
the entity which paid his salary. This gives rise to a further loss of employee
superannuation
contributions which, in my view, would be allowed in the
calculation for past economic loss.
assess the claimant’s past economic loss in the sum of
FUTURE ECONOMIC LOSS
claimant submitted the future economic loss being allowed in the amount of
$1,154,000 being a loss of $2,500 net per week for
the remainder of the
claimant’s working life less 15% for vicissitudes. The insurer submitted
that an allowance would be made
of loss of expected earnings of $1,800 for 12
months and thereafter a loss of $450 per week for 11 years. This would give rise
a future economic loss calculation of about $290,000.
I outlined above, I do consider that the claimant does have a significant loss
of capacity, particularly in respect to his ability
to perform physical tasks.
He is also significantly troubled by ongoing psychological difficulties. As I
have outlined in the synopsis
of the medical material these are conditions which
may improve with the passing of time. Further I know the claimant is undertaking
and pursuing business opportunities which will result in significant profit to
him. Should they come to fruition in this regard I
consider it appropriate to
provide a buffer for future economic loss.
note the claimant’s pre-accident earnings of in excess of $1,800 per week,
I consider it appropriate to allow a buffer loosely
based on a net loss of
earnings of in the order of $1,200 per week. This is a loss reflective of an
impaired earning capacity of
between 50 and 75%. By making an allowance for the
remainder of the claimant’s working life, had he not been injured in the
subject motor vehicle accident, and factor in for vicissitudes being offset by
an allowance for loss of employer superannuation contributions,
this gives rise
to a figure of, in the order of, $550,000.
assess the claimant’s future economic loss, including loss of
superannuation benefits, in the sum of
note that the workers compensation insurer has paid $228,422.66 weekly
compensation payments for which the insurer seeks an allowance
for reimbursement
of the sum. I further note the insurer has paid $305,472.29 for which it seeks
credit. The insurer is to have a
credit in the total amount of $305,472.29 in
respect to compensation for past loss of wages paid or payable. This amount
any amount owing in respect to taxation payments made on the money paid
to the claimant (Fox v Wood).
assess the quantification of this claim in the amount of $1,100,000. I note the
insurer is to have credit of $305,472.29.
assess the claimant’s costs in the amount of $40,825.40. I attach the
damages and cost calculator.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (444 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter