URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/1091.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Rail Tram and Bus Industry Union, New South Wales Branch v Transport Secretary o/b Transport for NSW [2025] NSWIRComm 1091 (10 November 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Australian Rail Tram and Bus Industry Union, New South Wales Branch v
Transport Secretary o/b Transport for NSW
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 1091
Hearing Date(s):
22 October 2025
Date of Orders:
10 November 2025
Decision Date:
10 November 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Commissioner Howell
In light of the Commission’s determination of the proper
interpretation, application and operation of the Award, the Commission
following Recommendations pursuant to
s 136(1)(a)
Industrial Relations
The Respondent is to update its payroll practices to reflect
the proper interpretation, application and operation of the Award for
relevant employees when working overtime on a public holiday; andWithin 28 days
of the publication of this decision the Respondent
ought review its records to
identify and redress any failure to properly acquit the time-in-lieu
entitlements of relevant employees
who have worked overtime on a public
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW – Award interpretation –
entitlement of shift workers in Transport Management Centre to
day in lieu for
working a public holiday
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Public Holidays Act 2010
Fair Work Act 2009
Cases Cited:
Amcor Limited v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union and Others
[2005] HCA 10
(2005) 222 CLR 241
Australian Workers Union v Graziers Association
[1939] CthArbRp 107
(1939) 40 CAR 494
City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
(2006) 153 IR 426
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
[1989] FCA 369
(1989) 30 IR 362
Director of
Public Employment by her agent the Commissioner of New South Wales Fire Brigades
and New South Wales Fire Brigades Employees'
[2008] NSWIRComm 158
Fair Work Ombudsman & Ors v Woolworths Group Limited & Ors
[2025] FCA 1092
Kucks v CSR Limited (1996) 66 IR 182 at 184
South Wales Nurses and Midwives' Association v State of NSW
[2024] NSWSC 636
Public Service Association and Professional Officers' Association
Amalgamated Union (NSW) v Secretary of the Treasury
[2014] NSWIRComm 23
Zoological Parks Board of New South Wales and The Australian Workers'
Union, New South Wales
[2004] NSWIRComm 85
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Australian Rail Tram and Bus Industry Union, New South Wales
Respondent:
Transport Secretary, o/b Transport for NSW
Representation:
Ms O Badger
Legal Officer,
Counsel: Ms V Bulut
Landers & Rogers
File Number(s):
2025/279972
Publication Restriction:
22 July 2025 the Australian Rail Tram and Bus Industry Union, New South Wales
(the RTBU or Notifier)
, notified the Industrial Registrar of an
industrial dispute with the Transport Secretary (the nominal employer of staff
by the Transport Service), in connection with the application and
operation of the Transport for New South Wales and Sydney Metro
Salaries and
Conditions of Employment Award 2022
(the Award)
. Specifically, the
dispute concerns the entitlements of continuous shift workers when working
on public holidays at the
Respondent’s Transport Management Centre
Notifier maintains the relevant employees in the TMC who work overtime on a
gazetted public holiday are entitled to
the payment of a penalty
rate for that work (at the rate of 250% of their rate of pay)
lieu for the public holiday on which the overtime was worked (NSUB [6]). The
Respondent maintains the relevant employees who
perform overtime on a public
holiday are entitled to be paid at the relevant penalty rate only (it is not in
dispute that rate is
250% of their rate of pay), and whatever practice has been
adopted in the past, the Respondent cannot be prohibited from complying
Award on its proper construction (RSUB [5]).
number of attempts to resolve the matter by Conciliation were held between 22
July 2025 and the issuing of a Certificate of Attempted
Conciliation on 19
August 2025, at which time the matter was programmed for hearing.
parties filed evidence and submissions in accordance with a timetable based on
the Commission’s Usual Directions, and on
21 October 2025 the parties
filed a helpful Statement of Agreed and Disputed Facts and Issues
(the Agreed
. The parties did tender statements filed in advance of the hearing,
but proceeded on the basis that the Agreed Facts set out the
material factual
considerations. The summary of Background below is largely (but not entirely)
based on the Agreed Facts.
1 November 2011, the corporation known as Transport for NSW
established pursuant to
Transport Administration Act
(the TA Act)
. The affairs of TfNSW are managed and controlled by
the Transport Secretary
its corporate status
, TfNSW is not
able to employ staff
. Staff are
employed in the Transport Service by the Government of New South Wales under
Part 7A of the TA Act
, to enable
TfNSW to exercise its functions. The Transport Secretary exercises the employer
functions of the government in relation
to persons employed in the Transport
functions of TfNSW include the co-ordination of transport services, the
management of incidents affecting the efficiency of road
and public transport
networks, including the co-ordination of communications with and responses by
relevant agencies, and the provision
of information about transport services and
transport infrastructure to assist people to use those services or
infrastructure
. The TMC is one of
the means by which those functions are delivered.
TMC's centralised operations centre is referred to as the Transport Operations
. The TOR is responsible for a number of important
functions, including coordinating network and service disruption and incident
on the NSW road network (including the coordination of emergency
services, bus, light rail and ferry operators, and State transport
including Sydney Trains and Sydney Metro). It operates 24 hours per day, seven
days per week, 365 days per year.
Award was made by consent and came into operation on 1 July 2022. It is divided
into two parts:
(1) Part A of the Award (clauses 1 to 33), ‘Core conditions covering
normal operations’, applies generally to employees
(2) Part B of the Award (clauses 34 to 38), ‘Conditions covering
shift-workers in the Transport Management Centre’, applies
to specified
classifications performing work at the TMC. The clauses in Part B apply
“to the extent” there is a “conflict”
with a clause in
for these proceedings, cl 34 applies
(1) TOCs, meaning Duty Manager Operations Controllers, Deputy Duty Manager
Operations Controllers, Senior Transport Operations Controllers
and Transport
Operations Controllers in the Operations Unit of the TMC; and
(2) TIOs, meaning Transport Information Officers in the TMC.
Collectively, TOCs and TIOs are referred to as the
employees”.
is not in dispute that the relevant employees:
(1) Are covered by Parts A and B of the Award;
(2) Are continuous shift workers, with shift arrangements of 70 ordinary hours
per fortnight, worked across six shifts per fortnight
(usually three shifts per
week) each of 11.67 hours in length.
A of the Award relevantly provides:
(1) Clause 18, Hours of Work, provides for 35 ordinary hours per week (cl 18.1),
worked between 7am and 7pm, Monday to Friday “Except
as provided for in
subclause 18.12, clause 21 and Part B, of this Award” (cl 18.2). Clause
18.12 provides additional conditions
for Sydney Metro Community Information
Centre Staff. It can be put to one side. Part B is addressed below. Clause 20
provides for
a flexible hours arrangement, but it can also be put to one
(2) Clause 28, Overtime, relevantly provides “Any hours directed to be
worked outside the Employee’s ordinary hours of
duty, if working standard
hours, or outside the bandwidth, if working under a flexible working hours
scheme, shall be overtime and
managed in accordance with the overtime provisions
of the Award”: (cl 28.1(b)). As for payment, it relevantly provides
overtime worked on a public holiday [shall be paid] at the rate of
double time and one half”: cl 28.3(b)(iv). If overtime is
worked on a
Saturday, Sunday or public holiday, the employee is entitled to “a minimum
payment [of] three (3) hours work at
the appropriate rate”: cl 28.3(d).
Clause 28.9, Payment for Overtime or Leave in Lieu, provides:
“The Employer shall grant compensation for directed overtime worked either
by payment at the appropriate rate or, if the Employee
so elects, by the grant
of leave in lieu at the overtime rate in accordance with paragraph
28.3(b). This leave shall be taken within
three months of the overtime worked
subject to organisational convenience except where it is being used to look
after a sick Family
Member. The leave shall be taken in multiples of a quarter
of a day. If leave in lieu is not taken within three months the
will be paid and the leave in lieu cancelled.”
(3) Clause 21, Shift Work, being “work for which ordinary hours
includes hours rostered outside the span of ordinary hours as
subclause 18.2” (cl 21.3(a)), provides for 35 ordinary hours per week,
rostered over cycles of up to 8 weeks, with
shift length parameters otherwise
outlined in cl 21.6. Overtime for shift workers is “all time
worked in excess of the rostered
shift length or the maximum ordinary
hours of the roster cycle” (cl 21.13). Clause 21.9, Payment for Shift
Work, and cl 21.13,
Overtime for shift workers, respectively provide in
subclause 21.9(g) and 21.13(b)(iii) and (v) (emphasis added):
All ordinary time worked
on a Public Holiday
is at the rate of double and one half of the ordinary rate of pay. The Employee
may elect, prior to working the
public holiday, to be paid at the rate of time
and one half of the ordinary rate of pay and a day off in lieu to be taken at a
mutually agreed between the employer and the Employee within 12 months
following the Public Holiday. The day off in lieu will be
cashed out if not
taken within 12 months of it being accrued.”
“(b) Payment of overtime will be made at the following
(iii) Any overtime work carried out on a public holiday shall
be paid for at the rate of double time and a half.
(v) Overtime may be granted as Time in Lieu in accordance with
subclause 26.9 of the Award.”
The reference in cl 21.13(b)(v) to cl 26.9 is wrong. It is clearly intended
to refer to cl 28.9 of the Award (extracted above).
(4) Clause 26, Public Holidays (underlining added):
“26.1 Employees are entitled, without loss
of pay, to the following standard public holidays:
(a) New Year’s Day;
(b) Australia Day;
(c) Good Friday;
(d) Easter Saturday;
(e) Easter Sunday;
(f) Easter Monday;
(g) Anzac Day;
(h) Sovereign's Birthday;
(i) Labour Day;
(j) Christmas Day;
(k) Boxing Day;
(l) and an additional day between Boxing Day
and New Year's Day,
and such other Local Holiday, public holiday/s or substitute day as ordered by
the government from time to time.
26.2 Employees directed to work on public holidays are to
be paid, excluding for overtime:
(a) a loading of 150% of the ordinary hourly base rate of pay
for any time worked on such holiday; and
(b) an additional day’s pay at ordinary rates.
26.3 Where Employees are not required to work on a public
holiday and where the holiday is due they shall receive payment of the
monetary value of the day.
26.4 Employees are not entitled to a public holiday where it
occurs under the following circumstances:
(a) During approved leave of absence without pay exceeding one
(b) When an Employee covered by Part B is rostered to work and
is absent without leave.
(c) When an Employee is on strike or is suspended without pay.
26.5 Public holidays occurring during the taking of annual
leave shall be treated as additional to the quantum of annual leave
26.6 An Employee required to work on a Local Holiday will be
granted time off in lieu on an hour for hour basis for the time worked
on the Local Holiday.
26.7 If a Local Holiday falls during the period of
an Employee's absence on leave, the Employee is not entitled to the
“Local Holiday” is defined to mean “a holiday that is declared
as an additional holiday for a specified part of
the State under
Public Holidays Act
A also includes Clause 9, No Extra
. The Notifier in part
relied upon this clause in support of an alternative contention, should the
Commission find the Award did not
provide what it contends. The argument being
to the effect that it would be an “extra claim” if the Respondent
demand the withdrawal of an over-Award entitlement that had been
consistently applied at the time the Award was made (that is to
say, such a
demand would be for a reduction in conditions of employment). Given the
conclusion I have reached, it is unnecessary
to deal with that submission.
then to Part B, clause 34 modifies Part A for the relevant employees affected by
this dispute. Clause 34.1 importantly provides
an interpretive rule clarifying
the interaction between Parts A and B of the Award:
To the extent
this clause conflicts with a clause in Part A, this
clause will prevail” (emphasis added).
34 then sets out specific conditions for the relevant employees in relation to
Hours of Work (cl 34.2, including ordinary
, conditions for Full Time
and Part Time employees
entitlements where Employees are rostered to work shifts of 12 hours 10
), specific entitlements
for Shift Work (cl 34.2, including defining
, payment for shift
, an additional entitlement
to annual leave for these shift
), a specific overtime
entitlement scheme to TOCs and
, and specific sick leave
entitlements
cl 34, TOCs and TIOs are continuous shift workers (cl 34.2(b)(i)), working 35
ordinary hours per week (cl 34.2(a)), worked as
“70 hours ...over a 2
week roster cycle”, rostered on shifts “of 12 hours 10 minutes,
including a 30 minute meal
break and a 20 minute paid crib
break” (cl 34.2(ii)), with no more than three consecutive days being
worked in any seven day
period (cl 34.2(b)(iv)). Clause 34.3(b)(vii) and (viii)
relevantly provide:
“(vii) Payment for all ordinary time worked on a Public
Holiday shall be at the rate of double and one half of the ordinary
(viii) Employees rostered off on a public holiday shall be
credited with a day in lieu for each such day.”
34.4 deals with overtime, providing generally “All time worked in
excess of 11 hours 40 minutes per shift or 70 hours
per fortnightly pay
period between midnight Sunday and midnight Saturday, shall be paid at the rate
of time and one half for the
first 2 hours and double time thereafter. Each
period of overtime shall stand alone”: cl 34.4(a). Overtime worked on
public holiday [entitles a payment] at the rate of double time and a
half” (cl 34.4(c)), with a minimum payment for 3 hours
work at the
appropriate overtime rate (cl 34.4(d)). For completeness, I note there are
equivalent entitlements for work on a public
holiday for the other
classification of workers covered by Part B of the Award.
practice, the Respondent offers overtime work to the relevant employees, which
the relevant employees can either accept or decline
Craig Andrew Norton, the Director, Customer Journey Operations, since
approximately January 2022, gave evidence of the functions
and operations of the
TMC including (amongst other things), the rostering arrangements in practice.
Simply described, whilst the
patterns differ somewhat between the different
classifications amongst the relevant employees, they typically work;
(1) 70 ordinary hours a fortnight comprising 6 x 11.67- hour shifts on a
rotating roster to provide 24hr
coverage (typically three shifts in every
seven-day period).
(2) The employees are broken into a number of teams, each of which is led by a
relevant manager/supervisor. The teams work a roster.
The roster fully rotates
over the course of 12 weeks, meaning each of the teams works a roster "line"
each fortnight, with each roster
line providing a particular set of shifts and
days off for the employees. Fully rotating through the various shift/day off
in the specific roster lines ensures the even distribution across
employees of day shifts, night shifts, weekend work and the like.
(3) Rosters are published 30 days in advance of the first shift for the roster
period, using a digital rostering system known as
Norton described overtime as “optional” (as opposed to directed),
and employees are able to mark themselves ‘unavailable’
digital rostering system so they will not, for example, be invited to backfill a
shift that has become vacant. He describes
overtime for the relevant employees
being ‘planned’ or ‘unplanned’, the former involving the
creation of
additional shifts in a roster pattern to meet events that are known
to give rise to increased need for staffing (such as the City2Surf
and the latter (for example) arising from the need to fill a shift in the roster
left vacant for some reason (such as
a employee falling ill or in an emergency
situation). In either case, the shift is filled by offers made and accepted,
with a relevant
employee picking up the overtime shift. If no-one can take the
whole shift “efforts will be made to redistribute the workload
employees already on shift”.
Notifier called evidence from a number of the relevant employees who described,
in their circumstances, having historically received
a payment for
hours worked at the relevant overtime rate, and a credit of time in lieu for the
public holiday (albeit it often required
specific claims to be raised), when
they worked overtime (whether planned or unplanned, as described by Mr Norton)
on a public holiday.
Amongst that evidence there was repeated reference to an
email exchange dating to November 2023 involving a Mr Kieren Wood, Acting
Manager Operations Coordinator, in which he made reference to cll 26.6 and
34.3(b)(viii) of the Award when confirming, in
his understanding, employees who
worked overtime on a public holiday were entitled to both payment at the penalty
rate (of 250%)
and time in lieu.
collection of evidence has been largely overtaken, however, by an agreed fact
that there has been an inconsistent application
of the entitlements under clause
34.3(b)(viii) over the years. Some relevant employees, when working overtime on
a public holiday,
were provided the following entitlements:
(1) Payment of 250% for hours worked on the public holiday;
(2) A day in lieu (or part day) credited to the employee's
'time-in-lieu'
17 December 2024, the Respondent circulated a communication to its employees
which indicated its position concerning entitlements
when relevant employees
worked overtime on a public holiday. The position as communicated by the
Respondent was that it considered
that the relevant employees were not entitled
to receive both overtime rates and the day in lieu when working overtime on a
matter was put into dispute by the Notifier
SUBMISSIONS
have had regard to the detailed written and oral submissions of the parties. It
is unnecessary to set them out in terms. Broadly
summarised, the submissions of
the Notifier
argue in the
application of the ordinary principles of
construction
, its position is
supported by one of two paths (my emphasis):
(1) There is conflict between Part A and Part B of the Award. Part B prevails to
the extent of any inconsistency. In that connection,
the Notifier contends cl
34.3(b)(viii) provides relevant employees who are “rostered off” on
a public holiday are credited
with a day in lieu for each such day. As a matter
of logic, public holidays on which overtime is worked in the case of continuous
shift workers is, by definition, always work done at a time when they would
otherwise be
‘rostered off’
. As stated by French J in
City of Wanneroo v Holmes
[a]wards ... should make sense according
to the basic conventions of the English language.’
Shift workers who
accept overtime work on a public holiday cannot be disentitled from the
operation of clause 34.3(b)(viii) because
they subsequently accept overtime work
(NSUB [19] – [21]). For those that work overtime (necessarily meaning work
are otherwise not rostered to work) on a public holiday, they are
entitled to the day in lieu (cl 34.3(b)(viii))
to be paid for
“Any overtime work carried out on a public holiday ...at the rate of
double tie and a half”: cl 34.4(c)
(noting the minimum 3 hour payment: cl
(2) In the alternative, if there be no conflict between Part A and Part B,
clause 26.2 of the Award supports the proposition of the
Notifier. In that
connection it was said (NSUB [23] - [29]):
(a) Clause 26.2 clearly delineates between the penalty percentage rate of 150%
and the additional day’s pay at ordinary rates.
It excludes overtime. In
the case of TMC employees and as a resulting effect of coverage of both Parts A
and B of the Award, the
effect of clause 26.2(b) remains when clause 26.2(a) is
displaced by the working of overtime on a public holiday.
(b) The word “paid” in the opening words of cl 26.2 should not be
understood literally, but as intended to provide Part
A employees (excluding for
overtime) with the benefit of the penalty rate of 150% (cl 26.2(a)) as well as
“a day in lieu”
(cl 26.2(b)). Whilst the rate contemplated by cl
26.2(a) is displaced because it conflicts with cl 34.4(vii), the day in lieu in
cl 26.2(b) does not and so continues to apply.
(3) On either case, the Notifier’s construction is generally consistent
with the shift worker entitlements in the context of
the Award read as a whole:
NSUB [32] – [43].
Respondent contends the relevant employees who perform overtime on a public
holiday are entitled to, and only entitled to, payment
at the rate of 250% for
all hours worked on the public holiday. They are not additionally entitled to
time in lieu: RSUB [4] –
[5]. The Respondent’s
submissions
, broadly summarised,
are to this effect:
(1) There is no dispute that where the relevant employees work overtime on a
public holiday, they are entitled to be paid at the
rate of 250% (or double time
and a half). The issue is whether they are additionally entitled to any other
benefit. In that connection:
(2) The Notifier’s reliance on cl 26.2 is entirely misplaced. It does not
apply to overtime. It only applies to employees “directed”
overtime (which the relevant employees are not), and it does not provide for a
time in lieu entitlement at all: RSUB[32]
(3) The Notifier’s reliance on cl 34.3(b)(viii) should also be rejected:
(a) Clause 34.3(b), sets out the rates of pay payable for shift work. It is
clearly directed at rates payable for ordinary hours,
and the penalties that may
attach to such hours. It reflects a pattern seen throughout the Award all the
entitlements for ordinary
hours, for overtime and the like are self-contained in
a particular clause (using the submission directed to overtime in cl 28 to
illustrate the Respondent’s pattern point, “one doesn’t need
to look outside the payment for overtime provision
to find the entitlement for
what are all the benefits that I get for working
(b) Subclause 34.3(b)(viii) applies to employees “rostered off on a public
holiday”. The words are expressed in present
tense – not past tense.
Employees are entitled to a day in lieu if they are rostered off on the day of
the public holiday.
The clause only applies to shift workers who, by definition,
work on a rotating roster of no more than three consecutive days in
a week, and
so may miss out on the benefit of a public holiday by reason of the happenstance
of their roster. If the shift worker
accepts an overtime shift on a public
holiday, the worker is no longer “off on a public holiday”, and so
does not receive
time in lieu under cl 34.3(b)(viii), but does reap the benefit
of the public holiday – namely the higher rate of pay that attracts
such work (see cl 34.4(c)).
(c) Reading the Award as a whole, and consistently, overtime pay is dealt with
separately in Part A and in Part B. Both sets of overtime
provisions are wholly
contained. All the benefits that attract to overtime work are identified. Clause
28.3 (in Part A) clearly does
not provide for overtime rates of pay in addition
to a day in lieu for working overtime. So much is clear by the existence of cl
28.9, which allows employees to convert overtime rates to equivalent days in
lieu. When work on a public holiday attracts multiple
entitlements, it is
clearly set out – see, for example, cl 26.2. If the Award had intended to
impart the benefit of 250% penalty
rates and a day in lieu entitlement to
overtime worked on a public holiday by TOCs and TIOs, cl 34.4(c) could, and
would, have simply
stated as much.
(d) Finally, it is somewhat nonsensical that, on RTBU’s construction:
(i) the time in lieu entitlement is only for the hours worked by the shift
worker (which may be as few as three hours). That language
is not found in cl
26.2 or in 34.3(b)(viii); and
(ii) the entitlement would only extend to shift workers who were initially
rostered off, and not to shift workers who were otherwise
performing overtime on
a public holiday. Why shift workers performing overtime on a public holiday
would be treated differently if
they were initially “off” is not
immediately apparent and not explained in the Notifier’s submissions.
(e) The construction advanced by the Respondent is consistent with the text,
context and purpose of the provision. A shift worker
who is “rostered
off” on a public holiday has the choice of: (a) having a day off on
another occasion (but no additional
pay); or (b) assuming a shift is available,
volunteering to pick up an overtime shift on the public holiday and receiving
of pay for such work (in addition to their weekly wage)
reply, the Notifier argued:
(1) The Respondent’s contentions around the operation of cl 26 ought not
be accepted (NRSUB [2] – [11]), for various
reasons (which need not be
presently detailed).
(2) The Respondent’s construction on the operation of cl 34.3(b)(viii),
emphasising the use of past tense to argue that once
an employee has accepted an
overtime shift they are no longer “rostered off” is wrong. The Award
does not deal with the
concept of rostered overtime. To construe the Award in
the manner suggested by the Respondent would give rise to the absurd position
that an employee who works very small amounts of overtime on a public holiday
would be denied a day in lieu: NRSUB at [13] –
parties also articulated arguments on the operation of cl 9, No Extra Claims of
the Award (NSUB at [55] – [57]; RSUB [43]
– [46]; NRSUB [25] –
[28]). Given the conclusion I have reached, it is unnecessary to consider those
contentions.
CONSIDERATION
entitlements of the relevant employees when working overtime on public holidays
are determined by the proper construction of the
Award. The principles that
inform the proper construction of an award were not in doubt and need not be set
out at length here
is sufficient to recognise the following. Whilst the Commission ought not be too
concerned by ‘
mere infelicities of
expression’
interpretation of an award nonetheless must begin with a consideration of the
ordinary meaning of the words used, understood
in their industrial context and
. The task remains
interpreting a document produced by
. The intention of the
drafters must be ascertained by reference to the actual words
. The task is to objectively
interpret the text used in the document, understood in context – not to
give effect to an anteriorly-derived
notion of what would be fair and
in this instance, begins with the statutory environment in which the Award was
agreed, including the
Public Holidays Act
(the PH Act).
The PH Act (s 7) adopts
sections 114
Fair Work Act
(the FW Act)
as a law of New South Wales. At their most basic, s
114 of the FW Act entitles an employee (subject to an employer’s
request), to be absent from work on a day or part‑day that is a
public holiday, and s 116 entitles a worker so absent to (my
“pay ...at the employee’s base rate of pay for
employee’s ordinary hours of work on the day or part‑day”. As
Perram J observed in
Fair Work Ombudsman & Ors v Woolworths Group Limited
[2025] FCA 1092
(at [120]), s 116 of the FW Act:
“...moves the economic cost of public holidays from employees who have
ordinary hours which fall on a public holiday to their
employer. It does so by
requiring the employer to pay the employee for the ordinary hours even though
they were not worked because
of the public holiday.”
then to the Award, in order to understand its proper operation, one must first
begin with Part A: Part B of the Award only
applies “to the extent”
there is a “conflict” with “a clause in Part
. Part A applies to
employees generally. The standard position is 35 ordinary hours worked Monday to
Friday in the span contemplated
by cl 18.2 (including if working a flexible
hours roster: cl 20.2(e)), or for those shift workers within cl 21.1(f) or (d)
excludes those covered by Part B), 35 ordinary hours averaged over a
roster period (including hours rostered hours outside the span
contemplated by cl 18.2: cl 21.3(a)).
hours include hours worked on a public holiday that falls Monday to Friday,
albeit they attract a penalty (described below).
26.1 and 26.3 broadly reflect the general position in the PH Act that where an
employee is “not required to work and
where the holiday is due”,
they are to be paid the “monetary value of the day” (cl 26.3), in
that way meeting the
command of 26.1, that the employee is
“entitled” to the holiday “without loss of pay” (the day
is lost but
the worker is paid the value of the day).
parties have obviously been conscious that the right to a public holiday in cl
26 will, to the extent there is no conflict, apply
to those covered by Part B.
Part B is expressly recognised in the entitlement to a public holiday at all, in
that the entitlement
to a public holiday (reflected in cl 26.1) does not apply
“When an Employee covered by Part B is rostered to work and is absent
without leave”: cl 26.4(b).
“directed to work on public holidays” (here referring to ordinary
hours) are to be “paid’, “excluding
for overtime”,
necessarily meaning for work in their ordinary span of hours, a loading (150% of
the ordinary hourly base rate
for any time worked on such holidays: cl 26.2(a)),
“and”, “an additional day’s pay at ordinary rates”
(cl 26.2(b)). The “additional day’s pay at ordinary rates”,
regardless of how many hours are actually worked on
the public holiday, ensures
the employee, despite being directed to work, retains the benefit contemplated
by cl 26.1 (because they
are paid for the full day under subclause 26.2(b),
regardless of how much time is worked – the holiday may be lost in whole
or part, but it is not lost without pay).
notion of “directed” (cl 26.2) and “not required” to
work (cl 26.3), must be understood in light of the
statutory context of the PH
Act, adopting s 114 of the FW
, but that can be put to one
side for the moment.
is an arrangement for a “Local Holiday” (defined in cl 2.1 of the
Award to mean “a holiday that is declared
as an additional holiday for a
specified part of the State under the
Public Holidays Act
(NSW)”), in cl 26.6: “An Employee required to work on a Local
Holiday will be granted time off in lieu on an hour for
hour basis for the time
worked on the Local Holiday.” A Local Holiday in the Award may well be
intended to refer to a “Local
under s 8 of the PH Act. Unlike
an “Additional public holiday” or a “Substituted public
holiday” in ss 5
and 6 of the PH Act, such a day is not a public holiday
(see s 8(4) of the PH Act), which may explain why it has been separately
identified in the Award (such a day not being a standard public holiday listed
under cl 26.1(a)-(l)
arrangement for a Local Holiday in the Award thus provides a bespoke benefit of
time in lieu for any hours worked on a Local
21.9(g) provides a specific scheme for the limited group of shift workers
covered by cl 21, which provides (my emphasis):
“All ordinary time worked on a Public Holiday is at the rate of double and
one half of the ordinary rate of pay. The Employee
may elect, prior to working
the public holiday, to be paid at the rate of time and one half of the ordinary
rate of pay and a day
off in lieu to be taken at a date mutually agreed between
the employer and the Employee within 12 months following the Public Holiday.
day off in lieu will be cashed out if not taken within 12 months of it being
turning to the Award’s overtime provisions, it is convenient to address an
aspect of the Notifier’s alternative
argument. That is, the
Notifier’s contention that cl 26.2(b) should
contemplating a payment, but as entitling the employees to “a day in
lieu”: NSUB [22] – [28]. It does
not. I agree with RSUB [21]
The clause is not concerned with time in lieu benefits”.
terms, cl 26.2(b) says an employee is “to be paid... an additional
day’s pay” on top of the loaded rate of pay
in subcl 26.2(a) when
working ordinary hours, clearly to ensure that the public holiday is not lost
without “loss of pay”:
cl 26.1. The Notifier’s alternative
argument does not invite me to avoid an infelicity in language. It invites a
substantive
re-writing of the clause. Where the parties have intended to provide
for a day in lieu, directly or upon election, they have expressly
said so (for
example, Part A shift workers may make an election to take either an additional
day’s pay or a day in lieu: cl
21.9, for ordinary hours worked on a public
then to overtime, Part A deals generally with overtime in cl 28. Overtime is
defined in cl 28.1(b) as “Any hours directed
to be worked outside the
Employee’s ordinary hours of duty, if working standard hours, or outside
the bandwidth, if working
under a flexible working hours scheme”, in which
case the overtime is to be “managed in accordance with the overtime
provisions of the Award”: cl 28.1(b). Overtime for shift workers are dealt
with elsewhere.
expression “managed in accordance with” the Award reflects the fact
overtime entitlements are not simply about rates
(and are in some respects
qualified). They include overtime worked that is less than a quarter of an hour
or time spent travelling
is not to be paid (cl 28.2(b) and (d)), there are
various meal break and meal allowance entitlements connected with overtime work
(cl 28.6 and 28.7), the rates for overtime vary (see cll 28.3 and 28.8), there
are minimum rest periods between shifts after working
overtime (cl 28.3(e)),
there are minimum payment entitlements for overtime worked in certain
circumstances (cll 28.3(d), 28.4(a)),
and that in some circumstances an employee
accrues “flex time” rather than an overtime payment: see cl 28.1(d),
elect to take time in lieu of overtime: cl 28.9.
rates outlined in cl 28.3 do not apply to a “shift worker” as
defined (see cl 28.3(a)), meaning the rates do not apply
to “an Employee
who works rostered shifts”: cl 2.1, Definitions. For those employees who
shift workers, “All overtime worked on a public holiday
[shall be paid at] the rate of double time and one half”: cl 28.3((iv),
and the employee is entitled to a minimum 3 hour payment: cl 28.3(d).
of overtime payment for those who
shift workers is provided
(1) For Part A shift workers, cl 21.13, which means “Any overtime work
carried out on a public holiday shall be paid at the
rate of double time and a
half” (cl 21.13(b)(iii)), which “may be granted as Time in Lieu in
accordance with subclause
26.9 [obviously 28.9] of the Award”: cl
21.13(b)(v); or
(2) One of the specific clauses in Part B that applies to shift workers. For,
the relevant employees, cl 34.4. Specifically on public
holidays “Any
overtime work carried out on a public holiday shall be paid for at the rate of
double time and a half”
(cl 34.4(c)), with a minimum payment of 3 hours:
accept the Award does recognise a distinction between ordinary hours worked on a
public holiday and overtime hours worked on a public
holiday, but not in the way
the Respondent contends. The rostering contemplated by cl 34.2 is clearly for
“ordinary hours”
of work (see cl 34.2(a), (b)(ii), (c)(i) (d)(i) and
(ii)). The Award does not contemplate rostered overtime. In referring to
the Award is clearly describing the ordinary hours rosters contemplated
by the Award itself. In crafting the various entitlements
applicable to public
holidays, the parties have carefully distinguished between entitlements when
(1) are “not required to work” (cl 26.3) or are “rostered
off” (cl 34.3(b)(iii), 37.3(b)(viii), 38.5(g)),
(noting in some respects
the Award provides “A rostered day off must not fall on a public
holiday”: cl 35.3(a)). The
words “not required to work” and
“rostered off”, need to be understood in light of the remainder of
including the defined term Rostered Day
in cl 2.1, meaning
the day that an Employee has off duty in accordance with the rostering
arrangements in their area of operation
”. Again, in referring to
rostering arrangements in their area, the Award is speaking of the ordinary
hours rosters it describes.
(2) work ordinary hours on a public holiday (cl 26.2, 21.9, 34.3(b)(vii),
37.3(b)(vii), 38.5(f)); and
rates of pay
for overtime worked, which by its very nature
involves work performed when the employee would not ordinarily be required to
or would be rostered off (whether it be by virtue of an extension at either
end of a shift
, as the result of
, or for the whole or a
part of a rostered day off, whether the overtime be planned or unplanned as
described by Mr Norton). In those
circumstances, for shift workers, “any
work carried out” is to be paid “at the rate of double time and
(clauses 21.13 (b)(iii), 34.4(c), 35.6(c), 36.6(c), 37.4(c),
38.7(c)), with those in Part B additionally entitled to a minimum 3
hour payment
(clauses 34.4(d), 35.6(d), 36.6(d), 37.4(d), and 38.7(d)).
Compensation
for overtime worked is to be “either by payment at the appropriate rate
or, if the Employee so elects, by the grant
of leave in lieu at the overtime
rate in accordance with paragraph 28.3(b)”: cl
. There is no conflict with
cl 28.9 in cl 34, but that seems to add little to the argument as on any view of
it, clause 28.9 only
deals with how the employee receives the value of the
penalty rate for overtime (whether on a public holiday or not).
Respondent’s argument is, in part, grounded in the practice of the
Respondent to offer, rather than direct, overtime to
employees, including
overtime to work on a public holiday. The Respondent’s argument is
otherwise addressed to a shift worker
who “accepts an overtime
on a public holiday” (RSUB [37]), the shift being included in
a roster as either a planned additional shift or a shift left
vacant (for
example, because someone is sick), arguing once accepted, they are no longer
“off on a public holiday”: RSUB
[37]. That submission appears to be
grounded in the evidence of how the Respondent creates ‘unallocated’
shifts, additional
to what is normally required when dealing with known
increases in demand (allocated overtime as it is described in the submissions)
or offers whole shifts to workers when unplanned overtime arises (RSUB [14]
– [18], referring to evidence of Mr Norton). How
parties to an Award have
conducted themselves under an Award (evidence of ‘user’ as it is
sometimes described
relevant to the proper construction of the Award.
very fact the parties have crafted a minimum 3 hour payment entitlement in cl
28.3(d) and 34.4(d) recognises overtime on a public
involve a full day’s work. The Award is
crafted on the
basis that someone will work an entire day or shift on overtime, and thereby
receive 250% of what they would ordinarily
earn on a full day or shift. Even Mr
Norton’s evidence indicates in some circumstances overtime work may be
allocated to those
already on shift: at [21].
the Respondent’s submissions have a superficial attraction, upon
examination they appear to have some foundational difficulties
(1) First, they fail to properly engage with the concept of rosters in the
Award, describing the scheme for ordinary hours –
in context, being
“rostered off” is being rostered off ordinary hours;
(2) Second, it fails to grapple with how the Award would operate when a relevant
employee works
than a full day (or shift) of overtime (perhaps less
than 3 hours, albeit the minimum payment would then arise), on a public holiday.
benefit available to one of the relevant employees is that
provided by cl 34.4(c) for overtime work performed on a public holiday,
Respondent argues, such an employee would not have been afforded the entitlement
contemplated by cl 26.1 of the Award (which
itself broadly reflects s 7 of the
PH Act, adopting the national minimum standard in
Fair Work Act
Such an outcome, in my view, creates such an industrially impracticable and
unfair outcome, that it cannot have been intended.
(3) Third, it would mean for a relevant employee who performs overtime on a
public holiday they would
if they worked a full shift (as the
relevant employee working ordinary time in accordance with the roster in 34.2
receive the same entitlement as a colleague working ordinary
hours (see cl 34.3(b)(vii) and 34.4(c)). But, if they work overtime on
holiday that involved
than a full shift (as the Award contemplates),
they could, on the Respondent’s argument, receive a lesser benefit than if
had stayed home (cl 34.3(b)(viii)). Both propositions appear unlikely to
have been intended and create an industrially impracticable
and unfair outcome.
a tension in the literal reading of the Award providing an employee being paid
for “work carried out” (cl 34.4(c))
on a day they are
“rostered off” (cl 34.3(b)(viii)), but that tension all but
evaporates when three contextual considerations
are taken into
(1) Clause 34 (like the other aspects of Part B) only applies “to the
extent” it “conflicts with a clause in Part
A”: cl 34.1.
Clause 34.3(b) describes a range of
to be made in the ordinary
application of the continuous shift worker rostering pattern contemplated by cl
34.2, informed by the
shift types described in 34.3(a). There is a degree of
incongruity in cl 34.3(b) “Payment for Shift Work” itself in that
34.3(b)(viii) purports to provide for a payment when a relevant employee is not
required to work at all (the remaining subclauses
of cl 34.3(b) providing
ordinary payment entitlements for ordinary hours work, including by way of leave
loading: cl 34.3(b)(ix)-(x)).
But that is the same incongruity that arises in cl
26.3. The purpose of cl 34.3(b)(viii) is self-evident (as the Respondent
acknowledged:
RSUB [36]). Subclauses 34.3(b)(vii) and (viii) are clearly the
mechanism by which the parties have intended the relevant employees
provided the entitlements contemplated by cl 26.2 and 26.3 for employees under
Part A (subcll 34.3(b)(vii) and (viii) creating
a conflict with cl 26.2 and
26.3, but preserving the benefit contemplated by cl 26.1).
(2) Absent cl 34.3(b)(viii) being read as the Notifier contends, there is no
“conflict” between cl 34 and cl 26.1 such
that cl 26.1 would
nonetheless continue to apply (cl 34 only prevailing “to the extent”
of any conflict with a clause
in Part A), meaning the relevant employees would
continue to have an entitlement to standard public holidays without loss of pay
in any event.
(3) For continuous shift workers, overtime is only available when they would
otherwise be “rostered off”.
Notifier’s construction provides that relevant employees working overtime
on a public holiday (which may be less than a
full day or shift under the Award,
and so the rate of pay would not necessarily compensate for the day lost, or
result in an entitlement
to the value of 350% of the ordinary day as the
Respondent submitted
), maintain
their entitlement under cl 26.1 (itself reflecting part of the national minimum
standards under the FW Act adopted as
a standard in New South Wales via the PH
Act), to a holiday on a standard public holiday without loss of pay (because a
day in lieu
is provided), but compensates for work done by the higher rate of
pay. It avoids the industrially impracticable and unfair consequences
Respondent’s construction.
is not to assign a meaning to the Award in order that it may provide what I
consider appropriate
recognise that the words used in the instrument cannot be interpreted in a
vacuum divorced from industrial
. It is to recognise a
construction that contributes to a sensible industrial outcome, an outcome that
ought be attributed to the
parties who
the Award (noting it
was made by consent) is to be preferred, and recognises the need to avoid narrow
or industrially impracticable
interpretations
. As Madgwick J
said in the oft cited passage from
meanings which avoid
inconvenience or injustice may reasonably be strained
. There is no real strain in
the ordinary meaning of the words here – after all, an employee who
performs overtime does so,
by definition, at a time where they are not required
to work, or are rostered off, from ordinary hours.
Respondent suggested to construe cl 34 (in particular, subclauses 3(b)(viii) and
4(c)) as the Notifier contends, would be inconsistent
with employees who work
overtime on a public holiday in Part A,
Clause 28.3
(in Part A) clearly does not provide for overtime rates of pay in addition to a
day in lieu for working overtime”
: RSUB[38]. Clause 28.3 (like cl
34.4(c)) self-evidently does not provide for a day in lieu, but I do not agree
there is inconsistency
of the kind relied upon.
26.3 provides an entitlement to “payment of the monetary value of the
day”, when the employee is “not required
to work on a public holiday
and where the holiday is due”. In context, similar to the use of the
expression “rostered
off” in cl 34.3(b)(viii), “not required
to work on a public holiday” is a reference to the employee not being
to work ordinary hours under the relevant ordinary hours scheme (being
the counterfactual to employees “directed to work”
ordinary hours in
cl 26.2 for non-shift workers, and the notion of a ‘rostered shift
worker’ being “an Employee
who is required to work their ordinary
hours on a permanent shift work roster” in cl 21.3(b), noting cl 21.9
provides for ordinary
hours for Part A shift workers).
my view, a Part A employee who works overtime on a public holiday, being a day
they are not required to work ordinary hours, are
entitled to
“monetary value of the day” (cl 26.3) and payment at the relevant
penalty rate for the hours worked on the public
holiday (cl 28.3(b)(iv), noting
the minimum payment contemplated by cl 28.3(d)). If Part A of the Award is not
understood in that
way, the same industrially impractical and unjust outcomes I
described above would arise for Part A employees. If understood in the
have explained, whilst a Part A employee would be entitled to a payment
equivalent to the monetary value of the day rather
than a day in lieu, there is
no sharp inconsistency in treatment between Part A employees and those under cl
34 as suggested by the
Respondent. There is a large measure of consistency
between Part A and Part B. In addition to the consistency with overtime, there
is broad consistency with ordinary hours worked on a public holiday:
(1) Part A shift workers in cl 21.9 are entitled to 250% of the ordinary rate of
pay for ordinary hours worked on a public holiday
(and have an election as to
whether to receive 150% rate of pay for the hours worked and a day in lieu, such
flexibility no doubt
reflecting the potential for differing shift lengths in
this cadre).
(2) Part A non-shift workers directed to work ordinary time are entitled to 150%
for hours worked (cl 26.2(a)) and an additional
payment reflecting the monetary
value of the day (cl 26.2(b)), agnostic (as the Respondent’s counsel
described it
) as to the hours
actually worked on the day. The ‘monetary value of the day’ no doubt
reflecting the fact the employee
could be a standard day worker under cl 18.2,
or be working under a flexible hours arrangement under cl 20, but nonetheless,
shift workers, working a day within the standard band.
(3) Part B, cl 34, continuous shift workers are entitled to 250% of the relevant
rate of pay for ordinary hours worked on a public
holiday: cl 34.3(b)(vii), the
value of which would be impacted by which shift type (listed in cl 34.3(a)(i)
– (iv)) is worked.
is a significant measure of consistency across Part A and Part B of the Award,
but not as the Respondent described it.
determine that the proper interpretation, application and operation of the Award
is that a relevant employee under cl 34 is entitled
the penalty
rate provided by cl 34.4(c) for “Any overtime work carried out on a public
the day in lieu under cl 34.3(b)(viii), if they
perform overtime on a public holiday (that is to say, a public holiday on which
are not rostered to perform ordinary hours).
notifier seeks a “determination” under s 175 of the IR Act, and
recommendations under s 136(1)(a) of the IR Act. It
has not sought either a
direction under s 136(1)(a) or an Order under s 136(1)(d). The form of the
relevant relief claimed by the
Notifier (RSUB [7]) is drafted on the proposition
the Award provides a relevant employee who works overtime on a public holiday is
entitled to “
time in lieu for the hours worked”
on a public
holiday. It does not. Clause 34.3(b)(viii) entitles a relevant employee
“rostered off” on a public holiday,
to a day in lieu, not time in
lieu for the hours worked (as, for example, 26.6 does for ordinary time worked
on a Local Holiday).
In any event, a determination under s 175 is not a form of
relief in and of itself, but is rather a facilitative step to enable the
interpretation, application or operation of a relevant instrument to be
determined as a step when discharging a function under the
proper interpretation, application and operation of the Award relevant to the
issue in dispute in the current matter, is reflected
in paragraph [57] above. In
addition, I make the following Recommendation pursuant to s 136(1)(a) of the IR
(1) The Respondent is to update its payroll practices to reflect the proper
interpretation, application and operation of the Award
as I have determined it
for the relevant employees when working overtime on a public holiday; and
(2) Within 28 days of the publication of this decision the Respondent ought
review its records to identify and redress any failure
to properly acquit the
time-in-lieu entitlements of relevant employees who have worked overtime on a
public holiday.
11 November 2025 - Amended the the Decision section of the coversheet to
reflect the final form or orders/relief granted rather than
the determination of
the proper interpretation of the Award.
The Dispute as originally
framed was not constrained to the relevant employees when working overtime, but
the submissions of the
notifier are confined to entitlements of the relevant
employees when working overtime, as was the oral
s 3C(3) of the TA
s 3C(1) of the TA
s 3E(4) of the TA Act, and
s 47A(2) of the
Constitution
ss 68B and 68C of the TA
Act, and s 47A(1) of the
Constitution
s 68(3) and (4) of the TA
Act. The Transport Secretary’s functions may be delegated: see s 68Q(7) of
s 3E and Schedule 1
Part 1 cl 1(f), (g) and (h), of the TA
Meaning “all persons
employed as a member of the Transport Service in the TfNSW Group and the SM
Group who are not designated
as a Transport Service senior manager or as a
Transport Service senior executive as defined in the Act”: cl 2.1 of the
Cl 34.1, noting the
definitions in cl 2
Following its
variation effective 19 December 2024 (398 IG 31, Serial
Cl 34.2(b) and (d)
respectively
Cl 34.3(d),
including that TOCs will be consulted with a view to developing and implementing
fatigue principles and systems: cl
Written Submissions of
the Notifier dated 9 September 2025, Court Book Tab B7 (the NSUB), Written Reply
Submissions filed 7 October
2025, Court Book Tab D1 (the NRSUB), that were
supplemented orally
Written submissions
filed 30 September 2025, Court Book Tab C2 (the RSUB), supplemented
TS 22/10/2025 pg 19
line 25 - 28
NSUB [14]-[18],
New South Wales Nurses and Midwives' Association v State of NSW
[2024] NSWSC 636
[15], Zoological Parks Board of New South Wales and The Australian Workers'
Union, New South Wales
[2004] NSWIRComm 85
, Kucks v CSR Limited (1996)
66 IR 182 at 184 and Marmara v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Ltd
[21]-[22], City of Wanneroo v Holmes
[1989] FCA 369
(1989) 30 IR 362
at 378-379; RSUB [25]
– [29], referring additionally to City of Wanneroo v Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and
Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
(2006) 153 IR 426
440, and Public Service Association and Professional Officers' Association
Amalgamated Union (NSW) v Secretary of the Treasury
[2014] NSWIRComm 23
City of Wanneroo v
Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
(2006) 153 IR
City of Wanneroo
v Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
, New South Wales Nurses and Midwives' Association v State of
[2024] NSWSC 636
[15](a), Zoological Parks Board at
Kucks v CSR Limited at
Director of Public
Employment by her agent the Commissioner of New South Wales Fire Brigades and
New South Wales Fire Brigades Employees'
[2008] NSWIRComm 158
New South Wales Nurses
and Midwives' Association v State of NSW
[2024] NSWSC 636
Clauses 34.1, 35.1,
36.1, 37.1, and 38.1
which see Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v OS MCAP
[2023] FCAFC 51
, and the discussion of ‘request’ and
‘required’ at [32] –
The reference to
“an additional holiday for a specified part of the State under the
Holidays Act
” reflecting the types of Orders that the Minister may make on
application of a local council under s 8(1) of the PH Act, to
specified day or part-day to be a local event day in the local government area
or in a specified part of the local
government area”. It would also appear
to capture a local public holiday declared under the
Banks and Bank Holidays Act
, preserved by cl 4, Schedule 1 of the PH
The entitlement in cl
26.1 of the Award is to standard public holidays listed in cl 26.1(a)-(l)
“and” another “Local
Holiday, public holiday/s or substitute
day as ordered by the government from time to time”. In this context the
conjunctive
“and” indicates the parties recognised a “Local
Holiday” is not a “standard public holiday” (referred
the opening of cl 26.1), or “public holiday/s or substitute day as ordered
by the government from time to time”,
but nonetheless captures a Local
Holiday as within the class contemplated by the entitlement in cl
And “Accrued day
off” defined to mean “the day not being a holiday, that an Employee
has off duty arising from
the working of a 19 day month”: cl
See cl 34.4(a), Notably
contemplated by cl 34.2(c)(ii) and (iii) but not expressed as overtime, but even
then when “rostered
to work shifts of 12 hours 10
noting there is no conflict in cl
21.13(b)(v)
Zoological Parks
Board of New South Wales v The Australian Workers’ Union, New South Wales
[2004] NSWIRComm 85
Cf the Respondent’s submission 22/10/2025 pg 29 line 49 to pg 30 line
Cf City of Wanneroo Holmes
[1989] FCA 369
(1989) 30 IR 362
at 379, referring to Australian Workers Union v Graziers
Association (NSW)
[1939] CthArbRp 107
(1939) 40 CAR
City of Wanneroo v
Australian Municipal Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
(2006) 153 IR
Amcor Limited v
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union and Others
[2005] HCA 10
(2005) 222 CLR 241
per Kirby J
Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association v State of NSW
[2024] NSWSC 636
The oral submission
raised inconsistency in a different manner, but to the same effect: TS
22.10.2025 pg 29 line 49 to pg 30 line
TS 22/10/2025 pg 21 line
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (358 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter