URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/228.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lo v Gu [2025] NSWCA 228 (17 October 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 228
Hearing Date(s):
03 October 2025
Date of Orders:
17 October 2025
Decision Date:
17 October 2025
Mitchelmore JA at [1];
McHugh JA at [2];
Griffiths AJA at [3]
(1) The Apprehended Personal Violence Order made by the District Court on
14 May 2025 be set aside.
(2) The matter be remitted to the District Court
for reconsideration according to law limited to the issue of the term of the
Apprehended
Personal Violence Order made by the Local Court on 22 April
(3) The parties bear their own costs of the proceedings in this
Catchwords:
CRIME — appeal and review — application for review of District
Court judgment dismissing appeal from Local Court ruling
apprehended personal violence order made against applicant — whether
District Court judgment involved jurisdictional
error — whether District
Court extended term of apprehended personal violence order in excess of
applicant unfairly denied opportunity to make
submissions on term of apprehended personal violence order and
COSTS — application for review of District Court order
awarding costs to respondents — whether appeal judge wrongly relied
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
whether order involved jurisdictional error
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
District Court Act 1973
Crimes (Appeal and
Review) Act 2001
Supreme Court Act 1970
Cases Cited:
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Bell
[2025] NSWCA 187
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2020] NSWCA 138
Corliss v Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2023] NSWCA 263
Garde v Dowd
(2011) 80 NSWLR 620
[2011] NSWCA 115
International Finance Trust Co Ltd v New South Wales Crime
(2009) 240 CLR 319
[2009] HCA 4
John v Rees
Licha v Joseph
[2025] NSWCA 192
LPDT v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
(2024) 280 CLR 321
[2024] HCA 12
Ming v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
(2022) 109 NSWLR
[2022] NSWCA 209
MZAPC v Minister for Immigration & Border
(2021) 273 CLR 506
[2021] HCA 17
Nathanson v Minister for Home
(2022) 276 CLR 80
[2022] HCA 26
Re Refugee Review Tribunal; Ex parte
(2000) 204 CLR 82
[2000] HCA 57
Stanley v Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW)
(2023) 278 CLR 1
[2023] HCA 3
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Yuk Lo (Applicant)
Chao Gu (First Respondent)
Rong Ji (Second
Respondent)
District Court of New South Wales (Third Respondent) (Submitting
Appearance)
Representation:
GD Wendler (Applicant)
GE Lewer and S Ramsden (First and
Second Respondents)
Solicitors:
William Chan & Co Lawyers
(Applicant)
Hugo Law Group (First and Second Respondent)
Crown Solicitor's
Office (Third Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00262848
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court
Date of Decision:
14 May 2025
Hanley SC DCJ
File Number(s):
2022/00148010
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
The Local Court issued an Apprehended Personal Violence Order (
in favour of the respondents, a husband and wife, and against the applicant,
their next-door neighbour, for a two-year period from
22 April 2024 to 21 April
2026. The applicant appealed to the District Court. Delivering ex tempore
reasons for judgment, the appeal
judge dismissed the appeal and set the duration
of the APVO for a period from 14 May 2025 to 13 May 2027. At no point during the
hearing, or in the appeal judge’s reasons for judgment, was the
possibility raised that the dates of the APVO would be changed,
nor was this
change explained.
After the ex tempore reasons were delivered, counsel for the respondents made
an application for costs, referring to both
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
The applicant (who did not have representation in the District Court) was
afforded but did not take advantage of several opportunities
to make submissions
on the question of costs. Costs were ordered in the amount of $15,000, to be
paid within 28 days. The applicant
sought judicial review of the appeal
judge’s orders, both in relation to the term of the APVO and as to costs.
Four grounds
of review were raised:
(1) in changing the dates of the APVO, the appeal judge proceeded on an
erroneous assumption that the APVO was stayed by lodgement
of the notice of
appeal and, in doing so, acted beyond jurisdiction;
(2) the appeal judge denied the applicant procedural fairness by failing to
invite submissions on the question whether the dates of
the APVO should be
(3) the appeal judge erroneously relied on ss 99 and 99A of the CDPV Act in
ordering costs in circumstances where these provisions
had no application;
(4) the appeal judge denied the applicant procedural fairness by failing to
invite submissions as to the quantum of costs, failing
to question counsel for
the respondents on quantum, and/or failing to inquire whether the applicant
wished to have the matter stood
(Griffiths AJA, Mitchelmore JA and McHugh JA agreeing)
held, upholding Ground 2 and rejecting Grounds 1, 3 and 4
As to Ground 1
(1) The appeal judge may erroneously have assumed that
(Appeal and Review) Act 2001
operated to stay
the APVO. However, any such misapprehension would be an error within
provided a valid source of power
for the orders made regarding the dates of the APVO and, while it is not clear
from the appeal judge’s
orders or reasons whether this provision was
relied upon, a failure to provide adequate reasons is not ordinarily a
error, unless it demonstrates a constructive failure to exercise
Stanley v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
(2023) 278 CLR 1
Ming v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
(2022) 109 NSWLR 604
[2022] NSWCA 209
As to Ground 2
(2) There is no indication that the applicant was put on notice that changing
the dates of the APVO was a potential consequence of
her appeal: [41]. The
applicant did not explain how, if she had been afforded the opportunity to make
submissions, there was a realistic
possibility that a different decision could
have been made: [43]–[44]. Nevertheless, it is appropriate to infer that
is a realistic possibility that the applicant may have been able to
persuade the appeal judge that the dates of the APVO should not
be changed:
Bangura v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2020] NSWCA 138
Corliss v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2023] NSWCA 263
[1970] Ch 345
International Finance Trust Co Ltd v New South
Wales Crime Commission
(2009) 240 CLR 319
[2009] HCA 49
Review Tribunal; Ex parte Aala
(2000) 204 CLR 82
[2000] HCA 57
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Bell
[2025] NSWCA 187
, considered
MZAPC v Minister for Immigration & Border Protection
(2021) 273 CLR
[2021] HCA 17
Nathanson v Minister for Home Affairs
(2022) 276 CLR
[2022] HCA 26
LPDT v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant
Services and Multicultural Affairs
(2024) 280 CLR 321
[2024] HCA 12
John v Rees
[1970] Ch 345
International Finance Trust Co Ltd v New South
Wales Crime Commission
(2009) 240 CLR 319
[2009] HCA 49
As to Ground 3
(3) The appeal judge erroneously relied upon ss 99 and 99A of the CDPV Act as
the source of the power to award costs. However, this
does not establish that
the costs order itself was beyond power in circumstances where the same order
could have been made under
s 28(3) of the CAR Act: [50]–[54].
Licha v Joseph
[2025] NSWCA 192
As to Ground 4
(4) The applicant was afforded several opportunities to make submissions on
the question of costs. The appeal judge was not obliged
to go further and either
stand the matter down or question the quantum of costs. No practical injustice
has been demonstrated: [56]–[59].
MITCHELMORE
: I agree with Griffiths AJA.
: I agree with Griffiths AJA.
: This application for judicial review concerns a 14 May 2025 decision of
the District Court (
District Court Judgment
), whereby Hanley SC DCJ
dismissed an appeal from a 22 April 2024 decision of Magistrate McGlynn in the
Local Court (
Local Court Judgment
). Magistrate McGlynn issued a two-year
Apprehended Personal Violence Order (
) in favour of Mr Chao Gu and Dr
the respondents
in the present proceedings) and against the
applicant in the present proceedings, Ms Yuk Lo. The duration of the APVO was
April 2024 to 21 April 2026. In dismissing Ms Lo’s appeal, Hanley
SC DCJ ordered that the APVO run from 14 May 2025 to 13 May
2027. This had the
practical effect of extending the operation of the APVO by slightly more than
one year. His Honour also ordered
Ms Lo to pay Mr Gu’s costs in a fixed
amount of $15,000.
summons filed on 8 July 2025, Ms Lo now seeks orders setting aside the District
Court Judgment and orders. She contends that Hanley
SC DCJ’s decision to
change the dates of the APVO was in excess of his jurisdiction and/or that his
Honour did not afford her
a sufficient opportunity to be heard before the change
was made. She also contends that the appeal judge erroneously relied on
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
) in awarding costs and failed to afford her a sufficient
opportunity to make submissions on the question and quantum of costs.
should be noted at the outset that, by virtue of
Court Act 1973
(NSW), an application for judicial review to this Court
lies only on grounds of jurisdictional error. Ms Lo must therefore demonstrate
(2011) 80 NSWLR 620
[2011] NSWCA 115
–[10] per Basten JA (Giles and McColl JJA
agreeing)).
Background summarised
23 May 2022, Mr Gu lodged an application for an APVO against Ms Lo. Mr Gu and Dr
Ji, who are husband and wife, are Ms Lo’s
next-door neighbours. The
application was opposed by Ms Lo, who at that stage had legal representation.
The application was heard
by Magistrate McGlynn over two days, on 28 August 2023
and 22 April 2024. Ex tempore reasons were delivered on the latter date,
Mr Gu’s application. As previously noted, the APVO was made for a
two year period from 22 April 2024 to 21 April 2026.
Lo, who represented herself, filed a notice of appeal against the Local Court
Judgment. In a 10-page appeal statement filed on
17 March 2025 (and accompanied
by 48 pages of annexures), Ms Lo alleged that the Local Court Magistrate made no
less than 13 errors.
She sought orders setting aside the APVO and costs.
submissions in response dated 29 April 2025, Mr Gu identified the relevant
statutory framework and legal principles governing the
appeal and explained why,
in his view, none of the alleged errors was properly founded. At no point did Mr
Gu submit that the dates
of the existing APVO should be changed.
written reply submissions dated 9 May 2025, Ms Lo took issue with various
aspects of Mr Gu’s submissions and further developed
appeal was heard by Hanley SC DCJ on 14 May 2025. Pursuant to s 84 of the CDPV
Crimes (Appeal and Review) Act 2001
), the hearing proceeded as a rehearing on the basis of the evidence in
the original Local Court proceedings (noting that an application
made by Ms Lo
to adduce fresh evidence was dismissed by the appeal judge).
ex tempore reasons for judgment, the appeal judge comprehensively reviewed the
evidence and submissions of the parties. Having
done so, his Honour explained
that “there was easily sufficient evidence to warrant the making of
orders”. His Honour
I dismiss the appeal. I confirm the magistrate’s orders. I confirm the
making of a personal apprehended violence order against
Ms Lo in the terms of
orders 1, 2, 8 and 11 for a period of two years from today; that is, 14 May
2025. That order will expire on
13 May 2027.
passage raises some difficulties. The appeal judge purported to “confirm
the magistrate’s orders”. Those orders
set the duration of the APVO
for a period from 22 April 2024 to 21 April 2026. However, the appeal judge also
set the APVO for a
period of two years from 14 May 2025, in effect extending its
length by approximately a year. At no point during the hearing, or
Honour’s ex tempore reasons for judgment, was the possibility raised that
the dates of the APVO would be changed in
this way, nor was this change
delivery of the ex tempore reasons, counsel for the respondents made an
application for costs, referring to both ss 99 and 99A
of the CDPV Act. Costs
were sought in the fixed amount of $15,000, which was said to comprise the costs
of preparation and the costs
of the appearances of the respondents’
solicitor and counsel. The following exchange then ensued between his Honour and
HIS HONOUR: Ms Lo, do you oppose the awarding of costs of $15,000? Do you oppose
the awarding of costs of $15,000?
APPELLANT: I object. I will appeal.
HIS HONOUR: Okay, you can appeal. But do you object - do you say you object to
the payment of costs?
APPELLANT: I appeal to your decision and also appeal to the decision of the
HIS HONOUR: That's okay, you can do that, that's your entitlement to do that.
But, in my view, normally costs are not awarded in
these types of matters, for
obvious reasons. Now, this is an unusual case, in my assessment, but the anger
is just extraordinary,
and extended over a long period of time.
appeal judge delivered short reasons on the question of costs. His Honour was
satisfied that the behaviour of Ms Lo was “so
vexatious, and the appeal so
unmeritorious” that “costs should be awarded of a professional
nature, to be a sign of indemnity
for relief to Mr Gu and Dr [Ji], for what I
anticipate has been an enormous [sic] money expended to deal with what I can
only assess
and have suggested, is irrational responses to deal with a concern
that has no foundation or rationality”. Costs were ordered
in the amount
of $15,000, to be paid within 28 days.
turning to the parties’ submissions in the present proceeding, it should
be noted that Ms Lo was a difficult and uncooperative
litigant in the District
Court proceedings. Her submissions included extremely serious and
unsubstantiated allegations that the Magistrate’s
decision was motivated
by racial prejudice. As the transcript records, Ms Lo also interrupted the
appeal judge at various points,
including in a raised
Parties’ submissions summarised
Lo, who was represented at the hearing by Mr Wendler of counsel, seeks judicial
review of the District Court Judgment and orders
on four grounds set out in the
“Orders Sought” section of her summons filed on 9 July
An order setting aside the decision of Hanley DCJ dated 14 May 2025 whereby his
Honour ordered that the APVO against the applicant
commence from 14 May 2025 and
expire on 13 May 2027 such order was in excess of jurisdiction and is null and
void as beyond jurisdiction.
Alternatively, setting aside the decision of Handley [sic] DCJ dated 14 May 2025
whereby his Honour ordered that the period of the
APVO commence on 14 May 2025
and expire 13 May 2027 by reason of a breach of procedural fairness in that his
Honour did not afford
the applicant an opportunity to be heard before directing
that the period or ambit of the APVO be increased by running from 14 May
13 May 2027.
An order setting aside the decision to award professional costs in favour of the
respondents by reason of jurisdictional error in
that the Court purported to
erroneously exercise its jurisdiction on costs pursuant to s99A (1) rather than
s99(3) of the CDPVA.
And further order the matter of costs be remitted to the
District Court
Alternatively, an order setting aside the decision to award professional costs
in favour respondents by reason of a breach of procedural
fairness having regard
to the manner and circumstances in which it was made. An order remitting the
matter of costs to the District
(a) Ground 1: did the appeal judge act in excess of jurisdiction?
her written outline of submissions dated 27 June 2025, Ms Lo contends that, in
extending the operation of the APVO, the appeal
judge failed to have regard to s
85(1) of the CDPV Act, which provides that the “lodging of a notice of
appeal under section
84 does not have the effect of staying the operation of the
order concerned”. It is said the appeal judge proceeded on the
assumption that the appeal was stayed by the notice of appeal and, in doing so,
acted beyond jurisdiction.
their written outline of submissions in response filed on 22 August 2025, the
respondents accept that the practical effect of the
appeal judge’s order
was to extend the duration of the APVO. However, they emphasise that, in
determining an appeal, “the
District Court may exercise any function that
the Local Court could have exercised in the original Local Court
proceedings”
(see s 28(2) of the CAR Act, noting that s 3 provides that
“function” includes “a power, authority or duty”).
s 79(2) of the CDPV Act, the Local Court (and, by virtue of s 28(2) of the CAR
Act, the District Court) has power to set an
APVO for “as long as is
necessary, in the opinion of the court, to ensure the safety and protection of
the protected person”.
On this basis, the appeal judge’s decision to
extend the APVO is said to be well within jurisdiction.
her written outline of submissions in reply, Ms Lo accepts that the Local Court
would theoretically have been entitled to impose
a three-year APVO. She
emphasises that its ability to do so would, however, be confined by ss 73(1) and
79 of the CDPV Act. She notes
that there is no reference to these sections in
the District Court Judgment and that the appeal judge does not appear to have
himself whether it was “proper” to extend the APVO by an
additional year for the purposes of s 73(1). Nor, as Ms Lo notes,
is there any
explicit reference in the orders or reasons to s 28(2) of the CAR Act. The
appeal judge’s failure to refer to
these provisions is said to indicate
his erroneous belief that the APVO was stayed.
may be interpolated here that, during the course of the hearing, the Court
raised with the parties whether ss 20 and/or 68 of the
CAR Act were potential
alternative sources of power or jurisdiction for the changed APVO made by Hanley
SC DCJ. Section 20 provides:
Determination of appeals
(1) The District Court may determine an appeal against conviction—
(a) by setting aside the conviction, or
(b) by dismissing the appeal, or
(c) in the case of an appeal made with leave under section 12
(1)—by setting aside the conviction and remitting the matter
original Local Court for redetermination in accordance with any directions of
the District Court.
(2) The District Court may determine an appeal against sentence—
(a) by setting aside the sentence, or
(b) by varying the sentence, or
(c) by dismissing the appeal.
may be noted that s 20 distinguishes between an appeal against conviction and an
appeal against sentence. Notably, the District
Court has a power to vary the
sentence in an appeal against sentence but has no power to vary a conviction in
an appeal against conviction
at [7]–[8]).
68 relevantly provides:
Court may confirm or vary conviction or sentence
with effect from earlier day
(1) An appeal court may order that a conviction or sentence confirmed or
varied by it on appeal, or any part of it—
(a) is to take effect (as confirmed or varied) on and from a day specified in
the order, or
(b) in the case of a sentence that has been served in part, is to recommence (as
confirmed or varied) on and from a day specified
in the order,
being the day on which the order is made or an earlier day.
(2) The order has effect despite any stay of execution that has been in force in
respect of the sentence appealed against.
District Court’s powers under s 68 will be discussed further below (see
(b) Ground 2: failing to invite
submissions on the duration of the APVO
support of the second ground of review, Ms Lo submits that the appeal judge at
no point invited her to comment or make submissions
on changing the dates of the
APVO notwithstanding that, in practical effect, Ms Lo would be the subject of an
APVO for a total of
three years. Emphasising that the duration of the APVO was
clearly a matter of significance for Ms Lo’s freedom, she submits
appeal judge’s failure to invite submissions amounted to procedural
unfairness.
their written outline of submissions, the respondents concede that Ms Lo was not
invited to make submissions on the utility of
extending the APVO. They submit
that, in these circumstances, the question for the Court is whether this was
material to the outcome
of the District Court Judgment. Hence the question is
whether there is a realistic possibility that the decision could have been
different if the error had not occurred (citing
for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
(2024) 280 CLR 321
[2024] HCA 12
that it is incumbent on Ms Lo to demonstrate materiality, the respondents submit
that any error was not material, because:
(a) It is highly unlikely that Ms Lo would have discontinued her appeal or made
cogent submissions had the appeal judge indicated
that his Honour was minded to
extend the operation of the APVO. This is said to be borne out by the fact that,
when Ms Lo was asked
to make submissions on the proposed costs order, she failed
to provide any meaningful response (see at [
(b) Neither the appellate record, nor any evidence filed by Ms Lo in the present
application, discloses a basis on which she could
have effectively opposed the
further extension of the APVO. Nor, it is said, do Ms Lo’s submissions to
this Court explain how
prior notice could realistically have made any material
difference.
her written outline of submissions in reply, Ms Lo repeats her submission that
it was procedurally unfair for the appeal judge
not to have afforded her the
opportunity to make submissions on the question of the duration of the APVO. It
is said, more specifically,
that she should have been afforded the opportunity
to make submissions on the question whether, for the purposes of ss 73(1) and
79(2) of the CDPV Act, it was “necessary” and “proper”
to extend the duration of the APVO.
(c) Ground 3: erroneous
exercise of costs power
relation to Ground 3, Ms Lo submits that the appeal judge wrongly relied on ss
99 and 99A of the CDPV Act in circumstances where
s 99A had no application
because Ms Lo was not a “protected person”. That the appeal judge
relied on these provisions
is said to be demonstrated by the fact that costs
were specifically ordered on grounds that Ms Lo’s conduct was vexatious
her appeal meritless. Ms Lo submits that the only lawful basis for
professional costs was s 99(3), which was not explicitly invoked
by the appeal
their written outline of submissions, the respondents emphasise that, under s
28(3) of the CAR Act, the appeal judge was empowered,
subject to a limitation
not relevant in this case, to “make such order as to the costs to be paid
by either party ... as it
thinks just”. The respondents concede that the
appeal judge wrongly relied on ss 99 and 99A of the CDPV Act in awarding costs,
but submit that the error is immaterial in circumstances where the same order
could have been made under s 28(3). In this respect,
the respondents emphasise
that the costs power conferred by s 28(3) is significantly wider than that
conferred by s 99A. The fact
that the appeal judge was satisfied that costs
could be awarded under s 99A is said to indicate that the same order would also
been made under s 28(3).
(d) Ground 4: failing to invite
submissions on costs
to Ground 4, Ms Lo submits that she was denied procedural fairness by the appeal
judge, who invited her to indicate whether she
opposed an award of professional
costs, but did not explicitly invite her to make submissions as to the quantum
of costs. Ms Lo also
complains that the appeal judge did not question the
respondents’ counsel in relation to the quantum of costs and that he
to award costs on an indemnity basis. Alternatively, Ms Lo submits that
procedural fairness required the appeal judge to inquire
whether she wished to
have the matter stood down “to become fully informed as to the
Court’s intentions concerning the
awarding of professional costs”.
their written outline of submissions, the respondents emphasise that Ms Lo was
asked twice whether she opposed costs being awarded
in the amount of $15,000 and
failed to take up the opportunity both times. In these circumstances, and again
noting that the District
Court’s power to award costs under s 28(3) of the
CAR Act is said to be “effectively unfettered”, the respondents
submit that Ground 4 is misconceived and discloses no jurisdictional error.
Consideration and determination.
(a) Ground 1: did the appeal judge act in excess of jurisdiction?
noted above, Ms Lo complains that, in extending the operation of the APVO, the
appeal judge failed to have regard to s 85(1) of
the CDPV Act, which provides
that the “lodging of a notice of appeal under section 84 does not have the
effect of staying the
operation of the order concerned”. Ms Lo submits
that it should be inferred from the appeal judge’s failure to refer
this provision that his Honour was unaware that the APVO was not stayed by the
lodgement of her notice of appeal (this is because
the effect of s 85 of the
CDPV Act overrides the usual stay imposed by s 63 of the CAR Act, thus lodgement
of a notice of appeal
under s 84 of the CDPV Act does not have the automatic
effect of staying the operation of the order concerned).
is regrettable that Hanley SC DCJ did not make clear in his reasons for judgment
which power he was purporting to exercise in making
the orders set out at [
] above. Having regard
to the terms of the orders and the fact that they expressly included a
confirmation of the Magistrate’s
order, Hanley SC DCJ may have been acting
under s 68 of the CAR Act. There appears, however, to be some force in Ms
Lo’s submission
that his Honour may erroneously have assumed that s 63 of
the CAR Act operated to stay the APVO made by the Magistrate and that the
of its operation therefore needed to be amended for it to be in force for two
years. It may be that his Honour overlooked the
fact that s 63 had no
application because of s 85 of the CDPV Act. Any such misapprehension by his
Honour in respect of whether the
Magistrate’s APVO was stayed by the fact
that Ms Lo had lodged an appeal would be an error within jurisdiction (see
Stanley v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2023] HCA 3
per Gordon, Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ).
the procedural fairness complaint to one side, the issue remains, however, as to
whether his Honour had the power to make
those orders.
are difficulties with the respondents’ suggestion that s 28(2) of the CAR
Act provides such a power. As noted above, the
effect of that provision is that,
in determining an appeal, the District Court is empowered to exercise any
that the Local Court could have exercised in the original
proceeding (and noting that “function” is defined in s 3 to
relevantly, “a power”). Despite the evident breadth of that
provision, some potentially difficult issues are
raised regarding the
interaction between that provision and s 20 of the CAR Act. The latter draws a
distinction between the District
Court’s power in determining an appeal
against conviction as opposed to an appeal against sentence. A question arises
this necessarily limits the breadth of the power under s 28(2). There is
a further question whether an appeal to the District Court
under s 84 of the
CDPV Act is to be treated as an appeal against conviction or an appeal against
is unnecessary to determine these questions here. That is because the parties
ultimately agreed that s 68 of the CAR Act provided
a source of power for the
orders made by Hanley SC DCJ regarding the dates of the APVO. The terms of s
68(1) and (2) are set out
] above. Significantly, under this provision, the
appeal court has the power to order that a conviction or sentence confirmed or
on appeal (or any part of it) is to take effect “as confirmed or
varied” on and from a day specified in an order. Thus,
it is clear that
this power is available when the appeal court is determining an appeal against
either conviction or sentence. The
potential difficulties presented by the
interaction between ss 20 and 28(2), as referred to above, do not arise.
previously mentioned, it is not clear from the terms of the orders or reasons
what particular power Hanley SC DCJ relied upon in
changing the dates of the
APVO. Ms Lo has not suggested, however, that any jurisdictional error is
demonstrated by the appeal judge’s
failure to provide adequate reasons for
making the challenged orders. This may be because a failure by an inferior court
adequate reasons does not, of itself, ordinarily amount to
Ming v Director
of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
(2022) 109 NSWLR 604
[2022] NSWCA 209
–[46] per Kirk JA, White and Mitchelmore JJA agreeing). Mere legal
error would not suffice.
these reasons, Ground 1 fails.
(b) Ground 2: procedural
failure by an inferior court to accord procedural fairness to a party in a
material respect constitutes jurisdictional error, procedural
fairness being an
essential characteristic of the exercise of judicial power (see, for example,
Bangura v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2020] NSWCA 138
per curiam).
establish jurisdictional error constituted by a breach of the fair hearing limb
of procedural fairness, it must be established
both that there was a denial of
procedural fairness and that it was material to the decision. In their written
outline of submissions,
the respondents identify the relevant question for the
Court as whether the appeal judge’s failure to invite submissions on
whether the dates of the APVO’s operation should be changed was a material
error. In identifying this as the relevant question
for the Court, the
respondents appear implicitly to concede that there was a denial of procedural
fairness by the appeal judge.
existence of the APVO was clearly of considerable importance to Ms Lo and there
is no indication that Ms Lo was ever put on notice,
by the respondents or by the
appeal judge, that changing the dates of the APVO was a potential consequence of
her appeal. Indeed,
an extension of the end-date of the APVO was not something
which was ever sought by the respondents.
relationship between materiality and procedural unfairness has been considered
by the High Court in several recent cases (see
for Immigration & Border Protection
(2021) 273 CLR 506
[2021] HCA 17
v Minister for Home Affairs
(2022) 276 CLR 80
[2022] HCA 26
). For present purposes, it is sufficient to
identify the following principles:
(a) An error will be material if there is a realistic possibility that the
decision that was made in fact
have been different but
for the error (
at [2], [85];
at [32], [46], [63];
(b) “Realistic” distinguishes the assessment of the possibility of a
different outcome from one where the possibility
is fanciful or improbable
at [2], [85];
(c) The existence of a realistic possibility that the decision could have been
different is a question of historical fact in respect
of which the applicant for
judicial review bears the onus of proof (
at [38]–[39];
(d) The types of evidence which have been held sufficient to establish relevant
facts for these purposes include the appellate record
[48]) and evidence of the content of a document or information required to be
provided as part of the decision-making process (
(e) Where a denial of procedural fairness arises from a failure to put an
applicant on notice of some fact or issue affecting them,
then it may be
possible readily to infer that the applicant might have addressed that fact or
issue by way of further evidence or
submissions and that the evidence or
submissions would have been approached with an open mind (
(f) It is “no easy task” to be satisfied that the loss of an
opportunity to provide further evidence or submissions did
not deprive the
person of the possibility of a successful outcome (
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Bell
[2025] NSWCA 187
AJA (Payne and Ball JJA agreeing) rejected the appellant’s submission that
it had been denied procedural fairness by
a Personal Injury Commission Review
Panel, which had refrained from inviting submissions from the parties concerning
the significance
of differences in the respondent’s reporting history. His
Honour emphasised that “it would have been plainly obvious
to the members
of the Review Panel that Mr Bell’s denial was inconsistent with his prior
reporting”, such that it was
“difficult to see how inviting Allianz
to make further submissions could have made a material difference”.
, his Honour also reasoned that the
appellant had failed to “explain how if it was given the opportunity to
make further submissions,
there was a realistic possibility that a different
decision could have been made but for the denial of procedural fairness”
Corliss v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2023] NSWCA
might be argued that the same reasoning applies here. Ms Lo has failed to offer
any explanation of how, if she had been afforded
the opportunity to make further
submissions on the question whether the duration of the APVO should be extended,
there was a realistic
possibility that a different decision could have been
made. She has not pointed to anything in the record or in the evidence before
the appeal judge to support the existence of such a possibility. As noted above,
the question of materiality was raised for the first
time by the respondents in
their written outline of submissions. It was not addressed at all by Ms Lo in
her written submissions
in reply. In these circumstances, it might fairly be
said that Ms Lo has failed to discharge her onus of proof.
a crucial aspect of the reasoning in
was that ‘[i]t would
have been plainly obvious to the members of the Review Panel that Mr
Bell’s denial was inconsistent
with his prior reporting”. It was for
this reason that the Court considered that it was “difficult to see how
Allianz to make further submissions could have made a material
difference”. That is not the case here. There is a realistic
possibility that Ms Lo may have been able to persuade his Honour that the dates
of the APVO should not be changed. It may be accepted
that because Ms Lo
represented herself and apparently has no legal training, it is doubtful that
she was familiar with provisions
such as s 85 of the CDPV Act or s 63 of the CAR
Act. But there is a realistic possibility that, if Ms Lo had been given the
opportunity,
she may have asked why the appeal judge was minded to change the
dates. This may have caused the appeal judge to pause and reflect
upon his power
to make such a change. It is also possible that if the appeal judge responded by
saying s 63 of the CAR Act applied,
counsel for the respondents may have
assisted the Court by drawing attention to the effect of s 85 of the CDPV
all these circumstances, I consider this is a case where the Court should infer
that the procedural unfairness was material. The
circumstances here fit
comfortably with the following statements of Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ in
at [33] (footnotes omitted, emphasis added):
There will generally be a realistic possibility that a decision-making process
could have resulted in a different outcome if a party
was denied an opportunity
to present evidence or make submissions on an issue that required consideration.
The standard of “reasonable conjecture” is undemanding
recognises that a fundamental purpose of affording procedural fairness is to
afford an opportunity to raise relevant matters
which are not already obvious,
or not liable to be advanced by the apparently persuasive “story” of
the opposing party.
Where a Tribunal errs by denying a party a reasonable
opportunity to present their case, “reasonable conjecture” does
require demonstration of how that party might have taken advantage of that lost
opportunity
. Nothing said in
denies this. To the contrary, the
standard of “reasonable conjecture“, correctly applied, proceeds on
assumptions that
are derived from the rationale for procedural fairness, namely
that, if given a fair opportunity to present their case, a party will
advantage of that opportunity and that, by doing so, the party could achieve a
favourable outcome.
approach is also consistent with the astute observations of Megarry J in
[1970] Ch 345
at 402 (which were approved by Heydon J in
International Finance Trust Co Ltd v New South Wales Crime Commission
(2009) 240 CLR 319
[2009] HCA 49
It may be that there are some who would decry the importance which the courts
attach to the observance of the rules of natural justice.
“When something
is obvious”, they may say, “why force everybody to go through the
tiresome waste of time involved
in framing charges and giving an opportunity to
be heard? The result is obvious from the start.” Those who take this view
not, I think, do themselves justice. As everybody who has anything to do with
the law well knows, the path of the law is strewn with
examples of open and shut
cases which, somehow, were not; of unanswerable charges which, in the event,
were completely answered;
of inexplicable conduct which was fully explained; of
fixed and unalterable determinations that, by discussion, suffered a change.
To similar effect, see
Re Refugee Review Tribunal; Ex parte Aala
(2000) 204 CLR 82
[2000] HCA 57
per Gleeson CJ.
these reasons, Ground 2 should be upheld.
(c) Ground 3: erroneous
exercise of costs power
Lo submits that the appeal judge wrongly relied on ss 99 and 99A of the CDPV Act
as the basis for the costs order made by his Honour
in circumstances where these
provisions are inapplicable because Ms Lo was not a “protected
person”. The respondents
concede that the appeal judge made this error,
but they submit this error was immaterial in circumstances where the power in s
of the CAR Act was also available and would support the same outcome in
regard to costs.
respondents’ submissions should be accepted. There is a well-established
principle in various areas of the law that, if
a power is exercised upon a
mistaken belief as to its source, then this will not necessarily result in
invalidity if the decision
is able to be supported by another source of power.
The principle was recently applied to a costs decision of the District Court
[2025] NSWCA 192.
The primary ground of
judicial review in that case was that it was a jurisdictional error for the
District Court to have ordered
costs under the CDPV Act in
circumstances where its power to award costs was conferred by s
28(3) of the CAR Act, which it was said
was not relied upon. This complaint
was rejected on the basis that any erroneous reliance on the CDPV Act was
immaterial in circumstances
where s 28(3) of the CAR Act provided an alternative
source of power (see at [60]–[68] per Griffiths AJA). Kirk and Ball JJA
rejected the complaint on separate grounds, but agreed in the alternative with
that reasoning (see at [16]).
reasoning applies here. The parties accept that the appeal judge erroneously
relied upon ss 99 and 99A of the CDPV Act as
a source of the power to award
costs. However, this does not establish that the costs order itself was beyond
power in circumstances
where the same award could have been made under s 28(3)
of the CAR Act. As observed in
On its proper construction, s 28(3) does not oblige the Court to state
explicitly in either the terms of a particular order or the
accompanying reasons
for judgment, that the particular order as to costs is “just”. The
reference at the end of s 28(3)
to “just” appears in the context of
the Court being empowered to make such an order as to costs as it thinks just.
reflects the usual position that, subject to the terms of a provision
empowering a court to award costs, the court has a broad power,
generally unfettered, but must be exercised judicially (see
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
at 541–543 per Mason CJ, and at 567 per
[1990] HCA 59
Wendler properly acknowledged in oral address that Ms Lo’s appeal to the
District Court was meritless and he confirmed that
Ms Lo did not challenge the
dismissal of her appeal. In those circumstances, there can be no doubt that the
costs order could properly
be characterised as “just” for the
purposes of s 28(3).
orders do not make clear whether Ms Lo was ordered to pay costs on an indemnity
basis. There is a reference in the transcript
to his Honour saying that he was
“prepared to make a finding that is one of those where costs should be
awarded of a professional
nature, to be a sign of indemnity for relief to [the
respondents] ...”. It is unclear whether his Honour was simply using the
expression “a sign of indemnity for relief” to reflect the normal
compensatory nature of an order for costs. In any event,
neither party suggested
that s 28(3) of the CAR Act is not broad enough to apply to an award of
indemnity costs or a fixed sum costs
am satisfied that s 28(3) was wide enough to make the orders which in fact were
made. The remarks of Kirk and Ball JJA in
at [15] are
... Moreover, it is difficult to conceive how it could be said that making costs
orders might not have been just in circumstances
where his Honour had concluded
in his ex tempore reasons that the “the qualifications of frivolous and
vexatious are appropriate”
and that “[t]he appeal had no merit at
all these reasons, Ground 3 is rejected.
(d) Ground 4: failing
to invite submissions on costs
her appeal statement filed in the District Court on 17 March 2025, one of the
orders sought by Ms Lo was “Cost order –
cost follow the
event”. Accordingly, it may reasonably be inferred that Ms Lo was aware
that there would be cost consequences
depending on the outcome of her appeal.
Ms Lo may not have been aware of the nature of the costs order which would be
sought by the respondents, she was present in
Court when the costs application
was made. The respondents’ counsel provided only scant details in support
of his statement
that the proposed amount of $15,000 was in fact less than the
respondents’ actual legal costs. But that figure applied not
only to the
respondents’ legal costs of defending Ms Lo’s appeal (which, as
noted by Hanley SC DCJ, required a review
of the Local Court transcript over two
days, the exhibits tendered in that proceeding as well as the
“extensive” written
submissions), but also their costs of
successfully resisting Ms Lo’s motion to adduce further evidence.
the appeal judge asked Ms Lo more than once (see at [13] above) whether she
opposed a costs order in that fixed amount. Although
she made clear that she
objected, she gave no particular reason for doing so apart from her not
unexpected dissatisfaction with the
appeal judge’s substantive decision.
regard to all these matters, I do not accept that Ms Lo was denied procedural
fairness on the issue of costs of the District
Court proceedings. The appeal
judge was not obliged to go further and either stand the matter down or question
the quantum of costs.
No practical injustice has been demonstrated. Ground 4
Relief and costs
regard to Ms Lo’s success in establishing Ground 2, it is necessary to set
aside the APVO dated 14 May 2025.
Wendler also urged the Court to exercise the power under
Court Act 1970
(NSW) and make an order restoring the APVO dated 22 April
2024 so as to bring finality to the proceedings without the need to remit.
is reflected in the document styled “Applicant’s statement of orders
As the Court pointed out, however,
must be read
together with
of that Act, which is the source of the Court’s
judicial review jurisdiction. In accordance with general principle, the Court
would normally not make an order of the kind sought by Ms Lo in such a
proceeding unless the Court was satisfied that, on remittal,
no other order
could be made. That high level of satisfaction cannot be attained here,
particularly having regard to the obscurity
of the appeal judge’s reasons
for changing the dates of the APVO.
Regrettably,
therefore, the issue regarding the date of the APVO order made on 14 May 2025
should be remitted to the District Court.
Neither party objected to Hanley SC
DCJ conducting the reconsideration limited to this issue. This makes sense as
his Honour is well
familiar with the matter.
may well be that the parties will be able to agree consent orders in the
District Court which would restore the dates in the APVO
dated 22 April 2024. If
agreement cannot be reached, it will be a matter for the Judge to whom the
matter is allocated to give appropriate
case management directions, including an
opportunity for the parties to make submissions and file any evidence confined
to the issue
of the operative dates for the APVO.
see no reason to disturb the costs order made by Hanley SC DCJ, which
appropriately reflected his Honour’s rejection of Ms
Lo’s grounds of
to the costs of the present proceedings, although the normal rule is that costs
follow the event, I do not consider that Ms Lo’s
success in establishing
Ground 2 warrants an order for costs in her favour. Her other three grounds,
which occupied significant time
and resources, all failed. Furthermore, as Ms
Lewer (who appeared together with Ms Ramsden for the respondents) pointed out,
respondents bear no responsibility for the terms of the orders relating to
the dates of the APVO as made by the appeal judge. I consider
that the parties
should bear their own costs of the present proceedings.
propose the following orders:
(1) The Apprehended Personal Violence Order made by the District Court on 14 May
2025 be set aside.
(2) The matter be remitted to the District Court for reconsideration according
to law limited to the issue of the term of the Apprehended
Personal Violence
Order made by the Local Court on 22 April 2024.
(3) The parties bear their own costs of the proceedings in this Court.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (331 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter