URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1327.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Belverdere Pty Ltd v Idameneo (No 123) Pty Ltd [2025] NSWSC 1327 (17 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Belverdere Pty Ltd v Idameneo (No 123) Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1327
Hearing Date(s):
28 – 31 July 2025; further submissions 1 and 6 August 2025
Date of Orders:
17 November 2025
Decision Date:
17 November 2025
Equity - Commercial List
Dismiss summons with costs
Catchwords:
CONTRACTS — incorporated medical practice has 7-year contract to
provide IVF specialist services to bulk billing IVF clinic
specialist receives negative online reviews — IVF clinic receives patient
complaints about ‘bedside manner’
and lateness — staff
complain about rudeness and yelling — contract terminated without notice
on the basis of the “reasonably
held opinion” of the IVF clinic that
the doctor had “committed an act which if true would” adversely
reputation or business – doctor seeks $3.8M
NATURAL JUSTICE — whether IVF clinic obliged to give
notice – whether IVF clinic obliged to afford natural justice and
investigate complaints – case law review and principles at
[212]-[232].
CORPORATIONS – attribution of state of mind of
officers – principles at [256] – necessary to consider the evidence
of three officers to determine whether the corporation had a ‘reasonably
held opinion’.
NOTICE OF BREACH — whether written
notice required — whether notice conformed to requirements of clause
— principles
at [209]-[210] – oral notice
DAMAGES — company provides services by its
director, who is paid a salary – whether company’s loss is gross
or nett profit – principles at [293]-[296] — failure to
mitigate — doctor does not resume medical practice for
three years –
principles at [304]-[306].
WORDS AND PHRASES —
“would” at [233].
Cases Cited:
Australian Olympic Committee, Inc v Telstra Corporation Ltd
(2017) 258 FCR
[2017] FCAFC 165
Bacchus Corp Pty Ltd v Grapes of Australia Management
[2003] VSC 29
Ballas v Theophilos (No 2)
(1957) 98 CLR 193
Bartlett v Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
(2016) 92 NSWLR
[2016] NSWCA 30
Brambles Holdings Ltd v Carey
(1976) 15 SASR
British Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Co Ltd v Underground
Electric Railways Co of London Ltd
[1912] UKLawRpAC 43
[1912] AC 673
[1911-13] All ER Rep
Brookfield v Yevad Products Pty Ltd
[2004] FCA 1164
Bupa HI Pty Ltd v
[2019] FCAFC 180
Burns v MAN Automotive (Aust) Pty Ltd
(1986) 161 CLR
[1986] HCA 81
Cessnock City Council v 123 259 932 Pty Ltd (2024) 281 CLR
[2024] HCA 17
Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
(1991) 174 CLR 64
[1991] HCA 54
Doust v Riveaux Holdings Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 1434
Australia Ltd v Kennedy
[1999] NSWSC 922
F v National Crime Authority
(1998) 154 ALR 471
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Hadoplane Pty Ltd v Edward Rushton Pty Ltd
[1996] 1 Qd R 156
(No 123) Pty Ltd v Ticco Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWCA 329
Interstar Wholesale Finance
Pty Ltd v Integral Home Loans Pty Ltd
(2008) 257 ALR 292
[2008] NSWCA
Krakowski v Eurolynx Properties Ltd (1995) 183 CLR 563;
Maven Dental Group Pty Ltd v S&M England Pty Ltd
Payzu v Saunders
[1919] 2 KB 518
Regional Development Australia
Murraylands and Riverland Inc v Smith
[2015] SASCFC 160
Service Station
Associated Ltd v Berg Bennett & Associates Pty Ltd
(1993) 45 FCR 84
117 ALR 393
SSABR Pty Ltd v AMA Group Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 175
TC Industrial
Plant Pty Ltd v Robert’s Queensland Pty Ltd
(1963) 180 CLR 130
Wenham v Ella
(1972) 127 CLR 454
[1972] HCA 43
Principal judgment
Belverdere Pty Ltd (Plaintiff)
Idameneo (No 123) Pty Ltd
(Defendant)
Representation:
CE Bannan / JS Forbes (Plaintiff)
G O’Mahoney / A Reid
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
Keypoint Law (Plaintiff)
Johnson Winter
Slattery (Defendant)
File Number(s):
2022/275051
This is a claim for damages for breach of contract. The plaintiff,
Belverdere Pty Ltd, is an incorporated medical practice providing
specialist IVF
services through its sole director and shareholder, Dr Julie Lukic. The
defendant, Idameneo (No 123) Pty Ltd, is a
large national operator of medical
centres and a subsidiary of Primary Health Care Ltd.
defendant conducted a business called “Primary IVF” on behalf of
Primary Health Care. The plaintiff, defendant and
Dr Lukic signed a contract for
the doctor to provide medical services to Primary IVF for seven years. Dr Lukic
became the defendant’s
highest billing IVF specialist. But four years
later, the defendant terminated the contract on the basis that, in its
“reasonably
held opinion”, the doctor had “committed an act
which if true would” adversely affect the defendant’s reputation
business. The defendant did so after a series of staff and patients’
complaints, accompanied by negative patient reviews
posted online.
plaintiff now seeks some $3.8 million in damages. There are four issues. What
were the circumstances in which the defendant was
entitled to terminate the
contract? Did those circumstances exist? If not, what damages is the plaintiff
entitled to? Finally, did
the plaintiff act reasonably in mitigation, where it
took the doctor almost three years to resume medical practice?
should be said at the outset that there is no suggestion that Dr Lukic is other
than an able clinician. Not only did Dr Lukic’s
patients lack
qualifications to opine on her clinical competence, but most of the negative
reviews focussed on more ephemeral matters
such as how she made them feel and
whether she made them wait or was rude. Staff complaints were not about clinical
skills either.
Given the terms of the contract, it is also
to determine whether each of the matters about which patients or staff
complained, in fact, occurred. This case is simply
requirements of the particular clause were satisfied, being whether the
defendant had a “reasonably held
opinion” that the doctor had
“committed an act which
would” adversely affect the
defendant’s reputation or business.
plaintiff relied on the evidence of Dr Lukic. The defendant relied on the
evidence of (in order of increasing seniority):
(a) Dr Janelle McDonald, a fellow IVF specialist and the Medical Director of the
clinics at which Dr Lukic practiced;
(b) Jaime Simpson, the general manager of Primary IVF;
(c) Scott Beattie, the ‘Chief Executive – Day Hospitals, IVF and
Specialist Clinics’ of Primary Health Care; and
(d) Dr Malcolm Parmenter, the managing director and chief executive officer of
Primary Health Care.
submissions were made on the credibility of Dr Lukic, who was cross-examined at
length. The doctor is obviously a highly
intelligent person. Broadly, Dr Lukic
did not accept that any patient complaints may have ‘had a point’.
That said, the
doctor also gave explanations which seemed reasonable. She was,
on occasion, candid, accepting that there was a problem with a lack
notes on a couple of occasions. It was squarely put to Dr Lukic on more than one
occasion that she was lying. Dr Lukic
was clearly shocked at this
suggestion. She became upset on occasion. That was understandable in the
circumstances. Dr Lukic barely
held her temper on other occasions.
is a limit to which a trial judge should rely on demeanour, as opposed to
“contemporary materials, objectively established
facts and the apparent
logic of events”:
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
per Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ. As Lander J observed in
v Yevad Products Pty Ltd
[2004] FCA 1164
... Often, especially in commercial causes, the best evidence of the events the
subject of the inquiry in the trial is contained
in the contemporaneous
documents. Usually, documents are created in circumstances where parties do not
expect the documents to surface
in a trial. They often, therefore, contain the
true account of the contemporaneous event.
have reviewed the contemporaneous records first and then re-visited
Dr Lukic’s evidence. Dr Lukic’s historical response
and staff complaints was not dissimilar to her response in the witness box.
Broadly, Dr Lukic accepted that, on occasion,
she was rude or did yell at
people. But the doctor justified her actions on the basis that she was,
variously, advocating for her
patient’s welfare, redressing the clinical
errors of others, seeking to improve poor business operations by Primary IVF, or
simply behaving in a manner that was true to her personality or cultural
think the doctor’s evidence reflected her genuinely held views on this
subject. That is, the doctor was not lying. That said,
the doctor may lack
insight. A simple example is that Dr Lukic said that she was “rarely
late”, whilst the most common
complaint made about her by patients and
staff was that she was routinely very late. One qualification to this assessment
the doctor professed no recollection of most of the complaints, nor
Primary IVF’s efforts to address those complaints with
Dr Lukic in
meetings and correspondence. I expect that an experienced professional such as
Dr Lukic would remember – at least
– Primary IVF’s stern
communications with her in the years leading up to termination. That is, the
doctor’s recollection
was selective, recalling what accorded with her
perception and rejecting discordant information.
plaintiff was critical of Mr Simpson’s veracity as a witness, submitting
that he sought to minimise any evidence he perceived
to be unhelpful and
emphasised any evidence he perceived helpful. His evidence was said to be
evidently impacted by a desire to vindicate
his decision. Mr Simpson’s
evidence was described as “wholly incredible” and
“comprehensively undermined
by the contemporaneous evidence”.
disagree. Mr Simpson was a solid witness who gave evidence in a perfectly fair
and open manner. Nor do I accept the invitation to
prefer Dr Lukic’s
evidence to that of Mr Simpson in the event of conflict between them. On the
contrary, I have preferred
Mr Simpson’s evidence. Mr Simpson carefully
planned for their meetings, including preparing speaking notes. Dr Lukic made no
notes. Further, what was said at these meetings appears to have come as
something of a surprise to Dr Lukic. As she put it, “I
was horrified. I
was shocked. I was scared. I had never in my whole career anywhere been
subjected to this. [It] was very frightening
for me.” Dr Lukic’s
recall of their meetings may have been affected by the stressors she described.
said, and as the quote from the doctor’s cross-examination illustrates,
Dr Lukic did over-state things from time to time.
Or, as Mr Simpson put it,
the doctor was “probably slightly dramatic”. This is not a criticism
of Dr Lukic but a note
that, on occasion, I have found it necessary to pare back
the doctor’s observations.
Primary IVF
2014, Primary Health Care established “Primary IVF”, making IVF
services available to couples with almost all costs
covered by Medicare. The
defendant conducted that business, operating IVF laboratories and providing
facilities and services to specialists
and health care professionals who
provided IVF fertility services. The defendant promoted its offering on the
internet, stating “Primary
IVF is the only IVF clinic (that we are aware
of) that provides Medicare bulk-billed IVF”. Dr Lukic said that the
at the practice “was the first of its kind in Australia”.
McDonald was the first fertility specialist engaged by Primary IVF. She
established a clinic in George Street, Sydney. Dr McDonald
became the Medical
Director. By July 2014, the defendant had also opened a day surgery and
laboratory in Darlinghurst. Primary IVF
later opened premises in Victoria,
Queensland and Western Australia.
Lukic was then practising in Bondi Junction through her company, The Conception
Zone Pty Ltd. Dr Lukic was the second fertility
specialist recruited by Primary
IVF. As Dr Lukic put it, “Without my joining, and Dr McDonald, there would
be no Primary IVF.”
Lukic incorporated the plaintiff to enter into contracts with the defendant. On
28 July 2014, contracts were signed. The parties
executed three deeds:
“Sale of Practice” between the plaintiff, the defendant, the doctor
and The Conception Zone (
); “Provision of Services to
Incorporated Medical Practitioner” between the plaintiff and defendant
Services Deed
); and “Performance Guarantee: Incorporated Medical
Practitioner” between the defendant and the doctor. The relevant
of the Sale Deed and Services Deed are the same.
the Sale Deed, the defendant agreed to buy Dr Lukic’s practice, including
goodwill, from The Conception Zone for $1.4
million: cl 2.1. The plaintiff
agreed to ensure that Dr Lukic provided medical services from the George Street
and Darlinghurst premises
for at least seven years, and to provide medical
services only from those premises: cl 4.2(a), Sale Deed; cl 2.1, Services Deed.
The Sale Deed included a restraint such that the doctor was obliged to work
exclusively for the defendant during the seven-year term.
A restraint also
applied for three years after the Services Deed was terminated for whatever
reason: cl 5. During that period, the
doctor could not render medical services
within 8 kms of her former Bondi Junction practice or 5 km of the George Street
or Darlinghurst
doctor was to provide medical services for no less than 50 hours a week for 46
weeks of the year: cl 4.2(b), Sale Deed. The plaintiff
also agreed to procure
that the doctor “act in a harmonious way with the other practitioners and
staff” at the George
Street and Darlinghurst premises: cl 4.2(c), Sale
Deed; also cl 5.3(c), Services Deed. (The defendant relied on the latter
in its alternate case, in the event that it was not entitled to
terminate the contract on the basis that it did.)
its part, the defendant was obliged to supply the plaintiff with suitable space,
administrative services, clerical staff, facilities,
plant and equipment
necessary for the plaintiff to conduct its incorporated medical practice from
the George Street and Darlinghurst
premises: cl 3. These services included
collecting fees on behalf of the doctor: cl 3.2, Services Deed. In return, the
agreed that the defendant could retain a portion of the medical fees
collected on behalf of Dr Lukic: cl 6, Services Deed.
doctor was not an employee, servant or agent of the defendant: cl 11, Sale Deed;
cl 11, Services Deed. The defendant was not entitled
to tell the doctor how to
perform medical services, but the doctor was obliged to follow the
defendant’s directions concerning
the operation or management of the
clinics and the business there conducted: cl 5.2 and 5.3, Services Deed.
9 of the Sale Deed and Services Deed concerned termination. Relevantly, cl 9.2
“9.2 The Purchaser may terminate this Deed on the
happening of any of the following events:
(a) any of the ... [plaintiff] or the Doctor commits any
serious breach of any provision of this Deed and the ... [plaintiff] or
Doctor has failed to remedy that breach within 7 days of receiving a notice from
the Purchaser calling for that breach to be
remedied; or
(b) in the reasonably held opinion of the Purchaser any of [The
Conception Zone], the [plaintiff] or the Doctor has committed an
act which if
true would, in the opinion of the Purchaser, adversely affect the reputation or
business of the Purchaser conducted
from the [George Street and Darlinghurst
clinics]; ...
9.2(b) is the critical provision, while cl 9.2(a) is relied on in the
alternative. Termination of one contract led to termination
of the other: cl
10.1, Sale Deed. I will return to the termination clause in detail at [
Lukic began practising from George Street and Darlinghurst. Doctors in the
George Street clinic were supported by reception and
support staff. There were
also a number of fertility GPs, nurses and day surgery nurses at the Sydney and
Darlinghurst clinics. Primary
IVF used a “shared care model”: a
patient may initially consult one specialist but then, when further procedures
done, be seen by another specialist.
Simpson said that Primary IVF clinics had a high volume of patients, consistent
with its reputation and market position as an affordable
and leading bulk-billed
IVF provider. The George Street clinic was a very busy clinic. Dr Lukic
worked five days a week and every
second Saturday and approximately 8 to 10
hours a day. She was the only specialist who worked full-time.
McDonald observed that Dr Lukic’s practice was busy from the outset.
Dr Lukic said that she typically consulted between 10
to 15 patients a day.
As Dr Lukic put it, “I was basically seeing the same number of patients as
all the other practitioners
Lukic agreed that one of the main drivers for the viability, profitability and
growth of Primary IVF was its ability to attract
patients, where low-cost IVF
was “only profitable through numbers”. Dr Lukic said that the
initial appeal of Primary
IVF to patients was the low cost, but accepted that
attracting patients also depended on the reputation of the clinic for
“patient-centred
care”. Dr Lukic agreed that the reputation of the
clinic was also closely tied to the reputation of the practitioners who worked
for the patients of Primary IVF, there was general consensus that IVF patients
were a unique cohort that needed to be ‘handled
with care’. As
Dr Lukic put it, IVF patients were often extremely emotional due to the
issues they were facing in attempting
to become pregnant, “IVF fertility
treatment is a very stressful process for all couples.” Further,
“IVF patients
[are] unlike other patients. ... we fill them with hormones,
they have unreasonable expectations, they blame themselves, their partners
the wives, the wives blame the husband ... and when things ... don't go
right, they get very upset”.
the context in which patients were receiving care, Mr Simpson said that one of
his priorities was to ensure that those working
at Primary IVF clinics treated
patients and other staff in a respectful, professional and sensitive manner. Or
as the Head of Fertility
Services at Primary IVF, June Wong, put it at the time
of these events, “As we are all aware, patients are very emotional and
their perception on anything can be misconstrued so ... think about what and how
to deliver.”
Staff and patient complaints
of the complaints which follow pre-dated the defendant’s termination of
the contracts (in August 2018) by some years. Although
Mr Simpson only joined
Primary IVF in February 2018, he had access to earlier information stored on an
internal network drive of
the business.
Mr Simpson reviewed historical
information held in the defendant’s records about Dr Lukic before
terminating the contracts.
He said, “I read all information I knew to be
held by the business at the time concerning feedback or complaints relating to
Dr Lukic. I did this because I wanted our decision-making processes to be
undertaken having regard to all such available information.”
addition to the defendant’s internal records, Primary IVF and each of its
doctors were the subject of patient ‘reviews’
posted on social media
and a website called “RateMDs”. I say at the outset that Dr Lukic
received favourable reviews
from time to time. (Also in evidence are a large
number of cards sent by grateful new parents to the doctor, expressing their
for her care during their fertility journey, leading to the arrival of
their baby.) As to the accuracy of these reviews, Dr McDonald
“Patients can embellish.” Dr Lukic put it much more strongly:
Online trolling for most IVF specialists is quite common
(This is one of the doctor’s comments that I have pared back.)
contemporaneous records indicate that Primary IVF had difficulty with
Dr Lukic’s behaviour from the outset. As mentioned,
the doctor began
working from the George Street and Darlinghurst clinics after contracts were
signed on 28 July 2014. On 8 August
2014, three incidents occurred. As
later described by Primary Health’s National Manager Operations
Improvement, Linda Alvares,
there was reason for Dr Lukic to be annoyed or upset
on each occasion, “What was different about Dr Lukic is the way she
the upset – it was
loud, emotional outbursts.
Dr Lukic is
softly spoken in general. To picture the impact,
you have [to] picture her
August 2014, Dr Lukic’s dealings with IVF Clinic Manager, Laura Minutillo,
also proved difficult. Ms Alvares reported that,
when Dr Lukic discovered that a
letter had not been posted to a patient, “it was rage against
Laura”. This was followed
by “mini outbursts at Laura” leading
up to “a major incident” such that the receptionist “felt
by Dr Lukic”. Mr Ayres was asked to log an incident report.
Ms Alvares understood that Mr Ayres spoke to Dr Lukic and “her
response was that she wasn’t aware it had such a huge impact on Laura and
was going to make it better in the future.”
20 August 2014, one of Dr Lukic’s patients encountered difficulty when
presenting for Imaging. Ms Alvares reported that Dr
Lukic “pushed past
patients that were waiting to be seen by imaging, abused the girl at Imaging in
front of patients, and stormed
an incident in front of the patient where their cycle had been “mucked
as their appointment did not go ahead and the patient did not have her
scan, “So we were protecting the patient ... it didn’t
happen in the
way that you are implying.”
21 August 2014, Dr Lukic arrived almost an hour after a patient’s
appointment. Ms Alvares reported, “This happened
on more than one
occasion.” In the week of 25 August 2014, the Head of Fertility Services
at Primary IVF, Ms Wong, began work
at Primary IVF and, in her first week,
“had also spoken to Dr Lukic”. I infer from Ms Alvares’
memorandum that
Ms Wong raised the matters about which staff had complained to
that point.
15 September 2014, Dr Lukic received a favourable review on
“RateMDs”, describing the doctor as “fantastic”.
October 2014, Dr Lukic received a ‘1 star’ review, “Devastated
that I used her, she was terrible and had
a shocking bedside manner. Went on
leave for 3 weeks before I was due despite telling me she would be here. Always
ran 1 hour late”.
Another patient rebutted this poor review, commending
Dr Lukic’s clinical skills,
“She’s not overly fluffy
with her personality but I liked that. She got down to business and it was
perfect ... she was
worth the wait. Highly highly recommend
4 November 2014, Ms Wong met with Dr Lukic to discuss “outburst
heard”. According to Ms Wong’s detailed note,
“I advised Dr
Lukic that loud & aggressive conversation was overheard”. (Dr Lukic
agreed that this would be damaging
to the reputation of Primary IVF –
“if it happened” – but did not remember the particular
incident.) Ms Wong
asked Dr Lukic to explain the reasons for the outburst. Ms
Wong’s note records that Dr Lukic expressed frustration in respect
number of ‘teething difficulties’ in transferring her patients from
her Bondi Junction practice to Primary IVF,
including the new receptionist and
reception rooms, a lack of administrative support in closing her Bondi Junction
practice, becoming
familiar with Primary Health’s systems and a reduction
in earnings.
Wong informed Dr Lukic “the outbursts towards staff is unprofessional
& not accepted ... Having such frustrations &
dissatisfaction on issues
displayed with outburst behavio[u]r, loud vocal displays, and inappropriate
language is not acceptable
and must be recognized to ensure that improvement
takes place to all work towards a goal of harmoniously working together”.
The note concluded:
“Dr Lukic was very taken aback that everyone is “afraid” of
her and that [Primary IVF] had made her this way as
she was not like this.
Dr Lukic stated that she thought I was a friend and wanted to help her but it
looks like I am against her
Dr Lukic stated that she will not be talking to anyone so she doesn’t have
to deal with anyone and how they feel.
[Ms Wong] reiterated that ... her decision to not talk to anyone is again
demonstrating an unprofessional behavior as to be working
communication will need to take place.
... At this point, Dr Lukic, walked away from the desk towards the sink and
stood by the sink shaking her head in “disbelief”
on what I had just
communicated to her. She continued to say that she thought that I was there at
[Primary IVF] to help but instead
I am causing her grief.”
Wong discussed the problems raised by Dr Lukic with her further on 5 and 11
November 2014.
January 2015, Primary IVF received complaints from two new mothers about Dr
Lukic’s delivery of their babies. These complaints
were communicated to
Dr Lukic. Both mothers intended to take the matter further. Whether they
did so is not known. By contrast, a
favourable review was posted on RateMDs the
same month, “Excellent Dr”.
in January 2015, Primary IVF’s office staff appear to have taken the
apparently disorganised state of patient records in
Dr Lukic’s room into
their own hands. Two staff members spent seven hours sorting the records by
patient, and leaving notes
with no patient name for Dr Lukic to sort. The
purpose of doing so was to scan the medical records into a document storage
When Dr Lukic arrived at rooms the next day, the office staff told her
what they had done, “At this point, [Dr] Lukic was extremely
agitated that
[we] touched her things. I explained to her that it was extremely concerning
that she had patients in her care with
no notes who needed to see the nurses. Dr
Lukic started to rant and rave that she had her own system of where things are
we had disrupted her ... filing system. ... She continued to rant and
rave and yell and pacing up and down her room. As she continued
increasingly agitated, I asked her how I can assist her now that we have
collated her documents ...”. Dr Lukic asked
for an expanding folder to be
used for her to file patient notes alphabetically. The office staff complied,
albeit they also continued
to scan the records into Primary IVF’s
Lukic said that the notes belonged to the patients from her previous Bondi
Junction practice. She had asked repeatedly for filing
cabinets to store the
notes, but these were not provided. Dr Lukic said she was told to leave the
notes in the corner of her room.
Dr Lukic agreed that she did become upset when
staff members went through her documents without her permission. Dr Lukic
agreed that
she was “not happy” but said that she did not get
aggressive and objected to the suggestion that she was ranting and
raving. The
fact that staff came into her office without her permission and started working
with her notes was not something that
she had ever seen in her medical career
Lukic agreed that staff raised with her concerns about her note keeping on a
couple of occasions but “the computer system
was very difficult initially
to negotiate. It took us a long time to learn how to do it properly”. Dr
Lukic also agreed that,
on a couple of occasions, “The odd patient got
through without me competing the notes in time, yes.” Dr Lukic did not
accept, however, that her interaction with staff in relation to this matter
affected the reputation of Primary IVF as it was “a
private matter that
was behind closed doors in a private office.” Dr Lukic was also critical
of the staff member involved,
who she said was non-medical and “roped
in” to help out “because Primary IVF became so big so quick, they
have enough staff to cope ... It was
reference to “bedlam” was probably an over-statement).
March 2015, Primary IVF received a detailed complaint from a patient who had
undergone three unsuccessful IVF cycles with Dr Lukic.
The patient complained
the patient was at a laboratory
for a blood test. The person taking bloods
called Dr Lukic to confirm what was required and commented that “he had
never spoken
to someone so rude”. After an unsuccessful egg collection in
November 2014, Dr Lukic told the patient, “that was a waste
time”. While the doctor said she would return, she did not. Against this,
the patient described Dr Lukic’s advice
in respect of a third cycle as
“reasonable”. Primary IVF printed off the clinical notes, which
appear to have been reviewed
and discussed with staff, including Dr Lukic. The
notes record, “Dr [Lukic] – bedside manner quite clinical –
quite personal”.
March 2015, Dr Lukic also received complaints from two patients via a private
health insurer. Dr Lukic responded to the complaints,
which did not relate to
her specifically, in a professional manner. Dr Lukic pointed out the
‘teething difficulties’
inherent in opening the new clinics,
particularly in light of the overwhelming response to the service.
Health Care brought in Karen Montague to support the Primary IVF business and
investigate the issues and challenges which
Dr Lukic had raised. Ms Montague
prepared a file note of her work undertaken from 25 to 27 March 2015. Ms
Montague recorded, “[Ms
Wong] ... was concerned that [Dr Lukic] was not
well and had possibl[y] not been home as [she] was wearing the same clothes as
previous day and her car appeared as if [she] had possibly been sleeping in
it”. Dr Lukic did not recall the matters set out
in the file note but
denied that she had ever slept in her car.
26 March 2015, Ms Montague noted:
“4. [Ms Wong] advised [Ms Montague] that [Dr Lukic] was
wearing the same dress as she had worn for the previous 2 days and
that she did
not smell clean
5. By mid-morning [Ms Wong] advised [Ms Montague] that [Dr
Lukic] was in a very bad mood and was shouting and banging things around
asked [Ms Montague] to reposition herself from one of the GP rooms to be in
proximity of [Dr Lukic’s] room, which [Ms Montague]
6. [Ms Montague] noted [Dr Lukic’s] bad mood although did
not see any evidence of shouting and banging.”
27 March 2015, Dr Lukic met with Ms Montague and Ms Wong and discussed her
dissatisfaction with the financial benefits of the contractual
arrangements. Dr
Lukic sought approval to work outside Primary IVF. Ms Montague said that
she would ask Henry Bateman of Primary
Health Care. Dr Lukic did not recall this
31 March 2015, a patient posted an unfavourable review on “RateMDs”:
“She is has a very abrasive manner and really
doesn’t seem that
interested in her patients. ... Her bedside manner is terrible.”.
7 April 2015, Ms Alvares emailed Ms Montague with a collection of incidents
involving Dr Lukic and staff in August 2014, as earlier
described. Ms Alvares
also noted that Dr Lukic’s “rage” was one of the reasons that
a member of staff had left
the clinic within one week of starting.
Alvarez added, “There were incidents that happened along the way that I
relayed ... by phone as they happened, and [Mr Ayres]
was asked to log them /
document them / speak with Dr Lukic along the way. If you need me to list these
from memory, do let me know
and I can do so ...”. Ms Alvares’
email was fairly expressed, setting out countervailing considerations where
applicable.
7 April 2015, the defendant wrote to Dr Lukic, responding to the various
financial concerns raised at her meeting with Ms Montague
on 27 March 2015,
“It is also an opportunity for the company to outline concerns that it has
defendant declined to permit Dr Lukic to work
elsewhere. Further, the defendant raised concerns in respect of unprofessional
The defendant set out various instances of such conduct in August and
November 2014, as earlier described, “We do not wish
to escalate this
matter but you must understand that we cannot and will not tolerate any such
behaviour going forward”.
The defendant also outlined problems
with Dr Lukic’s medical records and her resistance to using its electronic
medical records,
“We are also very concerned about a number of recent
complaints from your patients ranging from allegations of negligence to
inadequate hand over.”
The doctor was asked to immediately modify
and monitor her behaviour going forward.
letter was presented to Dr Lukic at a meeting on 8 April 2015 with
Ms Montague and the defendant’s Chief Clinical Officer,
Houston. The agenda for the meeting recorded that Dr Lukic’s “angry
outbursts” had “much improved
since November 2014 but cannot be
tolerated”.
A detailed file note of the meeting records that a
wide range of Dr Lukic’s concerns with Primary IVF were discussed, as well
as Dr Lukic’s “previous outbursts being intimidating to
Dr Lukic explained that her outbursts were due to anger
when she felt that patient care was, or might be, compromised. The doctor
asked to raise such matters with management in their office.
Lukic does not recall receiving this letter and believes she would have
remembered if it had been provided to her. More likely,
the letter was given to
Dr Lukic, as recorded in the contemporaneous file note and I so find. Of these
early incidents, Dr Lukic
“You're commenting on a time where this clinic had only just started,
there were very few things in place. We were made lots
of promises as
specialists that this would be ready to start, ready to go. We had inexperienced
staff, inexperienced procedures,
patients complaining, there were a lot of
things going on and as specialists, we had given up our lives and our previous
to do this, and all I can say is it was an extremely stressful time
for everybody involved in the clinic around those dates.
... I was extremely frustrated because the promises made were not being kept.
... The way this is presented looks worse than what actually happened on those
days... was not me protecting myself, it was protecting
the patients that were
involved as a result of some of the mistakes made.
... There was no intention to take anything out on staff, ... when I'm
stressed and I get frightened that a mistake has been made,
I tend to get quite
anxious and I get a little loud, but it is not an aggressive action against
staff, it is just myself—”
20 April 2015, both Primary IVF and Dr Lukic were the subject of an unfavourable
review on RateMDs: “Primary IVF and Julie
Lukic were always late, often
rude and seldom pleasant to deal with. My files were lost in a sea of unmarked
boxes on Julie’s
office floor”. The patient waited for almost two
hours but received no acknowledgement of the delay when seen by the doctor.
patient attended for a procedure but was not told that a doctor other than
Dr Lukic would be performing the procedure, “If
Primary IVF and Julie
Lukic didn’t bulk bill, I can’t imagine they would have a business.
I’ve certainly taken
mine elsewhere”.
July 2015, Primary IVF began to keep a log of complaints in respect of
Dr Lukic. Most of the entries relate to a lack of medical
28 September 2015, Ms Minutillo received a “very distressed phone
call” from one of Dr Lukic’s patients, who
made a formal complaint.
A detailed file note records:
“... on Friday, 25th of September 2015 at 1:00pm they had an appointment
with Dr Julie Lukic and were ‘disgusted by her
behaviour’. [The
patient] stated that Dr Lukic didn’t actually explain anything to her at
all about the IVF process and
spoke to [the patient] and her husband in a
belittling way. Dr Lukic blamed [the patient’s] fertility problems on [the
husband ... and stated that he was a ‘drunk’, after
they let her know that he drinks approx 7 beers a month. [The patient]
Dr Lukic yelled at her and her husband unnecessarily. Both [the patient] and her
husband felt that Dr Lukic was extremely
rude and abrupt and needed coaching on
her bedside manner. When [the patient] asked Dr Lukic if everything was okay as
incredibly frustrated and rushed, Dr Lukic responded by saying
‘Yes I am, I have a plane to catch, this shouldn’t take
don’t you know anything about IVF?!”
IVF made arrangements to change the patient’s treating doctor. It was
explained to the patient, however, that Dr Lukic
may still perform some of the
IVF procedures given the ‘shared care’ arrangements at the clinic.
The patient “stated
that this made her feel incredibly anxious.” Ms
Minutillo agreed to raise the patient’s concerns with the new treating
doctor. Dr Lukic did not recall any of the matters in this file note being
discussed with her and denied having called a patient
or their partner a
29 September 2015, the defendant’s complaint log records,
“Discussion re multiple complaints from patients. Patient
last Friday said
JL was rushed and abrupt. Other patients have complained on social media about
JLs communication skills. JL informed
of these complain[t]s. JL says she is too
busy to spend enough time with each patient and we suggested she has reduced
patients in the diary. She declined, saying her income will drop if
that is done”.
30 September 2015, Ms Wong passed on some positive feedback from a patient to Dr
Lukic. According to Ms Wong’s file note,
Dr Lukic commented on their
meeting the previous day “and stated that we need not worry as she will be
giving us her resignation.”
Ms Wong said this was not a resolution nor
what the defendant was seeking. Rather, the defendant made her aware of negative
in order to achieve positive change. Further:
“I reiterated my comment to her when she posed the question, when did you
hear m[e] raise my voice to patients? - my comment
was - Dr Lukic - you are
currently raising your voice at the moment and can be perceived as loud and
anger. Dr Lukic further indicated
that as she is not "pretty", uses her hands
alot, is loud due to her ethic background does not make her a bad person.
[Ms Wong] reiterated
that no one is stating she is a bad person however is
highlighting that at times her deliverance can be perceived as rude or rushed
loud and angry.”
Dr Lukic agreed that she had told the patient that she had a plane to catch, Ms
Wong advised that it may be better not to mention
her plane trip, “As we
are all aware, patients are very emotional and their perception on anything can
be misconstrued so going
forward think about what and how to deliver.”
that day, Ms Minutillo and Ms Wong met with Dr Lukic again in relation to
“her yelling” towards an employee who
had commenced with Primary IVF
that week. Ms Minutillo’s note records:
“Dr. Lukic did not feel that her behaviour was offensive and stated that
‘she could not work in a place where she had
to watch her P's and Q's and
be nice to people.’ Dr. Lukic stated that ‘[Ms Wong] will
receive my resignation next week
and I don’t care if I have to fight
Primary in court for the next 10 years, as long as I can get out of my contract
and I don’t
have to work here.’ [Ms Wong] and I repeatedly
tried to steer the conversation back to issue at hand, Dr. Lukic's abusive
toward the administrative team, however Dr. Lukic was only interested
in discussing her pending resignation until such time that
she blamed myself and
[Ms Wong] for ‘making her late and causing further potential patient
complaints, and asked us to leave
her office.”
Lukic did not recall the matters set out in this file note.
28 October 2015, Dr McDonald sent an email to Dr Lukic and colleague
Dr Susan George, checking whether the practitioners were doing
the correct
proportion of procedures according to their contracts. Dr McDonald advised that
she was “doing too many procedures
and [Dr Lukic] is doing too much
consulting.” Dr Lukic replied as follows:
“I suggest you keep out of my business. I will not be reducing my
consulting numbers. Also, I have never worked in a clinic
where the consultants
did not have the common decency to share the weekend and public holiday
I was recruited to work at [P]rimary IVF by Edmund Bateman. At no time did he
emphasise I had a limitation on the amount of work
I was allowed to do. In fact
quite the opposite. If this is the case then consider this my resignation. Your
efforts as a medical
director and your communication skills leave a lot to be
McDonald responded politely, suggesting that Dr Lukic should discuss the matter
with someone from administration, as the problem
was that “we are paid
very poorly for procedures, so in effect, we are doing extra procedures for your
patients”. More
relevant for present purposes is Dr Lukic’s terse
communication to her colleague.
29 October 2015, it appears that the issues raised by Dr McDonald and
Dr Lukic were discussed further and a decision made. On 30
October 2015,
Dr Lukic came into the clinic and started packing her boxes to take home.
Ms Wong and Ms Minutillo listened to Dr Lukic
outline her concerns
regarding the defendant and how the medical centre was being run. There is no
evidence as to how Dr Lukic’s
issues were addressed, save that Dr Lukic
continued to work at the George Street and Darlinghurst clinics.
3 May 2016, a one-star review was posted in respect of Dr Lukic on RateMDs,
“Terrible, don’t go there. Plenty of better
doctors around.”
19 May 2016, IVF Practice Manager, Shivanthi Jayamaha, emailed Ms Wong,
noting that a few patients wanted to change specialists
“as they are tired
[of] waiting for more than 2 hours for Dr Julie Lukic appointments”. The
patients complained that
other specialists did not have such long wait times and
Dr Lukic had a reputation for always being late. Ms Wong was asked to speak
Dr Lukic about her appointment book. Ms Wong forwarded the email to
Dr McDonald, “We will need to discuss and strategise
as to how to
bring up this topic.”
26 May 2016, a couple complained to the defendant of a “bad
experience” with Dr Lukic that day. The couple said that
“disrespected” and the doctor’s attitude and ethics was bad.
The couple complained that the doctor was
“not friendly” and
“looked unhappy and upset”. The wife then mentioned at a subsequent
consultation that
she had a thyroid problem. According to the patient, Dr Lukic
raised her voice and asked “Why didn’t you tell me”
“gazed at me in a scary way”. The patient then did a blood test but
heard nothing as to the result before returning
with her husband, when Dr Lukic
was “upset with me and raised her tone and blamed me why I didn’t
call the nurse when
I didn’t receive any news. We had a little bit of an
argument and my husband mentioned to her not to be impolite ... Her behaviour
shows that she doesn’t want to assist us”. The couple changed
specialists and thanked Primary IVF for making this possible,
“Honestly we
already have a bad impression because of this with Primary IVF but you change
our mind.” Dr Lukic did not
recall this patient or the consultation.
same day, likely the same couple posted a one-star review of Dr Lukic on
“This doctor was terrible and have bad manner. First of all I always have
to wait for one hour or one hour of half from the
appointment. She is not
friendly and informative either. She is also very argumentative and made patient
feel not comfortable. Not
really know about the patient, once I told her than
she checked at her computer after so much argued. I immediately change my
specialist.”
Wong discussed this complaint with Dr Lukic and reported to Primary Health
Care’s Chief Clinical Officer, Dr Kevin Bullen,
that Dr Lukic “felt
that the consultation went well”, that her attitude and ethics during the
consultation were fine
and professional and the consultation proceeded as
normal. Ms Wong then discussed the matter with Dr McDonald, who considered that
the behaviour, if verified, was likely triggered by recent family issues for Dr
Lukic. Dr Lukic does appear to have been having significant
pressure from
dependent members of her family. (On 12 August 2016, the doctor advised the
practice that she was running late as an
ambulance had not arrived to take her
mother to respite care.)
7 June 2016, a couple asked to change specialists from Dr Lukic as “whilst
she has been good ... our appointments with her
have often brought additional
stress to us. She has been quite forward with her recommendations and has not
really shown us the understanding
based on our situation and
circumstances.” The couple advised that they have “nothing against
Dr Julie” but felt
that a change would be the right step for them. Dr
Lukic did not recall this patient or any consultation with them.
21 June 2016, Dr Lukic complained to Ms Wong, “Due to recent changes
enforced on me by Darlinghurst Day Surgery regarding
the way I perform egg
retrievals, I must respect[fully] decline from performing any more procedures on
medico legal grounds. ...
I do not understand why Primary IVF feel qualified to
challenge a method of egg retrieval which is accepted by the majority of IVF
clinics throughout Australia and the rest of the world. I do not enforce my
techniques on the other doctors. I deserve the same respect
in return.”
Dr McDonald replied that the change related to infection control; she had
asked the registered nurse to follow
this up with her. The rights and wrongs of
the clinical issue are not known. Dr Lukic’s abrasive email to her
colleagues is
noteworthy.
Lukic said that Ms Wong only spoke to her once about patient complaints. On that
occasion, Ms Wong referred to a thread of complaints
online but did not provide
specifics. The contemporaneous records indicate that Ms Wong spoke to Dr
Lukic more than once. By my count,
Ms Wong documented such interactions on four
23 June 2016, a one-star review was posted in respect of Dr Lukic on RateMDs:
“From our very first appointment she was rude & insensitive. At 38
weeks she made me cry by telling me a story about a
traumatic birth she had just
encountered. I was so relieved when she was on leave the day I have birth and
dreaded seeing her for
my follow up appointment, where she made a sarcastic
comment about my scar shape. We went elsewhere for baby number 2 and 3, such
different experience! Avoid her if you can.”
15 July 2016, a patient complained about Dr Lukic, who was said to be
“very rude in her approach” and made the patient
feel “quite
stupid and worthless ... Dr Lukic has been quite cold. ... Dr Lukic’s
conduct was not right or fair to couples
... We both left feeling depressed,
foolish and now angry”.
22 July 2016, a patient made a complaint about Dr Lukic, describing her manner
as “very abrupt, bordering on rude”
and not forthcoming with
information. The patient said that, on leaving consultations “I walk out
feeling like I have been
a naughty school child leaving the principal’s
office”. The patient found Dr Lukic’s tone to be dismissive and
unhelpful. When advised that the patient wanted her GP to take over the care of
her pregnancy, Dr Lukic picked up her referral pad
and threw it to the back of
her desk. The doctor was also consistently late to appointments.
10 August 2016, a patient complained about Dr Lukic’s “bedside
manner” in consultations the previous year, adding
that she had
“spoken to numerous other patients and they all feel that Dr Lukic is
abrupt and rude. ... I feel that she treated
us like a number and didn’t
have any empathy towards what we were going through.”
February 2017, Vanessa Raggio began to work at the George Street clinic as Nurse
Manager. On the third day of her job, Ms Raggio
was talking to Mr Ayres
don’t know who you think
you are, but we aren’t Genea and we do
things differently around here.” Dr Lukic stormed back into her room,
her bag and left. Mr Ayres followed Dr Lukic to the carpark in an
attempt to calm her down. There were patients still waiting to
see the doctor,
but she did not return (nor the next day) and all appointments had to be
cancelled. Ms Raggio later advised Mr Simpson
that she came to learn that
this was a normal pattern of behaviour. Sometimes Dr Lukic apologised a few days
later, usually accompanied
with a “but” such as “you need to
communicate with me more” or “we need to work as a team.”
Lukic said she did not yell at Ms Raggio but agreed that she said “this is
not Genea” as Primary IVF’s premises
were low-cost clinics which
operated under different protocols so that low-cost practices could be run more
efficiently. Dr Lukic
did not recall, but did not deny, storming out and
not returning to work the next day. Dr Lukic said that she complained to Mr
“Ms Raggio was not kindly towards me.” Dr Lukic
believed that
mistakes by nursing staff occurred more frequently after Ms Raggio began. (In
answering some complaints, Dr Lukic criticised
the competence or clinical
skills of other health practitioners. I am in no position to, and make no
finding in respect of, the competence
or clinical skills of others.)
19 May 2017, a patient made a complaint to Ms Jayamaha, describing Dr Lukic
as “aggressive and rude”. The couple complained
that, when they were
called, Dr Lukic was “angry and no greeting at all ... Dr Lukic did not
listen to us and said our questions
improperly [so] that I needed to repeat my
question several times.” The patient complained that no patient should be
this way. Ms Jayamaha reported that the patient was “quite
upset” when they called. Dr Lukic did not recall the patient
consultation.
contrast, on 25 May 2017, Dr Lukic received a five-star review on RateMDs. The
patient described Dr Lukic as “wonderful”
supportive”, where the patient's excess weight prevented her from
undertaking treatment. Dr Lukic “never
made me feel bad about my weight
but made sure I understood that getting my weight down is the only way this will
work. I am looking
forward to losing weight and returning to see her!”
9 July 2017, Dr Lukic received a two-star review on RateMDs. Dr Lukic was
90 minutes late, pressed the patient to have a caesarean
at the outset, rushed
the induction, was “impatient and unsympathetic ... Unprofessional ...
Never again.” On 31 July
2017, Dr Lukic received a one-star review on the
same site, “She is beyond rude. So insensitive and talks to you like
completely and utter[ly] stupid. Always late and wouldn’t
even acknowledge or apologise. You’re time doesn’t matter!
glad I’ve found this out before I got too far into my pregnancy. She will
NOT be my obstetrician”.
August 2017, a patient complained to Primary IVF in respect of Dr Lukic,
advising that they had “decided to contact the media
and [had] an
emergency [appointment] with [their] lawyer ... to discuss what we can do to
ensure others are treated fairly and not
thrown away as easily as we
were.” After a third unsuccessful IVF cycle, Dr Lukic had advised that the
patient could not do
another cycle based on the patient’s results. The
patient complained, “She is so quick to just throw us away after 3
when I know women who are older than me with more issues than I have and yet
they are able to cycle as many times as they
would like.” (I have included
this complaint as it was one reviewed by Mr Simpson; the doctor’s conduct
was otherwise
unremarkable.)
9 October 2017, Dr Lukic received a five-star rating on RateMDs, described as
“fantastic” and offering the couple a
fresh approach with helpful
knowledge and insight. On 16 October 2017, a less favourable rating was posted,
concurring with other
reviews about Dr Lukic’s abrasive manner and lack of
bedside manner or empathy. Dr Lukic was said to be “scathing and
unapologetic” in the couple’s first appointment, leaving the patient
“devastated and crying”. Subsequent
appointments “confirmed
her lack of caring for her patients and general insensitivity. I would recommend
avoiding her.”
On 17 October 2017, a similar review was posted,
“She is beyond rude!! [Dr Lukic] always runs late, speaks to you like
an idiot. ... She is shit. ... Wouldn’t see her again. Fuck
you Dr Lukic!”.
Change of management
September 2017, Dr Parmenter became the managing director and CEO of Primary
Health Care. He said, “As a business, [Primary
Health Care] probably had
more of a focus on revenue and profitability than it did on the quality of the
services that it provided”.
Dr Parmenter’s objective was to try to
bring the focus back to a quality operation. He recruited Mr Beattie and Mr
with whom he had worked previously, to assist him to achieve that
November 2017, Mr Beattie began work at Primary Health Care as Chief Executive
– Day Hospitals, IVF and Specialist Clinics.
He had operational
responsibility for IVF clinics including Primary IVF. Mr Beattie reported to
Dr Parmenter.
On commencing work with Primary Health Care, Mr
Beattie visited the Primary IVF clinic in George Street to meet the doctors,
Dr Lukic. Mr Beattie became aware that various staff and patients
had made complaints about Dr Lukic and that adverse commentary
been posted by patients on the internet. (Mr Beattie’s practice at the
time was to look at websites such as RateMDs
to read feedback posted online.) Mr
Beattie was informed by Mr Ayres that Dr Lukic required “careful
management”.
11 November 2017, Dr Lukic received a one-star rating on RateMDs website,
“She is very very rude and talks down to you, very
unprofessional, she
brings Primary IVF and the rest of the staff (who we found to be very nice),
into disrepute.”
15 November 2017, Primary IVF’s records record that shouting was heard
coming from Dr Lukic’s room. A patient came
out crying and sat down. The
patient’s partner was “visibly angry, and quite aggressive due to an
escalation within the
consultation ... shouting remarks like ... ‘you
should not be a doctor’”. Of this, Dr Lukic said:
“I have accepted this my whole 20 year career in IVF. I don't blame the
patients for being upset, I don't blame them when they,
you know, say things
that they accuse me of, and
if I was, then where is the evidence for that? It's
just hearsay.”
December 2017, the George Street and Darlinghurst clinics closed for
refurbishment and expansion. It appears that Dr Lukic was
also providing medical
services from Primary IVF’s Victorian clinic. On 18 December 2017, a
couple from Victoria made an extensive
complaint to Primary IVF in respect of Dr
Lukic, expressing concern over her “lack of many things”:
“1. Manner[.] I felt like I was a school girl in the
principal’s office being told off for doing something wrong. ...
of questioning was patronising ... she became clearly frustrated which was very
obvious through her facial expression, her
tone and body language. She would
make a terrible poker player. ... she looked me down in complete disdain. I was
feeling very uncomfortable.
2. Empathy[.] Wow. There was none. There wasn’t an
inkling. Dr Lukic seemed unimpressed throughout the consult. I’m
surprised that she’s in this line of work. ... Her bedside manner does not
exist. She is painfully horrible. She has
no awareness of emotional
intelligence. None.
3. Soft skills[.] ... I don’t think this would sit well
with Dr Lukic.
4. Brand[.] ... Dr Lukic is a hindrance to Primary IVF brand.
... she is well educated. I don’t doubt that but her people
appalling. It’s shocking. She practices out of Sydney Primary IVF right?
Fly her back.”
19 December 2017, a review was posted on RateMDs, almost certainly by the same
couple, “Dr Lukic is in [the] wrong field.
Zero bedside manner. ...
Absolutely unprofessional and zero care factor. Shocking. ... She has no people
skills at all. Do not recommend.”
30 January 2018, a review was posted in respect of Dr Lukic on RateMDs,
“Horrible woman. Left me in tears. Total lack of
empathy, she
shouldn’t be allowed around people. I’ve had more empathy from a dog
than her. ... She[‘s] judgemental
to the point she looks disgusted ...
Wouldn’t even let me try IVF”.
February 2018, Mr Simpson started work as the General Manager of Primary IVF. He
reported to Mr Beattie. Dr Parmenter, Mr Beattie
and Mr Simpson met
regularly to discuss the Primary IVF business. Dr Parmenter said that
Dr Lukic’s conduct was a topic regularly
discussed in meetings with
Mr Beattie and Mr Simpson.
March 2018, the George Street and Darlinghurst clinics re-opened after
renovations. The closures caused problems for patients and
health professionals
alike. Dr Lukic said that, after the premises re-opened, there were more nurses
and embryologists but no increase
in operating times. This led to delays in
patients being able to start an IVF cycle. Another doctor complained that
clinicians had
received very little income for three months, apart from a small
advance against future income.
10 April 2018, IVF Billing Administrator and receptionist, Kyleen Fiasco,
reported an incident to Ms Jayamaha. Dr Lukic had entered
the administration
room at the George Street clinic and yelled at staff, complaining that she was
not receiving as many initial consultations
as her colleagues. When told that
the staff were trying to find Dr Lukic initial consultations, the doctor yelled
you are not”. At this point [Dr Lukic] storms off in a
huff [and in] the reception area [the doctor] slams her hand down to
pick up her
next patients.” Ms Fiasco reported that this had been “going
on” and had “escalated over the
past few months”. One of
Ms Fiasco’s colleagues became tearful and said “No one likes to
be yelled at” whilst
another said “You can’t do anything to
please her [but] I’m used to getting yelled at.”
Lukic did not recall this incident but agreed that she had spoken to the front
desk a few times about overloading her with patients,
which caused her to run
late. I note that this is the
of what the contemporaneous record
indicates, which is that Dr Lukic wanted to see
patients; see
Jayamaha promptly reported the incident to Mr Simpson: (emphasis added)
Please note there are few reasons behind the reduction in initial consults for
Unfortunately we are starting to experience quite a few patients
requesting to switch specialists as a result of JL's bedside manner.
reason behind patients are not placing a complaint is due to fact that Primary
IVF operating on a share care program.
Instead of a verbal / written
complaint the patients fill out a patient survey which is anonymous.
main concern for the patient is that once a complaint has been put into writing
they may have JL in theatre and as a result she
may take revenge.
patients are also reading reviews online with regards to JL and insist that we
do not allocate her as their treating Dr
Unfortunately we have to offer patients with options and we can't force the
patient to see JL.
Ms Jayamaha noted in her incident report, Primary IVF patients were invited to
complete a patient feedback survey. The surveys
were on display at the front
counter. The surveys allowed patients to provide optional anonymous feedback for
the purpose of monitoring
performance. Primary IVF periodically summarised and
presented the results of this feedback in a table format. (Dr Lukic said
was unaware of this.) Some 28 surveys are in evidence, of varying
legibility, completed from December 2017 to April 2018. Dr Lukic
is specifically
referred to in eight surveys as follows:
(a) One patient said that Dr Lukic and her nursing colleagues were amazing and
genuinely cared about their patients.
(b) Another patient complained that the couple had been waiting an hour before
seeing the doctor.
(c) Another patient stated that Dr Lukic was “very very angry with
patients and her behaviour is so strange and I don’t
want to see her again
in my life!! She’s a monster!!”.
(d) Another patient described Dr Lukic as “absolutely terrifying”.
(e) Another patient advised that they would not recommend Dr Lukic at all as she
was “rude, impersonal, had no idea about us
as patients, and seemed to
simply rush us out the door.”
(f) Another patient said that Dr Lukic “traumatised me – clinic did
nothing about it”.
(g) Finally, a patient commented that whilst it was nice to have bulk-billed
IVF, the waiting was not acceptable, “over an
hour in EVERY TIME!! Dr L is
ALWAYS LATE FFS!! She handwrites notes ever heard of a pc?!?”.
Simpson asked Ms Jayamaha for records of the social media reviews referred to in
her incident report. Mr Simpson also sought advice
from the Head of People and
Employment Law, Corporate at Primary Health Care, Kit Yap.
11 April 2018, Mr Yap suggested either an ”informal” or
“formal” approach for “dealing with Julie’s
behavioural
issues which are negatively affecting staff and patients”. The
“informal” approach was to have a discussion
with Dr Lukic in
relation to the negative feedback received about her from patients and staff. Mr
Yap also outlined the “formal”
approach, which was to set out these
matters in a letter, giving Dr Lukic 14 days in which to remedy the breach or
risk termination
of the contract with the plaintiff. The letter would also
include an undertaking requiring that Dr Lukic do certain things, for example,
cease shouting at staff or otherwise treating them in an inappropriate manner.
Whilst the defendant was considered to have grounds
to immediately take the
“formal” approach, Mr Yap noted that commercial concerns –
“for example, the lack
of action taken by previous management”
– may persuade Mr Simpson to take the “informal” approach.
reviews on RateMDs in respect of Dr Lukic were printed on 12 April 2018. Mr
Simpson read the reviews for Dr Lukic and also for
Primary IVF, to make sure
that he had proper context for the reviews.
Simpson reviewed historical information relating to Dr Lukic, reading all the
information that was held by the business concerning
relating to the doctor. This included the log of complaints commenced in July
2015: see [
]. He specifically
considered the letter of 7 April 2015 (which set out various instances of
conduct in August and November 2014,
]), the patient complaint of 28 September 2015 (see
]), Ms Wong’s
file notes of meetings with Dr Lukic on 30 September 2015 (see [
]) and the complaint of
August 2017 (see [
]). Where some of the complaints pre-dated his
employment at Primary IVF, Mr Simpson spoke to personnel, including
Ms Jayamaha and
Dr McDonald, and sought to verify the historical
complaints. Based on what was conveyed to him, Mr Simpson believed that the
had a proper factual basis.
Simpson conferred with Mr Beattie. Mr Simpson conveyed that his view was that
there was substance in the complaints. (Mr Beattie
relied on Mr Simpson in that
regard.) Mr Beattie discussed how best Dr Lukic might be convinced to change her
behaviour such that
the complaints would cease. Mr Simpson was of the view that
an “informal” approach should be adopted, seeking a verbal
acknowledgement and acceptance from Dr Lukic that her behaviour was not meeting
her contractual commitments, together with a commitment
to remedy the issues
raised. They agreed to take the “informal” approach.
12 April 2018, another patient made a complaint in respect of Dr Lukic, who
was said to have “berated” the patient
for not telling her that her
husband was on testosterone, “Dr Lukic used harsh tone and scolded patient
and called the patient’s
endocrinologist an ‘idiot’ ...
Patient started crying ... The recovery nurse was left to
console/comfort”. Dr Lukic
did speak to the patient after the incident in
a much calmer way.
Lukic recalled this incident but denied using a harsh tone towards the patient
or scolding her husband. Dr Lukic did not recall
calling the husband an idiot
and said that she would not have done so as it would have been unprofessional
and she always maintained
a professional relationship with her patients and
their partners.
13 April 2018, Primary Health Care received another complaint about
Dr Lukic from a GP, whose patient had been treated by Dr Lukic.
patient claimed that Dr Lukic had been “angry and verbal[ly] abusive to
both partners since the start”. The treatment
was said to have been
inappropriate by the subsequent treating specialist. The GP emailed, “If
substantiated, the behaviour
and management are completely unacceptable, grounds
for severe professional misconduct and possibly even deregistration. It also
presents as a significant risk [to] the reputational status of the Centre. ...
The doctor is highly likely to require counselling
and possibly mental health
intervention.”
Simpson immediately investigated the complaint and was informed by a clinician
that Dr Lukic’s treatment of the patient “look[s]
standard.” Mr Simpson reported to Mr Beattie. Mr Beattie said the
complaint from the GP was significant to him, as GPs
often referred their
patients to Primary IVF. Whilst the GP’s complaints were broadly
consistent with the complaints about
Dr Lukic of which Mr Beattie was aware, the
GP’s email added a further level of seriousness to the complaint:
behaviour was negatively affecting the perception of
general practitioners, who provided important referral work for Primary IVF.
Lukic said she did not recall the patient or know the GP and the complaint was
never raised with her. Dr Lukic considered the GP’s
email was slanderous.
Dr Lukic denied becoming angry or abusive with this patient, “I’m
never verbally abusive to any
of my patients.” Dr Lukic said
This was investigated, looked into and totally exonerated
This was a significant over-statement by the doctor. When asked what led her to
this conclusion, Dr Lukic said “Because
... well I’m still working,
there was no [H]CCC complaint, ... there was no medical legal issue and no one
in the clinic actually
accused me that I used the inappropriate hormones. ... So
whoever this person is making these claims against me, is ... slanderous.”
now, Mr Simpson said he had “very concerning comments” from
anonymous patient surveys, “very concerning comments”
from RateMDs,
details of a staff incident that took place less than a week ago and two
concerning complaints that he received on
12 and 13 April 2018. What the
patients had said in some of these materials suggested that the way in which Dr
Lukic provided care
was “entirely inappropriate at times”. Mr
Simpson considered that he had a reasonable basis to go and speak to Dr Lukic
that I had an obligation as the CEO of the company
based on the information
I’ve just gone through to have a meaningful conversation with
Dr Lukic about that.”
16 April 2018, Mr Simpson telephoned Dr Lukic and informed her that a meeting
had been arranged the next day in her rooms, where
he would be joined by Mr
Beattie. Also on 16 April 2018, Primary Health Care’s in-house counsel
provided Mr Simpson and Mr
Beattie with draft talking points for the meeting.
Whilst in-house counsel suggested that Mr Simpson review the negative feedback
and comments collated, it was not recommended that Dr Lukic be provided
with the written survey results or documents in respect of
the most recent
complaint “as the survey contains feedback also adverse to [the defendant]
and the emails disclose individuals
and [Dr Lukic] may well retaliate against
those individuals.” In-house counsel further suggested that screen shots
website should only be provided if Dr Lukic asked for it, and if her
demeanour was considered appropriate.
Health Care’s in-house counsel also provided a draft notice of serious
breaches. The notice itemised the following instances
of negative feedback from
patients, patient complaints and staff complaints:
(a) patient comments from the feedback surveys;
(b) negative reviews on RateMDs from October 2017 on;
(c) the patient complaint made on 13 April 2018; and
(d) staff complaints of inappropriate and disrespectful conduct including
repeatedly yelling at staff members (including regarding
the levels of initial
consultations being provided to Dr Lukic), threatening staff (including stating
that if one staff member could
not “get it together [they] might be better
off going somewhere else”) and physically slamming her hand down to pick
up her next patient in front of staff and the public while in reception.
draft letter repeatedly stated that Primary Health Care had recently become
aware of these matters. Where all matters referred
to in the letter post-dated
the change of management, I infer from the careful wording of the letter that
the defendant was concerned
to address any suggestion that it should have taken
action before and could not now do so.
to the letter was an undertaking to be given by Dr Lukic, acknowledging that she
had acted in the manner described in the
notice and, in doing so, had acted in
breach of the plaintiff and her obligations under the Sale Deed and Services
Deed. It was proposed
that the doctor, on behalf of herself and the plaintiff,
would undertake that she would not engage in the conduct again or in any
towards staff or patients which, in the reasonable opinion of the defendant, was
inappropriate or unprofessional. Further:
(emphasis added)
On behalf of myself and the [plaintiff], I acknowledge that
if I act in
contravention of this undertaking, or if another complaint or instance of
negative feedback is received, then
a. the [defendant] will ... be
entitled to immediately
terminate the Sale Deed and Services Deed without further notice to me
17 April 2018, Mr Simpson amended the talking points and prepared a
‘snapshot’ of the patient feedback surveys to share
with Dr Lukic.
In-house counsel approved the amendments and the snapshot, save that the
patient’s comment, “Dr Lukic
traumatised me – clinic did
nothing about it”, should be shortened to refer only to “Dr Lukic
traumatised me”.
In-house counsel advised that this reduced the risk that
Dr Lukic would argue that Primary IVF knew about, and in some way condoned
accepted, her behaviour. Mr Simpson actioned that advice.
17 April 2018, Mr Simpson and Mr Beattie met with Dr Lukic in her rooms. There
was considerable focus on what was said by the defendant’s
representatives
at the meeting with Dr Lukic on 17 April 2018 because, in the alternative, the
defendant contended that it was entitled
to terminate the Sale Deed under cl
9.2(a). This required the defendant to give a notice “calling for that
[serious] breach
to be remedied”.
Simpson said the meeting took about one hour. During the meeting, he closely
followed the talking points. He looked back to the
talking points for reference
while he was talking. Mr Simpson also brought a bundle of reference material,
including patient comments
and feedback, to show Dr Lukic during the meeting. Mr
Beattie recalled that Mr Simpson was very conscientious and well-briefed and
spoke consistently with the talking points. Mr Beattie said that Mr Simpson
spoke cautiously.
Lukic said the meeting lasted for only 15 to 20 minutes. Dr Lukic did not take
notes of the meeting but said that the meeting "was
emblazoned on my mind
because I had never been subjected to anything like that in my life."
Dr Lukic denied Mr Simpson’s version
of the conversation at this
reasons earlier given, I have generally preferred Mr Simpson’s evidence as
to what occurred. Mr Simpson had spent some time
preparing for the meeting,
including liaising with in-house counsel in respect of talking points. Mr
Simpson clearly anticipated
that this may be an uncomfortable and potentially
volatile conversation. In the circumstances, it is likely that Mr Simpson
the talking points.
talking points contained a number of options, depending on how the meeting
unfolded. Having regard to the witnesses’ recall
as to how the meeting
progressed, and using the talking points as a guide, it is likely that Mr
Simpson said the following: (Mr Simpson’s
handwriting on the talking
points is underlined)
“2. As you’re aware, the purpose of this meeting is
to share with you feedback we have received from a number of patients
employees regarding your conduct towards them and our serious concerns arising
from that feedback.
5 As I indicated yesterday when we spoke, that there have been
a number of complaints as well as negative feedback received about
you from both
patients and staff members of the Company.
6 Various negative comments from patients through feedback
forms and public forums describe your conduct towards them and general
manner as consistently ‘rude’, ‘hostile’,
‘impersonal’, ‘angry’ and lacking
in any empathy.
7. [If Julie asks for details:] I won’t go through each
and every comment, however, to give you an idea, some examples of
the written
Simpson gave Dr Lukic the ‘snapshot’, which extracted the following
comments from the patient feedback surveys on a
single page:
“Primary IVF Patient Feedback Survey – comments
Would not recommend Dr Lukic at all. She is rude, impersonal, had no
idea about us as patients, and seemed to simple rush us out the
‘I’ve been visited by Dr Julie Lukic and she is very very angry
with patients and her behavous
is so strange and I don’t want
to see her again in my life!! She’s a monster!!’
‘Dr Lukic traumatised me ...’
‘Julie is terrifying’
preparing this document, Mr Simpson said that he selected the worst examples
from the surveys, as they were relevant to the conversation
that he wanted to
have with the doctor that day. Dr Lukic was invited to respond “but we
didn’t delve into detail about
specific individual comments.” He
focussed on the behaviour that led to the comments rather than the comments
themselves. Mr
Simpson said that Dr Lukic rejected the substance and validity of
the complaints and was dismissive.
Lukic agreed that Mr Simpson shared with her various examples of negative
did not know the patients
who had made the complaints, as they were not named. Even so, the doctor did not
believe that there was
any substance in the complaints, “when you work
with patients with infertility issues you are often dealing with highly
patients who in some cases have high expectations that are not capable
of being met. When those expectations are not met, the patient
can become upset
and often the doctor becomes the focus of their anger and frustration.”
The doctor also responded that, as
Primary IVF was unique in offering a fully
Medicare-funded service, some patients felt entitled to an IVF cycle regardless
medical conditions, weight or chances of success. Patients could become
frustrated and emotional when they were told that they could
not have the
treatment they wanted because they were overweight or were too old. But
Dr Lukic said that she did not abuse patients.
to Dr Lukic, Mr Simpson replied “Nevertheless, I don’t want to hear
any more complaints.” Dr Lukic responded
that it was unreasonable to
expect that, as all staff had had complaints, “you can’t run an IVF
clinic of this nature
without it happening.” Dr Lukic pointed out
that she had not had any medico-legal issues regarding the treatment of any of
her patients for more than four years, even though she had seen hundreds of
patients. Dr Lukic had received many compliments and
thanks from patients over
Simpson broadly agreed with Dr Lukic’s evidence of her response to the
patient complaints. But Mr Simpson then said to Dr
Lukic that the overwhelming
number of complaints received, where a doctor was identified as being the
subject of the complaint,
were about her
Simpson also showed the doctor printed copies of the Primary IVF feedback
surveys and explained that her conduct was said to be
rude, hostile, impersonal,
angry and lacking in empathy. Mr Simpson said “I do recall actually
showing the surveys just so
that Dr Lukic could physically see what I was
referencing”. Dr Lukic denied that Mr Simpson showed her the surveys.
have preferred Mr Simpson’s evidence, I find that he did.
Lukic said she also told Mr Simpson and Mr Beattie of the various problems being
experienced at Primary IVF due to poor practice
management. She considered that
this was a cause of patient dissatisfaction. Mr Simpson said that he did not
want to hear about those
matters. Dr Lukic said that Mr Beattie also
“wouldn’t listen to anything I tried to say.”
Simpson and Mr Beattie agreed with this. Mr Simpson said that Dr Lukic wanted to
talk about a number of issues with the management
of Primary IVF, but he
focussed on the specific behavioural concerns that he had come to discuss,
“I had a very deliberate
objective in mind for that meeting, and getting
into a discussion about operational matters I would consider a distraction from
objective.” Mr Beattie recalled that Dr Lukic was dismissive and
wanted to talk about other things such as staff. Mr Beattie
said this was
something of a distraction as it was not the point of the meeting, which was
more about her behaviour.
talking points continued: (notes emphasised by Mr Simpson’s handwriting
are underlined)
“11. The Company has also recently become aware of a
number of further negative comments posted over the last few months
of the public on the website ‘RateMDs’ regarding your behaviour
towards patients. These comments are similar
in nature to the written feedback
received from the anonymous Company survey and raises to the Company an alarming
pattern of inappropriate
and unprofessional behaviour from you towards
12. [If Julie wants details, and ONLY if you consider it
appropriate based on Julie’s reactions and demeanour, you may wish
her the screenshots. Alternative 1:] Again, I don’t wish to go into
chapter and verse today, but for ease I have a
screenshot of the relevant
webpage which sets out these comments.”
Simpson recalled showing Dr Lukic screenshots from the RateMDs reviews. Mr
Simpson agreed that he did not focus on favourable reviews,
“It was about
focussing in on the behaviour and the comments that suggested there was some
very concerning things that were
probably more important than talking about the
favourable reviews.”
Lukic denied that Mr Simpson showed her screen shots from the RateMDs website.
Dr Lukic said, “Mr Simpson came in and accused
me of these things,
and when I asked for the proof and the evidence, I was not shown any proof or
evidence. I was not given any
names. I was not given any numbers. ... I can
categorically tell you yes, I did not see these things.”
Mr Simpson appears to have been having some difficulty persuading Dr Lukic
of the seriousness of the matters he raised, as opposed
to the problems with the
management of Primary IVF which Dr Lukic wanted to talk about, Mr Simpson may
well have shown Dr Lukic the
printout of the RateMDs reviews. Where I have
generally preferred his evidence, I accept that he did, notwithstanding Dr
emphatic evidence to the contrary.
talking points continued:
“14. As recently as last week the Company received a
report of you being angry and verbally abusive towards a patient and
15. Furthermore, the Company has also received numerous
complaints and reports from its staff that on multiple occasions you have
shouted at them or otherwise verbally abused them in the presence of patients
and other staff members.”
Simpson recalled that, at this point, Dr Lukic went silent. Dr Lukic agreed that
Mr Simpson may have discussed a complaint made
by a staff member “but he
did not show me any official complaint”. Dr Lukic also said that Mr
Simpson “raised the
issue of m[e] being loud in the corridors.”
talking points continued:
“16. In the Company’s opinions, this conduct as
I’ve described to you not only adversely affects the reputation
business of the Company, it also creates a risk to the health and safety of its
staff members and of others including patients.
17. As such, this type of conduct by you towards patients and
staff members is entirely unacceptable and has to stop immediately.
18. The Company hereby puts you on notice that if any and all
inappropriate or unprofessional conduct by you towards patients and
members does not cease immediately, the Company will have no alternative but to
take more formal action per the deeds it has
entered into with you and your
Consistently
with the talking points, Mr Simpson said he told Dr Lukic that, in the
company’s opinion, the conduct not only
adversely affected the reputation
and business of the company, but also created a risk to the health and safety of
its staff members
and of others including patients. Her conduct towards patients
and staff was not acceptable and had to stop immediately. If her conduct
stop, the company would be required to take more formal action against her under
its contract with her. He did not recall
making any reference to rectifying any
Beattie’s recollection of this meeting was not strong. Mr Beattie did not
recall whether a statement was made at the meeting
that notice was being given
under the deeds.
Mr Beattie recalled that Mr Simpson said there was
a real problem that needed to stop, as it was having a negative impact on
and staff. But if things did not improve, then Dr Lukic was told
that further steps would be taken by Primary Health Care, although
recall any discussion about what those further steps might be.
this, Dr Lukic said that it was not clear that she was said to be in breach of
anything “it was just to inform me what
was being written.” Dr Lukic
denied that she was told that the business had serious concerns about her
conduct. Nor did Mr
Simpson accuse her of damaging the reputation of the
business. Nor was it said that, if her conduct did not improve, then further
steps would be taken by the defendant. No formal warning was provided.
Lukic said, “the meeting was to just accuse me of many things, most of it
anonymous, nothing specifically ‑ no specific
complaint, ...
nothing about how they were going to investigate this or prove this or who these
people are. So at the end of the
meeting, there was nothing to suggest that ...
it was causing that kind of problem.” Dr Lukic added, “I’ve
seen this kind of horrifyingly personal attacks on doctors in any of the
clinics I’ve worked [in] both here and in Australia
against me or anybody
else.” Dr Lukic said the complaints were “nothing more than
slanderous trolling ... In my whole
career I think I’ve only had two
[H]CCC complaints, and both were cleared.” Further, “I was accused
and tried and
judged on very little.”
talking points continued:
19. Scott and I need verbal assurances from you today that you
acknowledge the conduct described and that you will take all steps
necessary to
rectify it moving forward.
20. [If Julie denies the conduct:] Julie, from the volume of
inappropriate and unprofessional behaviour is not just a one off in an otherwise
unblemished record. Given this, I find it very
difficult to believe you when you
deny that you have engaged in any conduct th[a]t is ’rude’,
‘impersonal’, and ‘angry’
behaviour towards both patients and staff.
22. [If Julie mentions personal issues as justification for the
behaviour:] I understand you may have some personal and financial
issues going
on at the moment. However this is no way excuses your conduct. There are no
circumstances in which it would ever be
appropriate for you to behave
inappropriately or unprofessionally towards patients and staff members.”
Simpson said that Dr Lukic’s response during the meeting was “a case
of denial, there was a case of deflection. Then
there was an acceptance, and
then, finally an acknowledgement.” Further, “Dr Lukic did admit
there was substance to some
of those complaints by the end of the meeting and
gave Mr Beattie and I an undertaking that she would address that. ... There
an acknowledgement from her to address her behaviour at the end of that
meeting.” Given this, Mr Simpson decided not to provide
the notice of
serious breaches that he had brought to the meeting, nor the proposed
undertaking. Mr Simpson agreed that he did not
refer to the letter, although the
contents of the letter “included components of the conversation that took
recalled that Dr Lukic was jumping between topics and was defensive. The doctor
talked about personal issues. His impression
was that Dr Lukic sought to
deflect the concerns which Mr Simpson had raised. At some point, however, Dr
Lukic said that she would
take on board the matters that Mr Simpson had
raised. Mr Beattie said “we came away hoping, I guess, that she’d
enough, thought enough about it to change some behaviour. ... she indicated
she would take it on board ... so we sort of [went] away
thinking, ‘okay,
well we’re going to give that a go.’” But Mr Beattie did not
believe that Dr Lukic agreed
with any of the complaints.
Lukic agreed that Mr Simpson made it clear to her that the organisation expected
her behaviour to improve going forward. The doctor
agreed that she undertook to
improve her behaviour. Dr Lukic said, “I didn’t want see this happen
anymore ... I did try”.
The doctor said “I agreed to improve my
behaviour, because it was the way to move forward from this thing.” Dr
also said that Mr Simpson set her a target of zero complaints “which
was setting me up for failure because there wasn’t
a doctor in that clinic
that hadn’t received complaints. ... the clinic was
notoriously
receiving complaints
.” (Again, this was something of an
over-statement).
to an email from Mr Simpson to Mr Yap sent two months’ after this meeting,
Mr Simpson indicated to Dr Lukic, using
the examples referred to in the draft
breach notice, that “she was in breach of her obligations”.
(Mr Simpson clarified
in his affidavit that he had actually referred Dr
Lukic to the examples listed in the ‘snapshop’, rather than the
notice.) Further, Dr Lukic “did provide some acknowledgement
of these incidents / behaviour hence she was not asked to formally
legal issue – to which I will return – is whether the defendant gave
a notice to Dr Lukic at the meeting in April
2018 which conformed with the
requirements of cl 9.2(a), in particular, calling for a serious breach to be
remedied. Where Mr Simpson
did not give Dr Lukic the letter giving notice of
serious breaches and accompanying draft undertaking, the factual issue is what
Mr Simpson and Mr Beattie said. There are three evidentiary sources:
contemporaneous records; affidavits by the participants more
than five years
later, and cross-examination of the participants more than seven years later.
The contemporaneous documents are likely
to give the most accurate indication of
what was said, being both the talking points prepared for the meeting and
Mr Simpson’s
email to Mr Yap immediately after the meeting.
is clear that this was an important meeting. Mr Beattie attended the meeting to
convey his concern at the Primary Health Care executive
level about the
complaints that had been made about her. I expect that Mr Beattie’s
attendance would have signalled to Dr Lukic
that the subject of the meeting
was serious.
is also clear from the evidence of all participants that Dr Lukic did not
readily accept what Mr Simpson was telling her. Where
the object of the meeting
was not accomplished at the outset, or in its early stages, it is likely that Mr
Simpson continued to progress
through the talking points. This would have been
necessary to achieve the purpose of the meeting, for which purpose Mr Beattie
travelled from head office to the George Street clinic.
is apparent from Mr Simpson’s contemporaneous email to Mr Yap that he
indicated to the doctor that “she was in breach
of her obligations”.
Further, Dr Lukic’s recollection that Mr Simpson said he did not want
to hear any more complaints,
or set her a target of zero complaints was, I
think, a recollection of Mr Simpson having sought an undertaking from the doctor
the lines of the draft undertaking attached to the notice of serious
breaches. As mentioned, the draft undertaking included an acknowledgement
“if another complaint or instance of negative feedback is received”
then the defendant was entitled to terminate
the Sale Deed and Services Deed
without further notice. This suggests that Mr Simpson got to the end of the
talking points and, further
still, conveyed the substance of the draft
undertaking.
I have generally preferred Mr Simpson’s evidence of what was said to that
of Dr Lukic, and having regard to the talking
points and the later email from Mr
Simpson to Mr Yap, I find that Mr Simpson did tell Dr Lukic that the defendant
considered her
to be in breach of the contracts, given her behaviours about
which patients and staff had complained. Further, he gave notice to
Dr Lukic in
accordance with the talking points, that is, “if any and all inappropriate
or unprofessional conduct by you towards
patients and staff members does not
cease immediately, the Company will have no alternative but to take more formal
action per the
deeds it has entered into with you and your company.”
After the warning
same day as the warning was given, a post was made on Instagram suggesting that
“Dr L was horrible. Be prepared she made
me feel shit about myself. Even
though at this point it was #malefactorhubby ... she said I was too overweight
... I said I have
struggled to lose weight. ... She ROLLED HER EYES!! She told
me I should try starving myself!!” On returning after having lost
and when eating only one meal a day, the doctor said, “what is your one
meal McDonalds??”.
Simpson agreed that there was a GP at the Primary IVF practice called
Dr Lenehan and the reference to “Dr L” could
have been to her,
“I think you can safely assume” that the reference was to Dr Lukic.
He did not ask Dr Lukic whether
the complaint referred to the GP. Dr Lukic did
not know who the patient was that made this complaint but said she had never
a patient that they should try starving themselves nor asked whether their
one meal of the day was McDonalds.
27 April 2018, a review was posted on RateMDs in respect of Dr Lukic,
noting that a couple had had “such an unpleasant experience
with her. She
was just awful. For what should be a stress free and lovely process has turned
into a upset, crying and angry situation.”
weeks after the warning, on 9 May 2018, there was an incident between Dr Lukic
and a nurse. Mr Ayres met with Dr Lukic, who
said that the nurse’s
training was inadequate, the nurse gave her “attitude” and she
reacted. Mr Ayres emailed
Nurst Unit Manager Karina Bosetti and Ms Raggio
advising, “I would be confident [that the nurse’s] communication of
comments made are correct. I think [this] matter needs to be escalated to
[Mr Simpson]”.
Raggio provided Mr Ayres with further details of the incident, having spoken to
the nurse and Dr Lukic at length. The nurse was
extremely upset and sobbing,
stating that she had never been treated like that by anyone else ever in her
whole working life. The
nurse said that she had tried very hard to please
Dr Lukic and was upset that the doctor thought she was disrespectful and
uninterested
in what she had to say as the opposite was true, “[the nurse]
feels constantly belittled and is struggling with her confidence
reported that she had advised Dr Lukic that her actions with nurses was
degrading their confidence and contributing to their
mistakes; it was for Ms
Raggio to address any gaps in training. Ms Raggio advised Mr Ayres that Dr Lukic
“must develop insight
into her behaviours and it needs to be shown that
steps have been taken by Primary to do this – it’s risk management
if nothing else.”
to Ms Raggio’s later note to Mr Simpson on this incident, Dr Lukic
was known to be “hard on nurses that were
learning”. Ms Raggio had
been directed to always sit with this particular nurse and another staff member
that had been working
in the clinic for 14 months, when they went through
results with Dr Lukic. During such sessions, Ms Raggio observed that Dr Lukic
would ask the nurses “multiple questions that she knows they will probably
not know the answer to. When they don’t know
the answer she becomes
aggressive and angry and asks them more difficult questions until they start to
become anxious until it gets
to the point that the communication has broken
this occasion, the tension was rising but Ms Raggio had to leave the room for a
short time and, on her return, Dr Lukic was yelling
at the nurse “how dare
you be so disrespectful, I have never seen a nurse so disrespectful, you are
just like ... nurse!”.
Ms Raggio advised, “From that moment on
I was instructed not to let this doctor be alone with ... two [particular]
Lukic said she did not abuse the nurse in any way and Ms Raggio’s
description of the incident was false. After the matter
with raised with her,
Dr Lukic said she refused to have the nurse in her office without someone
else present and left her office
door open so that there were no allegations of
misconduct. Dr Lukic regarded Ms Raggio’s description of the incident as
“slanderous
to me as a reputable senior physician ... And if you’re
looking for more things that could damage ... an IVF clinic, it’s
Lukic said the issue which led to this incident was that the nurse had missed a
severe case of ovarian hyperstimulation. This complication
can lead to death.
The nurse did not check with Dr Lukic before sending the patient away.
Dr Lukic then treated the patient for ovarian
hyperstimulation when she
returned to the clinic four days later. The doctor said, “she’s made
up ... this whole story
that I attacked her ... when no one was looking. I
can’t fight this kind of stuff ... and I was not even privy to any of this
until afterwards”. Dr Lukic added, “It's all deflected that it's all
me, me, me and the act ‑ and it's totally
the ‑ the bigger issue of the fact that we had a lot of
inexperienced, untrained staff in the clinic at that time.”
21 May 2018, a one-star review of Dr Lukic was posted on RateMDs,
“Don’t waste your time and money with Dr Lukic. I
had a horrible
experience ... she was so rude and aggressive”. The next day, a one-star
review was also posted, “I agree
with ALL reviewers who have marked 1
20 June 2018, Mr Simpson emailed Primary IVF clinicians, advising of changes in
the management structure of the fertility clinics,
including by the introduction
of an IVF Operations Manager in each clinic and the appointment of clinical
directors. Dr Lukic ‘replied
all’ with some strongly worded
criticisms of the delays being experienced by patients in getting a nursing
appointment. Dr
Lukic said she inadvertently selected “reply all”,
rather than replying to Mr Simpson only.
colleague privately endorsed Dr Lukic’s comments. Dr McDonald also agreed
with Dr Lukic’s observation, asking Mr Simpson
whether he had any ideas as
to how to reduce the bottleneck at nurse interview level. Mr Beattie was less
impressed, asking Mr Simpson
whether he wanted Mr Beattie to chastise
Dr Lukic and suggest that “in the context of a very positive email to
the business,
having her reply all with her comments is simply not the way it
should be done”. In cross-examination, Mr Beattie said that
Dr Lukic had a
right to raise these points “probably, obviously, more directly with
us.” Mr Beattie said, however, that
he did not then form the view that the
plaintiff’s contract should be terminated at that point.
Simpson said he was disappointed to receive the ‘reply all’ email.
He accepted that the closure of the Darlinghurst
clinic, which turned out to be
longer than expected, caused problems, albeit Dr Lukic’s email was
“probably slightly
dramatic”. But Mr Simpson said the ‘reply
all’ email had no bearing on the decision to terminate, relative to the
other matters he was confronted with.
next day, on 21 June 2018, Mr Simpson emailed Mr Beattie and general counsel,
Yvette Cacchia, advising that he had spent time
reflecting on the matter
overnight. He had formed the view that it was time to end the association with
Dr Lukic. (Mr Simpson said
the fact that he had reflected on the matter
overnight indicated that he considered the magnitude of that decision.) He
disagreed with the suggestion, repeatedly put, that the ‘reply
all’ email prompted the termination. I accept Mr Simpson’s
in this regard. Further, Mr Simpson emailed:
“She has a long history of intimidating staff that until recently has gone
unchecked and I face the prospect of losing my Nurse
Manager and a number of her
team in Sydney who are clearly intimidated by her.”
10.30 am, Mr Beattie, Mr Simpson and Ms Cacchia met for some 30 minutes to
agree on a course of action in relation to Dr Lukic.
According to Mr
Simpson’s email sent to Mr Yap shortly after the meeting, they formed the
view that Dr Lukic was in breach
of her contract for repeated incidents of
poor behaviour and conduct over an extended period of time and proposed to
terminate her
the meeting, the contracts with the plaintiff were collated and the financial
impact of the termination was assessed. Mr Beattie
said that they were weighing
up the financial implications for Primary Health Care of terminating the
contracts with Dr Lukic. Mr
Simpson emailed Mr Yap, advising that it was
proposed to conduct a face to face meeting with Dr Lukic the following week to
her of the decision to terminate; his assistance was sought to prepare
the necessary documentation. Mr Simpson advised Mr Yap that
further problems had
continued since the meeting on 17 April 2018, with “more recent negative
customer feedback ... further
incidents involving intimidation of staff”
and Dr Lukic’s email to all clinicians and staff which was said to be
inappropriate”.
22 June 2018, Ms Raggio provided further information at the request of
Mr Simpson. In a detailed note, Ms Raggio expressed concern
Lukic’s treatment of nursing staff, in particular, new and junior staff.
Dr Lukic was said to consistently berate
and complain about the abilities of
nursing staff, saying things like “you are non-existent to me” and
out of my face”. Further:
“Attacks by this individual come without warning, are extremely aggressive
and usually contain a negative comment that is targeted
at the individual.
After discussion with the team; each one regaled stories of being reduced to
tears on numerous occasions, not wanting to come to
work for fear of reprisals
and being made to feel like they do not know anything.
... This consistent behaviour by the specialist has led them to feeling anxious
to approach her and they report feeling nervous about
discussing results and
discussing patients.
The nurses, including myself, feel that they are in devil if you do or don't
cycle wherein if they ask the specialist about a patient
they are berated and if
they don't ask the Dr about a patient they are also berated.
The nurses report that the difficulty for them has been that there is a general
acceptance that these behaviours are just a part
of the culture. Having worked
in other organisations with zero tolerance for these behaviours it is
disappointing to them that, seemingly
no action has been taken to this point.
The nurses and I believe that the expectation that we modify our behaviour in
order to not upset this perpetrator seems wrong.
... these behaviours are very often exhibited when there is no other staff
member in around, so appear quite calculated.”
Raggio acknowledged that Dr Lukic did, on occasion, apologise to staff but did
not change her behaviour. Further, the doctor would
explain that her behaviour
was “for their own good” and only “because they care”.
The nurses’ view
was that there had been a culture of acceptance of this
behaviour to that point. Primary Health Care’s in-house counsel sought
further details from Ms Raggio, which were duly provided on 24 June 2018.
25 June 2018, Mr Simpson met with Ms Jayamaha to discuss a proposed course of
action with Dr Lukic. There were a number of decisions
to be made concerning
patient consent, billings and guidance to be given to clinicians and staff. Mr
Beattie said there were not
many IVF specialists who were capable of doing the
role or interested in doing the role in a bulk-billing practice, “So it
was a consideration as to what we would do to continue the service or keep the
service being provided at the level that it was, if
she was to stop working with
26 June 2018, Mr Simpson emailed Mr Yap, suggesting that it was necessary to
include Dr McDonald ahead of the meeting with Dr Lukic.
They needed to explain
the rationale for the decision to terminate Dr Lukic’s contract and
involve Dr McDonald in the decision
making as to what would happen after Dr
Lukic’s departure. Mr Simpson requested a meeting with Mr Yap later that
week to clarify
the process and timelines, “I don’t want to delay
this too long but I am conscious of the fact that we need to be prepared
manage any fall-out which will require some preparation.” That is,
although it had been initially planned to terminate the
plaintiff’s
contract in the course of that week, logistical considerations delayed matters
for, as will be seen, six weeks.
on 26 June 2018, Ms Raggio provided Mr Simpson with a letter of complaint
received that day, with a patient asking to change
her treating specialist from
Dr Lukic to another doctor. The patient complained:
“I have found Dr Lukic to be completely unprofessional in her approach to
managing her appointments, conducting consultations
and providing professional
advice and guidance. In almost every instance, Dr Lukic has either arrived late
for my appointments or
taken lunch at the exact time of my appointment. ...
During consultations she appears disinterested and disengaged, which often
results in her providing incomplete, ad hoc or misinformation.
... the total lack of empathy and compassion ... has left me emotionally
distressed and wondering how I can trust this person to
provide truthful and
well thought out treatment plans.”
29 June 2018, Mr Simpson, Mr Beattie, Ms Cacchia, Mr Yap and in-house counsel
met to discuss the proposed decision to terminate
the plaintiff’s
contract. On 6 July 2018, preparation continued. Primary Health Care calculated
Dr Lukic’s earnings for
the past two years, being $1,245,188 for the 2017
financial year and $1,193,821 for the 2018 financial year. A meeting was held to
“regroup” and finalise the approach, including documentation,
financial settlement and a meeting plan. Primary Health
Care prepared projected
earnings for the remainder of the plaintiff’s contract, based on the past
48 weeks (excluding when
the laboratory was closed). The projected loss of
income to Primary Health Care was some $6.8 million, while the estimated loss of
earnings to Dr Lukic was some $3.8 million.
late July 2018, the defendant compiled patient feedback on Dr Lukic from Primary
IVF’s customer feedback surveys, on-line
reviews and patient letters. Mr
Simpson saw that additional adverse reviews had been added since
April 2018.
Friday, 3 August 2018, Mr Simpson met with Dr McDonald, Ms Jayamaha and Mr
Beattie to discuss the termination of Dr Lukic. It was
proposed to meet with Dr
Lukic’s colleagues on Wednesday, 8 August 2018, to advise them of the
proposed course of action. It
was then proposed to call Dr Lukic to request
a meeting with her the following morning and, on 9 August 2018, to meet with Dr
and a support person.
is convenient to set out Dr McDonald’s observations of Dr Lukic. Her
evidence was relevant on the alternative case, to establish
a serious breach of
the plaintiff’s obligation to procure that Dr Lukic acted “in a
harmonious way with the other practitioners
and staff”: cl 4.2(c),
Sale Deed; cl 5.3(c) Services Deed. The defendant did not have the benefit of Dr
McDonald’s evidence
when forming any opinion under cl 9.2(b).
Dr McDonald was a fair witness.
McDonald and Dr Lukic had adjoining rooms at the George Street clinic. Two days
a week, the doctors were both in their rooms. On
other days, they alternated at
the Darlinghurst day surgery. Dr McDonald observed that Dr Lukic frequently
arrived late to work.
Dr McDonald saw that Dr Lukic’s patients
were often left waiting in the waiting room for long periods of time; the
often looked stressed and irritated. Dr Lukic denied this and said she
was “rarely late”.
McDonald said she observed Dr Lukic being irritable and cranky at least once a
week, raising her voice at staff or storming out
of the clinic and leaving her
patients waiting in the waiting room. These incidents became more frequent and
more intense. Dr McDonald
saw Mr Ayres “pacify” Dr Lukic on
occasion, speaking calmly to her, removing her from the environment and
sometimes taking
her away for coffee. Dr McDonald also said she heard raised
voices at times, “
I did hear Julie shout at people, on occasion. ... it
was fairly regular. A couple of times a week
.” This included Dr Lukic
shouting at nursing and administration staff, “I heard it, witnessed it
directly.” Dr
Lukic denied this.
to Dr McDonald, staff encountered difficulty working with Dr Lukic, who often
became visibly and / or audibly frustrated
when her preferences were not adhered
to. Dr McDonald was told by nursing staff, anaesthetic staff and laboratory
staff at the Darlinghurst
day surgery from time to time that they wanted to
avoid being in an operating room with Dr Lukic as she would frequently become
and raise her voice at them. Dr McDonald did not see this for herself, as
the doctors worked in the day surgery on alternate days.
McDonald noticed a deterioration in Dr Lukic’s behaviour and level of
personal care in 2018. Dr Lukic looked dishevelled
in her appearance and
clothing at times and often short-tempered. Dr Lukic denied that she was
dishevelled but agreed that she occasionally
expressed her frustration to
Dr McDonald about what was occurring at Primary IVF, in an attempt to
improve matters.
Termination
Sunday, 5 August 2018, Mr Simpson circulated some documents to Mr Beattie
and Mr Yap for input in respect of “the proposed
separation with
Dr Lukic”, including a notice of termination. On Tuesday, 7 August
2018, Mr Beattie commented that he was “slightly
continuing since their meeting in April
2018, “It looks like there are
instances, but if we can just confirm the patient comments are more recent, that
will confirm
our position.”
Beattie said, “I guess I was asking, ‘do we have evidence?’
... we needed to actually have a case for termination
... Has she actually
changed her behaviour? This was much more a judgement call we were making on
whether or not this individual
was capable of changing her behaviour so that
they could be a ... well-functioning part of our business.” Mr Beattie
“So you have [Mr Simpson], who was ... saying, ‘well, listen,
I can’t make this work in my business. I don’t
believe she has the
necessary capacity to adjust’, and I was involved in speaking with lawyers
and [Mr Simpson] on whether
or not we also had a legal position to match
Simpson said there was evidence of complaints between 17 April 2018 and when the
decision was made to terminate Dr Lukic, as well
as historical complaints, which
were taken into account. He agreed that he did not definitively examine the
complaints received after
17 April 2018 to ascertain whether the underlying
conduct had occurred.
Wednesday, 8 August 2018, a discussion guide was prepared for the meeting with
Dr Lukic’s colleagues. The note records that
the defendant had to confront
a significant volume of negative and concerning feedback and complaints in
respect of Dr Lukic. It
was proposed to provide the document summarising some of
this material. Problems had also been occurring with staff for a long period
time and it was proposed to terminate her contract. Whilst it was acknowledged
that Dr Lukic carried out a “magnitude of
work”, this short term
benefit was not in the long term interests of Primary IVF, patients or staff.
that evening, Mr Simpson tried to contact Dr Lukic twice and then sent an email
informing her of the meeting the next morning
at 9.30 am to discuss her
contract. Dr Lukic was invited to bring a support person. Dr Lukic says
that, on receipt of the email,
she called Mr Simpson to ask what the meeting was
9 August 2018, Dr Lukic met with Mr Simpson, Mr Beattie and Ms Cacchia.
According to Mr Simpson, either he or Mr Beattie opened
the meeting by referring
to the April 2018 meeting, the purpose of which was to share a series of
negative comments and feedback
from patients and staff. They had then emphasised
that the pattern of behaviour was unacceptable. The doctor had undertaken to
this behaviour. Unfortunately, despite that undertaking, Primary IVF had
continued to receive negative feedback and complaints about
the doctor. They
were therefore of the opinion that she was not able to modify her behaviour and
would be providing a notice of termination
after the meeting.
Beattie and Mr Simpson showed Dr Lukic some examples of patient comments from
surveys. Mr Beattie agreed that the complaints were
not specifically put to Dr
Lukic, nor was she asked if there was substance to the complaints, “I
mean, based upon our assessment
of her historical response to complaints, I
guess we’d run to the point where we weren’t going to have a
reasonable answer
from that.” The doctor did not say much in response.
Mr Simpson agreed that the decision to terminate having been made, it
not matter what Dr Lukic might have said in the meeting.
Beattie recalled that Dr Lukic raised a number of matters that she wanted to
talk about, which were unrelated to the decision to
terminate or otherwise
sought to justify the conduct that gave rise to the termination. Mr Simpson
sought to bring the conversation
to Dr Lukic, she asked what the meeting was about and Mr Simpson said there
had been another complaint against her. Dr Lukic
said that this was the first
she had heard of it. Ms Cacchia said there had been a thread online about her
behaviour. Dr Lukic asked
what that meant. Mr Simpson gave her a letter of
complaint from a patient, complaining that the doctor had advised her that she
consider losing weight before her next cycle of treatment. Dr Lukic
responded that the clinical advice given was appropriate but,
without the
patient’s file, she could not comment any further.
Lukic also said, “Are you all aware that there was a new death scenario on
the operating table yesterday due to the fact
that the patient was overweight?
It was not a patient of mine but a patient of one of the other IVF specialists.
Is this the only
complaint?”. According to Dr Lukic, Mr Simpson said
“One is all I needed. You are not to return to Primary IVF’s
premises today, even to collect your things. They will be packed and sent to
you. We will send you a formal termination notice later
today.” (Mr
Simpson denied that he said “One is all I needed”. Mr Beattie
agreed.) Mr Beattie also said that they
would be in contact with her over the
next few days “to discuss damages”. Dr Lukic was in shock and left
the meeting.
the meeting, Mr Simpson emailed the notice of termination to Dr Lukic. The
letter repeated the incidents referred to in the
notice of serious breaches
prepared for the April 2018 meeting (see [
]), said in the letter to have been discussed at that
meeting. In addition, the letter referred to subsequent material being: adverse
online reviews dated 17 April 2018, 27 April 2018, 22 May 2018 and 26 July 2018;
the written complaint of 26 June 2018; and the instances
of behaviour described
by Ms Raggio
junior nursing staff.
the letter, Mr Simpson advised that, as a result of Dr Lukic’s behaviour,
Primary IVF staff and patients had felt anxious,
threatened and fearful of
potential reprisals by the doctor against them should they notify Primary IVF of
her behaviour. The doctor’s
behaviour was said to be entirely unacceptable
and, as a result, the defendant held serious concerns for the ongoing health and
of its employees and patients. The defendant was therefore said to be of
the reasonably held opinion that the doctor had committed
acts which would
adversely affect “and have in fact adversely impacted” its
reputation or business conducted from George
Street and Darlinghurst. The Sale
Deed was terminated with immediate effect under cl 9.2(b) and, as a consequence,
the Services Deed
was terminated too: cl 10.1(b).
defendant also reminded Dr Lukic of the restraints in the Services Deed.
Finally, the defendant said it had suffered losses of
$7,501,343 as a result of
the termination. The defendant requested that the plaintiff pay this sum by
22 October 2018 and provided
its bank details.
receiving this letter, Dr Lukic said that no notice was given to her that the
defendant was considering terminating the contract.
Lukic’s response
is convenient to set out Dr Lukic’s response to the complaints made by
patients and staff, before turning to whether the
defendant was entitled to
terminate the contracts having regard to those complaints. Of the patient
complaints, Dr Lukic said “These
are patients’ opinions. ... but
that does not automatically mean that you should believe them over me. Dr Lukic
said she had
never been given the patient notes or any opportunity to clear
herself in respect of patient allegations and accusations, “I’ve
just been accused.” Dr Lukic said, “
I know that every
appointment I have with patients goes well
”. Dr Lukic added:
Look, I'm human, I think ‑ we're all human and
patients ‑ patients pick up on sometimes the strangest
things. You might
be a bit more tired, they may perceive things that are
not there intentionally, are not there to discredit them in any way. I'm
not perfect in every way, but I certainly do not go out of my way to be abusive
to ‑ to patients. ... I’m not abusive
to my patients.
... none of us can be sure how we present to someone. How I talk to one
person, they might love it, they might be very, very happy
and someone else
might think you're, you know, the worst person on the planet, but you have done
nothing different. You've spoken
the same way ...
Lukic put the complaints down to how the defendant ran Primary IVF.
Dr Lukic understood that the practice operated on the basis
that it would
make profit based on the high volume of patients. The low-level return on each
patient meant that the practices operated
on a tight budget. Due to its method
of charging, patients with medical issues who would not normally attempt to go
through IVF elsewhere
became patients. Many people from ethnic minorities came
for treatment. Dr Lukic believed that this led to communication issues,
particularly when the interpreters engaged by the defendant incorrectly
translated information to the doctor. Dr Lukic believed that
there was more
demand than the practice could handle.
to the Medicare charging method, the practices expanded rapidly and
Dr Lukic believed that the defendant did not have sufficient
support the rapidly expanding practices. Dr Lukic believed that most of the
people that worked at the George Street practice
were overworked; tiredness
caused issues with harmony between staff. Dr Lukic said that, with the rapid
expansion of the practice,
the number of nurses who had to work in a small room
increased from three to six. Some nurses were inexperienced in IVF and Dr Lukic
believed they had difficulties interpreting results and relaying these results
to patients.
Lukic said that a patient who wanted to see a specialist at Primary IVF was
required by the defendant to see a general practitioner
at least twice before
being referred to the specialist. Dr Lukic observed that this caused patients to
become frustrated by the delay
before seeing her.
Lukic said that the IVF journey is very difficult, particularly if the patient
has issues with their weight. From time to time,
Dr Lukic had to deliver
information about weight management to patients going through IVF, which was
usually a stressful and emotional
time for them. Dr Lukic tried to deliver this
information professionally and sensitively however, even when so delivered, it
often not well received by the patient. It involved the patient accepting
that their conduct with regards to food intake and exercise
was a contributing
cause to difficulties becoming pregnant. This was difficult information for
patients to receive and process.
Lukic explained that her role involved speaking to people about their sperm
count, smoking, eating too much, drinking too much
and being too old. Often
people did not like being confronted with these realities. This could cause
tension between the doctor and
the patient which, in turn, could cause issues
for the practice.
staff complaints, Dr Lukic accepted that at times she did become frustrated with
the defendant’s management of the George
Street and Darlinghurst practices
and that she vented her frustrations to management and others, either verbally
or by email. Dr
Lukic said she did this with a view to improving some of the
problems that she and other staff encountered.
Lukic believed that the George Street rooms were not big enough to cope with the
rapid expansion of the practice. Dr Lukic said
there were problems with heating
and air-conditioning and every few months, with sewerage. Staff were
uncomfortable and frustrated.
The receptionists were very young and
inexperienced and did not know how to manage patients’ expectations if a
doctor was running
late. As the practice was busy, there was often no time for
lunch breaks, which caused issues for staff and, in turn, for patients
were overworked and unprofessional to those patients.
Lukic said “I tend to be loud even when not stressed.” Dr Lukic
agreed that there were other sources of stress in her
life at the time including
financial stress and strains in her personal life, where she was caring for an
elderly mother who had
severe Alzheimer’s and supporting a sibling
financially. Dr Lukic denied, however, that she took out her frustration and
on staff and patients. Dr Lukic agreed that her frustrations with
how the clinic was being run caused her on occasion to raise her
voice or yell
at staff “but it was not a daily event.”
Entitlement
to terminate
first issue is what were the circumstances in which the defendant was entitled
to terminate the contract. This turns on the proper
construction of the relevant
clause. As to the basis on which the defendant purported to terminate the
contract, the plaintiff accepted
that cl 9.2(b) did not require the defendant to
prove that the relevant “act” actually occurred before exercising
rights. The words “if true” made it clear that the truth of the
acts need not be proved; a reasonable basis for concluding
the acts occurred was
sufficient. But the clause obliged the defendant to investigate whether an
“act” had occurred.
plaintiff submitted that cl 9.2(b) required the defendant to afford natural
justice to the doctor. The valid exercise of the
termination power in cl 9.2(b)
depended on the “reasonably held opinion” of the defendant. This
required a reasonable
basis for the opinion and, where it permitted the exercise
of a discretion adverse to the counterparty, natural justice:
EFG Australia
Ltd v Kennedy
[1999] NSWSC 922
Bartlett v Australia & New
Zealand Banking Group Ltd
(2016) 92 NSWLR 639
[2016] NSWCA 30
Bupa HI Pty Ltd v Chang
[2019] FCAFC 180
Doust v Riveaux Holdings Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 1434
Reasonableness was required in respect of both the process and the result.
defendant submitted that cl 9.2(b) did not require it to conduct an
investigation into the “acts”; this was said to
be contrary to the
express language. The defendant merely had to hold an
act had been committed, noting the use of the words “
”. This contrasted with other provisions in the contract which
applied to conduct which
been committed, such as cl 9.2(c), which
applied where the plaintiff or doctor were guilty of misconduct.
defendant submitted that the suggestion that cl 9.2(b) required that
Dr Lukic be afforded an opportunity to respond was not supported
text or context of the Sale Deed. While other termination powers specifically
referred to providing notice of a breach and
an opportunity to remedy that
breach, cl 9.2(b) did not: see cl 9.1, cl 9.2(a). The text was in contrast to
that considered in
Bupa HI Pty Ltd v Chang
[2019] FCAFC 180
the alternative, the defendant contended that it was entitled to terminate the
contract in any event under cl 9.2(a) given the
plaintiff’s failure to
remedy serious breaches, of which notice was said to have been given at the
meeting of 17 April 2018.
The plaintiff contended that, as the defendant did not
give Dr Lukic
notice at that meeting, no right to terminate
arose. What was required was a notice specifying the breach and requiring the
to remedy the breach within seven days. Clause 9.2(a) requires that the
notice must identify the serious breach and call for “that
to be rectified.
mentioned, cl 9 of both the Sale Deed and Services Deed concerned termination
and was in the same terms. The first sub-clause concerned
the plaintiff’s
right of termination. Clause 9.1 provided:
9. TERMINATION OF THIS DEED
9.1. The ... [plaintiff] and the Doctor may terminate this Deed
by notice in writing to the Purchaser if the Purchaser commits
any breach of any
provision of this Deed other than a breach which (being capable of being
remedied) is remedied within 7 days of
notice being given to the Purchaser by
the ... [plaintiff] and the Doctor.
Noteworthy,
the right to terminate could only be exercised after giving “notice
”. Clause 9.2 concerned the defendant’s rights of
termination and provided:
“9.2 The Purchaser may terminate this Deed on the
happening of any of the following events:
(a) any of the ... [plaintiff] or the Doctor commits any
serious breach of any provision of this Deed and the ... [plaintiff] or
Doctor has failed to remedy that breach within 7 days of receiving a notice from
the Purchaser calling for that breach to be
remedied; or
(b) in the reasonably held opinion of the Purchaser any of [The
Conception Zone], the [plaintiff] or the Doctor has committed an
act which if
true would, in the opinion of the Purchaser, adversely affect the reputation or
business of the Purchaser conducted
from the New Premises;
(c) any of the [plaintiff] ... or the Doctor is guilty of any
wilful neglect or misconduct; or
(d) the Doctor is partly disqualified or fully disqualified
Health Insurance Act 1973
(e) the Doctor ceases to be registered or recognised under the
Health Insurance Act 1973
(Cth) as a specialist obstetrician and
gynaecologist;
(f) the registration of the Doctor under the Act expires
(without being renewed), is surrendered, is cancelled or is suspended;
(g) conditions, notations, undertakings, reprimands, or
endorsements on the registration of the Doctor under the Act, are imposed
the Act; or
(h) a petition for the winding up of either [The Conception
Zone] or the [plaintiff] is presented.”
the sole right of termination in cl 9.1, cl 9.2 continued to list further rights
of termination beyond termination on notice
for failure to remedy a breach. Many
of the “events” enumerated in sub-cll 9.2(b) to (h) were serious in
nature, but
not all. The imposition of a condition on the registration of the
Doctor under sub-cl 9.2(g) may be minor, requiring the Doctor to,
for example,
undertake a course in medical recordkeeping, or more major, requiring the Doctor
to only practice under supervision.
Similarly, the petition for the winding up
of the plaintiff under sub-cl 9.2(h) may result from failure to pay a
bill in a timely manner or something more serious. But what
each of these “events” have in common is that they pose an
existential threat to the arrangements between the parties, either because the
Doctor can no longer practice medicine for practical
purposes or at all, the
plaintiff ceases to trade or, in the case of sub-cl 9.2(b), the continuation of
the arrangement will be destructive
the defendant’s
or business.
the chapeau to cl 9.2 provides that the Purchaser “may” terminate
the Sale Deed on the happening of any of the events
which are then described, I
do not consider that this gives rise to a discretionary element in the
defendant’s decision-making,
beyond the fact that it will be necessary, on
the happening of any of these events, to decide whether to terminate the Sale
(or Services Deed) or affirm the contract and move on. Using sub-cl 9.2(g)
as an example, if conditions were imposed on the Doctor’s
registration,
the defendant may consider that the conditions can be readily satisfied and
removed from the registration, or the Doctor
can continue to provide medical
services notwithstanding the condition, such that the defendant chooses not to
exercise its rights.
the plaintiff contended in its pleading that the defendant’s power to
terminate under cl 9.2 must be exercised reasonably
and in good faith, this
being a term implied by law, this was not agreed, nor the subject of the
plaintiff’s closing submissions.
I take this not to have been pressed.
Termination on notice
first sub-clause is relied on by the defendant in the alternative. Clause 9.2(a)
can be seen as the corresponding provision to
the plaintiff’s right of
termination in cl 9.1. While cl 9.1 required the plaintiff to give “notice
in writing”
to the defendant, cl 9.2(a) only requires the defendant
to give “a notice”. Reference to “a notice” may suggest
an object, item or thing, which may suggest a written notice. But the clause
does not say so. Where cl 9.2(a) follows immediately
from sub-cl 9.1, the
absence of a requirement for notice “in writing” is obvious and
presumably intentional. On the plain
meaning of the words, oral notice will
suffice. As Dixon CJ observed in
Ballas v Theophilos (No 2)
(1957) 98 CLR
[1957] HCA 90
, where a partnership deed contained an option but no express
provision as to how to exercise it, “any definitive communication
would suffice” so long as the communication expressed clearly and
unequivocally that the partner was exercising that right:
the defendant gives notice orally or in writing, the notice must conform to the
requirements of cl 9.2(a), in particular,
calling for the serious breach to be
remedied. For example, in
Idameneo (No 123) Pty Ltd v Ticco Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWCA 329
, the defendant sent a letter alleging that the doctor had
breached the contract. But Santow JA (Mason P and Hodgson JA agreeing)
that no notice was given in the terms of the clause, “Rather there was at
most an allegation of breach ... namely
that ‘you acquired an interest in
a Medical Centre in Macquarie Street allegedly in your partner’s name.
This, I understand,
is in breach of the contract in a number of
respects’.” The doctor was simply urged “to promptly correct,
and maintain
all your obligations under your contract”: at [99].
Termination without notice
9.2(b) is the critical provision. The parties’ submissions raised,
essentially, two issues: the extent to which the defendant
needed to investigate
“an act” and, further, to afford natural justice to the doctor.
Resolving these issues largely
turns on the particular provisions of this
contract. Guidance on the relevant principles is also provided by judicial
consideration
of similar contracts in the authorities referred to by the
parties, to which this judgment now turns.
EFG Australia Ltd v Kennedy
[1999] NSWSC 922
, a contract of employment
provided that the employer could terminate the contract forthwith and without
notice if, in the reasonable
opinion of its board, the employee was guilty of
negligence, dishonesty, misconduct or incompetence.
, Hodgson CJ in
Eq was not prepared to imply a requirement to give notice but added, at
I am inclined to think that "reasonable opinion" ... means an opinion arrived at
reasonably, as well as reasonably based on available
material. In most cases,
this would require natural justice to be afforded.
has been applied outside the employment context:
Bupa HI Pty
Ltd v Chang
[2019] FCAFC 180
(Gleeson, O’Callaghan and Jackson
Doust v Riveaux Holdings Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 1434
(Hammerschlag CJ in Eq).
justice was not mentioned in
Interstar Wholesale Finance Pty Ltd v Integral
(2008) 257 ALR 292
[2008] NSWCA 310
, where a finance
company terminated a contract with its mortgage originator on the basis that it
considered that the mortgage originator
had engaged in deceptive activity in
relation to loan applications. Their contract provided that the finance company
“may terminate
this Agreement immediately upon the happening of any of the
following events ... (c) where the Originator ... has engaged in any
deceptive or fraudulent activity in relation to an Application or a Settled Loan
or [the finance company] considers, in its
reasonable opinion, that the
Originator ... has engaged in deceptive or fraudulent activity in relation to an
Application or a Settled
Loan.” Allsop P (Giles and Ipp JJA agreeing),
considered at [96]:
“... the second branch of cl 20.1(c) is a state of affairs or circumstance
dependent upon the state of mind of Interstar and
there being sufficient grounds
to make it a reasonable opinion. It does not depend upon there being a breach of
contract, or upon
Interstar or its Originator’s Representative having in
fact engaged in deceptive or fraudulent activity. Evidence for fraud
evidence for an opinion that fraud has occurred may be quite different. What
might well reasonably support an opinion may well
be entirely inadequate to
conclude that fraud occurred.
President added that the provision rested upon “the existence of an
opinion which must be reasonable, and so must have a
foundation”: at [140]. But that the finance company had formed the opinion
reasonably did not mean that the mortgage
originator had been deceptive or
fraudulent, “There may have been a misunderstanding, matters may not be as
they reasonably
seem. ... The kind of evidence to found fraud, and the kind of
evidence to found an opinion that fraud has occurred may well be of
different character”: at [140].
was not followed in
Bartlett v Australia & New Zealand Banking Group
(2016) 92 NSWLR 639
[2016] NSWCA 30
, as the contractual provisions were
different. In
, a contract of employment provided:
13. Disciplinary Action
If you fail to comply with the provisions of your employment agreement or any
other ANZ performance requirements, ANZ may take disciplinary
action which may
include suspension with or without pay and, in certain circumstances,
termination of your employment with ANZ (see
clause 14).
14. Termination of Employment
14.3 Termination by ANZ
b) Immediate Termination Without Notice
ANZ may terminate your employment at any time, without notice, if, in the
opinion of ANZ, you engage in serious misconduct, serious
neglect of duty, or
serious breach of any of the terms of this employment agreement. ... .”
terminated the plaintiff’s employment without notice after an
investigation found that he had sent a confidential internal
document to a
journalist. Macfarlan JA (Meagher and Simpson JJA agreeing) concluded that the
precondition for the bank taking disciplinary
action under cl 13 was a failure
to comply with the employment agreement. Satisfaction of the precondition
depended upon an
breach of the employment contract, not on the
bank’s opinion as to whether such a breach had occurred: at [30]. In these
circumstances,
was not applied as, to construe the bank’s
entitlement to immediately terminate without notice as permitting termination
there had in fact been no misconduct or other breach, but only the opinion
of the bank that that had occurred, would be inconsistent
with cl 13: at [31].
To avoid this conflict, his Honour construed the required opinion of the bank as
referable to the seriousness
of the misconduct or breach, not as to its
existence. Macfarlan JA considered that adoption of this approach also paid
to the severe consequences that would flow on summary termination of
employment: at [32].
Honour further concluded that, in forming an opinion under cl 14.3(b), the bank
was “obliged to act reasonably, at least
and at least so far as its process, as distinct from the result, was
concerned”: at [49]. That is, the decision would
be invalid if it was so
unreasonable that no reasonable decision-maker would ever have come to it.
Further, the clause required “a
reasonable as well as honest state of
satisfaction” on the part of the bank: at [49], citing
Service Station
Associated Ltd v Berg Bennett & Associates Pty Ltd
(1993) 45 FCR 84
(1993) 117 ALR 393 at [40] (Gummow J).
Court concluded that ANZ acted unreasonably as it undertook a limited
investigation, did not provide the employee with a copy
of a handwriting expert
report, did not give him the opportunity to obtain advice about the expert
report or an opportunity to respond
to it. The bank failed to follow its own
policy in relation to evidence that it treated as fundamental to its enquiry.
That policy
required the bank to afford procedural fairness to an employee
facing serious disciplinary action, to have a reasonable opportunity
to the allegations made against them and to respond to any evidence that may be
relied on to make a finding by providing
evidence of their own: at [54].
recently, in
Bupa HI Pty Ltd v Chang
[2019] FCAFC 180
, a private health
insurer de-registered an ophthalmologist from its Bupa Medical Gap Scheme.
Practitioners who were part of the scheme
were effectively held out by Bupa to
its members as being Bupa’s trusted and preferred providers. Dr Chang
was giving his patients
a Xanax tablet before a procedure but claimed for an
anaesthetic service. Bupa considered that the doctor was claiming benefits under
the wrong Medicare item number, costing the insurer some $520,000.
could de-register a practitioner from the Bupa Medical Gap Scheme under the
terms of its contract with the practitioner, which
Bupa’s Medical Gap Scheme deregistration procedure
Bupa may deregister a Registered Medical Gap Scheme practitioner from the Bupa
Medical Gap Scheme by giving the practitioner written
notice of deregistration
2. If in Bupa’s reasonable opinion, the
practitioner’s conduct may adversely impact the goodwill, reputation or
of Bupa at any time; or
Before Bupa exercises its rights under Bupa’s deregistration procedures in
relation to particular conduct, Bupa will:
1. Give the Registered Medical Gap Scheme practitioner a
written notice setting out reasons for deregistration; and
2. Except where, in Bupa’s opinion, deregistration is
urgently required to protect the interest of Bupa or Bupa members,
provide the
Registered Medical Gap Scheme practitioner with an opportunity to make
submissions in relation to the matters set out
in the notice referred to in
Deregistration is for a minimum period of 6 months but Bupa may, in its absolute
discretion, elect to re-register a practitioner
prior to the expiry of
Court considered that, on the proper construction of the contract, it was for
the doctor to establish on the balance of probabilities
that Bupa’s
opinion was not arrived at reasonably, and that the opinion was not reasonably
based on available material, following
: at [64]. Further, the
contractual terms required that Bupa hold the reasonable opinion when giving
written notice of deregistration:
at [65]. At [66]:
The terms also require a certain process to be followed before the notice of
deregistration is issued. Bupa must give the practitioner
written notice
setting out reasons for deregistration. And (assuming there is no urgency)
it must provide the practitioner with
an opportunity to make submissions in
relation to the matters set out in that notice. The practitioner’s
entitlement is to
make submissions in response to the reasons that Bupa has
articulated. That entitlement would be pointless if Bupa were permitted
form an opinion at the outset of the process and then hold the opinion
regardless of the content of the submissions made by the
practitioner. It
would also be pointless if a notice of deregistration could be contractually
effective, even though the opinion
justifying it was only reasonable because of
matters that Bupa had not disclosed to the practitioner, being matters on which
practitioner could not make submissions. It follows that the question
of whether or not the opinion was reasonable must be evaluated
by reference to
the reasons given by Bupa in the written notice to the practitioner setting out
reasons for deregistration, and in
light of the submissions made by the
practitioner in response.
the standard of reasonableness was necessarily informed by the fact that
deregistration was for a minimum period of six months.
To deprive the
practitioner of significant benefits during this period was a serious step. As
such, an opinion on Bupa’s part
would not be reasonable “if it were
based on insubstantial grounds”: at [67]. Where Bupa reached its decision
the advice of a GP and the views of an employee who was not herself a
doctor, without first asking an ophthalmologist or anaesthetist
matter, the contractual requirements were not satisfied. The fact that an expert
witness at trial later expressed an agreement
with Bupa’s opinion was of
no moment “once it is understood that, properly construed, the clause
requires the process
– not merely the result – to be
reasonable”: at [72]. The later expert opinion was something that Bupa did
know at the time and was not disclosed to the practitioner as a reason for
deregistration.
these authorities considered distinct contractual provisions, the following
contractual indicia may point to an obligation
to accord natural justice to the
counterparty before exercising a right of termination:
(a) the contract obliges the party to give notice to the counterparty before
termination:
EFG Australia v Kennedy
cf Bupa HI v Chang
(b) it is a contract of employment:
EFG Australia v Kennedy
Bupa HI v Chang
(c) the contract prescribes particular procedures to be followed before the
opinion is reached:
Bartlett v ANZ
Bupa HI v Chang.
this, it may not matter whether the contract requires the opinion to be
“reasonable”, as the requirement of reasonableness
may be implied in
Bartlett v ANZ
at [49]. The onus of proving that the
defendant’s opinion does not comply with the contractual provision likely
rests on the
Bupa HI v Chang
at [64]. Finally, a defendant
cannot rely on matters which came to its attention after it was required to form
the requisite opinion,
to justify that that opinion was reasonable:
at [72]. Much turns on the terms of the particular contract, to which
this judgment now turns.
to any requirement for notice to be given, by sharp and immediate contrast with
the immediately preceding sub-clause, cl 9.2(b)
does not require the defendant
to give a notice to the plaintiff or the Doctor, calling for any
“act” to be remedied.
Indeed, there is no requirement that “an
act” amounts to a breach, or even a serious breach, of the Sale Deed or
Deed. This indicates that the parties intended that no notice need be
given, so long as the Purchaser held the relevant opinion on
the relevant basis,
before exercising its right to terminate. The sub-clause is drafted for use
without the need to attend to the
formal requirements of notice or notice
periods, to enable the defendant to prevent damage to
defendant’s
assets, being its reputation or business, in the specified
circumstances.
to the nature of the contract, the relationship between the defendant and Dr
Lukic was not an employment relationship. The Sale
Deed is a commercial
contract. The defendant paid a substantial sum to acquire the doctor’s
practice. That said, terminating
the contract would likely have significant
financial consequences for the plaintiff and the doctor. Not only will the
plaintiff and
the doctor lose revenue that would have been enjoyed under the
remainder of the term of the contract, but the doctor will be restrained
providing medical services in the surrounding area for some time. In these
circumstances, an opinion may not be reasonable “if
it were based on
insubstantial grounds”:
to any procedures required by the contract, the three deeds do not prescribe a
procedure for informing the doctor that the defendant
is considering taking
steps under this provision or giving the doctor an opportunity to make
submissions before reaching a final
opinion: see
Bupa HI v Chang
far as the evidence reveals, were there policies in place which required the
defendant to afford procedural fairness to
the doctor in the circumstances, as
Bartlett v ANZ
is, none of these contractual indicia point directly to an obligation on the
defendant to accord natural justice to the plaintiff
or the doctor. But this
obligation may arise indirectly, given the contractually prescribed
“events” which must happen
before the defendant is entitled to
terminate the contract under cl 9.2(b). There are two “events”: an
anterior event,
being the doctor’s “act”, and the formation of
a particular opinion by the defendant.
to the required attributes of the defendant’s opinion, cl 9.2(b) requires
the defendant to have a “reasonably held
opinion” that the doctor
has committed an act which, if true, will have certain consequences. The words
make plain that the Purchaser does not have to be
satisfied that the doctor has
committed the act:
at [96], [140]. But the defendant can only hold the required opinion on this
matter if it is “reasonably held”. A reasonable
opinion has been
variously described as “an opinion arrived at reasonably, as well as
reasonably based on available material”
) or an opinion for
which there are “sufficient grounds” or a “reasonable
foundation” (
). This requires a considered assessment of
the likelihood that the doctor has committed the act, before turning to consider
its implications.
making this assessment, it may be necessary to tell the doctor about “the
act” and seek their response in order to
form the requisite opinion
notwithstanding that cl 9.2(b) does not make it mandatory to present the
alleged acts to the plaintiff
or the doctor for response. As Henry J noted
Maven Dental Group Pty Ltd v S&M England Pty Ltd
[2018] QSC 220
in respect of a similar clause, at [31]:
“... The happening of the event referred to in clause 11.2(b) was a
reasonably held opinion. The alleged failure to afford
an opportunity to respond
had the potential to ground an argument that the event of a “reasonably
held opinion” could
not have occurred because the requisite opinion could
not be reasonably held until Dr England had a reasonable opportunity to respond.
is, in forming a “reasonably held” opinion that the doctor has
committed acts, “if true”, the purchaser
may well enquire of the
doctor as to whether the act occurred or not and, if so, whether the act was
justified in the circumstances.
In some circumstances, it may not be possible
for the purchaser to form a “reasonably held” opinion without so
In other circumstances, it may not be necessary or practicable to get the
doctor’s version of events before the relevant opinion
may be able to be
formed. The touchstone is not whether the defendant investigated the
“act” or afforded natural justice
to the plaintiff or the doctor but
whether, in the circumstances, the defendant formed a “reasonably held
to the implications of the doctor’s conduct, cl 9.2(b) requires that the
acts, if true, “
... adversely affect the reputation or
business of the Purchaser” conducted from the George Street and
Darlinghurst premises.
“Would” is often used in the place of
“will”; by using these words, “one is elevated from
possibilities
– perhaps into the world of probabilities”
National Crime Authority
(1998) 83 FCR 99
(1998) 154 ALR 471
(O’Loughlin J). More recently in
Australian Olympic Committee, Inc v
Telstra Corporation Ltd
(2017) 258 FCR 104
[2017] FCAFC 165
, the Court
considered legislation which prohibited the use of the Olympic symbol to promote
goods or services where it “would
suggest” that the promoter was a
sponsor of the Olympic Games. The Court (Greenwood, Nicholas and Burley JJ)
considered, “The
use of “would” instead of “could”
precludes the construction that rests upon a mere suggestion or some likelihood.
... Taken together, “would suggest” may be understood to mean that
the relevant meaning is more likely than not to be
brought to mind”: at
is, the defendant must be satisfied to a requisite degree of certainty that the
consequence of the doctor’s acts “would”
adversely affect its
reputation and business, rather than “may” or “could”
affect its reputation or business.
The defendant must hold a reasonable opinion
that it is probable or more likely than not that the doctor’s act will
result. But cl 9.2(b) repeats that the defendant’s opinion on
this subject is just that – an opinion – emphasising
defendant does not need to be satisfied that, in fact, it will have that effect.
Was termination effective?
second issue is whether the “events” described in cl 9.2(b) had
happened as at 9 August 2018. The plaintiff submitted
that the defendant did not
hold the requisite opinion at the time as the opinion was not reasonably based
and there was a failure
to afford natural justice to Dr Lukic. The person who
held the opinion was the one who made the decision, who was said to be Mr
The plaintiff accepted that Mr Simpson was of the opinion that Dr
Lukic had “committed an act which if true would, in the
opinion of the
Purchaser, adversely affect the reputation or business of the Purchaser
conducted” from the relevant premises.
But how Mr Simpson had arrived at
that opinion was said to be misconceived.
plaintiff submitted that negative reviews posted by patients were not enough to
form the view that the defendant’s business
or reputation would be
adversely affected. The investigation of the “acts” was inadequate.
Mr Simpson simply compiled
complaints but did not investigate the substance
of the complaints and whether the “acts” had occurred. Further, it
unclear what Dr Lukic did, that is, what was “the act” that gave
rise to some of the vitriolic surveys and reviews. It
was clear from the
doctor’s evidence that she still had no idea what prompted those reviews
and nor did the defendant, where
it never engaged with Dr Lukic on the topic.
The fact, if it be a fact, that Dr Lukic received more complaints than the other
was said to be explicable on the basis that Dr Lukic saw more patients.
plaintiff submitted that Mr Simpson did not direct his attention to the
“acts” underlying the complaints but concluded
that there was a
theme emerging from the complaints as to rudeness and insensitivity. He relied
on that theme to conclude that the
acts had occurred. Further, Mr Simpson
proceeded on the basis that the words “if true” permitted him to
ignore whether
the acts occurred. Mr Simpson regarded it as sufficient that the
act was alleged. These misconceptions infected his opinion such
that was not
reasonably held. The process followed by the defendant in exercising its
discretion was said to be infected by
unreasonableness and
ought not to have been exercised in the way that transpired.
plaintiff submitted that Dr Lukic’s ‘reply all’ was
“manifestly the catalyst” for Mr Simpson’s
decision to
forthwith terminate the contracts “and to manufacture a case for doing
so”. It was said that the defendant
decided to terminate the Sale Deed on
21 June 2018 and what followed was “an attempt by Idameneo to justify that
and an attempt to provide a contractual basis for that
decision.” I reject this submission. The plaintiff was effectively
that the defendant was acting in bad faith when purporting to rely on
cl 9.2(b). That should have been specifically pleaded and particularised
the letter of termination referred to 14 complaints or negative reviews, the
plaintiff submitted that the defendant could only
rely on the complaints that
were presented to Dr Lukic and to which she was invited to respond. It was a
fundamental requirement
of natural justice that a decision maker identify the
matters relied on and invite the affected party to respond to those matters.
any event, the 14 complaints referred to in the letter did not amount to a
“hill of beans”. The patient complaints
were anonymous and
unreliable. Some of the complaints related to waiting times, over which the
doctor had little control. Other complaints
were said to be nonsensical.
Further, if a complaint was not referred to in the letter of termination, then
the defendant was not
entitled to rely on that complaint to support termination
under cl 9.2(b).
to the alternative basis of termination, the plaintiff further submitted that,
given the defendant’s decision to take an
‘informal’ approach
at this meeting, as opposed to the formal approach described by in-house counsel
of “providing
[Dr Lukic] with 14 days’ notice to remedy the breach
or risk termination”, the Court should find that neither Mr Simpson
or Mr Beattie gave any ‘notice’ to Dr Lukic that she was in
breach of contract, nor that the doctor needed to rectify
the breach, nor that
the defendant would terminate the contract absent rectification.
the plaintiff submitted that, even if such notice could have been given orally,
it was incumbent on the defendant to tell
Dr Lukic that cl 9.2(b) permitted it
to terminate the contract based on certain acts, the defendant had formed a view
that an act
had occurred, and to ask her what she said about it. (This
submission, I think, muddies the requirements of cl 9.2(a) and cl 9.2(b).)
Mr Simpson and Mr Beattie told Dr Lukic at that meeting went nowhere near
this. Precious few acts were identified in the material
that was provided to
Dr Lukic at this meeting. It comprised a one-page document that had four
customer surveys and a generic reference
to staff complaints.
defendant submitted that the opinion formed for the purposes of exercising the
termination power under cl 9.2(b) was reasonable,
having regard to the continuum
of complaints, concerns and feedback it considered. If any of this conduct had
truly been engaged
in by Dr Lukic, such conduct would have adversely affected
the reputation or business of defendant
patients and staff. Dr
Lukic accepted as much.
defendant submitted that there was a body of complaints that were not isolated
but occurred over a sustained period of time, from
when Dr Lukic first began to
work for Primary IVF in 2014 until, and after, the April 2018 meeting. The
doctor’s problematic
conduct was in respect of patients and their
partners, on the one hand, and with doctors and other staff members of the
the other hand. The complaints came from a number of sources: staff
members about their interactions with Dr Lukic, staff members
reporting on Dr
Lukic’s interaction with other staff members, patients, the GPs for those
patients, patient surveys collected
by Primary IVF and patient reviews posted
online. There was a high degree of commonality across this material.
defendant submitted that there was no basis to limiting the “acts”
to those referred to in the letter of termination.
There was no basis for such a
limitation in the contract. The question was what the decision-maker had in fact
relied upon in arriving
at their decision. There was no reason to doubt
Mr Simpson’s evidence as to the matters to which he had regard.
defendant accepted that there were teething problems when the George Street and
Darlinghurst clinics were established, and other
stressors on staff working in
the practice. But all staff were enduring the same problems. It was Dr
Lukic’s reaction to those
difficulties which made her a “complete
outlier” in the practice. The defendant accepted that some of the
complaints may reflect unrealistic expectations of a
‘Rolls Royce’ service being delivered for a Medicare price. But
complaints were minor in the scheme of things; the body of the complaints was
defendant submitted that the clinic’s ability to attract both patients and
staff was critical to its operational success.
The ability to attract and retain
staff was particularly important, where good people were hard to find, recruit
and retain at the
time. Further, in order for its business to survive and
thrive, the defendant’s workforce needed to be motivated, with high
rather than low. The doctor’s conduct was capable of having a deleterious
impact in that regard. If staff morale is
low, then staff were harder to retain
and was harder to recruit new staff in the marketplace. Whilst the
doctor’s unsatisfactory
interactions with other staff may have happened
behind closed doors, staff talk. News spreads. There was a very real prospect
the defendant’s reputation may be damaged in this regard.
defendant further submitted that it provided a combined offering to patients at
the George Street and Darlinghurst clinics, including
fertility GPs, nurses and
laboratory services conducted by embryologists. All of these services were
marketed together. The defendant
could not distinguish between services provided
by Primary IVF, on the one hand, and services provided by Dr Lukic on the other.
But the reputation of the fertility specialists was always going to be important
to the success of the clinics.
the extent that it was suggested that the plaintiff should have been accorded
natural justice, the defendant maintained that it
was not obliged to do this
but, in any event, the termination in August 2018 was the culmination of many
occasions on which Dr Lukic’s
conduct had been raised with her directly
including from a letter sent to Dr Lukic soon after beginning work at Primary
IVF and including
the April 2018 meeting.
to the alternative basis of termination, the defendant submitted that
Mr Simpson’s evidence as to what was discussed at this
April 2018 should be accepted. It was consistent with the “overall logic
of events” that Mr Simpson did the
very thing at the meeting that he had
prepared to do. That was to raise, fairly and squarely, his concerns with the
doctor, to show
her examples of those concerns, to explain to her that whatever
had gone before in terms of how her conduct had been treated was
not going to
continue into the future:
Fox v Percy
. The plaintiff, through Dr Lukic,
was given notice of the conduct constituting a serious breach of this obligation
on 17 April 2018.
Dr Lukic was informed about the complaints that had been
made in relation to the manner in which she had interacted with staff. The
doctor was informed of the defendant’s view of such conduct and informed
in no uncertain terms that the conduct had to cease
immediately. It was clear
from the further staff incident in May 2018 that the plaintiff failed to remedy
the breach.
defendant contended that the plaintiff breached the obligation to procure that
Dr Lukic act in a harmonious way with other practitioners
Dr McDonald saw Dr Lukic shouting at nursing staff and administrative staff
on at least a weekly basis, and these incidents
only got worse over time. Staff
working at the day surgery reported to Dr McDonald that they wanted to avoid
being in an operating
room with Dr Lukic, because she would frequently become
angry and raise her voice at them.
Termination without
the “events” described in cl 9.2(b) happened such that the
termination on 9 August 2018 was valid? What was the “act”
doctor had committed? I agree with the plaintiff that patient complaints and
online reviews were not an “act”
within the meaning of cl 9.2(b).
The “act” was the doctor’s conduct which prompted the
complaint or review. Whether
the “act” occurred, either at all or as
specifically described by the patient, could not be known for sure. Nor did the
clause require that level of certainty. The defendant’s reasonably held
opinion was in respect of whether “the Doctor
has committed an act which
would” have specified consequences.
Lukic did not accept the patient complaints unless they were proven before, say,
the Health Care Complaints Commission. Dr Lukic
effectively equated the
disciplinary framework applicable to medical practitioners with the contractual
framework. Whilst that analysis
is understandable, given the doctor’s long
career in the medical profession, the contractual requirements are different. It
necessary for the defendant to determine whether each of the
matters about which patients or staff complained, in fact, occurred.
same can be said in respect of staff complaints. I do not accept the
plaintiff’s submission that a staff complaint was not
absent the staff member giving evidence at trial. The defendant’s right to
terminate a contract in order
to protect its reputation or business cannot have
been understood by the contracting parties as conditional upon a formal hearing.
to which “acts” were considered by the defendant at the time, I do
not agree that the defendant was limited to the
“acts” referred to
in the letter of termination. Where cl 9.2(b) did not oblige the defendant to
provide a notice at
all, it can hardly be said that events or acts not referred
to in the letter of termination cannot be relied upon as forming the
the required opinion. But the fact that an act of the doctor was not referred to
in the letter of termination may indicate
that it was not in fact relied upon at
the time when the opinion was said to have been formed.
earlier noted, the defendant’s in-house counsel who prepared the letter of
termination appears to have been alive to the
fact that the previous management
had not done anything about Dr Lukic’s behaviour, and perhaps should have.
I infer that the
correspondence was limited to acts which had occurred after the
change of management for that reason. But Mr Simpson said he relied
and staff complaints that were not referred to in the letter of termination. I
accept his evidence.
to which of the defendant’s officers can be said to reflect the opinion of
the corporate defendant, the test for attribution
of a state of mind to a
company will always depend upon context, and the purpose for which that
attribution is sought; the “directing
mind and will” test is not a
universal rule
SSABR Pty Ltd v AMA Group Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 175
It may be more than one person. In
Krakowski v Eurolynx Properties
(1995) 183 CLR 563;
[1995] HCA 68
, the corporate state of mind was
considered to depend on the evidence of three people, of whom only one had given
evidence. At 582-583:
As Bright J said in
Brambles Holdings Ltd v Carey
(1976) 15 SASR 270
Always, when beliefs or opinions or states of mind are attributed to a company
it is necessary to specify some person or persons
so closely and relevantly
connected with the company that the state of mind of that person or those
persons can be treated as being
identified with the company so that their state
of mind can be treated as being the state of mind of the company. ...
A division of function among officers of a corporation responsible for different
aspects of the one transaction does not relieve
the corporation from
responsibility determined by reference to the knowledge possessed by each of
plaintiff contended that Mr Simpson alone held the relevant opinion, which was
said not to be reasonably held. But the evidence
indicates that Mr Simpson,
Mr Beattie and Dr Parmenter were all involved in the decision to terminate. As
such, whether the defendant
held a reasonable opinion is to be determined by
reference to the state of mind of Mr Simpson, Mr Beattie and Dr Parmenter
than Mr Simpson alone.
A reasonable opinion?
deciding to terminate the contract, Mr Simpson understood that he had to be
satisfied that the complaints relied upon were true.
Simpson felt he had a reasonable basis to refer to patient complaints
“without needing to verify completely.” He considered
body of evidence collected from 2014 to 2018, including patient feedback
surveys, social media commentary and staff complaints.
Mr Simpson said the
complaints reviewed by this time overwhelmingly concerned Dr Lukic.
Simpson also undertook a very detailed review of online reviews for the other
doctors at the practice, the outcome of which was
that “there were clearly
different comments pertaining to Dr Lukic ... than that of the other
doctors”. He was focussed
on the commentary to see whether there was
something consistent across all of the doctors or isolated to one or more
doctors. “It
was clear that there was some disturbing commentary and
single star ratings that stood out as part of my overall analysis across
doctors.” Mr Simpson also considered the possibility that some of the
RateMDs may have been made by the same aggrieved
patient, or were bogus reviews.
on the patient surveys, RateMDs reviews and staff complaints, Mr Simpson
considered that this was suggestive of behaviour, language
and interactions that
were not appropriate. Mr Simpson said the combined picture of the material
reviewed indicated language and
behaviour by a doctor which was rude, hostile
and lacking empathy, “there was ample suggestion that that was concerning
behaviour.”
Simpson said that, based on the information he had seen regarding complaints and
comments about Dr Lukic, and her ‘reply’
email, he was of the view
that the defendant needed to end its association with her. He formed this view
because of the actual and
potential reputational damage he saw that she had been
causing or was liable to cause at both a local level and more broadly. This
due to the publicly available social media coverage about her, the complaints
received from patients and her treatment of staff
across the business.
Mr Simpson was also concerned that he would lose his nurse manager and a
number of Dr Lukic’s team in
Sydney who appeared, from
Ms Raggio’s document, to be intimidated by Dr Lukic. Mr
Simpson’s view was that these matters
had already caused reputational
damage and the defendant needed to prevent further reputational risk.
Simpson considered that there was an unacceptable level of poor behaviour and
conduct by Dr Lukic over a sustained period of time
that presented a risk to
staff and threatened the reputation of the defendant’s IVF business. He
considered that it was appropriate
to terminate the contract. Mr Simpson said
the decision was not taken lightly.
Beattie gave evidence in a fair and open manner. Mr Beattie said that he was of
the view that Dr Lukic had not adjusted her behaviour
after it was raised at the
meeting in April 2018. He formed this view based on the contents of the draft
termination letter, which
he considered indicated a pattern of consistent
unchanged behaviour. He considered that the conduct of Dr Lukic continued to
a negative impact on patients and staff and was affecting Primary
IVF’s business in a negative manner. As Dr Lukic had not
adjusted her
behaviour since it was raised with her in April 2018, Mr Beattie believed
that she was not ready, willing or able to
Beattie said this had particular implications for Primary IVF, as it was a
national brand that was seeking to open new clinics
in other states of
Australia. The target market was women aged in their late 20s to early 40s. To
Mr Beattie’s observation,
women in this age bracket regularly
reviewed and posted in online forums.
Beattie was also concerned to ensure ongoing work for Primary IVF’s
business as well as maintaining highly-engaged staff
and a safe workplace. As a
bulk-billing fertility specialist, Mr Beattie’s impression was that it
would have been difficult
to replace Dr Lukic as he was aware that not all
fertility specialists would agree to bulk-bill. But the concerns he had about Dr
Lukic outweighed his concern about the loss of revenue generation. Whilst Dr
Lukic’s engagement generated significant revenue
for Primary IVF, Mr
Beattie believed that the broader implications of her conduct on the business
generally justified the decision
to terminate the contracts.
Beattie said that the decision to terminate the plaintiff’s contract was
considered a material decision for Primary Health
Care as the plaintiff and
Dr Lukic generated a substantial portion of revenue for the Primary IVF
business. As such, where the decision
had the potential to materially impact
revenue of Primary IVF, it required the approval of Dr Parmenter.
Mr Beattie discussed the
financial impact of Dr Lukic leaving the Primary
IVF business with Dr Parmenter, indicating his view that the financial impact
outweighed by the commercial need to maintain the reputation of the business
and given the company’s duties to employees. Dr
Parmenter indicated
that he agreed.
Parmenter was a candid and fair witness. Dr Parmenter was aware that
Dr Lukic was a “high-volume IVF doctor”, that
is, she saw more
patients than most, if not all, of the other doctors at Primary IVF. Dr Lukic
was a significant source of revenue
for the Primary IVF business. Dr Parmenter
had been briefed by Mr Beattie after the meeting with Dr Lukic in April 2018.
Dr Parmenter
was told that there were reports that Dr Lukic was putting
patient satisfaction at risk with her approach to consultations and there
complaints from staff about her behaviour. Further, Dr Lukic was resistant to
making any type of change.
Parmenter was asked to approve the decision to terminate Dr Lukic’s
engagement and did so on the recommendation of Mr Beattie
and Mr Simpson. Dr
Parmenter said the proposed termination was an important topic. The reasons
given to support the termination were
the volume of negative feedback about Dr
Lukic’s interactions with staff and patients and their negative impact on
the reputation
of the Primary IVF business and the practice generally, where the
view was that Dr Lukic was not willing or able to adjust her behaviour.
Dr Parmenter was told that Dr Lukic was unwilling to address the issues
that had been raised on multiple occasions and that the business
had reached the
point where separation was considered to be the only solution. Dr Parmenter
was aware that the recommendation to
terminate Dr Lukic had been reviewed by Mr
Yap and Ms Cacchia.
Parmenter formed the view that the Primary IVF business would not achieve the
quality of service objectives that he was pursuing
if Dr Lukic was to continue
practising at Primary IVF. Further, the reputation of the business would be
jeopardised by Dr Lukic’s
conduct if she stayed on. He approved the
recommendation to terminate Dr Lukic’s engagement. He did so despite
high-volume practice and the revenue that would be
foregone by terminating her contract, due to the concerns he had at the time
the impact of Dr Lukic’s conduct on the reputation of the
Primary IVF business and the ability of Primary IVF to achieve its
service objectives.
consider that the opinion arrived at by the defendant, through its officers, Mr
Simpson, Mr Beattie and Mr Parmeter was arrived
at reasonably. Mr Simpson
proceeded in a considered and thorough manner. He collated a substantial body of
staff complaints, patient
complaints and online reviews over a four year period.
He consulted with staff who were working for Primary IVF about
that pre-dated his arrival. From this, it was apparent that
Dr Lukic had struggled, when joining Primary IVF, to interact with staff
manner that was considered acceptable. Dr Lukic had been spoken to on this
subject on several occasions by a number of people.
behaviour does not appear to have improved over time and, if anything, got
worse. There was a steady stream of patient
complaints and online reviews which,
overall, indicated that Dr Lukic was interacting with patients, with some
frequency, in a manner
which was not conducive to the sensitivities of the IVF
patient cohort.
Mr Simpson undertook the detailed work, he conferred with Mr Beattie, who
obtained approval from Dr Parmenter. Mr Simpson’s
work was also reviewed
by in-house counsel, including Mr Yap and general counsel, Ms Cacchia.
Dr Parmenter placed store in the fact
that Mr Simpson’s work had been
reviewed by others. Each of Mr Simpson, Mr Beattie and Dr Parmenter were
concerned to ensure
that the defendant’s reputation and business was not
damaged by Dr Lukic’s “acts”. By April 2018, there were
indications that Dr Lukic’s behaviour was having that effect, where Ms
Jayamaha reported to Mr Simpson that patients were asking
to see a specialist
other than Dr Lukic given her “bedside manner”. Further, “Most
patients were also reading reviews
online with regard to [Dr Lukic] and insist
that we do not allocate her as their treating [doctor].” Further, given
care model, Ms Jayamaha advised that patients were not making
complaints but were reporting their observations on the patient feedback
surveys. A review of those surveys gave a concerning insight into
patients’ experiences of the doctor.
consider that the opinion in respect of the implications of the doctor’s
acts on the defendants’ reputation and business
was one for which there
were sufficient grounds and a reasonable foundation. Dr Lukic agreed that the
conduct described in the various
patient and staff complaints would be damaging
to the reputation of Primary IVF “if it was true”. This concession
appropriate given: the particular features of the IVF patient cohort; that
the profitability of the Primary IVF model was based upon
its ability to attract
patients; and that attracting patients depended not only on its low cost but on
the clinic’s reputation
for “patient-centred care” and the
reputation of its specialists: see [
only were the “acts” something that would probably affect the
defendant’s reputation and business, there were
indications that this had
already begun. Patients were asking to see doctors other than Dr Lukic. Some
support staff appear to have
left the defendant’s employ already as a
consequence of the doctor’s behaviour: see [
]. Dr Lukic’s
interactions with junior nursing staff continued to be problematic, with a
further incident occurring three weeks
after the warning given in April 2018.
The nursing staff at Primary IVF appear to have been generally discontented with
how Primary
IVF was addressing the doctor’s behaviour towards them. The
defendant was now concerned with risk management.
to natural justice, it would have been easy for the defendant to speak to Dr
Lukic about each of the “acts” before
the notice of termination was
given. There was plenty of time between when the decision to terminate was made
and when that decision
was implemented. While the defendant was not obliged to
consult with Dr Lukic or afford her natural justice, the question is whether
failure to do so has the consequence that the defendant’s opinion was not
“reasonable”. In the circumstances,
I do not think this is fatal,
for two reasons.
some of the “acts” had already been put to Dr Lukic for response at
the meeting in April 2018. The defendant was
aware of her position on those
“acts”. Second, the defendant was also aware of Dr Lukic’s
overall attitude to patient
and staff complaints, which was dismissive and
deflecting responsibility back to Primary IVF. Indeed, the doctor continued to
the “acts” the same way at trial.
these circumstances, it was reasonable for the defendant to proceed on the basis
that putting each of the “acts” to
Dr Lukic for response would not
add any new information to their assessment as to whether the “acts”
had occurred and
what the implications of those “acts” would be on
the defendant’s reputation and business. In sum, I conclude that
“events” described in cl 9.2(b) had happened as at 9 August 2018 and
the defendant’s termination of the contracts
Termination on notice
I am wrong about this, the plaintiff agreed to procure that Dr Lukic acted in a
harmonious way with the other practitioners and
staff at the George Street and
Darlinghurst clinics: cl 4.2(c), Sale Deed; cl 5.3(c), Services Deed. Having
regard to the contemporaneous
documents and the evidence of Dr McDonald, I am
satisfied that the doctor was not acting in a harmonious way with her colleagues
and staff. Dr Lukic’s interactions were regularly abrasive and upsetting
to those with whom she worked. I do not suggest that
the doctor intended to have
this effect on her colleagues, but her approach could not be described as
harmonious. The frequency and
severity of these disharmonious interactions,
notwithstanding being ‘spoken by’ the defendant from time to time on
subject, amounted to a serious breach of this contractual obligation.
issue is whether the defendant gave a notice to Dr Lukic at the meeting in April
2018 which conformed with the requirements of
cl 9.2(a), in particular, calling
for the serious breach to be remedied. It is accepted that the defendant did not
give Dr Lukic
the letter giving notice of serious breaches and accompanying
draft undertaking. But oral notice was sufficient as long as it was
clearly and unequivocally, calling for a serious breach to be remedied.
to whether what Mr Simpson said to Dr Lukic was enough to meet the requirements
of cl 9.2(a), I have already found that Mr Simpson
told Dr Lukic at that meeting
that the defendant considered her to be in breach of contract and gave notice
that “if any and
all inappropriate or unprofessional conduct by you
towards patients and staff members does not cease immediately, the Company will
have no alternative but to take more formal action per the deeds it has entered
into with you and your company.” Further, whilst
Mr Simpson did not recall
making any reference to rectifying any breach, he effectively told Dr Lukic the
same thing, where rectifying
the serious breach would be achieved by immediately
ceasing to engage in the conduct complained of.
9.2(a) did not specifically require the defendant to notify the doctor that,
absent rectification of the breach, the defendant
would terminate the contract.
But, in any event, the indication that the defendant would “take more
formal action per the deeds”
would likely have been understood by the
doctor as a reference to bringing the contractual arrangements to an end. In the
I consider that the defendant is also entitled to succeed on its
alternative case as the defendant gave notice in conformity with
requirements of cl 9.2(a):
Idameneo (No 123) Pty Ltd v
I am wrong about this, then it is necessary to consider the defendant’s
claim for damages. To do so, it is necessary to describe
what happened after 9
August 2018. Shortly after the meeting, Dr Lukic emailed a medical recruiter,
who had earlier enquired whether
the doctor was available for locum work. Dr
Lukic advised, “I have changed jobs” and may be interested in such
she asked whether there was anything available.
further reflection, however, Dr Lukic concluded that she could not take up a
locum position as a general obstetrician and gynaecologist.
The doctor said that
was very different to working as an IVF specialist which, by that time, she had
done for a long time. Dr Lukic
had not worked as a general obstetrician and
gynaecologist for 14 years and did not believe that she had the skills to take
positions. Dr Lukic said “I might have sent that first email in a
moment of panic after that meeting, but the reality of it
was ... I had got
through [my whole career] without any ... major clinical event and then, to
suddenly at my age put myself in deliberate
situations where I knew my skills
were not up to it. I had not been to any obstetric conferences in over 12 years.
I had not done
any of the latest certificate that were being required. I had
done none of that.” Dr Lukic said that IVF specialist jobs did
locum positions but “I needed to find a permanent job.” Dr Lukic
said she put out feelers to two major clinics
but received no reply.
13 August 2018, the plaintiff’s solicitor sent a holding letter, refuting
the allegations in the notice of termination. On
5 October 2018, the
plaintiff’s solicitor responded in detail to the letter of termination,
contending that the termination
was invalid and of no effect. The plaintiff
purported to accept the defendant’s repudiatory conduct, terminating the
The plaintiff and Dr Lukic sought damages of $4 million.
Lukic said that, between 10 August 2018 and February 2019, the parties’
solicitors were engaged in settlement negotiations.
Dr Lukic was concerned that
the defendant would commence proceedings against her if she practised within the
restraint area during
the restraint period described in the contracts and would
seek the damages referred to of $7 million. The doctor proceeded with caution.
November 2018, Dr Lukic discussed the possibility of practising with an IVF
specialist in the Rocks, Sydney. But
the doctor interested in setting up
this clinic had no real plans and made no offer. In December 2018, Mr Ayres told
Dr Lukic that
he was thinking of starting an IVF clinic and would consider Dr
Lukic for a position after she sorted out her problems with the defendant.
February 2019, Dr Lukic met with Mr Ayres to discuss the matter further, as
Mr Ayres was in the process of negotiating funding
for the new clinic. Dr Lukic
expressed interest.
May 2019, Dr Lukic accepted the role of Medical Director at Connect IVF.
Dr Lukic expected to resume practice in about six months
but, for various
reasons, this did not happen. Dr Lukic said “I never thought I would be
out of work for so long, but ... I
gave [Mr Ayres] a verbal agreement, so in my
mind, I was now part of this, yes, we expected to start work.” In June
Ayres sent Dr Lukic a proposed shareholders agreement and doctors
agreement for the new business. Negotiation of the shareholders
agreement took
two months. In July 2019, Dr Lukic incorporated a new company for this purpose.
In August 2019, discussions with the
investors in the new practice broke down
and new investors had to be found.
September 2019, Dr Lukic sold her Bellevue Hill home as she did not have
sufficient income to meet mortgage repayments. Meetings
with new investors
began. In November 2019, Connect IVF agreed to lease premises in Crows Nest for
a day surgery and laboratory.
In December 2019, heads of agreement were signed
with the investors. In March 2020, new corporate entities were incorporated for
the Connect IVF venture. Dr Lukic signed contracts on 9 March 2020. Dr
Lukic was concerned at the delay in opening the new IVF clinic,
advising that
“Things are now serious for me and I need some certainty”. A
business plan was completed.
transaction was further delayed by Covid-19 lockdowns. Dr Lukic was stranded in
Victoria, when visiting a family member. Dr Lukic
remained in Victoria until the
lockdown was lifted in November 2020. Meanwhile, Connect IVF submitted a
development application in
May 2020, the progress of which was also delayed by
council staff working from home and building inspections being delayed.
Development
consent was given in January 2021. Building began. In May 2021, Dr
Lukic began practising at Connect IVF in Sydney.
plaintiff seeks damages for the loss of profits that it would have earned during
the remainder of the seven-year term of the contracts.
The plaintiff sought
damages in the amount of loss earnings estimated by the defendant, when
considering the financial implications
of termination, being $3,494,772. Damages
of $3,778,986 were sought.
defendant submitted that the best source of evidence for the plaintiff’s
loss was its tax returns, not an undated spreadsheet
prepared by an unidentified
author for another purpose. Nor did the plaintiff’s claim for damages
account for expenses incurred
by the company, but only income. Where the
contracts were on foot for a total of 1,473 days, the defendant calculated that,
on average,
the plaintiff earned $1,973 in net income each day. Where the
plaintiff claimed loss from 9 August 2018 until Dr Lukic commenced
Connect IVF on 1 May 2021, this was a period of 996 days. Using the average
daily net income, the plaintiff’s loss
was $1,965,108.
plaintiff submitted that Dr Lukic’s salary should not be deducted from the
plaintiff’s revenue before calculating
loss, although it was not explained
why. In reply, the plaintiff submitted that, if salary paid to Dr Lukic had to
be deducted to
arrive at net income, then the figures for the 2018 financial
year should be used, being $877,550. Where the George Street and Darlinghurst
clinics experienced ‘teething problems’, the figures from earlier
years provided no reliable indication of likely income
after 9 August 2018. If
this approach was taken, then the damages were $2,394,384 (after dividing
$877,550 by 365 (to give a daily
rate of $2,404) and multiplying this by
the plaintiff submitted that the 2018 figures should be adjusted to allow for
the closure of the Darlinghurst clinic for
renovations for three months. The
contemporaneous documents indicated that the closure had a depressant effect on
earnings. I accept this. Using the defendant’s spreadsheet
of the doctor’s gross billings, the plaintiff submitted that
Lukic’s average monthly billings were $352,540 for the nine months when
the Darlinghurst clinic was open but only an average
of $31,332 for the three
months when the clinic was closed. That is, gross billings of $963,623 were
lost. As Dr Lukic would have
received (at least) 35% of that amount (under cl 6
of the Services Deed), that is a loss to the doctor of $337,268 due to the
If that were added to the 2018 figure of $877,550, the annual figure
becomes $1,214,818 and the relevant daily rate becomes $3,328.
Across 966 days,
the plaintiff’s damages are $3,215,108. Alternatively, the FY18 figure
could be increased by 25% to allow
for the effective loss of 3 months.
This gives an annual figure of $1,096,937, a daily rate of $3,005 and damages of
$2,902,830.
Consideration
initial question is whether the plaintiff is entitled to an award of damages
reflecting its gross receipts from the defendant or
its net profit after paying
expenses, including Dr Lukic’s salary. The general measure of contractual
damages is the amount,
so far as money can provide, necessary to put the
plaintiff in the position they would have been if the contract had been
Wenham v Ella
(1972) 127 CLR 454
[1972] HCA 43
460 (per Barwick CJ). The
prima facie
measure of contractual damages is
net profit rather than gross income:
Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty
(1991) 174 CLR 64
[1991] HCA 54
at 81 (Mason CJ and Dawson J) 100
(Deane J), 152-153 (Gaudron J) and 160 (McHugh J).
a company has a contract to provide services to a defendant, and where those
services are provided by the company’s directors
or shareholders, the
company’s contractual damages for breach of contract remain its net
profits and not what the company’s
directors or shareholders would have
been paid by the company if the contract had been performed:
Hadoplane Pty
Ltd v Edward Rushton Pty Ltd
[1996] 1 Qd R 156.
There, Pinkus JA (Thomas J
agreeing) declined to lift the corporate veil. At 162:
“... it is tempting to adopt a solution of deconstructing the legal
framework in which the [directors and shareholders] conducted
their business,
assessing damages as if they and not the company had made the relevant contract
and brought the actions. I can see
no justification in principle for taking this
course. ... It is a familiar notion that the use of a company structure can
it complications and disadvantages, as well as the hoped-for
advantages.”
Honour rejected the notion that the company was entitled to damages based on
gross receipts lost, without regard to expenses incurred.
Similarly, Thomas J
observed at 164-165:
“While the result is an unfortunate one from the composite view of the
appellant company and of [its directors], it is a consequence
of the legal
structure that was created for reasons which were thought to be of overall
advantage at the time. To introduce exceptions
would I think create uncertainty
in the law and also perhaps jeopardise the advantages which currently follow
from a relatively strict
adherence to the principle of separate corporate
existence.”
v Edward Rushton
was distinguished in
Bacchus Corp Pty Ltd v Grapes of
Australia Management Ltd
[2003] VSC 29
on the facts, albeit Habersberger J
nonetheless accepted that “one has to assess the loss of net profits, not
the loss of gross
income, of the contracting party”: at [46].
the plaintiff is Belverdere Pty Ltd. Whilst Dr Lukic was a party to the
contracts, she is not a party to the proceedings. The
measure of loss is the
company’s net profits which it would otherwise have enjoyed if the
contract had remained on foot for
the remainder of its term, not the gross
receipts which would have been paid by the defendant to the plaintiff.
plaintiff’s tax returns for 2015 to 2019 financial years reported total
income of $12,292,913 but nett income of $2,906,632.
Although the 2015 to 2019
financial years do not precisely align with the life of the Sale Deed and
Services Deed, being from 28
July 2014 to 9 August 2018, I agree that it is
appropriate to include all income. Dr Lukic said that the plaintiff
set up for Primary IVF, it was never meant to be an ongoing
entity under any other circumstance.” The plaintiff did not undertake
other business, either before or after providing services to Primary IVF. The
company’s only source of income was that
generated by the incorporated
medical practice that Dr Lukic conducted. Any expenses were in relation to that
defendant’s calculation of loss probably understates the plaintiff’s
loss as it does not account for the significant
drop in income for three months
in 2018 when the Darlinghurst clinic was closed for renovations. The
plaintiff’s calculation
of loss probably overstates the plaintiff’s
loss for two reasons. First, the doctor’s fees in the months after the
Darlinghurst
clinic re-opened may have been higher than usual, as the doctor
endeavoured to perform a backlog of procedures. Second, whatever
the rights and
wrongs of it, there is some evidence that the doctor was becoming less popular
with patients, who were asking to see
another specialist. The doctor’s
fees may have been negatively affected by this in the remaining three years of
the term of
the contract.
arriving at a measure of damages, I have ignored the nett income for the 2015
financial year to allow for any ‘teething difficulties’.
‘normalised’ nett income for the 2018 financial year to allow for
the closure of the clinic. I have done so by
increasing the net income for the
2018 financial year by 20% to $1,053,060. As adjusted, the nett income for the
2016 to 2019 financial
years is $2,717,709 over 1,136 days, which is a daily
rate of $2,392. Using that daily rate over the remaining 996 days of the term
the contract, the plaintiffs’ loss was $2,382,780. The remaining question
is the extent to which this figure should be discounted
for any failure to
Failure to mitigate
defendant submitted that any loss should be limited by reason of the
plaintiff’s failure to mitigate to three or six months
of lost net income.
For three months, the loss was $177,570 and, for six months, $351,140. Six
months was said to be extremely generous.
No reasonable steps were taken to
secure another contract that would allow it to conduct an incorporated medical
practice for several
years. Further, Dr Lukic never intended to use the
plaintiff in the new Connect IVF venture in any event, but incorporated a new
corporate vehicle. The plaintiff was left to “wilt on the vine” with
no attempt to mitigate any loss that it had suffered.
defendant submitted that Dr Lukic maintained her fellowship with the Royal
Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians
and Gynaecologists at all
times, which required her to complete continuing professional development. Dr
Lukic gave warranties under
the new contractual agreements entered into in May
2021 that she had specialist registration in obstetrics and gynaecology. It was
open to Dr Lukic to enquire with the recruiter, who routinely emailed her, as to
whether they had any other form of work available
which she was qualified to
perform. She made no such enquiries with the recruiter or with any other
recruitment agencies, hospitals
or clinics.
plaintiff submitted that Dr Lukic acted reasonably in seeking to mitigate her
loss. There was a sustained and consistent effort
to obtain a replacement
position as an IVF specialist. Mitigation does not require a person to move
interstate in order to find a
placement position, especially in circumstances
where it seemed that a position would be available with Connect IVF in
short order. Unfortunately, various matters delayed Dr Lukic’s
commencement with Connect IVF such as disputes between investors
and Council
approvals. IVF specialist positions were said to be rare, even when one could be
found outside of the areas prohibited
by the restraints.
Consideration
assessing loss for breach of contract, “loss which is due to unreasonable
or improvident actions of the plaintiff is generally
disregarded by application
of the rules of mitigation of loss”:
Cessnock City Council v 123 259
932 Pty Ltd
(2024) 281 CLR 39;
[2024] HCA 17
(per Edelman,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ).
is reasonable for a person to do in mitigation of damages is a question of fact
in the circumstances of each case:
Payzu v Saunders
[1919] 2 KB 518
Bankes LJ);
British Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing
Co Ltd v Underground Electric Railways Co of London Ltd
[1912] UKLawRpAC 43
[1912] AC 673
[1911-13] All ER Rep 63
Regional Development Australia
Murraylands and Riverland Inc v Smith
[2015] SASCFC 160
it is contended that a plaintiff should have taken steps by way of mitigation,
the onus of proof is on the defendant:
Cessnock City Council v 123 259 932
at [121], citing
TC Industrial Plant Pty Ltd v Robert’s Queensland
(1963) 180 CLR 130
[1963] HCA 57
at 138 (Kitto, Windeyer and Owen
of Mr Simpson’s responsibilities was specialist recruitment. In his
experience, fertility specialists had multiple options
in selecting their place
of work, as there was a high degree of competition and demand for qualified
fertility specialists. In the
recruitment undertaken in his role, fertility
specialists could ‘pick and choose’ and it was challenging for
to attract and retain specialists due to high demand.
Lukic agreed the reality was that huge growth in demand for IVF had not been met
by a similar growth of medical professionals providing
such services.
Consistently with this, it will be recalled that Primary IVF paid Dr Lukic $1.4
million to join their business, albeit
in 2014. In 2018, the defendant was also
concerned as to how it would replace Dr Lukic after the contracts were
terminated.
is a little surprising in these circumstances that it took Dr Lukic nearly three
years to resume medical practice. I do think it
was unreasonable for her to wait
until she had secured a new business venture and to exclude a temporary,
part-time or employed position
until that venture came to fruition. Where,
according to Mr Simpson, there was a high demand for fertility specialists, it
that Dr Lukic would have been able to secure such work and the
associated income if she had chosen to do so.
do note, however, that the doctor remained subject to a restraint for three
years after termination of the contracts and could not
render medical services
in a large part of the Sydney metropolitan area: see [
]. I note also that the
plaintiff’s legal representatives were in negotiations with the
defendant’s legal representatives
for six months. Those negotiations
likely focussed on who would pay what sum to who, but also where the doctor
could work given the
restraint. If that was not a subject of negotiations, it
could easily have been raised.
the restraint, I would have considered that the timeframes posited by the
defendant were reasonable and allowed a loss of six
months net income, being
$425,000. But, given the restraint, and the additional uncertainties about the
relaxation of that restraint,
I would have allowed a loss of 12 months net
income, being $850,000.
these reasons, I make the following orders:
(1) Dismiss the Summons with costs.
(2) In the event that a special costs order is sought, direct the party seeking
the order to serve any affidavits and submissions
(limited to three pages) by 24
November 2025, with any affidavits in reply and submissions (limited to three
pages) to be served
by 1 December 2025 and the application to be determined on
the papers.
(3) Direct the parties to notify any errors or omissions by 24 November 2025.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (609 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter