URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/232.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v Gow [2025] NSWCA 232 (23 October 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v Gow
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 232
Hearing Date(s):
7 October 2025 — on the papers
Decision Date:
23 October 2025
Bell CJ at [1]
Adamson JA at [2]
McHugh JA at [94]
(1) Declare that the respondent is not a fit and proper
person to remain on the Roll of Australian
(2) Order that the name of the respondent be
removed from the Roll of Australian Lawyers.
(3) Order the
respondent to pay the applicant’s costs of the proceedings.
Catchwords:
LEGAL PRACTITIONERS — disciplinary proceedings — application by
Prothonotary for removal of name from roll — practitioner
convicted of
criminal offences — breach of undertakings to Law Society — failure
to complete practice management course
— practising without a practising
certificate — holding-out as solicitor — misappropriation of trust
forgery and uttering of false court orders — subsequent
criminal offending including breaches of bail, common assault and driving
offences — practitioner unfit to remain on roll
Legislation Cited:
Bail Act 1980
Crimes Act 1900
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(NSW), ss 6,
, 138, 144, 148, 264, 388
Queensland Criminal Code, s
Summary Offences Act 2005
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), r 14.3
Cases Cited:
Bridges v Law Society of New South Wales
[1983] 2 NSWLR 361
Briginshaw v
(1938) 60 CLR 336
[1938] HCA 34
Carr v Council of the Law Society
of New South Wales
[2020] NSWCA 276
Council of the Law Society of New South
Wales v Duncan
[2024] NSWCA 147
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2019] NSWCA 33
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v XX
[2025] NSWCA 4
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Zhukovska
(2020) 102 NSWLR 655
[2020] NSWCA 163
Council of the New South Wales Bar
Association v Einfeld
[2009] NSWCA 255
(2009) 258 ALR 768
Council of the NSW
Bar Association v Power
(2008) 71 NSWLR 451
[2008] NSWCA 135
New South Wales
Bar Association v Cummins
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
[2001] NSWCA 284
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v Sukkar
[2007] NSWCA
Principal judgment
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
(Applicant)
Samantha Gow (Respondent)
Representation:
K Curry (Applicant)
Not applicable
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Crown Solicitor's Office (Applicant)
applicable (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/232330
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
By amended summons filed on 18 December 2024, the Prothonotary of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales (the applicant) sought a declaration
respondent, Samantha Gow, is not a fit and proper person to remain on the roll
of legal practitioners (the roll), and an
order that her name be removed from
the roll. This application invoked the Court’s original jurisdiction,
derived from its
inherent power and
of the Legal Profession Uniform Law
The respondent did not file an appearance and took no active part in the
proceedings although she was served. The application therefore
proceeded on the
The respondent was admitted as a lawyer in New South Wales in February 2013.
In March 2016, a practising certificate was issued to
her to practise as a
Principal of a Legal Practice on her undertaking to the Law Society to complete
the next available Practice
Management Course. Thereafter she practised through
a company, Sam Gow Pty Ltd, as trustee for the Gow Family Trust, under the name
“Gow Group Global Legal Services”. She failed to comply with her
undertaking and on 14 December 2017 the Council of the
Law Society resolved that
she was not a fit and proper person to hold a practising certificate. No further
practising certificate
was issued to her.
The Prothonotary relied on 27 particulars spanning the period 2014-2024.
These included:
• 2014 convictions in Queensland for breach of bail,
being drunk in a public place, and committing public nuisance;
• failure between 2016 and 2017 to comply with an
undertaking to complete a Practice Management Course;
• dishonest conduct in 2017 concerning client monies,
resulting in a successful Fidelity Fund claim by Mrs Ferguson;
• falsely holding herself out as a solicitor in
Queensland and New South Wales in 2018, including in
R v Hadfield
Volkswagen Financial Services Australia Pty Ltd v Gow
• 2021 convictions in Queensland for forging and
uttering court documents purporting to be orders of the Federal Circuit Court,
for which she was sentenced to nine months imprisonment (suspended after 70
• breach of bail conditions in 2021;
• a 2023 assault on her mother, resulting in a
12-month Community Corrections Order and an apprehended-violence order; and
• 2024 driving offences in Victoria, resulting in
fines and licence disqualification.
The respondent made no submissions or appearance to oppose the relief
The Court held
(Adamson JA, Bell CJ and McHugh JA agreeing)
declaring the respondent is not a fit and proper person to remain on the roll of
legal practitioners:
(1) The evidence established that the respondent was not a
fit and proper person to remain on the roll: [81].
(2) The respondent’s repeated failure to comply with
her undertaking to the Law Society to complete a Practice Management
demonstrated that she could not be trusted to fulfil obligations associated with
her right to practise. Her continued holding-out
as a solicitor after her
practising certificate had lapsed misled courts and breached the trust reposed
in legal practitioners. Her
misappropriation of client funds and the forgery of
false court orders demonstrated serious dishonesty and a willingness to put
interests above duty. Her further offending, including breaches of
bail, common assault and driving offences, indicated that she
is prepared to
breach the law for her own convenience and cannot be trusted to abide by it:
[82]-[91] (Adamson JA), [94] (McHugh
(3) The cumulative effect of the conduct proved against the
respondent was that she was not a fit and proper person to remain on
(4) The respondent’s misuse of the trust account and
her separate conduct in forging and uttering court orders of the Federal
Court would each independently have warranted her removal from the roll:
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v XX
, considered.
: I have had the benefit of reading the reasons of Adamson JA. I agree
with those reasons and the orders her Honour proposes.
: By amended summons filed on 18 December 2024, the Prothonotary of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales (the applicant) seeks a
declaration that the
respondent, Samantha Gow (the respondent) is not a fit and proper person to
remain on the roll of legal practitioners
(the roll) and an order that the
respondent’s name be removed from the roll.
Court has original jurisdiction to make these orders under its inherent
the respondent was served (having consented to service by email) and has had
several interactions with the applicant since
the original summons was filed on
24 June 2024, she neither filed an appearance, nor attended any directions
hearings, nor filed
any evidence, nor took any steps to actively oppose the
orders. I am satisfied that the applicant, through the Crown Solicitor’s
Office, has made ample attempts to make the respondent aware of the proceedings,
including the detail of, and evidence supporting,
the allegations made against
her. No substantive response has been received from the respondent, although she
sent an email to the
applicant’s solicitor on 2 September 2024, asking
that her appearance at the directions hearing be “excused”. The
applicant has received no further communication from her. The respondent has
failed to engage with these proceedings. Accordingly,
this matter is to be
determined on the papers.
the respondent has not appeared to oppose the orders sought, this Court must
satisfy itself independently not only that she
is presently unfit to practise
but also that she is likely to be unfit in the indefinite future such that the
removal of her name
from the roll is appropriate:
Council of the Law Society
of New South Wales v XX
[2025] NSWCA 4
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Duncan
[2024] NSWCA 147
Council of the NSW Bar Association v Power
(2008) 71 NSWLR
[2008] NSWCA 135
Council of the Law Society of
New South Wales v Parente
[2019] NSWCA 33
the Law Society of New South Wales v Zhukovska
(2020) 102 NSWLR 655
the reasons given below, I am persuaded that the applicant has discharged his
onus of proving that the respondent is not a fit
and proper person to remain on
the roll and that, accordingly, the respondent’s name ought be removed
from the roll.
Court is obliged to set out the findings of fact on the basis of which a
practitioner’s name has been removed from the
roll: see the summary of
authorities in
Council of the New South Wales Bar Association v Einfeld
[2009] NSWCA 255
(2009) 258 ALR 768
. There are two reasons for
this. First, in the event that the respondent applies to be returned to the
roll, the Court hearing such
an application is required to take into account the
conduct on the basis of which the order for removal was made:
Bridges v Law
Society of New South Wales
[1983] 2 NSWLR 361
at 362-363 (Moffitt P).
Secondly, the making of detailed factual findings serves to educate the
profession as to the conduct which
has been found to be inconsistent with
continued practice.
applicant relies on 27 particulars in support of the relief sought in the
amended summons. He contends that these particulars
cumulatively demonstrate
that the respondent is not a fit and proper person to remain on the roll. The
particulars can be summarised
as follows:
(1) 2021 convictions in the Magistrates Court of Queensland (particulars
(2) 2014 findings of guilt in the Magistrates Court of Queensland (particulars
(f) and (g));
(3) 2024 Local Court of New South Wales findings of guilt (particulars (h) and
(4) 2017 Law Society of NSW finding that the respondent was not a fit and proper
person to hold a practising certificate and its
refusal to renew her practising
certificate (particulars (j)-(m));
(5) 2018 conduct in continuing to act as a solicitor in:
(a) R v Hadfield
in the Supreme Court of Queensland in Brisbane when she
purported to act on behalf of Mr Hadfield (particulars (n)-(p));
(b) Volkswagen Financial Services Australia Pty Ltd v Gow
the Magistrates
Court of Queensland at Cleveland (particular (q));
(c) Gow v Volkswagen Financial Services Australia Pty Ltd
in the Local
Court of New South Wales at Tweed Heads (particular (r)); and
(6) 2018 Law Society of NSW finding of dishonest act or omission of the
respondent resulting in a claim by Mrs Ferguson against the
Fidelity Fund
(particulars (s)-(aa)).
particulars include conduct both in New South Wales and Queensland. The Legal
Services Commission in Queensland conducted its
own investigations into the
respondent’s conduct in purporting to act as, and holding herself out as,
a solicitor and also
her criminal conduct. It provided that material to the
applicant to support the present application.
propose to address the particularised allegations in chronological
Background: the respondent’s admission to practice
and right to practise
respondent was born in 1979. On 15 February 2013, the respondent, then 33 years
old, was admitted as a lawyer to the Supreme Court
of New South Wales and her
name was entered on the roll. She has not been admitted elsewhere.
respondent held a practising certificate as an employee of a legal practice
(supervised) from 11 March 2013.
March 2016, the respondent applied for a variation to her practising certificate
to practise as a Principal of a Legal Practice
of an Incorporated Legal
Practice. Her then current practising certificate was subject to condition 3,
which required her to complete
a Practice Management Course. On 25 March 2016,
the respondent gave a solicitor’s undertaking, to complete the next
Practice Management Course. On the basis of that undertaking,
condition 3 was removed and condition 4, which recorded the undertaking,
imposed. Thereafter, the respondent was issued with a practising certificate as
a Principal of a Legal Practice.
April 2016, the respondent practised through a law practice known as “Gow
Group Global Legal Services”, which was
operated through a company, Sam
Gow Pty Ltd as trustee for the Gow Family Trust, later known as 1189 Properties
Ptd Ltd (the Gow
company), of which the respondent was the sole director and
shareholder.
respondent was granted numerous extensions of her undertaking. However, when she
still had not done the Practice Management Course
as at 30 June 2017, her
practising certificate was not renewed for the following practice year (1 July
2017-30 June 2018). On 14
December 2017, the Council of the Law Society refused
to renew the respondent’s practising certificate for the 2017/2018 year.
The applicant appears to accept that the respondent held a practising
certificate up to 14 December 2017.
respondent’s failure to comply with her undertaking to complete the
Practice Management Court and associated conduct is
relied on by the applicant
in support of the relief sought and will be addressed below.
conduct relied on in support of the application
2014 offending
29 May 2014, the respondent pleaded guilty to the offences of breach of bail
undertaking
Bail Act 1980
(Qld)); being drunk in a public
Summary Offences Act 2005
(Qld)); and committing
public nuisance
Summary Offences Act
). Although the
Queensland Magistrates Court in Southport ordered that no conviction be
recorded, fines were imposed for all offences.
non-compliance with undertaking to the Law Society
referred to above, despite non-compliance with her undertaking to complete the
Practice Management Course, the respondent’s
practising certificate was
renewed and extensions granted for her to complete the course. However, as at 30
June 2017, she had still
not complied with her undertaking and no further
practising certificate was issued. She was referred to the Law Society’s
Professional
Standards Department for failing to comply with her undertaking.
14 December 2017, the Council of the Law Society refused to renew the
respondent’s practising certificate for the 2017/2018
year, resolving that
she was not a fit and proper person to hold a practising certificate. Its
reasons for its resolutions included
the following:
The Lawyer’s conduct demonstrates her failure to appreciate the nature and
obligation imposed by the Undertaking provided and
the condition imposed on her
practising certificate and/or the seriousness in failing to comply with the
Undertaking and condition.
The nature of the Lawyer’s alleged conduct is of such seriousness that the
Council believes that the protection of the public
warrants the cessation of the
Solicitor’s right to practise.
14 December 2017, the Law Society appointed Richard Flynn as manager of the
respondent’s law practice. On 16 December 2017,
Mr Flynn informed the
respondent by telephone that she was no longer permitted to practise as a
solicitor, hold herself out as a
solicitor or operate a trust account. In a
letter dated 20 December 2017, Mr Flynn confirmed his appointment and what he
her in the telephone conversation.
referred to above, the respondent’s practising certificate for the year
ended 30 June 2017 was not renewed and no further
practising certificate was
The respondent’s conduct which gave rise to a
successful claim by Mrs Ferguson against the NSW Fidelity Fund
The underlying facts
15 August 2017, the respondent offered to act as solicitor for Mrs Ferguson,
aged 72 years and retired, who wanted to buy a unit
in Surfers Paradise with an
associate for $125,000. The respondent gave Mrs Ferguson her trust account
details and asked her to transfer
$57,500 (for her half-share in the unit less
the deposit) into that account, which she did on 4 September 2017. At the time
transfer, the respondent’s trust account had a nil balance.
16 September 2017, the respondent met Mrs Ferguson in a car park, showed her a
contract on her mobile phone and asked her to sign
it electronically. Mrs
Ferguson did so, believing that it related to her purchase of the unit. She
received no information from the
respondent and was unable to contact her after
November 2017, despite repeated requests for the return of the money.
the sum of $57,500 which Mrs Ferguson had deposited into the respondent’s
trust account, the respondent transferred a total
of $20,500 to her office
Date of transfer
Amount of transfer
21 September 2017
28 November 2017
6 January 2018
28 January 2018
7 February 2018
respondent’s office account showed that withdrawals were made from the
office account for the respondent’s personal
expenses totalling
$10,343.43.
respondent admitted that the office account was overdrawn immediately prior to
the first transfer referred to above on 21 September
27 January 2018, Mrs Ferguson sent the respondent an email in the following
This is 3 months ago and no communication. You have no office and meet at a
service station.
This is all to keep from returning my money which I have constantly asked for
and no answers from you.
17 years of saving and all I have. You have no morals and obviously take
advantage of elderly in this position. Absolutely disgusting.
The Law Society investigation into Mrs Ferguson’s complaint
10 May 2018, Peter Edwards, who had been appointed by the Law Society to
investigate the matter, interviewed the respondent. A
transcript was made of the
interview. The respondent informed Mr Edwards that Mrs Ferguson was still a
client of hers, admitted that
she had authorised the transfer of a total of
$20,500 from the trust account to the office account but maintained that the
were made to enable payment for “services rendered” and
that she had issued invoices for each amount. When it was put
to the respondent
that she had not issued any invoices to Mrs Ferguson, she responded, “That
is not true”.
20 July 2018, Mr Edwards reported to the Law Society on his investigation. He
expressed the view that the respondent had breached
the following provisions of
the Uniform
Disbursing trust money of $20,500 to her office account without authority
and failing to repay trust money totalling $57,500 when
Withdrawing trust money of $20,500 for legal costs contrary to the
applicable procedures and requirements.
Causing a deficiency of $20,500 in both the law practice trust account and
trust ledger account for Mrs Ferguson.
Misleading the investigator (Mr Edwards) in relation to her dealings with
Mrs Ferguson, including that she “issued” tax
invoices to Mrs
Ultimately,
on 26 July 2018, Mr Flynn attended the Manly branch of the Bank of Queensland
(BOQ) to arrange to transfer the funds from
the respondent’s trust and
office accounts to repay Mrs Ferguson. He was advised that there was nothing in
the accounts. Subsequently,
Mr Flynn learned that, on 19 July 2018, the
respondent had gone to the BOQ’s Coolangatta branch and withdrawn all the
from the trust and office accounts of her practice, in return for bank
cheques which totalled $47,120.02. At Mr Flynn’s request,
the BOQ put a
stop to those cheques to prevent the respondent from having access to these
funds. He arranged for further bank cheques
to be drawn in favour of Mrs
Ferguson and posted them to her under cover of letter dated 31 July
Mrs Ferguson’s claim on the Fidelity Fund
letter dated 31 July 2018, Mr Flynn advised Mrs Ferguson of her right to make a
claim on the NSW Law Society Fidelity Fund for
the disparity (in the order of
$10,000) between what she had paid and what Mr Flynn had been able to recover.
Mrs Ferguson lodged
a claim which was received by the Law Society on 16 August
Byron was appointed to investigate Mrs Ferguson’s claim against the
Fidelity Fund. In her report of 15 November 2018,
she identified the following
issues: first, whether the respondent performed any relevant work; second,
whether any work performed
was of value to Mrs Ferguson and, if so, how that
value might be offset; and, third, whether the respondent had acted dishonestly
or made dishonest omissions.
to the third matter, Ms Byron relevantly found:
It seems very unlikely that any proper costs would have been anything like
$10,000.00. Rather, the following matters suggest that
the invoices totalling
$10,000.00 were an attempt to cover a dishonest taking of that amount:
• the date errors in the ledgers
• the absence of any documents related to the claimed
• the transfers from trust after the December 2017
refusal of a pc [practising certificate] and appointment of the manager
• Ms Gow’s attempts, as recently as July 2018, to
withdraw the balance of the trust and office accounts, including
her creation of
a new “trust” account.
a meeting on 15 November 2018, the Fidelity Fund Management Committee (FFMC)
resolved that the Presiding Administrator of the Fidelity
Fund be provided with
the FFMC’s initial view of the claim, which was to:
(a) find that a default occurred within the meaning of section
219 of the Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW) (‘Uniform Law’),
a failure of the law practice 1189 Properties Pty Ltd trading as Gow Group -
Global Legal Services in respect of $10,379.98
of $57,500.00, received from the
claimant on 4 September 2017, this failure arising from dishonest acts or
omissions of the law practice’s
associate Samantha Catherine Gow; and
(b) determine the claim by wholly allowing it for the amount
of $10,379.98 plus interest on that amount at the rate of 5% per
annum from 16
August 2018 to the date of notification of allowance.
Presiding Administrator’s Final Report dated 29 November 2018 agreed with
the findings of fact made by the FFMCA and with
the course proposed, and said at
paragraph 20:
It follows that [the respondent] engaged in a course of dishonesty which is
confirmed by the [respondent’s] conduct on 23 September
2017 when she
transferred trust money to an overdrawn account and her failure to repay.
13 December 2018, the FFMCA resolved to accept the recommendation in the Final
Report and paid Mrs Ferguson the amount claimed
together with
Acting as a solicitor and holding herself out as a
solicitor notwithstanding her lack of practising certificate
In the Queensland Magistrates Court at Cleveland in March-April 2018 in
Volkswagen Financial Services Australia Pty Ltd v Gow
12 March 2018, Volkswagen Financial Services Australia Pty Ltd (VW) filed an
application in the Queensland Magistrates Court at
Cleveland (the Cleveland
Magistrates Court) for delivery of goods, being an Audi motor vehicle (the Audi)
of which the Gow company
was the lessor and the respondent was the guarantor
under the lease.
15 March 2018, the magistrate, by order, authorised the repossession of the
Audi. VW repossessed the Audi on 24 March 2018.
10 April 2018, the Gow company and the respondent applied to set aside or stay
the order for repossession. Their application came
on for hearing in the
Cleveland Magistrates Court before Magistrate Sarra on 18 April 2018. In the
course of the hearing, the respondent
said of the Audi:
[The Audi’s] got my belongings in it. ... [A]ll my ... client files are in
the Magistrate asked the respondent what her client files were doing in the boot
when they “[should] ... be in a filing
cabinet secured in [her]
office”, the respondent said that she had “been on a matter in the
Supreme Court”. When
the Magistrate asked her what her occupation was, she
said that she was “a solicitor”. She added:
I have a practising certificate in Queensland at the moment under my firm, your
the Magistrate asked the respondent how many files were in the car, she
It was just basically one client’s files. It’s probably, like, two
folders in the boot.
the conclusion of the hearing, the Magistrate set aside the application to
injunct the sale of the vehicle; directed that the files
be retrieved from the
vehicle within a specified time; ordered the respondent (Ms Gow) to pay costs of
$600; and noted that the matter
would be referred to “the Legal [Services]
Commission” for its consideration.
11 June 2018, at the Magistrate’s request, the Administration Officer of
the Local Court at Cleveland emailed the transcript
and the orders made to the
Legal Services Commission, which investigated the conduct.
Supreme Court of Queensland at Brisbane in the matter of R v Hadfield in March
7 March 2018, the prosecution of Vaughn Hadfield was listed for review before
Boddice J of the Supreme Court of Queensland at Brisbane.
Mr Hadfield’s
then solicitors, Hannay Lawyers, sought and were granted leave to withdraw from
representing him. The matter
was stood down as Mr Hadfield was not present in
Court, in breach of a condition of his bail.
the hearing of the matter resumed at 2.02pm, the respondent sought leave to
appear on behalf of Mr Hadfield. She did not explain
why leave was required but
informed the Court:
Your Honour, I’ve just been
talking with my learned friend
break in relation to a bit of a firm mix-up on the defence perspective. I
wasn’t aware that Mr Hannay’s firm appeared
this morning. I
don’t act for that firm. And I just wanted to put that on the record.
We were only retained, pretty much yesterday
, your Honour. And we would
like to seek a further adjournment, if your Honour’s minded for - sorry -
two further adjournments.
One for early - next week at the Court’s
discretion for a bail variation application and, also, a further one for this
to be brought into some sort of organisation and funding to be also
brought into some sort of organisation.
... [I]n my respectful submission, your Honour, in relation to that is that
my client has instructed me
that he was not aware he was to attend -
sorry, his solicitors that were on the record on Friday, Hannay Law, told him
that he wasn’t
to attend on Friday - he was advised by them to attend
today. There’s been a lot of confusion just for my limited understanding
so far in relation to
my client’s understanding
of what was going
on with his matters and what he’s actually being charged for, indicted
for, etcetera. Which, even myself,
was just clarifying the number of indictable
offences is different to what I was initially instructed, also.
So in my respectful submission, your Honour, the time that’s necessary
even though there has been a very long delay. And it’s
my intention to
bring it as short as possible and try and fix this matter because it’s
very messy and in the quickest time
that I possibly can, your Honour.
(Emphasis added.)
Boddice adjourned the matter to 21 March 2018 for review on the basis that Ms
Gow was his legal representative. Before adjourning
the matter, his Honour
directed the following remarks to Mr Hadfield:
You have interfered with the proper administration of justice in terms of the
listings of this court in the attitude you have taken
to date. I am not going to
tolerate it anymore.
So you need to cooperate with your solicitor
(Emphasis added.)
21 March 2018, Ms Gow again sought leave to appear for Mr Hadfield. The
transcript recorded that she said:
I [indistinct] to seek leave at the moment. I am a solicitor, but I have a
problem with my practising certificate to appear today
[indistinct] Mr Hadfield
is in the court.
respondent also said:
Your Honour, I have made some enquires over the last fortnight, since we were
here last, in relation to Mr Hadfield’s legal
matters with Legal Aid and
also the Department of Public Prosecutions. Now, [indistinct] the only thing
Gabrielle, who I believe is the legal officer on this matter
have sent a request through two weeks ago, in relation to receiving a copy of
the indictment along with any other QP9s, etcetera,
that would assist with my
looking into this matter for him
I did call this morning
have not had a reply to that email , so
I call when - in the break, to their
and I was advise[d] that Gabrielle was on leave, but I did leave a
message for, I believe, her assistant Samantha to call me back
haven’t received a response [from] that either. So I’m - I have
forged ahead with some progress, your Honour, however,
I do need to inform the
there is a real problem with our funding
. There seems to be a
problem with Legal Aid, in particular. There’s a dis -there’s an
argument whether his funding was
cancelled or whether it was refused. I was
informed just before the court today that [indistinct] in Southport [indistinct]
he would need to, possibly, make an appeal to that decision. However, we
still haven’t really established whether - what the
decision actually was
to appeal to start with.
(Emphasis added.)
the basis of the respondent’s representations to the Court that the
funding for representation was still being sorted out,
Boddice J adjourned the
matter again and listed it for review on 2 May 2018.
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld) informed the Legal Services
Commissioner (Qld) that there was no electronic
record at that office of any
communication having been received by that office on that day.
appearance on 21 March 2018 was the last occasion on which the respondent
appeared on behalf of Mr Hadfield.
In the Local Court of New
South Wales at Tweed Heads in May-June 2018 in the matter of Gow v VW
1 May 2018, the respondent filed a statement of claim in the Local Court of New
South Wales at Tweed Heads (the Tweed Heads Local
Court) in which she alleged
that VW’s repossession of the Audi on 24 March 2018 was unlawful. The
statement of claim was served
on VW on 8 May 2018. On 30 May 2018, the
respondent filed an application for default judgment (which was premature as VW
had 28 days
from service of the statement of claim within which to file a
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), (UCPR), r 14.3). VW
filed a notice of motion seeking that the proceedings be struck out as an abuse
of process or, in the
alternative, on the basis that they were frivolous or
vexatious. The notice of motion was served on the respondent on 7 June 2018
listed for hearing on 26 June 2018 before Dunlevy LCM.
the course of the hearing, the following exchange occurred between Dunlevy LCM
and the respondent:
HIS HONOUR: Are you actually a solicitor?
PLAINTIFF: Yes your Honour.
NAUGHTON [representative for VW]: She is not admitted as a solicitor on the
PLAINTIFF: I am not admitted at the moment because there are things going on
with my law firm that I am still dealing with, with
the Law Society. I am
representing myself today.
HIS HONOUR: I understand and you can represent yourself as a litigant in
Yes, by profession yes
(Emphasis added.)
the conclusion of the oral hearing on 26 June 2018, Dunlevy LCM dismissed the
respondent’s proceedings on the bases that
the decision of the Cleveland
Magistrates Court was
res judicata
and also that the proceedings were an
abuse of process.
Criminal conduct
Forging and uttering documents which appeared to have been issued by a
court in January and February 2018
16 September 2021, the respondent pleaded guilty in the Queensland Magistrates
Court at Southport to the following four charges
contrary to s 488(1)(a) of
the Queensland Criminal
Offence charged
30 Jan 2018
Forge a document with intent to defraud, in circumstances where the
document appeared to have been issued by lawful authority, namely
by the Federal
Circuit Court (the Circuit Court).
Utter a forged document to [DW], with intent to defraud, in circumstances
where the document appeared to have been issued by lawful
authority, namely by
the Circuit Court.
Forge a document with intent to defraud, in circumstances where the
document appeared to have been issued by lawful authority, namely
by the Circuit
Uttered a forged document, with intent to defraud, in circumstances where
the document appeared to have been issued by lawful authority,
namely by the
Circuit Court.
statement of facts tendered on sentence was accepted by the respondent. The
following is a summary of these facts.
respondent and [DW] were married in 2002 and had children, including SW, who was
born in 2004. They divorced in 2008. There was
an informal arrangement between
them as to custody of, and access to, the children. SW lived with the respondent
and went to a local
school (the Local School). However, in January 2018, SW told
her father that she wanted to live with him. DW agreed and, on 23 January
enrolled her in a school which SW had previously attended (the College).
29 January 2018, the respondent sent the following text to DW:
[SW] does not go to [the College] anymore. She is enrolled in [the Local School]
and that is where she will stay that is also where
[JW, another child in the
family] is going. I will be advising school of this tomorrow and the court.
the time this and subsequent texts (see below) were sent, there were no relevant
court proceedings on foot.
or about 30 January 2018, DW received a text message from the respondent which
attached a document which purported to be parenting
orders made by “Judge
Jarrett” of the Circuit Court with respect to SW in respect of file number
ZB3062/201 (the first
orders). The document identified DW as the respondent to
the proceedings but did not show the respondent (Ms Gow) as a party. The
orders included an order that SW live with Ms Gow, that DW submit to
psychological assessment, and that SW attend the Local
School. The first orders
purported to be signed by “Judge Jarret” (Jarrett J) of the Circuit
Court (paragraph 10 of the
statement of facts).
sending the first orders to DW, the respondent sent the following text to
You need 2 organise for [SW] to be brought home within the hour and I
don’t want you anywhere near my house and let[‘]s
hope you have
enough sense not 2 be arrested in front of ur daughter
These are not the last of the orders I am seeking either. Do you have a lawyer
or should I have the police serve you with the other
court documents?
Still 2 self absorbed 2 learn. That’s a Family Court Order [DW] ......
What you think your [scil.] above the Judges 2!?
court order was uttered to induce DW to act in a way detrimental to his lawful
right to have custody of SW at the relevant time.
6 February 2018, the respondent went to the front office of the College and
handed a document which purported to constitute orders
of the Circuit Court to a
staff member of the College (the second orders). The orders were in the same
terms as the one referred
to above but, in this version, the respondent was
listed as the applicant. The staff member informed the respondent that SW had
school that day. The respondent left the document with her and said that
she would return the following day.
7 February 2018, the respondent attended the College and demanded that SW be
sent home with her. She referred to the second orders
and alleged that DW had
“stolen” SW. The principal telephoned DW, who attended the school.
An agreement was reached,
as a result of which SW went home with the
respondent.
20 February 2018, the respondent contacted the principal of the College to
arrange for SW to be collected so that she could be
enrolled in the Local
School. The principal said that he would honour “the document”
(being the second orders). The respondent
collected SW from the College.
second court orders were uttered to induce the College to act in a way
detrimental to a legal right it enjoyed, which was, in
effect, to have SW, who
was enrolled in the College, attend the College.
mid-February 2018, DW contacted the Circuit Court to discuss the first orders
and cited the file number for its reference. He was
told that no orders had been
made in any matter involving DW or the respondent on 30 January 2018; the file
number did not exist
in the court records; and a similar file number (ZB 3602 of
2001) related to the matter between the parties in 2001.
24 May 2018, a search warrant was executed at the respondent’s residence
in her presence and in the presence of her solicitor.
Her mobile phone and
computer files of MS Word documents similar in appearance to the first and
second orders were seized. On 8 June
2018, a search warrant was executed at the
College, in the course of which the second orders and documents relating to
enrolment were seized.
16 September 2021, the respondent was sentenced (for the four offences) to a
term of imprisonment of nine months, which was suspended
after 70 days in
custody (which equated to the pre-sentence custody from 8 July 2021 to 15
September 2021).
Breach of bail undertaking in 2021
21 June 2019, the respondent entered into a bail undertaking in the Queensland
Magistrates Court at Brisbane to appear at Southport
on 1 July 2019 and
subsequently, whenever the matter was listed. The address at which she was to
reside for the purpose of her bail
was her residence in Banora Point,
Queensland. The matter was listed before the court on 7 January 2021. On 6
January 2021, the respondent
emailed the prosecutor saying that she could not
attend court as she was living in New South Wales and was prevented by COVID-19
restrictions from attending. The prosecutor endeavoured to obtain information
without success.
the respondent failed to appear at the Local Court at Southport on 7 January
2021, a warrant was issued for her arrest. The police
facts recorded:
When questioned as to why she failed to appear the defendant stated that she was
under COVID19 lockdown in Tweed Heads at the time
of her appearance. She further
stated that she did not surrender herself immediately after lock down was lifted
because she planned
to contest the validity of the warrant through the District
and Supreme courts.
respondent pleaded not guilty to the charge of failure to appear in accordance
with her undertaking contrary to
Bail Act 1980
(Qld). On 9
March 2021, the respondent was convicted of that offence and fined
Common assault of respondent’s mother on 5 July
11 April 2024, the respondent was convicted by the Local Court at Tweed Heads
(following her plea of guilty) of an offence of common
assault contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW), committed on 5 July 2023 against the
respondent’s mother.
A/LCM’s remarks on sentence included the following narrative, based on the
police facts:
... Apparently, there was a plan for the complainant [the respondent’s
mother] and Ms Gow and the children to travel to Sydney
on the day in
Ms Gow was woken by her mother. A dispute followed about matters which are not
outlined in any particular detail, other than that
she became frustrated towards
her mother. The accused threw a jewellery box at the victim, hitting her on the
forearm, causing her
pain and a small bruise, then threw a number of other items
at the victim, including a chair, which hit the victim on her buttock
lower back. The accused then picked up a toothbrush and held it in her hand
towards the victim’s face with a clenched
fist, causing the victim to be
worried about her wellbeing. The accused’s brother took hold of her, and
the accused threw the
toothbrush at the victim, hitting her in the upper
The circumstances were made worse by the fact that the accused’s young
children, ten and 11, were present in the house. They
sought help from another
member of their family. They then left the property and went next door to find
safety. The police arrived
and they observed the accused at the time to be
erratic and appeared to be in a hyper state and to be upset and crying. She was
She did not resist the arrest, and she was cautioned and taken to the
police vehicle and taken to the Tweed Heads Police Station.
respondent was convicted and sentenced to a Community Corrections Order (CCO)
pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) for a
period of 12 months, expiring on 10 April 2025. The CCO was subject to
conditions, which included that the respondent
be subject to supervision by a
Community Corrections Officer, undertake a mental health assessment and
undertake any treatment or
programs recommended by that assessment and to
undertake a drug or alcohol program as recommended. An Apprehended Violence
was made against her for the protection of her mother and two other named
persons for a period of two years.
Driving offences
28 October 2024, the respondent was convicted of the following offences in the
Magistrates Court of Victoria at
30 December 2023
Drive while disqualified.
Use unregistered motor vehicle on highway.
4 January 2024
Drive while disqualified.
Use unregistered motor vehicle on highway.
Fail oral fluid test within 3 hours of driving.
28 October 2024, the respondent was sentenced for these offences by an aggregate
order which imposed a fine of $1,000 without conviction.
Further, her
driver’s licence was cancelled and she was disqualified from driving in
Victoria for 12 months.
Consideration
gravity of the allegations made by the applicant against the respondent is such
that they need to be proved on the balance of
probabilities to the
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 336
[1938] HCA 34):
see, for example,
The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v
[2007] NSWCA 341
at [40]; and
Carr v Council
of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2020] NSWCA 276
the inferences for which the applicant contended can more readily be drawn in
circumstances where the respondent has chosen
not to give evidence refuting the
evidence adduced against her. This is not a case where the respondent’s
right to silence
might operate to moderate the duty of candour which she owes to
this Court: cf.
at [28] (Hodgson JA, Beazley and McColl JJA
evidence adduced on behalf of the applicant which forms the basis of the
findings made above is sufficient to prove the particularised
allegations made
in support of the claim for relief to the requisite standard.
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
, Spigelman CJ explained why legal practitioners must conduct
themselves in accordance with the highest standards of integrity:
There are four interrelated interests involved. Clients must feel secure in
confiding their secrets and entrusting their most personal
affairs to lawyers.
Fellow practitioners must be able to depend implicitly on the word and the
behaviour of their colleagues. The
judiciary must have confidence in those who
appear before the courts. The public must have confidence in the legal
profession by
reason of the central role the profession plays in the
administration of justice. Many aspects of the administration of justice depend
on the trust by the judiciary and/or the public in the performance of
professional obligations by professional people.
evidence establishes that the respondent is not a fit and proper person to
remain on the roll.
respondent’s extended and repeated failure over a period of almost 18
months (from March 2016 to December 2017) to comply
with her undertaking to the
Law Society to complete a Practice Management Course demonstrates that she
cannot be trusted to do that
which she has undertaken to do and that she is
cavalier about compliance with obligations associated with her right to
respondent’s breaches of bail undertakings in 2014 and subsequently in
2021 indicate, together with other evidence, a disregard
of her obligations to
the courts before whom she appeared as a party and as a legal representative.
They are consistent with other
evidence which indicates that she is prepared to
put her personal interest and convenience ahead of her duties to the court.
least from 14 December 2017, the respondent ceased to be a “qualified
entity” within the meaning of s 6 of the Uniform
Law since, as she did not
have a current practising certificate, she was no longer an “Australian
legal practitioner”.
After that date, the respondent was prohibited from
engaging in legal practice (s 10 of the Uniform Law) or representing that she
was entitled to engage in legal practice (s 11 of the Uniform Law). Further, she
became uninsured, thereby exposing those for whom
she acted to deception and to
the risk of obtaining professional legal services from an uninsured entity. She
also misled the courts
before whom she appeared by using language which was apt
to imply that she was entitled to act as a legal practitioner or failing
express the reason why the leave to appear which she sought was required. She
acted, not only in breach of the statutory prohibitions,
but also in breach of
the trust which courts are entitled to repose in legal practitioners who appear
before them.
respondent’s appearances in respect of her own matters against VW (in the
Cleveland Magistrates Court and the Tweed Heads
Local Court) and when purporting
to appear on behalf of Mr Hadfield in the Queensland Supreme Court constitute
breaches of the statutory
prohibition.
might be observed that even if the respondent was entitled to take instructions
from Mrs Ferguson in August 2017 (on the basis
of the applicant’s
concession that the respondent had a right to practise until 14 December 2017),
she was required to cease
to act for her as soon as the decision was made by the
Law Society on 14 December 2017 not to renew her practising certificate. After
that date she was prohibited from representing that she was entitled to engage
in legal practice. However, the only conduct particularised
by the applicant in
respect of Mrs Ferguson is the respondent’s conduct which gave rise to the
claim on the Fidelity Fund.
Accordingly, I do not take into account her
continuing to act for Mrs Ferguson after 14 December 2017 (if indeed she did so)
the respondent.
respondent’s conduct in inducing Mrs Ferguson to pay $57,500 into the
respondent’s trust account and then treating
the money as her own by
paying it into her office account and using it for general expenses is
particularly serious. In
, the Court said of misappropriations by legal
practitioners of clients’ funds:
40 As explained in
at [22]-[23], the appropriate
maintenance of trust accounts is critical to upholding confidence in the legal
profession and the misappropriation
sum of money by a lawyer is a
gross violation of the oath or affirmation which every new lawyer makes on
admission to practice, namely
to “truly and honestly conduct”
themselves in the practice of a lawyer of the Supreme Court of New South Wales:
Barwick v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v
[2015] NSWCA 258
at [24], Bell CJ added
“Such dishonourable conduct harms the reputation of lawyers practising in
this State and undermines public confidence in the
legal profession:
at [13]. As such, the damage done by the Respondent’s acts
extended well beyond the clients and principals of the firm by which
employed. The relief sought by the Law Society is entirely justified.”
41 It was said by this Court in
at [65] that
“the ordinary consequence of misappropriation of trust funds by a
practitioner is removal from the roll”.
Mrs Ferguson received financial compensation from the NSW Fidelity Fund (because
of the finding that the respondent had acted
fraudulently), her trust in the
legal profession was damaged by the respondent’s conduct. Mrs Ferguson
suffered considerable
stress over a lengthy period as a result of the prospect
of losing her life’s savings. But for the diligence of the NSW Law
Society, the money which had not yet been dissipated may not have been recovered
from the respondent.
respondent’s conduct in forging and uttering documents in January and
February 2018 (in connection with the custody of SW
to make it appear as if they
were generated by the Circuit Court) is egregious. She deliberately misled
innocent persons, DW and
the staff of the school where SW was enrolled and
caused DW to relinquish custody of SW, who had expressed a desire to live with
him rather than the respondent. DW and the school staff acted immediately to
comply with what appeared to be court orders but which
were, in fact, fake
documents which the respondent had produced with a view to obtaining a result
which suited her. The respondent’s
conduct had the consequence of
undermining the trust which the community is entitled to place in documents
which appear to be court
orders. Her conduct in forging and uttering purported
court orders was a deliberate and premeditated attempt to influence people
act (on pain of contempt of court) in a way that suited her.
respondent’s convictions for breach of her bail undertaking in 2021 and
common assault in July 2023, when taken together
with the other established
conduct are consistent with a pattern of disregard for the law.
driving offences committed by the respondent in December 2023 and January 2024
also exhibit a disregard for the law. The evidence
does not reveal when, or in
what circumstances, the respondent was disqualified for driving at the time of
the offences or when the
vehicle which she was driving became deregistered.
However, her preparedness to drive in these circumstances was not only illegal
but also irresponsible. Taken together with other evidence, it tends to indicate
that she is prepared to breach the law for her own
convenience and that she
cannot be trusted to abide by the law.
cumulative effect of the conduct proved against the respondent is that she is
not a fit and proper person to remain on the roll.
Further, the respondent's
conduct in relation to Mrs Ferguson and the misuse of the trust account and her
separate conduct in forging
and uttering court orders of the Federal Circuit
Court would each independently have warranted her removal from the
Proposed orders
propose the following orders:
(1) Declare that the respondent is not a fit and proper person to remain on the
Roll of Australian Lawyers.
(2) Order that the name of the respondent be removed from the Roll of Australian
(3) Order the respondent to pay the applicant’s costs of the proceedings.
: I agree with Adamson JA. I would add one observation. For a
lawyer to forge and utter any document is extremely serious. Such
discloses not only dishonesty but a willingness to manipulate others for
personal advantage. But for a lawyer to forge and
utter what purport to be
court orders is, as Adamson JA says, egregious. The respondent’s
conduct discloses a lack of insight
into, and a disregard for, the
administration of justice itself. It demands her removal from the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (374 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter