URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/244.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Birch v Bunbury [2025] NSWCA 244 (6 November 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Birch v Bunbury
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 244
Hearing Date(s):
29 September 2025
Date of Orders:
6 November 2025
Decision Date:
6 November 2025
Mitchelmore JA at [1]
McHugh JA at [2]
Ball JA at [3]
Appeal be dismissed with costs.
Catchwords:
DAMAGES – assessment of damages for statutory unconscionable conduct
and breach of fiduciary duties in acquisition of company
– valuation of
start‑up company – where primary judge rejected expert valuation
reports from plaintiff and defendants
– whether primary judge erred in
relying on statements by defendant to creditor as to the value of the
Legislation Cited:
Australian Consumer Law, ss 21, 22
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission Act 2001
Evidence Act 2005 (NSW), s 79
Cases Cited:
Blacktown City Council v Concato (No 4)
[2020] NSWSC 9
Commonwealth v
Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
(1991) 174 CLR 64
[1991] HCA 54
Hall v Busst
[1960] HCA 84
104 CLR 206
at 220-221; [1960] HCA
In the matter of 1derful Pty Limited
[2024] NSWSC 1414
In the matter of 1derful Pty Limited (No 2)
[2024] NSWSC
Marks v GIO Australia Holdings Ltd
(1998) 196 CLR 494
Pages Property Investments Pty Ltd v Boros
[2018] NSWSC 986
Commissioner of Taxation (Cth)
(1934) 51 CLR 197
[1934] HCA 7
Spencer v The
Commonwealth (1907) 5 CLR 418;
[1907] HCA 82
Principal judgment
Michael Birch (Appellant)
Luke Bunbury (First Respondent)
Pty Ltd (Second Respondent)
1derful Pty Ltd (Third Respondent)
The 1derful
Group Pty Ltd (Fourth Respondent)
Representation:
A Cheshire SC with DA Pittavino (Appellant)
(Second to Fourth Respondents)
Solicitors:
(Appellant)
Gillis Delaney Lawyers (Second to Fourth Respondents)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Supreme Court of NSW
Equity – Corporations List
[2024] NSWSC 1670
Date of Decision:
23 December 2025
File Number(s):
2023/353008
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
Through two companies he controlled, 1derful Pty Limited (
The 1derful Group Pty Limited (
1derful Group
) (together, the
), the first respondent, Mr Luke Bunbury, established a business
in 2021 using proprietary technology, and relying on an Agreement
Mastercard, which would, subject to regulatory approval, permit particular
businesses to provide branded debit and credit cards
that had instalment and
hybrid payment options.
By mid-2023, the Companies were in serious financial difficulties. In April
2023 one of 1derful’s creditors, brought an application
to wind up 1derful
in the Supreme Court of Victoria. The Companies had a number of other creditors
who had also not been paid. On
25 May 2023, Mastercard wrote to Mr Bunbury
asserting that 1derful was operating in breach of the Mastercard rules and
obligations
and demanding payment of $871,000. Mastercard subsequently suspended
the Agreement and outlined a “pathway” for 1derful
to resume its
membership.
Mr Birch (the appellant), who had previously assisted the Companies to raise
capital, advised Mr Bunbury that in view of the winding
up application it would
be impossible for the Companies to raise further capital. In that context, in
late June 2023, Mr Birch and
Mr Jack Dahan, who Mr Birch had introduced to
Mr Bunbury and who also had previously assisted the Companies to raise capital,
Mr Craig Seymour, a management consultant, to develop a strategy to
delay or to set aside the winding up process so that the Companies
complete a proposed capital raising.
Mr Seymour and Mr Birch developed a plan, without Mr Bunbury’s
knowledge, to acquire the Companies’ business. To execute
the plan, Mr
Seymour and Mr Birch established a special purpose vehicle, Fletch Capital Pty
). Fletch then acquired the debt the Companies owed to PI
Lorica Pty Ltd (
) at a discount, and demanded the debt within a very
short period of time, knowing (through Messrs Seymour and Birch) that the
could not pay that debt within that time. Fletch then purported to
exercise the power of controller to sell the Companies’
business to itself
without marketing or taking any steps to identify the value of the business.
Fletch carried out several other
steps, culminating in the appointment of a
receiver to the Companies knowing that no assets remained in them so that no
steps could
easily be taken to recover those assets.
Two companies, controlled by Mr Seymour and Mr Birch respectively, each held
five shares in Fletch. The remaining 70 shares were held
by Axiom Properties
Ltd, a publicly listed company, through a wholly owned subsidiary, Axiom
Investment Holdings Pty Ltd (together,
). Axiom had agreed to
provide Fletch with initial capital of $2 million in the form of a loan.
The primary judge, Black J, found that in carrying out the plan, Mr Seymour
breached fiduciary duties he owed the Companies, and that
both Mr Seymour and Mr
Birch engaged in unconscionable conduct in contravention of
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
Australian Consumer Law
in connection with the sale.
Both the plaintiffs and the defendants at trial led evidence from experts on
the calculation of the Companies’ loss. Both analyses
depended on the
application of a multiple to future maintainable earnings. The primary judge
rejected both approaches for different
reasons. In essence, the primary judge
formed the view that neither approach provided a rational basis to assess the
true value of
the Companies. Instead, his Honour found that the view expressed
by Mr Seymour to Mr Kopp, a director of one of the Companies’
that the value of the business was at least $2 million, provided an adequate
foundation for concluding that the value
of the business was at least that
The appellant raised multiple grounds of appeal directed to the
appropriateness of the primary judge’s reliance upon Mr Seymour’s
statements to Mr Kopp as a reliable indicator of value. First, Mr Birch
contended that the plaintiffs could have called reliable
expert evidence on the
question of value. Second, Mr Birch contended that the statements were not
reliable because neither the assumptions
on which they were based nor the
knowledge, experience and expertise of Mr Seymour in relation to making
assessments of value were
established. Third, that Mr Seymour did not make the
statements for the purposes of expressing his opinion on value but rather for
the purpose of ensuring the transaction would proceed.
(Ball JA, Mitchelmore and McHugh JJA agreeing)
dismissing the appeal:
(1) The value of an asset is a question of fact. Approximating a
business’ value by estimating its future cash flows will not
always be the
best method of determining value. In the case of start-up companies, for
example, a better guide to the value of a
business may be the amount that an
informed investor is willing to invest in the business for a particular share of
it, provided
the investment occurred at a time close to when the question of
value arises. Accordingly, the primary judge was not required to
rely on expert
valuation reports: [27]-[28].
Payne v Commissioner of Taxation (Cth)
(1934) 51 CLR 197
Hall v Busst
(1960) 104 CLR 206
[1960] HCA 84
Blacktown City
Council v Concato (No 4)
[2020] NSWSC 9
Pages Property Investments Pty
Ltd v Boros
[2018] NSWSC 986
(2) Mr Seymour must have learned about the Companies’ business in the
course of formulating the plan with Mr Birch. Both were
sophisticated
businessmen who could make whatever enquiries they thought were appropriate for
the purposes of pursuing the plan to
acquire the Companies’ business.
Moreover, Mr Seymour met with Mastercard and consequently was in a good position
assessment of whether an agreement could be reached with Mastercard
for it to continue to provide services in connection with the
business. It was
in that context that Mr Birch and Mr Seymour together with Axiom (a
publicly listed company) invested in Fletch
and Axiom lent Fletch an initial
amount of $2 million. That was a market transaction which provided a good
indication of the minimum
value of the Companies’ business: [31].
(3) In relation to the transaction itself, the precise reasoning process
engaged in by the participants is irrelevant to the question
of value. What is
relevant is the decisions they made, provided those decisions were based on full
information. There was no evidence
in this case that the decisions made by
Axiom, Mr Birch and Mr Seymour were based on wrong or inadequate information
relevant to
the value of the business. “Full information” in this
context does not mean perfect information. Rather, it means accurate
information
that the buyer and seller need to make a decision about what price to pay or to
accept for the asset. For those reasons,
the relevant transactions are a good
indication of the minimum value of the business at the time: [38].
MITCHELMORE
: I agree with Ball JA.
: I agree with Ball JA.
This is an appeal by the third defendant in the Court below,
Mr Michael Birch, against the following order made by the primary judge
(Black J) on 3 July 2025:
“7 Judgment for the Third Plaintiff and Fourth Plaintiff
against the First Defendant, Second Defendant, and Third Defendant,
jointly and
severally, in the sum of $2 million plus interest under
Procedure Act 2005
That order, among others, was made following the delivery of two judgments by
the primary judge: see
In the matter of 1derful Pty Limited
[2024] NSWSC
In the matter of 1derful Pty Limited
[2024] NSWSC 1670
). The first of those, delivered on 8
November 2024, dealt with extensive claims made by the plaintiffs against the
defendants arising
from the sale of the business carried on by the third
plaintiff, 1derful Pty Limited (
), and the fourth
plaintiff, The 1derful Group Pty Limited (
1derful Group
(together, the
), to the first defendant, Fletch Capital
). The claims included claims that the second and
third defendants had breached fiduciary duties they owed to the Companies and
the first to third defendants had engaged in unconscionable conduct in
contravention of
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission Act 2001
) or s 21 of the
Australian Consumer Law
) in connection with the sale.
The second judgment, delivered on 23 December 2024, dealt with the orders that
should be made in the
light of elections made by the plaintiffs following
delivery of the first judgment. As is apparent, the only order that is the
of appeal is the order for the payment of damages.
2021, the first respondent, Mr Luke Bunbury, established through the Companies a
business using proprietary technology, and relying
on a licence agreement with
Mastercard, which, subject to regulatory approval, would permit particular
businesses to provide branded
debit and credit cards that had instalment and
hybrid payment options. Mr Bunbury was a director and the chief executive
of the Companies. He and his wife each held 17,500 shares in 1derful
Group. A further 10,000,000 shares of the 13,130,540 shares
issued by 1derful
Group were held by the second respondent, St Jean CF Pty Ltd (
). Mr Bunbury and his wife each owned 50% of the shares in
St Jean. 1derful Group owned all the shares in 1derful.
mid-2023, the Companies were in serious financial difficulties. On
31 January 2023, 1derful had entered into a facility agreement
general security deed with PI Lorica Pty Ltd (
) to borrow
$322,000 for a period of two months at an interest rate of 36%. 1derful’s
obligations under the agreement were guaranteed
by 1derful Group and Mr Bunbury
and the obligations of the Companies were secured by charges given by them over
all their assets.
By an amended loan agreement dated 2 March 2023, the amount of
the loan was increased by $261,000. By 31 March 2023, 1derful had
defaulted in
repaying the increased loan amount.
24 April 2023, Think Grow Pty Ltd (
1derful’s creditors, brought an application to wind up 1derful in the
Supreme Court of Victoria (an earlier application
by another creditor had been
dismissed). The Companies had a number of other creditors who had not been paid
including CK Advisory
Group Pty Ltd in its own right and as trustee for CK
Investment Trust trading as Fifo Capital Northern Beaches (
). The evidence suggests that FIFO Capital was owed approximately
$700,000. That loan was apparently the subject of a second ranking
although neither the relevant loan agreement nor the security appears to be in
25 May 2023, Mastercard wrote to Mr Bunbury asserting that 1derful was
operating in breach of the Mastercard rules and obligations
of a principal
member, which entitled Mastercard to take action, including termination of
membership, and demanding payment of an
outstanding amount of $871,000.
Mastercard subsequently (on 31 July 2023) suspended the Mastercard agreement and
outlined a “pathway”
for 1derful to resume its principal membership
activity with Mastercard.
19 June 2023, Mr Birch, who had through a company in which he had an interest,
MDC Trilogy, previously assisted the Companies to
raise capital, advised
Mr Bunbury that in view of the winding up application it would be
impossible for the Companies to raise further
capital. In that context, in late
June 2023, Mr Birch and Mr Jack Dahan from Hennessey Capital Partners Pty
Ltd, who Mr Birch had
introduced to Mr Bunbury and who also had previously
assisted the Companies to raise capital, approached Mr Craig Seymour, a
consultant, to develop a strategy to delay or to set aside the
winding up process so that the Companies could complete a proposed
raising. Mr Seymour and Mr Birch had been friends since childhood.
primary judge found that Mr Seymour and Mr Birch developed a plan, without Mr
Bunbury’s knowledge, to acquire the Companies’
business. As the
primary judge explained, the plan was developed and modified, and steps were
added to it, over time. The primary
judge described the plan in the following
terms (PJ1[193]):
“... a plan for Fletch to acquire the Companies’ business by, first,
acquiring at a discount the debt of PIL owed by
the Companies; then demanding
payment of the debt within a very short time, knowing (through Messrs Seymour
and Birch) that the Companies
could not pay that debt within that short time;
then purportedly exercising the power of controller to sell the Companies’
business to itself without marketing or taking any steps to identify the value
of that business; then transferring the shareholding
held by 1derful in 1derful
Lending to Fletch, to allow it to obtain its Australian credit licence, and then
causing that Australian
credit licence to be reissued to 1derful Lending under
the changed name of APL Lending Pty Ltd (‘APL Lending’); and finally
appointing a receiver to the Companies knowing that no assets remained in them
so that no steps could be easily taken to recover
those assets.”
Fletch had been established as a special purpose vehicle to carry out the
plan. Two companies, controlled by Mr Seymour and Mr Birch
respectively, each
held five shares in Fletch. The remaining 70 shares were held by Axiom
Properties Ltd, a publicly listed company,
through a wholly owned subsidiary,
Axiom Investment Holdings Pty Ltd (together,
). Axiom had
agreed to provide Fletch with initial capital of $2,000,000 in the form of a
Importantly
for present purposes, in connection with his retainer, Mr Seymour had several
discussions with Mr Mathias Kopp, a director
of FIFO Capital, principally it
seems to ensure that FIFO Capital would not seek to recover its own debt
immediately. One of the
conversations occurred on 16 August 2023. According to
Mr Kopp, who was not cross-examined, during that conversation Mr Seymour
the plan to him, and told him that “$2 million would go into the
SPV [special purpose vehicle]”, that Mr Seymour was
meeting with
Mastercard the following day and hoped to negotiate, if Mastercard received
their payment of $1 million, repayment of
the $1 million by way of
“incentive payment”, and that there was “a $1.2 million
R&D claim to be lodged [with
the government] as well”.
Kopp and Mr Seymour had a further telephone conversation on 28 August 2023 in
which Mr Seymour told Mr Kopp that he expected Fletch
to acquire the PIL debt
the following day. Mr Kopp asked whether that would cause a problem for FIFO
Capital. Mr Seymour replied
that the outcome for FIFO Capital would be no
different than in a liquidation and that “The debt owing to [PIL] was
If the valuation comes back at $2 million, then there would be enough
money to pay FIFO Capital”. The reference to a “valuation”
here appears to have anticipated what became the sale price adjustment mechanism
in the Business Sale Agreement referred to at [13(e)]
below. Later the same day,
they had another conversation in which Mr Seymour said in response to a
statement by Mr Kopp that FIFO
Capital would only get paid if the valuation of
the assets were greater than $2 million that “Yes, that is correct. But
assets are worth at least $2 million every day of the week”. Mr Kopp
says in his affidavit that later, in the same conversation,
“I have done a back of the envelope valuation exercise and, let me tell
you, that is not far off what happens in the insolvency
world anyway, and I
can’t see this being worth less than $2 million. So the customers are
worth something, the strategy is
worth something, the credit license, the
agreements, there is the code.
If I was advising a purchaser, which I am not, if they had $2 million and I
would not advise someone to go into this with only $2
million, but if they had
$2 million, I would advise them to get control of the assets, pay [PIL] $1
million and stand in their shoes,
pay Mastercard $1 million, get $1 million
back, pay FIFO and get on with it, that way you don’t have to account to
Kopp also said in his affidavit, in response to evidence given by Mr Seymour,
that “Mr Seymour had made several statements
to me during the months prior
to October 2023, that FIFO Capital would be repaid and that 1derful was worth at
least $2 million”.
accordance with the plan:
(a) By a deed of assignment dated 25 September 2023, between PIL and Fletch, PIL
assigned to Fletch all of its rights, title and
interest in relation to the
facility agreement and security deed for the sum of $700,000. By that time, the
total amount owing to
PIL was $942,326;
(b) On 26 September 2023, PIL gave notice of that assignment to the Companies
and Mr Bunbury;
(c) On 27 September 2023, the winding up application brought by Think Grow was
dismissed, Fletch gave the Companies notice of the
assignment and demanded
payment of the outstanding debt of $942,326 by 4.00 pm on that same day;
(d) At 4.29 pm on 27 September 2023, Fletch gave the Companies notice that
because its demand had not been met it was entering into
possession and taking
control of the Companies’ assets, including its business, pursuant to
cl 8.1 of the security deed;
(e) On 3 October 2023, Fletch, in its capacity as controller, purported pursuant
to a Business Sale Agreement (the
) to sell to itself the
assets of the Companies including their business for the sum of $757,273
exclusive of GST. Under cl 7 of the
BSA, the sale price was subject to be
increased to reflect any increase in the value of the assets following a
valuation of them.
That valuation was never undertaken. As the primary judge
found at PJ1[199], the sale also took place without any marketing campaign
attempts at a sale to other potential purchasers;
(f) Also on 3 October 2023, Fletch passed a written resolution purportedly as
sole shareholder appointing Mr Seymour in place of
Mr Bunbury as sole director
of 1derful. In addition, Fletch, purportedly exercising powers under the
security that had been assigned
to it, transferred the shares of 1derful Lending
Pty Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of 1derful, to itself;
(g) On 13 October 2023, Fletch and PIL jointly appointed Mr Mitchell Ball
as receiver of the Companies’ assets;
(h) On 16 October 2023, the Australian credit licence held by 1derful Lending
was reissued in the name of APL Lending, a company
controlled by Fletch.
an originating process filed on 7 November 2023, Mr Bunbury and St Jean brought,
with leave, a derivative action in the name of
the Companies claiming a wide
range of relief against Fletch, Mr Seymour and Mr Birch arising out of what had
PJ1, the primary judge relevantly found that Mr Seymour (but not Mr Birch)
had breached fiduciary duties he owed to the Companies
(PJ1[231]) and that
Fletch knowingly assisted in that breach (PJ1[242]). The primary judge also
found that both Mr Seymour and Mr
Birch engaged in unconscionable conduct in
contravention of s 12CB of the
or the corresponding
provision in s 21 of the
: PJ1[278], [288]. None of those
findings is challenged on appeal.
his Honour observed, as a result of his conclusions, the Companies were required
to elect between potentially inconsistent remedies,
such as proprietary remedies
in the form of a declaration that Fletch held the whole of the business
transferred to it on a constructive
trust in favour of the Companies or
alternatively an injunction requiring a return of the business and compensation
for the loss
of value of the business while it had been in Fletch’s
Ultimately,
the Companies elected for a remedy of an injunction requiring return of the
business and compensation for the loss of
value of the business. His Honour
dealt with the precise form of orders that should be made in PJ2. As I have
explained, the only
order that is challenged on appeal is order 7, which is set
The primary judge’s conclusion on
the plaintiffs and the defendants at trial led evidence from experts on the
calculation of the Companies’ loss. It was
common ground between the
experts, and accepted by the primary judge, that the business that was
transferred to Fletch had no value
by the time that it was transferred back to
the Companies. The question was what the value of the business was at the time
was transferred to Fletch – that is, on 3 October 2023.
plaintiffs led evidence from Mr Paul Davies who expressed the opinion that the
then present value of the adjusted enterprise value
was in excess of $29.7
million. The primary judge summarised Mr Davies’ approach in these terms
at PJ1[40]):
“Mr Davies had used revenue per customer figures and identified the number
of customers falling within particular cohorts,
based upon a third party’s
contemporaneous projection, to derive an implied enterprise valuation by
reference to the Companies’
H1 2024 projected revenues. He reached an
unadjusted enterprise value of in excess of $33.7 million by that method, which
increased by applying a control premium of 27.5% and discounted for a
lack of marketability by 19.1%, and applied a further discount
factor to take
account of, inter alia, the risks attached to the Companies’ business to
achieve present value of the adjusted
enterprise value of the Companies of in
excess of $29.7 million.”
defendants led evidence from Mr George Kompos. He valued the Companies’
business at $69,000, which in a second report was
adjusted to $107,000 to take
account of criticisms of his earlier report. In reaching the earlier figure, Mr
Kompos applied a multiple,
derived from comparable company data, to the
Companies’ earnings to arrive at a figure of $343,126. He then discounted
figure by 80% to take account of the fact that the Companies were insolvent
as at the date of valuation.
primary judge rejected both approaches. Both analyses depended on the
application of a multiple to future maintainable earnings.
In estimating the
future maintainable earning of the business, Mr Davies relied on the
contemporaneous projection made by a third
party of 1derful’s future sales
and revenue. However, there was no evidence that supported those projections and
no evidence
that would permit his Honour to make rational adjustments to the
figure used by Mr Davies: PJ1[44]. On the other hand, Mr Kompos
1derful’s recurring revenue at the valuation date without making any
adjustment for expected future increases in revenue.
The primary judge
considered that that approach was particularly inappropriate when dealing with a
startup company. But again, there
was no information before his Honour that
permitted him to make rational adjustments to the figures used by Mr Kompos:
primary judge also thought that there were other problems with both reports. Mr
Davies assumed that 1derful would be able to reinstate
its agreement with
Mastercard. However, the primary judge concluded that “the evidence does
not provide a sufficient basis
to find that relationship would be reinstated
while the Companies retained the business, and were in real financial
difficulty”
(PJ1[44]). In addition, the valuation assumed that the
Companies would remain in business “in circumstances that their
substantial
financial difficulties suggested a probability that it would fail in
the short to middle term” and there was no basis to think
discounted figure adopted by Mr Davies “was sufficient to adjust for the
substantial risk that then existed in the Companies’
the other hand, Mr Kompos’s analysis assumed that the Companies were
insolvent. That assumption, however, had not been proved:
Mr Kompos also assumed that key personnel had departed 1derful at the
valuation date without explaining the significance
of that fact and made other
assumptions concerning 1derful’s existing customers that were not correct
(although Mr Kompos did
make adjustments in his second report to take account of
the last of these points): PJ1[48]. The primary judge also thought that
Kompos’s valuation was inconsistent with what occurred at the
“Mr Kompos’ assessment of the value of the Companies’ business
was significantly less than Mr Seymour’s contemporaneous
assessment of its
value as not less than $2 million, to which I refer below, and also
significantly less than the amount that Fletch
and its (then) parent company,
Axiom, an apparently informed purchaser which was assisted by Messrs Seymour and
Birch who were plainly
sophisticated market participants, was prepared to pay
PIL to secure the opportunity to acquire the business by the exercise of
That difference likely reflects the fact that Mr Seymour and Fletch
both rightly recognised that the value of the Companies’
business to a
purchaser was largely a matter of its potential and its technology rather than
its then revenue and Mr Kompos’
valuation, as I noted above, had not
adequately accounted for that potential.” [PJ1[57]]
rejected the reports of both experts, the primary judge thought that the view
expressed by Mr Seymour to Mr Kopp, that the
value of the business was at least
$2 million, provided an adequate foundation for concluding that the value of the
business was
at least that amount. After referring to the well-recognised
principle that “mere difficulty in estimating damages does not
court from the responsibility of estimating them as best it can” (quoting
from the judgment of Mason CJ and Dawson
Commonwealth v Amann Aviation
(1991) 174 CLR 64
[1991] HCA 54
, his Honour said (at
“I consider that I can properly take a robust approach as to damages where
the Defendants’ conduct took the business
out of the Companies hands and
had the result that its future performance in the Companies’ hands, which
would have underpinned
its then value, cannot now be known with certainty. I
have not neglected Mr Cheshire’s submission that Mr Davies (whose evidence
I addressed above) did not identify any difficulty in ‘working out
damages’ by identifying ‘records that ought
to have been available
but were not.’ That submission does give sufficient weight to the real
difficulty that, obviously enough,
a start up company could never have records
of, or know as a fact, the future growth in the revenue of a business that it
was prevented
from conducting. For these reasons, I accept that Mr
Seymour’s contemporaneous assessment of the value of the business as at
least $2 million as sufficiently reliable evidence of its then value and I adopt
that figure in preference to the much higher value
derived by Mr Davies and the
lower values derived by Mr Kompos. I am left with a lingering unease that I
should have been more robust
and adopted a higher value to reflect the potential
of that business, notwithstanding the then suspension of the Mastercard
and the Companies’ critical financial difficulties. An appellate
court may have the opportunity to address that question, and
possibly the wider
difficulties in the valuation of start-up technology companies, if an appeal is
brought from this judgment.”
his amended notice of appeal filed 24 July 2025, Mr Birch raises six grounds of
appeal. The first five are all directed to the
appropriateness of relying on Mr
Seymour’s statements to Mr Kopp as a reliable indicator of value. Those
grounds can be divided
into three. First, Mr Birch contends that the plaintiffs
could have called reliable expert evidence on the question of value.
Consequently,
this was not a case where the difficulties in assessing value
entitled the primary judge to take the approach he did. Second, Mr
contends that the statements were not reliable because neither the assumptions
on which they were based nor the knowledge,
experience and expertise of Mr
Seymour in relation to making assessments of value were established. Third, Mr
Seymour did not make
the statements for the purposes of expressing his opinion
on value but rather for the purpose of ensuring the transaction would proceed.
The sixth ground of appeal is in the following terms:
“6 The primary judge erred in holding that the Third and
Fourth Respondents had suffered loss when there was a mechanism
for the price to
be adjusted in accordance with the value of the business.”
Consideration
6 can be put to one side. The mechanism for adjusting the price was contained in
the BSA. By order 2 of the orders made on
23 December 2024 by the primary judge,
“[t]he Business Sale Agreement of 3 October 2023 between the Third
Plaintiff and Fourth
Plaintiff and the First Defendant is void and is set
aside”. Consequently, it was irrelevant to the assessment of damages.
value of an asset is a question of fact:
Payne v Commissioner of Taxation
[1934] HCA 7
(1934) 51 CLR 197
at 206-207 (Gavan Duffy CJ, Evatt and McTiernan JJ);
[1934] HCA 7
Hall v Busst
[1960] HCA 84
(1960) 104 CLR 206
at 220-221;
[1960] HCA 84
Blacktown City Council v Concato (No 4)
[2020] NSWSC 9
(Campbell J);
Pages Property Investments Pty Ltd v Boros
(Lindsay J). Generally speaking, the value of an asset is the
price at which a willing but not anxious seller and a willing but not
buyer knowing all the facts relevant to their decision to sell and to buy would
exchange the asset. As McHugh, Hayne and
Callinan JJ said in
Marks v GIO
Australia Holdings Ltd
[1998] HCA 69
(1998) 196 CLR 494
[1998] HCA 69
, referring
to the judgments of Griffiths CJ and Isaacs J in
Spencer v The
Commonwealth
(1907) 5 CLR 418 at 431-2, 441;
[1907] HCA 82:
“[T]he value of what in fact was acquired is to be identified according to
what price freely contracting, fully informed parties
would have offered and
accepted for it.”
It follows that the minimum value of an asset is the price that a willing but
not anxious fully informed purchaser is willing to pay
the value of an asset consists solely of its ability to generate income –
such as a business – and there is no relevant
market transaction by which
value can be assessed, it will often be possible to approximate value by
estimating the future cashflows
of the business and determining the present
value of those cashflows or by applying a multiple to estimated maintainable
But they are not the sole or always necessarily the best methods of
determining value in the sense stated earlier. In the case of
companies, for example, a better guide to the value of a business may be the
amount that an informed investor is willing
to invest in the business for a
particular share of it, provided the investment occurred at a time close to when
the question of
value arises.
is considerable force in the points made by Mr Birch that the mere statement by
a market participant about value ought to carry
little if any weight. Statements
of that type are statements of opinion that do not obviously satisfy the
requirements of s 79 of
Evidence Act 2005
(NSW) (that is, that it is
a statement based on the person’s specialised knowledge). Moreover, it is
impossible to assess the
weight of the opinion without knowing the facts on
which it was based. Taken alone, the statements made by Mr Seymour to
fall into that category. Moreover, as Mr Birch points out, the
statements made by Mr Seymour were not directed at informing Mr Kopp
value of the Companies’ business but were directed at persuading Mr Kopp
not to take any steps to prevent the sale
of the business to Fletch from
proceeding.
however, is not the end of the matter. As at the date the value of the business
is to be assessed, there were transactions consisting
(a) The provision of a loan to Fletch of $2 million by Axiom;
(b) The payment by Fletch of $700,000 to acquire the debt of $942,326 owed to
(c) The sale by the Companies (controlled by Fletch) of the business carried on
by the Companies to Fletch for $757,273 exclusive
least the first and second of those amount to market transactions, in the sense
that they were at arm’s length between sufficiently
informed participants.
It is reasonable to infer from those transactions that the value of the business
was at least $2 million reflecting
the amount of the initial loan from Axiom. It
is plain that the purpose of that loan was to enable Fletch, a special purpose
to acquire the business carried on by the Companies and to provide
working capital for that business. Consequently, at the time that
Axiom advanced
the money, it must have thought that the loan could be repaid from the business.
That is, Axiom invested in the business
on the basis that it was worth at least
$2 million (and probably more). Axiom is a publicly listed company that in
acquiring shares
in Fletch and making a loan to it was able to make its own
assessment of the value of the Companies’ business. Moreover, both
Birch and Mr Seymour must have had extensive knowledge of the business, even if
they did not know all the details of its operation.
Mr Birch must have acquired
that knowledge in the context of the capital raisings he had been involved in.
Mr Seymour must have learned
plan with Mr Birch. Both were sophisticated businessmen who could make whatever
enquiries they thought were appropriate for the purposes of pursuing the plan to
acquire the Companies’ business. It is apparent
from Mr Seymour’s
discussions with Mr Kopp that he (Mr Seymour) at least met with Mastercard and
consequently was in a good
position to make an assessment of whether an
agreement could be reached with Mastercard for it to continue to provide
services in
connection with the business. It was in that context that Mr Birch
and Mr Seymour together with Axiom invested in Fletch and Axiom
lent Fletch an
initial amount of $2 million. That was a market transaction which provided a
good indication of the minimum value
of the Companies’ business.
Cheshire SC who appeared for Mr Birch, and Mr Birch in his written submissions,
advanced several arguments against the conclusion
of the previous
Mr Cheshire pointed out that the primary judge did not rely on a market
transaction for the conclusion he reached. Rather,
he relied on the statements
made by Mr Seymour to Mr Kopp. Moreover, the respondents did not file a notice
of contention seeking
to support his Honour’s conclusion on the
alternative basis.
argument based on the actual transactions was raised in the respondents’
written submissions (although not one that pointed
specifically to the loan). In
addition, the relevance of what actually happened to the question of value was
debated in oral argument
before this Court. It was not suggested that Mr Birch
was prejudiced by the fact that the issue had not been raised previously. As
Cheshire accepted, in those circumstances, the absence of the notice of
contention was not fatal.
although the primary judge did not rely specifically on what occurred as
evidence of value, it is plain that he thought
that what occurred and
Mr Seymour’s involvement in what occurred were relevant to the
question whether Mr Seymour’s statements
and his Honour referred to the amount that Axiom, Mr Birch and Mr Seymour were
willing to pay to
acquire the debt owed to PIL as a reason for rejecting
Mr Kompos’s valuation.
Mr Cheshire suggested that the fact that one person is willing to pay a
particular amount for an asset does not necessarily
determine value. That much
may be accepted. But the fact that an informed person is willing (and does) pay
a particular amount is
a strong indication that the asset is worth at least that
Mr Birch in his written submissions suggests that there was no evidence that Mr
Seymour had any relevant expertise in valuation,
of what assumptions he made in
his assessment of value or of what analysis he undertook to arrive at his
conclusions in relation
to value. In addition, Fletch accepted under the BSA
that there would be an adjustment in the purchase price for the business
a formal valuation.
points, of course, were directed at the primary judge’s reliance on the
statements made by Mr Seymour, not at the relevance
of the transaction itself.
In relation to the transaction itself, the precise reasoning process engaged in
by the participants is
irrelevant to the question of value. What is relevant is
the decisions they made, provided those decisions were based on full
information.
There is no evidence in this case that the decisions made by Axiom,
Mr Birch and Mr Seymour were based on wrong or inadequate information
to the value of the business. Plainly, having regard to the nature of the
business and the uncertainties associated with
it, the investment was a
speculative one. And the investment was a speculative one because of the
uncertainties associated with the
business, including the position that
Mastercard would ultimately take. But that fact alone does not affect the
question of value.
“Full information” in this context does not mean
perfect information. Rather, it means accurate information that the
seller need to make a decision about what price to pay or to accept for the
asset. Axiom, Mr Birch and Mr Seymour must
have been aware of the risks involved
in acquiring the business. Nonetheless, Axiom chose to lend $2 million to Fletch
chose to pay $700,000 to acquire control of the business. For the
reasons I have explained, those transactions are a good indication
minimum value of the business at the time.
follows from the fact that the price for the business ($757,273 ex GST) was to
be adjusted following a formal valuation. Under
cl 7 of the BSA, the price could
only increase if the formal valuation was greater than the price that Fletch
paid. There was no
possibility that part of the purchase price would be repaid
to Fletch. In any event, the price paid by Fletch to the Companies for
business itself was not a reliable indication of value, since that price was
essentially determined by Fletch.
is a suggestion in some of the submissions made on behalf of Mr Birch, that it
would have been possible to determine a more
accurate value of the business by
adopting the approach to valuation used by Mr Davies but using appropriate
assumptions. Whether
that is so is open to some doubt. It would still have been
necessary to make assumptions concerning future earnings of the business,
on any view would involve a substantial degree of guesswork. Depending on the
assumptions that were made, it would also be
necessary to discount the resulting
figure for risks associated with the business, such as the risk that Mastercard
would not reinstate
its contract. Again, the selection of appropriate discounts
would involve the Court taking a broadbrush approach that may amount
more than guesswork. But in any event, the fact that there may have been some
more reliable way for the respondents to
prove their damages does not mean that
that is the only way in which damages could be proved. For the reasons given,
the actual transactions
entered into by the parties provide an adequate
foundation for the conclusion that the damages were at least $2
follows that the appeal should be dismissed with
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (305 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter