URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDRGC/2004/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Lapa [2004] NSWDRGC 1 (16 September 2004)
of New South Wales
[2004] NSWDRGC 1
FILE NUMBER(S) :
162 of 2004
Her Honour Judge Orchiston
CATCHWORDS:
Drug Court Act 1998
(NSW) - Meaning of Eligible Person - Risk if admitted
to Drug Court Program - Risk to Community - Violent Conduct :-
LEGISLATION CITED:
Drug Court Act 1998
CASES CITED:
Chandler v DPP [2000] NSW Court of Appeal 125;
R v Ranse [1999] NSW
DPP v Ebsworth [2001] NSW Court of Appeal 318
DATES OF HEARING:
16 September 2004
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
16 September 2004
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES:
Regina: R. Ranken, Director or Public Prosecutions (NSW)
E. Thornton, Legal Aid Commission (NSW)
1 The Offender, Mr Lapa, was sentenced at Fairfield Local
Court on 14 April 2004 on a charge of intimidate a police officer while
execution of the officer’s duty under s 60(1) of the Crimes Act.
He was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of six months which was suspended
upon his entering into a s 12 good behaviour bond.
During the currency of the s
12 bond, he was charged with the further offences of break enter and steal and a
goods in custody to
which he has pleaded guilty and which have now been referred
to the Drug Court. The offender seeks entry to a Drug Court program.
Under s 8AB(2) of the
Drug Court Act
, (the Act), the Court may deal with an
offender in relation to an alleged failure to comply with the conditions of a
good behaviour bond if the person is “an eligible person” under
An “eligible person” is defined in
of the Act. So far
as is relevant to the present case, a person is not an eligible person pursuant
if the person is “charged with ...... an offence involving
violent conduct”.
4 The issue for determination by the Court is
therefore whether the charge of intimidate a police officer constitutes an
“violence conduct” which, if so, would render the
offender an ineligible person for entry onto the Drug Court program
5 The facts, as outlined in the
facts sheet, for the offence of intimidate a police officer are that:
On 20 February 2001 the defendant was a passenger in a motor vehicle stopped
by police. He swore at police when told to remain in
the motor vehicle and was
given a warning, whereupon he swore again, and was informed he was under arrest
for offensive language.
The defendant reached down into his jacket pocket.
Police attempted to restrain him, fearing that he may have a weapon in his
He struggled violently. Police located a ten centimetre kitchen knife at
the defendant’s feet.
At the police station, the defendant said to police, “I am going to gut
you like a fuckin’ fish, you cunt. I am going
to slit your fuckin’
6 The facts sheet states that the police:
“took these threats seriously due to his association with the criminal
element. Police fear that the defendant is capable of
carrying out these threats
due to his past violent behaviour towards police. At the station, the defendant
was uncooperative and
aggressive towards police and refused to be
interviewed”.
7 In Chandler v DPP [2000] NSW Court of Appeal 125,
the Court considered the meaning of the words “violent conduct” in
of the Act in the context of an offence under s 52A of the Crimes Act.
In that case, his Honour Justice Hodgson, Chief Justice in
Equity, with whom
Justice Stein agreed, upheld the decision of Senior Judge Murrell in R v Ranse
(1999) NSW DRGC, 2
Drug Court Act
has as one of its objects under
the provision of a benefit to offenders, hence
should be construed
quite strictly as it removes a benefit which would otherwise accrue to an
offender. His Honour held therefore
that in the application of
of the word “charged” suggests very strongly that it is the elements
of the offence with which the person was
charged which are significant, not the
particular conduct or circumstances of the offence actually committed by the
person. His Honour
expressly upheld the earlier decision of Senior Judge Murrell
in Ranse in this regard.
8 In reaching her decision in Ranse, Senior
Judge Murrell placed reliance also on the Second Reading Speech delivered by Mr
Whelan, MLC, Minister for Police on 27.10.1999 in which he stated:
“The Drug Court program will deal only with offenders who commit
certain categories of offences. These offences will be mainly
non violent theft
offences. Those offenders who commit sexual offences and offences involving
violent conduct will not be eligible.
The types of offences that will be
included are break enter and steal, fraud and forgery offences, offences
involving stealing from
the person or unarmed robberies provided there is no
violence [my emphasis], possession and use of prohibited drugs or dealing in
quantities of prohibited drugs below the indictable
9 Her Honour was of the view,
that having regard to the terms of the objects of the Act, the need to construe
narrowly, and the Minister’s Second Reading Speech:
“It is clear that
renders certain offenders ineligible by
reference to the offence charged rather than by reference to the surrounding
circumstances”.
10 In DPP v Ebsworth
(2001) NSW Court of Appeal 318, his Honour Justice Meagher, with whom Justice
Sheller and President Mason agreed,
upheld the construction of
Justice Hodgson in Chandler, that is, that the Court must look at the elements
of the offence charged to determine whether it
is an offence involving
“violent conduct”.
11 I note, however, that both Chandler
and Ebsworth were decided before the amendments under
Div 1A of the Act
were introduced, which provided for the Drug Court to deal with alleged breaches
bonds under s 8AB of the Act.
12 One must ask, therefore, whether
the focus on the word “charged” in
, should be given the
same force in the present context of s 8AB where the offender has already been
convicted and a suspended sentence
imposed as it was given in both Chandler and
Ebsworth and earlier in Ranse by her Honour Senior Judge Murrell. I am not aware
and the parties have not referred me to, any authorities which have
considered the construction of
in the context of s 8AB of the
13 I note that in Ebsworth, Justice Meagher stated that if the test
of looking at the elements of the charge (which I will henceforth
refer to as
the elements test) was wrong, then he would consider the particular conduct of
the offender in that case (which I will
henceforth refer to as the conduct
test). He was prepared to countenance that the elements test could be wrong and
went on to consider
the conduct test. I find his approach instructive in the
present case.
14 Given the uncertainty of the appropriate test in the
present context of s 8AB, I propose to follow Justice Meagher’s approach
in Ebsworth and consider first the elements test, (that is, whether the elements
of the offence of intimidate a police officer involves
conduct”), and then secondly, if I be wrong in that view, to consider the
conduct test, (that is, whether the
particular conduct of the offender before
the Court, based on the facts provided, constitutes “violent
The elements test
15 It has been held that
the word “intimidate” for the purposes of s 60(1) requires proof of
actual intimidation and means
“to render timid, to inspire with fear, to
overawe, to cower, or to force to, or deter from, some action by threats or
or by inducing fear”: Meller v Low (2000) 48 NSWSLR 517.
16 In R v Manton
(2002) NSWCCA 316
, the Court of Criminal Appeal held
that it is sufficient for the offence if the prosecution proves that the acts or
words, [my emphasis]
of the accused actually caused the police officers to
experience fear of apprehension for his or her personal safety.
clear from this that the offence is constituted either by conduct or threats
causing fear of apprehension for a police officer’s
personal safety.
18 The question is whether this can be characterised as an offence of
“violent conduct” pursuant to
s 5(2)(b)of
the Act. There is no
definition of the term “violent conduct” in the Act and there is no
case law directly on point that
I am aware of, or that has been referred to me,
in the particular context of a charge of intimidate a police officer. The Court
therefore seek guidance from the relevant case law, including Chandler and
Ebsworth, which dealt with the concept of “violent
conduct” in the
context of other offences.
19 In Chandler, Justice Hodgson, after
considering analogous provisions in other legislation and dictionary
definitions, was of the
opinion that “the dictionary definitions, suggest
that violence generally refers to the application of rough, strong, physical
20 Clearly on this definition the present offence of
intimidate police officer would not be “an offence of violent
21 However, Justice Hodgson’s acceptance of this
definition in Chandler must be viewed in the context of the particular offence
under consideration in that case, that is, a charge of dangerous driving causing
death, (s 52A), where, by the very nature of the
offence, an application of
actual physical force is required.
22 I do not consider that his Honour
thus sought to provide an exhaustive definition of the term “violent
conduct”. Indeed,
he was looking at the word
“violence”.
23 In Ebsworth, the Court held that a necessary
element of robbery is the use of violence or the threat of violence as the means
putting the victim in fear. President Mason stated that
does not require that the violent conduct give rise to physical injury.
24 I consider however that these principles in Ebsworth should be
considered in the context of the particular charge before the court
case, that is, robbery armed with an offensive weapon. I point in particular in
this regard to Justice Meagher’s observations
at p 4, para 20:
“In the present case, if one looks at the charge, it is implicit as I
have said from the verb, to rob, and the accusation of
an offensive weapon, that
violence was necessarily involved”,
and most pertinently he then goes on to say:
“Those two elements together [my emphasis] constitute violent
25 His Honour further went
on to say at paragraphs 25 and 26:
“Even if that test is wrong, [that is, the elements test], and if it
were necessary to consider the particular conduct of the
offender, the first
opponent’s behaviour in this case necessarily constitutes violent conduct
...... Threatening to use violence
in the form of brandishing a baseball bat is
sufficient to constitute violent
26 I find these remarks
highly instructive in the present case. Whichever test is applied, and Justice
Meagher looked at both, be
it the elements test or the conduct test, he
characterised violent conduct as a threat of violence coupled with an offensive
He required the conjunction of a threat of violence with an offensive
weapon being present at the time.
27 Justice Meagher found support for
his interpretation of the elements test in, and indeed quoted with approval
from, the decision
of R v Butcher
[1986] VicRp 4
(1986) VR 43
which similarly involved a charge
of armed robbery. The Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria, in that case,
was required to
construe the word “violence” in
, Vic. It held that it referred not only to physical force but also
included those aspects of intimidation and seeking to intimidate
exhibition of physical force or menaces:
“...... if actual force is not used, then the menace or threat must
either be such as to cause personal intimidation, or be
intended to cause
intimidation or submission. In our opinion, if force is used there can be no
debate that this is actual violence.
If threats are made personally to
intimidate or seeking to intimidate, this is also in our opinion violence. It
may be put that the
latter is constructive violence, as Willes SJ said in
Donnally’s Case. But both putting a person in fear or seeking to put
person in fear of being “subjected to force” have always been
accepted under the common law as violence, sufficient
to render a
contemporaneous larceny a robbery” (at
28 Further, the Full Court in Butcher
stated that:
“...... the word “violence” where it is used in
to be understood to refer only to physical force but rather to include those
aspects of intimidation and seeking to intimidate
by the exhibition of physical
force or menaces as in the past have been considered to constitute
violence” (at 53).
29 It further
“...... the intent now required may be a preparedness or intent to
overpower the party robbed, to seek to prevent his resisting
- either by actual
force or by intimidation” (at 54),
and the Court went on to say:
“If there is not actual force used then the putting in fear or seeking
to put in fear must be intended to induce the victim
through fear to part with
his money or goods in his keeping” (at 54).
and further still, at 54,
“These cases are simply illustrative of the fact that violence must be
interpreted to include threats such as in common experience
would be expected or
likely to take away resistance, which has always been considered to be an
element, necessary to prove, in the
30 Again, some of these
remarks must be read in the context of construing the word
“violence” in the context of the crime
of armed robbery.
have also considered and sought some guidance on the matter, from the decision
of R v Breeze
[1999] QCA 303
(1999) 106 A Crim R 441
which was referred to in Ebsworth. In
Breeze, a case which also involved the offence of armed robbery, the Queensland
Court of Criminal
Appeal followed Butcher and also referred to some Tasmanian
authorities. The Court held, at 445 and 446, that:
“In McCrossen
[1991] TASSC 1
[1991] TasR 1
, Green CJ had to construe a provision in
the Criminal Code (Tas) enabling a person convicted of a crime “involving
of violence” to be declared a dangerous criminal. Green CJ held
“Applying the meaning which the
common law has given to the word ‘violence’ I hold that for the
purposes of the
[relevant provision] the making of a threat to kill with the
intention of intimidating someone is capable of constituting a crime
an element of violence.”
32 In reaching this conclusion his Honour
applied Australian and English decisions ...... Of those the most significant
seems to us, Butcher
[1986] VicRp 4
[1986] VR 43
...... The question was whether
robbery under Victorian law is a crime “the necessary elements of which
include violence”
and the court held that it is, on the ground that
robbery, although it may be affected by threat, was at common law regarded as a
crime of violence. The court reached its conclusion by holding that:
“If threats are made personally to intimidate or seeking to intimidate,
this is also ...... violence” (at 50; 9)......”
The Court concluded:
“At the heart of the decision, however, is the view that at least in
the context of commission of a robbery [my emphasis], a
threat of violence to
induce compliance is itself regarded as violence.”
33 In summary, each of the cases of
Ebsworth, Butcher, and Breeze, dealt with the concepts of violence or violent
conduct in the context
of an offence of armed robbery. In the present context of
an offence of intimidate a police officer, there is a threat of violence
simplicter. There is no issue of the over-powering of resistance; and there is
no immediacy in terms of the threat made. Whilst the
threat was made directly,
nonetheless it lacked immediacy in terms of its capability of being carried out,
the offender being in
a police station at the time. I shall deal with these
issues further, however, in the context of the conduct test.
further considered whether some guidance may be provided in the context of the
offence of assault. Clearly the authorities
countenance that in some
circumstances, the use of verbal threats, alone, may constitute an assault, but
only where there is an apprehension
of immediate physical violence. For example
in R v Knight
(1988) 35 A Crim R 314
the accused made threats to do violence
over the phone to a judge, to a magistrate, and to a police officer.
Some description of the facts in this case bears quoting as I consider it is
instructive for the present purposes. His Honour Justice
Lee stated the facts as
“The matter came before Mr Henderson SM on 8 July 1983 and he found the
appellant guilty. The appellant appealed to the District
Court and the appeal
came before his Honour Judge Muir on 24 May 1984 who dismissed the appeal.
From about August 1983 Mr Henderson SM began to receive phone calls at his
some by his wife. The
calls were both threatening to the lives of himself and other members of his
family and also extremely abusive.
From about 9 June 1984 that is shortly after the appeal was heard by his
Honour Judge Muir, Constable Rowles and other persons in
the police force
received telephone calls threatening death or bodily injury to the Constable and
also containing much abuse and
...... his Honour himself began to receive calls at his home and at his
Chambers. The calls were of the same nature.
...... the appellant [was charged with] seven charges of assault, all of
which were based entirely upon words alleged to have been
used by a caller on
the phone to either Constable Rowles, Mr Henderson SM or the Judge....
I choose, merely by way of illustration of the nature of the calls, the
following call made on 24 December to Mr Henderson’s
mention that Mr Henderson’s daughter picked up the phone and heard certain
words used. But, the following are
the words which Mr Henderson himself heard
“Why don’t you have your
number changed? Fucking bitch. You fucking idiot. Your front gate isn’t
strong enough.
You fucking bitch. Your father’s a dead man. Are you his
fucking wife or his fucking daughter? You fucking bitch. I had him
in my rifle
sights. He is fucking dead man. Are you his fucking wife or his fucking
daughter? You fucking bitch? He is a fucking
dead man. We are going to put a
bomb at his front gate. I will poke your fucking eyes out with a
screwdriver.”
Then there is a reference to the mother and the daughter in the most obscene
fashion. It goes on:
“The whole police
force won’t save you. You’re a dead man.”
Further abuse followed then:
sit up there. You think you’re God. I’m going to shoot you. I was
going to shoot you last night but I will
leave it to tonight [sic] of your
The Hendersons were having a Christmas party on this evening” (at
36 Those were the threats that had to
be dealt with in that particular case and the question was whether, over the
phone, they constituted
an assault. Justice Lee held that:
“...... the evidence in the present case went no further than to merely
show that threats had been made to the various callers
and serious threats they
were. But as to there being any evidence that those threats were threats of
immediate violence it is clear
that they were not. They were mere threats which
may have been executed at any time, if at all” (at
37 His Honour then referred to the
decision of Barton and Armstrong (1969) 2NSWR 451 and quoted, as follows, from
“Taylor J, after referring to the fact that the mere taking of a
threat, whether the threat is to be carried out immediately
or not is enough to
raise fears in a person’s mind, asked the question: How immediate does the
fear of physical violence have
to be? Of course, the critical question is: How
immediate is the violence offered by the threat to be and I do not take his
to be saying otherwise. He went on, “In my opinion, the answer is
it depends on the circumstances”. It seems to me that
a threat of violence
made over the phone could be a threat of immediate violence in given
circumstances, and thus an assault, and
accordingly I am not to be taken as
saying that merely because the threat is made by phone it could not thereby
constitute an assault”
(at 317 – 318).
I refer also to the case of Masters v Watt (1992) 10 Petty Sessions Review,
4507 which went on appeal before his Honour Justice Sharpe
of the Supreme Court
of New South Wales. He considered an assault charge on a taxi driver. He held
that threats can constitute an
assault, but in the circumstances of that case,
where the offender’s threat was made in conjunction with his feeling
and outside of his jacket, he was of the view that it could constitute an
assault. In so finding, he also considered the case of
“Then in 1969 Taylor J in considering an interlocutory application in
Barton and Armstrong
(1969) 2 NSWR 451
, held that threats uttered over the
telephone were capable of constituting an assault, and are not necessarily
properly categorised
as “mere words”. It requires a consideration of
the circumstances in which they are spoken” (at
38 He then referred to the
case of R v Knight:
“In R v Knight
(1988) 35 A Crim R 316
, Lee J, in a judgment with which
Carruthers and Love JJ concurred, held that where threats had been made but
there was no evidence
that they were of immediate violence, there was no
assault....
Clearly then “mere words” cannot constitute an assault. However
when words are such that they could create in the mind
of the victim a
reasonable apprehension of immediate physical violence, then the offence of
assault is capable of being established.
The evidence of the taxi driver, of the defendant’s feeling inside and
outside his leather jacket whilst directing him along
a darkened section of the
roadway having bushes on either side, and uttering words of an intention to kill
all combined to a factual
situation capable of being construed as violent words
creating an apprehension of immediate physical violence” [my emphasis]
39 Justice Sharpe then observed that,
on the basis of the authorities:
“...... “mere words” unless invoking apprehension of
immediate physical violence cannot constitute an assault, but
it is perhaps
misleading to use such a term as “mere words”. Before words as such
could be considered to constitute an
assault they would need to be aggressive
and/or violent. The test then is whether or not they firstly put the victim in
apprehension
of physical violence, and secondly, in apprehension of immediate
physical violence.” (at 4510)
is thus clear from these decisions that words alone, to constitute an assault,
must put the victim in fear of immediate physical
course, in the case before this Court, we are not dealing with either an offence
of armed robbery or an offence of assault.
Whilst the caselaw discussed above,
provides some useful guidance, I conclude that there is no unambiguous, clear
and compelling
authority directly on point, relevant to the particular charge of
intimidate a police officer.
42 Given the ambiguity in the matter, and
the difficulties in determining to what extent the cases referred to above can
in the particular context before me, I refer again to the general
considerations relevant to the construction of s 5(2)(b) of the
Act. In this
regard, I refer in particular to the remarks of Senior Judge Murrell in Ranse
“Section 5(2)(b) should be narrowly construed. It removes a benefit
which would otherwise accrue to an offender, ie the opportunity
of participating
in a Drug Court program. Ambiguous provisions of the Act should be construed to
allow drug dependent offenders the
benefit of an opportunity to seek to
participate in a Drug Court program” (at 3, para
43 I also refer again to the Second
Reading Speech which expressly countenanced that “unarmed robberies,
provided there is no
violence” would be eligible offences under s 5 of the
Act. This raises some question over exactly how the concept of violence
be construed in the
Drug Court Act
, given that robbery itself is held in the
case law to require an element of violence, yet the Second Reading Speech puts
in the category of “eligible offences”, providing there is
“no violence”. This raises the further question
whether the
authorities dealing with the concept of “violence” alone, are as
relevant to the concept of “violent
conduct” under
44 I further refer, in particular, to the observations of
Justice Meagher in Ebsworth that one requires the two elements of a threat,
coupled with an offensive weapon, “together”, to constitute
“violent conduct”.
45 I am therefore of the view, that in
the absence of compelling authority to the contrary, and construing the
legislation strictly
in accordance with Ranse, which approach was approved by
the Court of Appeal, I am not prepared to hold that the elements of a charge
intimidate a police officer necessarily involves “violent conduct”
so as to render an offender ineligible pursuant
The conduct test
46 If I be wrong in terms of my
consideration of the elements test, I now turn to consider the conduct test,
namely whether the conduct
of the particular offender, Mr Lapa, constitutes
“violent conduct” for the purposes of
of the Act.
47 I note that the actual conduct in this case was threats. Indeed, one
would have to say very serious threats. The police clearly
took them very
seriously, given the offender’s criminal associates and his past violent
behaviour, as stated in the facts,
towards police. Also, the threats were made
directly to the police officers, not over the phone.
48 However, the
threats were made at the police station, following the arrest of the offender,
hence in a context where there was
no immediate capacity for him to carry them
49 I further note, in this regard, that whilst the offender earlier
had possession of a knife whilst in the car, he was unarmed at
the time of the
making of the threats at the police station.
50 The threats do not
therefore have that immediacy demonstrated in the cases of armed robbery where
the capability, or perception
of capability, is required in the carrying out of
the threat on the spot. They also lack that immediacy which was demonstrated in
Masters v Watt in the context of a charge of assault, where the taxi driver was
in a situation where there was again that perception
of capability of carrying
out the threats on the spot.
51 In the present case, the offender was in
the safety of a police station with several police on hand. There could clearly
immediate apprehension of physical violence from the offender’s
threat. The apprehension is of future violence. The question
remains therefore
whether the police apprehension of future violence from the offender’s
threat could constitute “violent
conduct” under
52 I consider that the offender’s words whilst highly intimidating
to police, and using the language from the decision of R
v Knight, nonetheless
constituted “mere threats which may have been executed at any time, if at
all”. For these reasons,
I consider they cannot be characterised as
“violent conduct” under
53 Accordingly, I am
satisfied that the offender is an eligible person under
Drug Court Act
. The question now becomes whether it is appropriate under
for him to participate in a program under the Act having regard to his
criminal antecedants.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (48 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter