URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/278.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GTX v Children's Guardian [2025] NSWCATAD 278; (13 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
GTX v Children’s Guardian
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 278
Hearing Date(s):
25 September 2025, 3 November 2025 and 4 November 2025
Date of Orders:
13 November 2025
Decision Date:
13 November 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
A Starke, Senior Member
J Herberte, General Member
The decision of the Children’s Guardian dated 20 December 2024 to
place an Interim Bar on the applicant’s working with
children check
clearance is affirmed pending finalisation of the Children’s
Guardian’s risk assessment.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW — Application for review under s 27(3) of Child
Protection (Working with Children) Act 2012 — Interim
Bar placed on the
applicant’s clearance pending a risk assessment to decide whether the
clearance should be reinstated or cancelled
— Report made by former foster
child that she had been sexually assaulted by the applicant and an allegation
that the applicant’s
ex-wife failed to act protectively towards the child
— Tribunal to assess whether applicant poses a risk to the safety of
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Child Protection (Working
Children) Act 2012
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act 1988
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Cases Cited:
AYU v NSW Office of the Children’s Guardian
[2014] NSWCATAD 69
v Children’s Guardian
[2014] NSWCATAD 115
BHY v Children’s
[2015] NSWCATAD 91
BJB v The Children’s Guardian (No 2)
NSWCATAD 164
BKE v Office of Children’s Guardian
[2015] NSWSC
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
CHB v Children’s
[2016] NSWCATAD 214
Children’s Guardian v BRL
[2016] NSWSC
Commission for Children and Young People v V
[2002] NSWSC
Commissioner for Children and Young People v FZ
[2011] NSWCA
Commissioner for Children and Young People v IK
[2005] NSWSC 1136
v Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCATAD 295
CTE v Children’s
[2018] NSWCATAD 28
CXZ v Children’s Guardian
[2020] NSWCA
CYY v Children’s Guardian (No 2)
[2017] NSWCATAD 262
Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCATAD 308
Drake v Minister of Immigration
& Ethnic Affairs
(1970) 2 ALD 60
DYH v Public Guardian
[2021] NSWCATAD
FZ v Commissioner for Children and Young Persons
[2010] NSWSC 1144
Agriculture Pty Ltd v Commonwealth (2009) 240 CLR 162
McDonald v Guardianship
and Administration Board
[1993] VicRp 36
[1993] VR 521
Smith v Commissioner of Police
NSWCATAD 184
Tilley v Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCA 174
Secretary to the Department of Justice (Review and Regulation)
[2013] VCAT
YG & GG v Minister for Community Services
[2002] NSWCA 247
Secretary, Department of Justice
[2013] VSC 267
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
GTX (Applicant)
Children’s Guardian (Respondent)
Representation:
K McCallum (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
T Elliot-Orr (Applicant)
Solicitor (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00249659
Publication Restriction:
With the exception of expert witnesses and officers of government agencies,
the publication or broadcast of the name of any person
mentioned in these
proceedings referred to in the documentary material lodged in these proceedings
is prohibited. This order was
made on 10 July 2025 under
section 64(1)(a)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Note: A reference to the name
of a person includes a reference to any information, picture or other material
that identifies the person
or is likely to lead to the identification of the
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant sought administrative review under
Child Protection
(Working with
Children) Act 2012
(NSW) (‘the
decision of the Children’s Guardian made on 20 December 2024 to impose an
Interim Bar pending the respondent’s
completion of a risk assessment to
decide whether his working with children check clearance should be maintained or
Interim Bar was imposed because information held by the respondent indicated
there is a likely risk to the safety of children
if the appliant engages in
child-related work while the risk assessment is conducted.
applicant was a former foster carer, along with his ex-wife, GTZ. They have
provided foster care to as many as 100 children during
their foster careers with
Burrun Delai Aboriginal Corporation (“Burrun Dalai”). Notably, they
provided long-term care
for IB since his birth in December 2010 and his sister
VB since her birth in August 2015. They also provided care for BB (who is
unrelated to IB and VB) in two separate periods, the first from January 2018 to
December 2019 and the second from January 2021 to
September 2021.
11 December 2024, just over 3 years after leaving their care, BB alleged to
police that she had been sexually abused by GTX during
the second period of her
care with GTZ and GTX. BB also alleged that GTZ knew about the abuse and failed
to act protectively towards
a result of the allegations, IB and VB were removed from the care of the
applicant and GTZ on 11 December 2024. GTX’s and
GTZ’s carer
authorisations were suspended on 13 December 2024. The respondent issued a
Notice of Interim Bar and Risk Assessment
to each of GTX and GTZ on 20 December
1 July 2025, GTX applied for a review of the respondent’s decision to
place an Interim Bar on his clearance.
emphatically denied the allegations made against him and asserted that the
allegations against him and GTZ were without foundation
and untested against his
evidence. Prior to the removal of the siblings IB and VB, the applicant was a
foster carer for around 25
years, with around 100 children placed in the care of
his ex-wife and himself.
was submitted on behalf of GTX that he is a proud First Nations man with a
strong sense of social justice and is a respected elder
in his community who, in
his spare time, advocates for disadvantaged people. He provides services in
mental health for youth (under
the age of 25) and requires a clearance to
continue in that work. He is also involved as a volunteer in soccer at State and
was also submitted on behalf of GTX that a reasonable person would allow their
child to have unsupervised contact with the applicant
while he is engaged in
child-related work, and that the Tribunal should find that it is in the public
interest to remove the Interim
Bar placed on his clearance.
respondent submitted the decision to impose an Interim Bar is correct and ought
to be affirmed, having regard to the accumulated
weight of BB’s
allegations and a number of other allegations against GTX.
considering all the evidence, the Tribunal concluded that the applicant does not
pose a risk to the safety of children. However,
the Tribunal was satisfied that
a reasonable person would not allow their child to have unsupervised contact
with the applicant while
he is engaged in child-related work, and that it is not
in the public interest to set aside the Interim
Non-publication order
to the sensitive nature of these proceedings and to protect against the identity
of any child being disclosed, an order was made
on 10 July 2025 pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
’) that with the exception of expert witnesses and
officers of government agencies the publication or broadcast of the name
person mentioned in these proceedings or referred to in the documentary material
lodged in these proceedings is prohibited.
Material and evidence
before the Tribunal
following material was filed on behalf of the applicant in support of his
application:
(1) his affidavit affirmed on 19 August 2025 (marked for identification as
“Exhibit AX1”);
(2) an affidavit by his ex-wife (GTZ) affirmed on 13 August 2025 (marked for
identification as “Exhibit AX2”);
(3) an Outline of Submissions dated 1 September 2025 (not marked).
following material was filed on behalf of the respondent:
(1) a bundle of documents filed on 31 July 2025 pursuant to
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(NSW) (“the ADR
Act”) (marked for identification as “Exhibit RX1”);
(2) a bundle of documents labelled “Respondent’s Further
Evidence” filed on 16 September 2025 (marked for identification
“Exhibit RX2”);
(3) a further bundle of documents in two volumes labelled “Further s 31
responses from Department of Communities and Justice
and Burrun Dalai”
filed on 26 September 2025 (marked for identification as “Exhibit
(4) a bundle of documents comprising further material produced under Summons by
the Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force and
the Secretary, Department of
Communities and Justice (“DCJ”) (marked for identification as
“Exhibit RX4”);
(5) written Submissions dated 15 September 2025 (not marked)
Additionally,
the material filed in the associated Case No. 2025/00278297 concerning the
applicant’s ex-wife (GTZ v Children’s
Guardian) was before the
Tribunal. That material included:
(1) an affidavit by GTZ affirmed on 19 August 2025 (marked for identification in
the associated case as “Exhibit AZ1”);
(2) a bundle of documents filed pursuant to s 58 of the ADR Act in two volumes
(marked for identification in the associated case
as “Exhibit RZ1 Volumes
Oral evidence
applicant gave oral evidence and was cross-examined during the
Background leading to the application for review
applicant is a First Nations man aged 54. He was married to GTZ for almost 30
years, and together, they raised four biological
children. He and GTZ separated
in or around 2018 and were divorced in 2022.
and GTZ have been authorised foster carers for around 25 years. They were
accepted to provide foster care services with a not-for-profit
community-controlled organisation, Burrun Dalai Aboriginal Corporation
(“Burrun Dalai”) since 18 July 2008.
have provided foster care to many children, including biological siblings IB and
VB (“the siblings”) who are Aboriginal
and were placed with GTX and
GTZ shortly after each of their births. IB was placed in their care in January
2013 and VB was placed
with them in August 2015. The siblings remained in the
care of GTX and GTZ until 11 December 2024 when they were removed and placed
respite care following allegations made by another child BB who had been in the
care of GTX and GTZ that she had been sexually
abused by GTX and that GTZ knew
time when the siblings
were removed, IB was about to turn 12 years of age and VB
was aged 9 years.
and GTZ also provided care for BB (who is not biologically related to IB and VB)
in two separate periods of time. The first period
of care was from January 2018
until December 2019 (prior to the carers’ separation). The second period
of care was around 9
months in duration, from January 2021 to September 2021,
and was subject to an informal co-parenting arrangement agreed between GTX
GTZ. The children lived primarily with GTZ, and GTX provided respite care every
alternate weekend.
moved out of the family home by the end of 2018. However, there were occasions
when GTX stayed over the weekend, sleeping downstairs
on a mattress, taking the
children on outings during the day.
and GTZ maintained shared foster care responsibilities of the children IB and VB
until 11 December 2024 when they were removed
and placed in respite care. The
siblings have not been returned to the applicants’ care.
circumstances giving rise to the removal of IB and VB from GTX and GTZ’s
care were a precursor for the respondent’s
decision to place Interim Bars
on their working with children check clearances.
early December 2024, the Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice
(“DCJ”), received a number of reports alleging
that BB had made
disclosures to the effect that she had been sexually assaulted by GTX whilst in
his care and in the care of GTZ.
BB also alleged that she told GTZ about the
alleged abuse and that GTZ failed to act protectively towards BB and failed to
police or Burrun Dalai. At the time of the alleged abuse, BB was 10 years
old, turning 11 in September 2019. At the time of disclosing
the alleged abuse
in December 2024, BB was 14 years of age.
Allegations against GTX
and GTZ causing imposition of Interim Bar
her interview with police on 11 December 2024, BB alleged that:
(1) GTX called BB up to his and GTX’s bedroom, BB knocked on the door and
GTX told her to come in, at which time BB saw GTX
get on top of GTZ and start
“humping” (having sex).
(2) After school, GTZ was at work and GTX called BB up to his bedroom. She
knocked and he told her to come in and then “grabbed”
vagina and said “this is good for you”.
(3) Another afternoon, after school, BB saw GTX, his son TH and TH’s
friends walking around the home naked.
(4) BB saw GTX watching pornography on TV in the loungeroom and told BB, IB and
VB to sit down and watch it because he said it was
(5) GTX would force BB, IB and VB to watch him use the toilet.
(6) When GTZ was out of the home, GTX called BB up to his bedroom, pushed her
onto her back on the bed, pulled her legs apart and
put his penis up her vagina,
causing her to bleed. GTX then made BB get the bleach and clean up the blood.
GTZ came home and asked
what had happened and GTX told her BB had fallen over
and started bleeding.
(7) GTX attempted to sexually assault BB again but she ran away. BB said she ran
downstairs, grabbed clothes, a phone and a knife
and ran away. She said she
didn’t get very far before GTX’s son TH saw her and took her home.
GTZ later askd BB why she
ran away and BB told GTZ it was beause GTX sexually
abused her. BB asserted that GTZ said “okay” and BB was upset that
that GTZ didn’t tell the “police or DOCS”.
and GTZ have denied the allegations made by BB.
11 December 2024, police officers contacted DCJ to express concern about the
safety of IB and VB in the care of GTX and GTZ and
being “coached” before being interviewed by police. An investigation
was commenced by the
State Crime Command, Child Abuse Squad.
the same date, Burrun Dalai decided to place IB and VB into a respite
13 December 2024, Burrun Dalai suspended GTX and GTZ’s carer
authorisations.
16 Deember 2024, police officers interviewed IB and VB. They made no
disclosures.
19 December 2024, an Apprehended Violence Order (“AVO”) was made
against GTX for the protection of BB. The AVO was
withdrawn and dismissed on 13
February 2025.
20 December 2024, the respondent issued to each of GTX and GTZ a Notice of
Interim Bar and Risk Assessment.
27 and 31 December 2024, police officers spoke with GTX and GTZ’s
children, TH, IH and MH. They denied knowledge of
any offending behaviour by GTX
and denied they were exposed to pornography or nudity in the family home.
30 December 2024, police officers spoke with MW, a child previously in GTX and
GTZ’s care. MW said that GTX was a bit weird
and got in her space such
that he would get close to her when talking and this made her uncomfortable.
However, she denied that GTX
ever sexually touched or sexually assaulted her,
and had no complaint to make against him.
on 30 December 2024, police officers spoke with GTZ who made it clear she was
unaware of any offending by GTX towards any children
including BB. GTZ strongly
denied all the allegations and said GTX would not have done such things. She
said she had kicked GTX out
of the house at least before BB’s second stay
with her. She said GTX did not sleep at her house and was living with his
She said that if he did sleep over it would be on a mattress on the
floor in the loungeroom. She said he would only generally come
to the house on
weekends and was not home during the week after school. She said she was always
and never worked. GTZ also said that BB
never disclosed any offending by GTX or any other person to her. GTZ strongly
denied BB ever
seeing her and GTX have sexual intercourse and strongly denied BB
ever disclosing any offending to her.
15 January 2025, DCJ officers separately interviewed IB and VB and neither child
made any disclosures with respect to GTX.
29 January 2025, GTX declined an invitation to participate in an interview with
21 Febuary 2025, NSW police advised GTX’s legal representative that the
investigation into the disclosures made by BB was
suspended with no charges
pending. DCJ notes confirm that several lines of inquiry were exhaused. However,
after review of all the
available evidence, it was determined that the threshold
of proving all criminal offences beyond any reasonable doubt could not be
around the same time, officers of the Joint Child Protection Response Program
(JCPRP) completed a safety assessment and concluded
that, on the balance of
probabilities, sexual abuse had been substantiated. As a result, DCJ recommended
that GTX be allocated the
highest alert level available. On 10 April 2025, the
JCPRP Director determined that GTX would be designated as a “Person
Independent assessment of GTZ’s
capacities to act protectively
commissioned an urgent independent assessment of the applicant’s
ex-wife’s suitability and protective capacities to
care for IB and VB and
ensure their safety and well-being. The assessment was undertaken by a Cultural
Consultant who provided a
comprehensive report dated 29 May 2025. The Consultant
concluded that GTZ had “effectively demonstrated her protective capacities
to provide a safe and caring environment for the children that supports their
physical, emotional and cultural wellbeing”.
The Consultant recommended
reinstatement of GTZ’s carer authorisation on the conditions that her
clearance is reinstated and
the outcome of Burrun Dalai’s investigation is
that the allegations are unsubstantiated.
Outcome of reportable
conduct investigation by Burrun Dalai
23 June 2025, the Reportable Conduct Officer at Burrun Dalai wrote to GTX and
GTZ to inform them that Burrun Dalai had finalised
its investigtions into the
allegations made against them and determined there was insufficient information
to substantiate the claims
made by BB.
Application for
administrative review
1 July 2025, the applicant applied to the Tribunal for a review of the
respondent’s decision to impose the Interim Bar on
Other matters to be weighed in the assessment of
addition to the allegations by BB that caused the imposition of the Interim Bar,
there are a number of other allegations against
GTX allegations in the
workplace, socially and in the context of caring for foster children. These
matters are taken into account
when assessing GTZ’s risk to the safety of
children under the heading
“Consideration”.
Applicable legislation and legal
Protective jurisdiction of the Act
protective jurisdiction of the Act is plainly evident from its stated object as
set out in s 3:
3 Object of Act
The object of this Act is to protect children—
(a) by not permitting certain persons to engage in child-related work, and
(b) by requiring persons engaged in child-related work to have working with
children check clearances.
Paramount consideration
paramount consideration in the operation of the Act is set out in s 4:
4 Safety, welfare and well-being of children to be paramount
consideration
The safety, welfare and well-being of children and, in particular, protecting
them from child abuse, is the paramount consideration
in the operation of this
The Tribunal’s jurisdiction is protective, and not punitive
regard to that paramount consideration, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal under s
27 of the Act is protective, and not punitive,
Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCATAD 308
NSW Office of the Children’s Guardian
[2014] NSWCATAD 69
Commissioner for Children and Young People v FZ
[2011] NSWCA 111
per Young JA at [61]. The object of the Act is not to impose additional
punishment on a person such as the applicant, but to eliminate
possible risks to
CYY v Children’s Guardian (No 2)
[2017] NSWCATAD 262
protective jurisdiction of the Act was emphasised in
CXZ v Children’s
[2020] NSWCA 338
per Simpson AJA at [58]:
“It is plain that in some cases this will be the cause of potential
injustice to the applicant for a clearance. A person entirely
innocent of any
allegations may be refused a clearance because the evidence does not permit a
conclusion that the allegations are
without foundation and the inability to
reach such a conclusion leaves open sufficient possibility that the risk exists.
of the relevant provisions of the Child Protection Act satisfies me
that the legislature preferred the risk of injustice to an applicant
the safety of children.”
Definition of “children”, “child abuse” and the
meaning of “risk to the safety of children”
is defined in s 5(1) of the Act to mean “persons under the age of 18
words “child abuse” appearing in s 4 above are not defined in the
Act. The Tribunal stated in
BFX v Children’s Guardian
NSWCATAD 115
that the words would be aptly described as
“maltreatment of a child consisting of physical, emotional, or sexual
abuse, neglect,
or any combination of these, and includes exposure to harm
caused by or being subjected to family violence”.
meaning of “risk to the safety of children” is defined in s 5B of
the Act to mean a “real and appreciable risk
to the safety of
children.” The meaning of the word ‘risk’ was considered by
Young CJ (in Equity) in
Commission for Children and Young People v V
[2002] NSWSC 949
56 NSWLR 476
“One does not define risk as meaning minimal risk. One would... exclude
fanciful or theoretical risk but what one is looking
for is whether, in all the
circumstances, there is a real and appreciable risk in the sense of a risk that
is greater than the risk
of any adult preying on a child. One, however, must
link the word ‘risk’ with the words that follow, namely ‘to
the safety of children’...”
Honour’s consideration of the meaning of risk was cited with approval in a
number of cases before the Tribunal and the NSW
Supreme Court:
Children’s Guardian
[2018] NSWCATAD 28
BKE v Office of
Children’s Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 523
) at [26] and
at [39]. Ultimately, the Tribunal must consider whether a clearance,
if granted, will create a “real and not fanciful”
risk to the safety
of children:
per Basten JA at [26].
Child-related work
requires a WWCC clearance
s 8(1) of the Act, a worker must not engage in child-related work unless the
worker holds a clearance. A worker who is subject
to an Interim Bar must not
engage in child-related work: s 8(2) of the Act.
that involves direct contact by a worker with a child or children and that
to the work is defined as
“child-related work” for the purposes of the Act: s 6(1) of the
Test to be satisfied that a person is not a risk to the
safety of children
s 18(2) of the Act, the Children’s Guardian must grant a clearance to a
person who is subject to a risk assessment unless
satisfied that the person
poses a risk to the safety of children.
Risk assessment under s
15(4) of the Act
Subsections
15(1) and (2) of the Act set out circumstances in which the respondent must
conduct a risk assessment into a person who
has applied for or holds a
clearance. Section 15(3) makes clear that the respondent may decide when to
conduct a risk assessment
concerning a person who holds a clearance. That
discretion is not limited by subsections 15(1) and (2).
making an assessment, the Children’s Guardian
consider the
matters set out in s 15(4) of the Act. The Children’s Guardian does not
limit its consideration to offences involving
children because some offences or
behaviours might have an impact on children in the community or home. This is
clearly advised to
applicants applying for clearance.
the Children’s Guardian is not satisfied of risk based on the s 15(4)
matters alone, the ‘reasonable person’
and ‘public
interest’ tests set out in s 15(4A) of the Act
considered:
(a) a reasonable person would allow his or her child to have direct contact with
the applicant that was not directly supervised by
another person while the
applicant was engaged in any child-related work, and
(b) it is in the public interest to make the determination.
the person fails either the ‘reasonable person’ or the ‘public
interest’ test, clearance will not be granted.
of an Interim Bar
any time after commencing an assessment of a person who holds a clearance, the
respondent may determine that the person is subject
to an Interim Bar: s 17(1)
of the Act.
effect of an Interim Bar is to prevent the clearance holder from engaging in
child-related work or residing on the same property
as an authorised carer, as
defined in s 137 of the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection Act
(“the CYP Act”).
17(2) provides that “[t]he Children’s Guardian may make a
determination under this section if it is of the opinion
that it is likely that
there is a risk to the safety of children if the [clearance] holder engages in
child-related work or resides
on a property referred to in [s 17(1] pending the
determination of the application or assessment.”
Interim Bar may only be in place for up to 12 montjs: s 17(4)(c) of the
person made subject to an Interim Bar may apply to the Tribunal for review of
the decision to impose the Interim Bar provided the
Interim Bar has been in
force for more than 6 months: s27(3) of the Act.
Issue for the
Tribunal’s determination
issue for determination is whether GTX poses a real and appreciable risk to the
safety of children and, consequently, whether
the correct and preferable
decision (under s 63(1) of the ADR Act) is to affirm the imposition of the
Interim Bar on his clearance.
the purpose of determining an application for administrative review, the
Tribunal exercises all of the functions that are conferred
or imposed by any
relevant legislation on the administrator who made the decision: s 63(2) of the
in exercising those functions, the Tribunal must not simply “stand in the
shoes” of an administrator. The Tribunal
does not conduct a review of the
respondent’s decision to impose an Interim Bar. As explained in
Public Guardian
[2021] NSWCATAD 136
, the Tribunal must conduct its
review without any presumption as to the correctness of an administrator’s
“The effect of these two subsections is sometimes characterised as the
Tribunal being required to “stand in the shoes”
of the administrator
who made the decision. But that is not entirely accurate. I must conduct this
review without any presumption
as to the correctness of the decision:
McDonald v Guardianship and Administration Board
[1993] VicRp 36
[1993] VR 521
and I am required to decide what the correct and preferable decision is having
regard to the material before me. It is clear that
that may include material
which postdates the making of the decision:
YG and GG v Minister for
Community Services
[2002] NSWCA 247
Drake v Minister
of Immigration & Ethnic Affairs
(1970) 2 ALD 60
Tribunal has regard to the material before it, including material that may not
have been before the Children’s Guardian,
and the applicable law:
at [25], per Hodgson JA (with whom Foster and Brownie A-JJA agreed); applied
BHY v Children’s Guardian
[2015] NSWCATAD 91
What orders the Tribunal can make
Tribunal may make orders that affirm, vary, set aside or remit the matter to the
decision-maker for reconsideration, with or without
any directions or
recommendations from the Tribunal. If the decision is set aside, the Tribunal
may make a decision in substitution
for the decision it set aside: s 63(3) of
the ADR Act.
Mandatory matters for the Tribunal’s
consideration under s 30(1) of the Act
determining this application, the Tribunal
consider the
matters set out in s 30(1) as set out below:
30 Determination of applications and other matters
(1) The Tribunal must consider the following in determining an application under
(a) the seriousness of the offences with respect to which the person is a
disqualified person or any matters that caused a refusal
of a clearance or
imposition of an interim bar,
(b) the period of time since those offences or matters occurred and the conduct
of the person since they occurred,
(c) the age of the person at the time the offences or matters occurred,
(d) the age of each victim of any relevant offence or conduct at the time they
occurred and any matters relating to the vulnerability
of the victim,
(e) the difference in age between the victim and the person and the relationship
(if any) between the victim and the person,
(f) whether the person knew, or could reasonably have known, that the victim was
(g) the person’s present age,
(h) the seriousness of the person’s criminal history and the conduct of
the person since the matters occurred,
(i) the likelihood of any repetition by the person of the offences or conduct
and the impact on children of any such repetition,
(i1) any order of a court or tribunal that is in force in relation to the
(j) any information given by the applicant in, or in relation to, the
application,
(j1) any relevant information in relation to the person that was obtained in
accordance with section 36A,
(k) any other matters that the Children’s Guardian considers necessary.
Further considerations under s 30(1A) of the Act
addition, if the Tribunal is considering making an order enabling an applicant
to work with children, it
then consider the two-part test set out in
s 30(1A) of the Act:
(1A) The Tribunal may not make an order under this Part which has the effect of
enabling a person (the affected person) to work with
children in accordance
with this Act unless the Tribunal is satisfied that—
(a) a reasonable person would allow his or her child to have direct contact with
the affected person that was not directly supervised
by another person while the
affected person was engaged in any child-related work, and
(b) it is in the public interest to make the order.
First limb of the two-part test under s 30(1A)(a) - the “reasonable
person” test
first limb of the two-part test is known as the “reasonable person”
test. It requires the application of an objective
standard based upon the views
of the “reasonable person”. It assumes that the “reasonable
person” is acquainted
with all the relevant facts of which the Tribunal is
CHB v Children’s Guardian
[2016] NSWCATAD 214
legislation in Victoria contains provisions similar to those in s 30(1A) of the
VQB v The Secretary to the Department of Justice (Review and
Regulation)
[2013] VCAT 789
) at [36], the Tribunal held that an
objective test was called for by the legislation:
“... The reasonable person would, in reaching his or her conclusions,
acquaint himself or herself with all of the matters that
have been placed before
me, giving an applicant for a positive assessment a right to be heard, as well
as considering the material
gathered by the Secretary. A reasonable person would
not approach the task with a closed mind, thinking that once a person has
he or she can never be redeemed. The reasonable person, however, would
not put aside all scepticism and reasonable caution in this
most difficult area
in some over-optimistic attempt to facilitate rehabilitation.”
reasonable person approach taken in
was endorsed in NSW in
Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCATAD 295
at [91], the Tribunal said:
“In order to properly consider this test, a ‘reasonable
person’ would need to know about the disqualifying offence,
circumstances surrounding the offence, the applicant’s entire criminal
history, the length of time since those offences
occurred, his conduct since
then and any expert assessment made for him.”
Second limb of the two-part test under s 30(1)(b) - the “public
interest” test
second limb of the two-part test is referred to as the “public
interest” test. The notion of “public interest”
was addressed
by the High Court of Australia in
ICM Agriculture Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
(2009) 240 CLR 162 in which French CJ, Gummow and Crennan JJ said at
“The term ‘in the public interest’ is one of broad import.
When used in a statute, the term classically imports
a discretionary value
judgment to be made by reference to undefined factual matters confined only by
the subject matter, scope and
purpose of the statute in question.”
Accordingly,
in proceedings under the
Child Protection (Working with Children) Act
, the “public interest” must be considered in light of the
paramount purpose of the Act, namely, to ensure the protection
of children from
sexual or physical harm: s 4 of the Act.
applying the public interest test, the Victorian Supreme Court has endorsed a
broad and not a narrow approach:
ZZ v Secretary Department of Justice
[2013] VSC 267
) per Bell J at [205]. While emphasising the main
purpose of the Victorian legislation (equivalent to the NSW legislation) is the
protection of children from harm, the decision in ZZ
at [202] also
acknowledged the relevance and importance of rehabilitating offenders and their
right to work. The private interests
of an applicant such as their right to work
in their chosen area of employment are also a factor to be taken into
consideration insofar
as those private interests also have a broader community
benefit as per Bell J at [203]:
“In the context of the right to work, the tribunal has (in my view,
correctly) taken into account the public interest in enabling
persons to engage
in their chosen field of employment or in the field in which they are most
suited to work, in not lightly turning
people away from their commitment to a
chosen career and in encouraging people to use their qualifications, experience
and expertise
for the benefit of others.”
concept of public interest has been determined by the Tribunal on the basis of
giving priority to the broad interests of the community
over private interests:
Smith v Commissioner of Police
[2014] NSWCATAD 184
the Tribunal is not satisfied that an applicant has met either of the first or
second limbs in the two-part test, it is precluded
from making an order enabling
the applicant to work with children.
The approach to fact finding
and the assessment of risk
recognition of the protective jurisdiction of the Act and the paramount
consideration being the safety, welfare and well-being
of children, the Tribunal
is bound to follow the decision in
at [33] when assessing
“Thus in such cases it may be that NCAT can be satisfied that an
allegation of sexual abuse against an applicant is established.
Equally, NCAT
may be affirmatively satisfied that the relevant incident did not occur, in
which case it can be put aside. However,
in a context where the welfare of the
child is paramount and the question being posed concerns the risk of harm to
children, NCAT
may not be satisfied that an allegation of abuse has been made
out, but nevertheless conclude that the circumstances surrounding
a particular
incident or course of conduct means that there is a risk to a child or, more
correctly, that the existence of a risk
has not been disproven.”
approach to fact finding as explained in
at [33] has been approved by
the Court of Appeal in
Tilley v Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCA
per Simpson AJA at [57]:
“The task of the Tribunal is, to expand on what Beech-Jones J said in
, to determine, even if it is unable to be satisfied one way or the
other as to the truth of all or any of the allegations, whether,
by reason of
possibility
that the alleged conduct occurred, the applicant poses a
risk to the safety of children. [emphasis in original] If so, the Tribunal
refuse to grant a clearance. Of course, in that process the Tribunal will give
consideration to the strength of the evidence
supporting the allegations and
will, inevitably, reach conclusions about the truth or falsity of some. If it
finds any allegation
to be without foundation it will discard it from further
consideration. If it is satisfied that the allegation is well founded, it
assign to it such weight as it sees fit, in the consideration (inter alia) of
the circumstances listed in s 30. It is the allegations
between those two
extremes, those that are neither proved nor disproved, that the Tribunal must
address in determining whether the
applicant for a clearance poses a risk to
relying upon the analysis in
at [51], many cases will not lend
themselves to definitive factual determination. Where an allegation is neither
“well founded”
nor “groundless”, the Tribunal must
decide whether, on the evidence before it, the possibility that the conduct did
justifies a finding that the applicant poses a risk to the safety of
at [52]. The assessment and the weight to be assigned to
allegations will depend upon the seriousness of the allegations, the strength
any evidentiary support for those allegations, and the relevance of the conduct
the subject of the allegations to the risk to
the safety of children if a
clearance is granted to the applicant:
determining the application, the Tribunal is required to consider “the
totality of the evidence”:
at [28] citing
The Commissioner
for Children and Young People v IK
[2005] NSWSC 1136
Tribunal is to make a decision based on the “cumulative effect” of
the matters before it:
at [69]-[71].
standard of proof
party bears an onus of proof in relation to an application for review under s 27
of the Act:
BJB v The Children’s Guardian (No 2)
[2014] NSWCATAD
28(2) of the NCAT Act provides that the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of
evidence and may inquire into and inform itself
on any matter in such manner as
it thinks fit, subject to the rules of natural justice.
standard to which the Tribunal must be satisfied before making a positive
finding in relation to an allegation is the civil standard,
that is, on the
balance of probabilities, and not the criminal standard:
[14]-[17], subject to the need to have regard to the principles in
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
principle can broadly be described as a standard of satisfaction to be reached
where serious allegations are concerned. Put simply,
serious allegations with
serious consequences require more compelling evidence for the decision maker to
reach the necessary state
of reasonable satisfaction that the facts in dispute
are more likely than not to exist.
Consideration
proceedings before this Tribunal, the allegations are assessed according to the
civil standard, on the balance of probabilities,
subject to the
evaluating the evidence before us, it is not necessary to find that the offences
or the alleged conduct occurred. It is sufficient
to conclude that it is
that the alleged conduct occurred before then proceeding to
consider whether, based on the allegations, the applicant poses a risk
safety of children.
were difficulties in assessing some of the evidence in this case. It was
correctly submitted on behalf of the applicant that
there was a risk of
injustice if the serious allegations by BB were to be accepted without having
been tested, where the respondent
did not propose to call BB to be
cross-examined. It was further submitted on behalf of the applicant that it was
open for the Tribunal
to draw an inference that BB’s allegations were
false (citing
Children’s Guardian v BRL
[2016] NSWSC 1206
J at [32] and the reasoning of Harrison J in
FZ v Commissioner for Children
and Young Persons
[2010] NSWSC 1144
and the Court of Appeal decision in
Commissioner for Children and Young Persons v FZ
[2011] NSWCA 111).
for the respondent submitted that caution had been exercised when considering
whether to call a vulnerable person to be cross-examined,
and in this case BB is
a 15 year old teenage girl who has been assessed by DCJ as having significant
vulnerabilities by virtue of
her status as foster child and her medical
diagnoses, and because of her various placements and experiences in foster and
family/kinship
care. In evaluating the weight of BB’s allegations, we have
therefore taken into account those and a number of other factors,
Mandatory considerations in s 30(1)(a)-(k) of the
determining the application, we are obliged to consider the evidence under each
of the headings in s 30(1)(a)-(k) of the Act.
The seriousness of
the offences with respect to which the person is a disqualified person or any
matters that caused a refusal of
a clearance or imposition of an interim bar: s
30(1)(a) of the Act
allegations made by BB against GTX that caused the imposition of the Interim Bar
are serious and sexual in nature.
allegations were said to concern the period of her placement with the
applicant’s ex-wife and the applicant following
their separation, a period
from January 2021 to September 2021. She appeared to be very clear about the
time when the conduct occurred.
affidavit evidence was that the allegations that he had sexually assaulted BB
were untrue and that he found it very distressing
to be accused of such things.
He said that, in between the first and second periods when BB was placed with
them, BB was placed with
her family and then with a family who were not
authorised carers. When Burrun Dalai became aware of this unauthorised change in
they again placed BB with the applicant’s ex-wife.
applicant’s evidence was that he was not living in the family home in 2019
because he had separated from GTZ. He said that,
even before the separation, he
was regularly staying at his mother’s home to provide care for her. During
the second placement,
GTZ did occasional casual work when IB and VB and BB were
at school. He said that this was deliberately planned so that GTZ could
or after school hours when GTZ
was already home. On the occasions when he stayed over, he slept on a mattress
on the floor of the
loungeroom.
applicant said that he was never alone with BB. He said that his daughter (MH)
also lived at home and often had friends over so
it was a very busy household.
He also said that the layout of the house and the frequent movements of visitors
meant that there was
“no way that anyone would be alone with anyone
said that after he separated from his ex-wife, they were not sexually
written testimony was that BB sexually assaulted VB in the bath when she was
living with GTZ which prompted them to immediately
inform Burrun Dalai. After
being placed with family, followed by the unauthorised placement with another
family, the applicant would
occasionally collect BB so she could accompany IB
and VB to the beach. He said that BB told him she was angry about being removed
from GTZ’s house, and that she missed living with them.
also said that BB was reported to have been exposed to sexual abuse in previous
foster placements (including having been exposed
to a convicted paedophile) and
was reported to have exhibited highly sexualised behaviours, including towards
the partner of one
of her family member carers (AB).
cross-examination in these proceedings, the applicant confirmed that he had not
participated in a police interview. He said
that he offered police the
opportunity to interview him in a particular location and it could not,
apparently, be accommodated.
described his relationship with his ex-wife as being “at arm’s
length”, and that they each had new partners.
He acknowledged there was
tension, but not hostility, between them. He also acknowledged that his
biological children were closer
to their mother because they lived in close
proximity to her.
oral evidence corroborated his affidavit testimony. He said the allegation that
BB saw him and his ex-wife having sex was false.
He denied that he had any
sexual relations with BB or that he attempted to sexually assault BB. He denied
that BB had seen him going
to the toilet. He said that her allegations were
fabricated and were “absolutely false”. He said that Burrun Dalai
cleared him and his ex-wife of the allegations.
questioned as to whether he had a theory about what may have occurred, GTX
proffered that when BB was placed with family in between
the first and second
placements with GTZ, she was exposed to sexual abuse and that DCJ failed to
protect her.
note that, under cross-examination in associated proceedings (Case No.
2025/00278297), GTZ’s oral evidence corroborated the
applicant’s
written and oral evidence with respect to their relationship and the physical
arrangements in the household after
their separation. Her evidence corroborated
the applicant’s testimony that GTZ had acted protectively towards VB and
Burrun Dalai to remove BB from the placement after VB disclosed that
BB had touched her inappropriately. GTZ’s evidence in
the associated
proceedings corroborated the applicant’s denial of allegations that GTZ
had participated in the offending conduct
by having sex with GTX and his
rejection of the allegation that GTZ had not acted appropriately to report
sexual assault allegations
to the police or Burrun Dalai.
and GTZ’s three biological children (TH, IH and MH) were all interviewed
by police and said that BB’s allegations
were false. TH said he never saw
his father show pornography to BB or any other child. He denied ever walking
around the house naked
and denied seeing his father or anyone else walking
around the house naked. MH denied any knowledge of her father’s offending,
saying he would not do such things. IH said he never saw or heard of any sexual
offending regarding his father and that BB never
disclosed any offending to
Cultural Consultant engaged by DCJ to assess GTZ’s protective capacities
recorded that MH was interviewed by police and
found the allegations to be
“disgusting” and “gross”. She said that she caught the
bus home every afternoon
with BB and if anything had happened, she would have
seen it and would have said something to someone.
and VB were also interviewed by police and made no disclosures.
do not dismiss the possibility that, sadly, BB has at some point in time, been
the victim of sexual abuse. Both GTX and GTZ postulated
that BB may have been
subjected to abuse when she was living with her own family and then with
non-authorised carers before the second
period of care with GTZ and the
applicant in 2021. We make no finding concerning the possibility that their
assertions (about who
may have perpetrated any abuse towards BB) may be
light of all the evidence, we are not persuaded that the abuse has been
perpetrated by GTX or GTZ. We say this, taking into account
consistent and emphatic denial of the allegations made against him and GTZ, and
the prevailing circumstances in the household
at the time of the alleged
conduct, following the parties’ separation. From 2020, GTX was not having
sexual relations with
GTZ and he did not have a bedroom in the house at that
time. GTZ did not work full time and only engaged in inconsistent casual work.
If she did work, it was during school hours so that she could be home when the
children arrived home from school. This was necessary
because of the
children’s complex conditions and their need for consistent supervision.
GTX was not alone with the children
on the weekdays after school as GTZ was
already home.
acknowledge that, as a result of the PCPRP assessment, GTX was designated to be
a “Person Causing Harm”. However, there
are a number of
counterbalancing factors to be taken into account. They include that there is no
corroborating evidence to support
BB’s allegations, the police
investigation was suspended with no charges pending, no charges have
subsequently been laid against
either party, the AVO against GTX was withdrawn,
and the reportable conduct investigation concluded that the allegations against
both GTX and GTZ were unsubstantiated.
have accepted the evidence of GTX with respect to BB’s allegations to be
truthful. In the overall assessment of the applicant’s
risk, we have given
a substantial amount of weight to our finding that GTX did not engage in the
alleged conduct.
Other matters
Charge of indecent assault – Alleged incident in February
records note that a nursing colleague of GTX alleged that on 7 February 1994 he
indecently assaulted her. The allegation was
that she had driven him to his
residence where she was invited in to read bridal books while he prepared his
work uniform, that he
walked behind her and put her in a bear hug, carried her
against her will to his bedroom and put her on his bed where he lay on top
her and kissed her a number of times. He then attempted to pull up the
victim’s dress and unzipped her dress. The victim
persuaded GTX to stop
the attack and then drove them both to the medical centre where she reported the
incident to her supervisor.
The victim asserted that GTX repeatedly apologised
applicant was charged with assaulting, beating and ill-treating the victim but
the matter was dismissed at the Local Court and
no further action ensued.
applicant’s affidavit evidence was that the allegations were not true. In
giving his oral evidence, he said the victim had
made a false report. He
asserted that he had rejected her, and that she knew he was getting married but
wanted “one last fling”.
He denied that he repeatedly apologised to
the victim on the drive to their workplace.
argued that this matter had been considered previously by the Children’s
Guardian and it had not prevented him from being
given his clearance.
the historical nature of this matter (more than 30 years ago), and that the
allegations were not tested by a court and the complainant
was not called by the
respondent to be cross-examined in these proceedings, we have not allocated
weight to the allegations in assessing
GTX’s likelihood of risk. However,
when assessing whether the reasonable person test has been satisfied, the
allegations may
be taken into account as part of the accumulated allegations
that the reasonable person would be assumed to take into account.
DCJ report May 2007 of “bashing” children
May 2004, DCJ received a report that GTX and GTZ “bashed” children
in their home and that GTX smacks them. It was also
alleged that a child was
sexually assaulted by another child in the home, and that she was told by her
carer that she was “not
allowed to tell”.
allegations were comprehensively addressed by the applicant’s ex-wife in
the associated Case No 2025/00278297.
denied the allegations that he “bashed” children and smacked
is insufficient evidence to support the allegations. Accordingly, we have not
taken them into account when assessing GTX’s
Allegation that a female teenage foster child was left in
the unsupervised company of three teenage boys - November 2004
report stated that a female child had asserted that in November 2004 when GTZ
and GTX went out, she was left with three teenage
boys who touched her
inappropriately and smacked her with a wooden spoon and a piece of garden
allegations were comprehensively addressed by the applicant’s ex-wife in
the associated Case No 2025/00278297.
also denied the allegations.
is insufficient evidence to support the allegation and we have not taken it into
account when assessing GTZ’s risk.
Charge and conviction
for offensive behaviour – February 2005
February 2005, GTX was charged with “behave in offensive manner in/near
public place/school” after he engaged in a
verbal altercation with a
worker at a local hotel whilst GTX was employed as head of security at the
hotel. GTX received a Section
gave oral evidence that he had a verbal disagreement with the complainant and
had not handled the incident to the best of his
ability. He said that he told
the magistrate hearing the matter that he and the complainant “got
loud”. His affidavit
evidence was that he was sorry for his actions on
that occasion, but felt he had been targeted by police because he is
Aboriginal.
have not allocated weight to this incident in assessing the applicant’s
likelihood of risk towards the safety of children.
However, when assessing
whether the reasonable person test has been satisfied, the allegations may be
taken into account as part
of the accumulated matters that the reasonable person
would be assumed to take into account.
Allegation in March 2007
of sexual intercourse with 15 year old girl and verbal abuse
applicant was the subject of an historical allegation that he engaged in sexual
intercourse with a 15 year old girl and that he
later hurled abuse at her. The
complainant later retracted the allegations but the police officer involved,
Senior Constable Costigan,
found the victim’s account of the offending to
be believable and she was unconvinced of the veracity of the version of events
provided by the victim at the time the complaint was retracted.
allegation was that GTX met the victim in or around 2003 when she was 15 years
of age whilst working in community health. It was
alleged that two weeks after
meeting her, he asked her to his office where they had sex. Following this, he
often said things to
her such as “You’re a slut”, “Town
bike”, and “Hope you die”. The victim claimed that over
period of four years they had sex about 50 times, with about 10 of those
occasions occurring before she was 16 years of age. She
stopped having anything
to do with GTX after January 2007 but he continued to yell abuse at her. She
also said that GTX threatened
her by saying that another person was going to
“bash” her. She alleged that in or around 2005 GTX was physically
towards her by twisting her arm and making her cry. He is also alleged
to have slapped her across the face during a sexual encounter,
whilst calling
her a “dirty slut”. She said that GTX was aware that she suffers
from depression and schizophrenia.
applicant’s affidavit evidence is that the allegations were not true and
that he had never had sex with the complainant
and did not have a relationship
with her. His oral evidence in these proceedings corroborated his denial of the
allegations which
he said were false. GTX also said that he and Constable
Costigan did not see “eye to eye”.
applicant argued that the matter was considered previously by the
Children’s Guardian and did not prevent the applicant
from being given a
allegations were not tested by a court and the complainant was not called by the
respondent to be cross-examined in these proceedings.
Senior Constable Costigan
was also not called to give evidence. Accordingly, we have not allocated weight
to the allegations in assessing
GTX’s likelihood of risk. However, when
assessing whether the reasonable person test has been satisfied, the allegations
be taken into account as part of the accumulated allegations that the
reasonable person would be assumed to take into account.
reports re welfare of baby in GTX and GTZ’s care – 2009 and
2009 and 2010, DCJ received several reports raising concerns for the welfare of
a baby who was placed in the care of GTX
and GTZ. The reports primarily
concerned the care and supervision of the baby, claiming she had swallowed a
balloon and that she
presented with blistering around her vagina and bottom due
to severe nappy rash, and also to bruising, grazes and a burn.
allegations were comprehensively addressed by the applicant’s ex-wife in
the associated Case No 2025/00278297.
oral evidence was that he recalled the baby had swallowed part of a balloon. He
also recalled that she had hit herself
with a toy on one occasion. He had no
recollection of there being blood in the baby’s nappy or of a staph
infection but said
the baby may have been taken to hospital. He said that a burn
was never identified on the baby’s stomach and an allegation
neglected the baby was never put to him. He said that they were asked to strip
the baby naked and photograph her before
she went to see her biological mother
and upon her return to their care.
accept that there were complex circumstances surrounding the care of this baby
whose very young and inexperienced mother appeared
to be seeking to discredit
the applicant’s and GTZ’s efforts to care for, and keep, the child
safe. On balance, we do
not accept that the reports demonstrate neglect on the
carers’ parts, and have not given weight to the allegations in assessing
whether GTX poses a risk to the safety of children.
Allegation of
workplace incident concerning a patient and an employee – September
incident concerns GTX, who at the time occupied a senior position with a medical
service, engaging in an argument with a patient
directing the patient to leave. One of the employees was distressed at having
witnessed the exchange.
As she walked away, GTX allegedly yelled at her:
“You can leave the building as well”. A short time later, she went
leave and observed the patient on a stretcher being placed into an ambulance
after having a heart attack. The employee reported the
incident to police.
affidavit evidence was that the employee became annoyed with him after he asked
for the patient list for the day to be
re-scheduled and started yelling. He
asked her to stop yelling and, after she refused his request, he advised her to
leave the workplace.
He asserted that the matter was investigated and he was
cleared of any wrongdoing.
oral evidence was that he said: “If you don’t like it, go
saying that this
was “expected” He added that she is non-Aboriginal, with a strong
personality.
note that, on 25 October 2010, GTX received a formal written warning that he had
made several errors of judgment in dealing with
an incident involving an
employee in the presence of other staff and patients. The formal written warning
asserted that GTX’s
exchange with the employee amounted to an “over
reaction” and that other employees felt intimidated by him stating to
that they should be careful about what they put in their statements.
do not accept GTX’s evidence to be a reliable account of the incident or
the investigation that followed. We are of the view
that GTX’s reaction to
the incident was inappropriate and disproportionate, particularly given his
position of leadership in
the organisation. We note that his employment was
ultimately terminated on 13 December 2011 due to a breach of his employment
(referred to below).
Termination of employment due to
alleged mismanagement of funds - 2011
December 2011, GTX was terminated from his position as CEO of the community
medical service due to alleged laundering of $265,342.78.
In February 2013, the
District Court ordered GTX to repay the funds to the medical service within 56
days. To date, the funds have
not been paid.
affidavit evidence was that legal proceedings were initiated against him after
corrupt conduct within the organisation
and the mismanagement of funds. He said
that he was unrepresented during the initial court proceedings and could not
properly advocate
for himself. He asserted that the issue is being
reinvestigated “due to new evidence coming forward” and is hopeful
name will be cleared.
note that an email from the Australian Government Solicitor on 7 February 2025
to GTX advised that his complaint was still being
considered.
applicant’s oral evidence in the proceedings before the Tribunal was that
he had been terminated for breach of contract,
for not acting in the best
interests of the organisation. He said he was accused of embezzling monies and
acknowledged that he had
not paid the monies as ordered. GTX deflected blame
onto other employees with respect to his authorisation of various amounts,
that advice had been sought from the finance department of the
organisation at the time which he relied upon. Allegations against
GTX included
that he had authorised payment of monies with respect to items such as
fabricated repairs to a motor vehicle, travel
allowances, a diagnostic medical
procedure unrelated to the activities of the organisation, and construction
works to GTX’s
residence, and that he had used the corporation credit card
for personal items without justification or explanation. GTX asserted
majority of the allegations made against him were not true, but he did not
identify which of those allegations were not
note that GTX advised the Australian Government Solicitor in an email dated 8
February 2025 that “the proceedings and the
couple of years following are
the most traumatic time in my life and where I was being treated by a clinical
psychologist for severe
depression and anxiety”. There is no evidence
before the Tribunal from an independent psychological expert to support that
applicant’s evidence demonstrates that he does not accept responsibility
for the entirety of the allegations. However, in
light of the current review by
the Australian Government Solicitor, it is unsafe to make any finding in
relation to this matter.
Soccer Club ban due to aggressive
behaviour – August 2012
to police records, GTX was the subject of a complaint that, in August 2012, he
confronted a member of a soccer club who
was involved in a decision to impose a
one-match ban on him. The complaint was that GTX shouted and swore at the person
and refused
to calm down despite her requests. He eventually calmed down when
another person (described as an Indigenous female) intervened.
affidavit evidence was that he thought the decision to ban him was unfair and so
he challenged it. He said that the lady
who issued the ban started crying and
the matter was left there and not raised again.
oral evidence to the Tribunal was that he is aggressive on the field, and not on
the sideline. He denied that he had shouted and
sworn, and been aggressive. He
said that he had a raised voice and that the report to police was simply the
Committee member’s
version of events.
allegation was not corroborated by any other evidence. However, GTX’s
acknowledgment that the Committee member had cried
suggests that his conduct was
more aggressive than he has conceded. Whilst we have not taken this matter into
account when assessing
GTX’s risk, it is a matter that the reasonable
person may take into account with respect to the applicant’s desire to
involved in volunteering in community soccer events.
of excessive discipline on foster child (BB) – September 2018
a DCJ report in September 2018, it was claimed that GTX used physical discipline
on BB, then 8 years of age (now 15), claimed GTX
used physical discipline on
her. BB disclosed that GTX had hit her with a thong but did not leave a
denied the allegation.
allegation is not corroborated by any other evidence and is not substantiated.
We have therefore not taken it into account when
assessing GTX’s
Various allegations concerning foster child (BB) –
not sexual nature – September 2019
a DCJ report in September 2019, BB had expressed feeling left out and not wanted
and that GTX and GTZ told her they “can’t
wait until you go”.
It was also reported that she had torn shoes and was always cleaning the home,
and that she did not like
allegations were comprehensively addressed by the applicant’s ex-wife in
the associated Case No 2025/00278297.
denied the allegations. He said that his relationship with BB was the same as
his relationship with the other foster children
in his care, and that BB called
him “foster dad” or “dad”. He said that he treated her
as part of the family.
When asked if he understood the vulnerability of foster
children in out-of-home-care, GTX said that he had been a carer for 25 years
that he loved the foster children a “little harder” and
“deeper” than normal. In response to the suggestion
that BB did not
like him, GTX said that she was always the first one in the car to go out. He
also rejected the allegation that BB
had holes in her shoes.
light of GTX’s previous evidence that, even between BB’s first and
second placements with him and GTZ, he would collect
her and take her on outings
on the weekend with IB and VB, we regard his evidence about his treatment of BB
as truthful. The allegation
is not corroborated by any other evidence and is not
substantiated. We have therefore not taken the allegations into account when
assessing GTX’s risk.
DCJ report of foster child feeling
uncomfortable in GTX’s company – January 2020
report by DCJ in January 2020 noted that a child previously in GTX’s care
said she never wanted to go home and she felt uncomfortable
company. She alleged that GTX is very “touchy” with women and makes
them uncomfortable.
oral evidence was that he is a “touchy” person but he always asks
for consent.
allegation is not corroborated by any other evidence and is not substantiated.
We have therefore not taken the allegations into
account when assessing
GTX’s risk.
Allegations of sexual harassment and bullying
in workplace – March 2023
to records obtained by DCJ, in April 2024, GTX’s employment with a large
health organisation ended, following allegations
that he engaged in sexual
harassment and bullying of colleagues in March 2023 and June 2023. It was
alleged that, in March 2023,
GTX “purposely invad[ed] the personal space
of colleagues on three occasions” and “sat on a colleague’s
uninvited during a training program, which left her speechless and
uncomfortable”. It was also alleged that, in June 2023,
sexualised language toward a colleague during a training program” and
“showed a sexually explicit text
message to a colleague regarding his
intimate relationship with his partner”. The DCJ record stated that his
employment “ceased
on 10 April 2024 following four substantiated
allegations”.
affidavit evidence stated that the allegations were not true. He said that he
was interviewed about the matters alleged,
and decided to resign. Following his
resignation, he received a termination letter. The reasons he gave for resigning
are that the
allegations were not true and he asserted that the workplace was
not safe. He asserted that he and other First Nations colleagues
number of complaints about a manager in the organisation, saying that she had
misused health service funds. A complaint
was also made as to identity fraud
since GTX alleged the manager had falsely claimed to be Aboriginal and had
recruited two team
members who were not Aboriginal, to fill two Aboriginal
positions. GTX asserted that the manager had orchestrated false allegations
against him in response to the complaints he had made around her behaviour and
giving his oral evidence to the Tribunal, GTX said that he had accidentally
landed in a colleague’s lap. He said that she
said: “Should I call
you daddy?” to which he responded: “No, don’t call me
daddy”. His evidence with
respect to another colleague seeing an intimate
text message from his partner, was that he was driving at the time and the text
appeared on his phone and she asked about the message. He said that the
allegation that he had shown the message to his colleague
was false. He said
that he acknowledged the personal and professional boundaries in the context of
his employment. He added that
he is a huge target for false accusations because
he can speak “white language”.
purported substantiation of the allegations as a result of an investigation was
not provided to the Tribunal. We are therefore
not in a position to assess the
strength of the allegations or the rigour applied to assess the veracity of any
allegations made.
The complainants were not required by the respondent to be
called to be cross-examined and no explanation was provided as to why
not called. It is therefore not safe to make a finding that the conduct occurred
since it could result in an injustice.
However, when assessing whether the
reasonable person test has been satisfied, the allegations may be taken into
account as part
of the accumulated allegations that the reasonable person would
be assumed to take into account.
Aggressive, verbal abuse of
biological daughter – April 2024
a casework team note dated 3 May 2024, of a meeting to discuss concerns about
the GTZ household, an exchange between GTX and his
daughter MH in late April
2024 had been reported to police. It was alleged that GTX had abused his
daughter MH at a local shop by
yelling: “You’re a dog ####”
and “I hope you and your mother die”. It was alleged that IB and VB
a few metres away, sitting in the car, and had witnessed this. It was
alleged that GTX also made threats: “You wait, your other
is going to be
crying at pick up, you wait.”
was reported that the police interviewed MH that night and that VB was awake in
bed at the time and was crying with worry. It was
reported that VB was scared
and that MH was really scared.
allegations were addressed by the applicant’s ex-wife in the associated
Case No 2025/00278297. GTZ’s evidence was
that she found GTX’s
conduct to be “disgusting” and explained that emotions had been
heightened on that occasion
as it was the anniversary of their son’s
the associated case, MH gave evidence, saying that GTX’s conduct was
unusual. Her evidence was that the comments were not
made in the presence of IB
oral evidence to the Tribunal was that he recalled the incident, but not the
words he had used. However, he denied that
he had said “I hope you and
your mother die”.
appears to be an isolated incident, possibly reflecting the level of grief
experienced by GTX over the loss of his son. We have
accordingly not given a
great amount of weight to it in terms of assessing GTX’s risk to the
safety of children. However, it
reflects his demonstrated tendency to make very
aggressive verbal statements in response to situations of conflict and his
are disproportionate to the circumstances. GTX did not express
remorse for his deeply offensive comments to MH which demonstrates
that he has
limited insight into the impact of his behaviour upon
Allegation by ex-wife of GTX’s intimidating
behaviour – May 2024
May 2024, the applicant’s ex-wife raised with an officer of Burrun Dalai
that she had concerns about GTX following a recent
situation when they met to
exchange the siblings IB and VB. She alleged GTX had stood at her car door
window just looking at her
and she later observed him following her with the
children in the car. She also claimed GTX had attended hospital with their
MH which left her with concern that VB and IB were unaccompanied at the
oral evidence to the Tribunal was that he did not engage in the conduct as
alleged, and that he had simply let GTZ know
what had happened on the weekend.
He denied stalking and denied intimidating GTZ.
balance, given the conflicting statements by each of GTX and GTZ, the incident
is indicative of tension between the parties. It
appears that the handover
occurred around the time of the anniversary of their son, a time of heightened
emotions when dealing with
grief. It is possible that GTX has little insight
into how his conduct may be perceived by GTZ but it is not a matter on which the
Tribunal can safely make a finding against GTX. We have therefore not given it
any weight in our assessment of GTX’s risk towards
Reports of GTX online communications with IB –
July/August 2025
30 July 2025 and 1 August 2025, DCJ received reports raising concerns that IB
was having contact with GTX and that VB was having
further reported that GTX sent approximately 2000 messages, including a message
stating: “We will get
you home as soon as you can” (sic).
allegations were also addressed by the applicant’s ex-wife in the
associated Case No 2025/00278297.
oral evidence was that he had his first face-to-face contact with IB and VB for
two hours, as arranged by DCJ, in late
October 2025. He said they had cuddles
and played “UNO”. He said that he was not good with technology but
had “liked”
some messages received through TikTok by sending love
hearts, to remind IB that he loved them. He acknowledged that his communication
in July 2025 had not been authorised through DCJ.
evidence demonstrates his love for the siblings and his insight into the
vulnerability of the siblings who were cared
for by GTX and GTZ since birth. We
understand there are no formal restraints imposed on the carers with respect to
their communications
to IB and VB. We accept that the comments may be
emotionally confusing for the siblings at this time and may cause disappointment
if it transpires that they are not returned to the care of GTZ’s primary
The period of time since those offences or matters occurred
and the conduct of the person since they occurred: s 30(1)(b) of the Act
allegations by BB concern events that she asserted took place in the second
period of her placement with GTX that is, between
January and September 2021.
GTX continued to co-parent (with GTZ) IB and VB until their removal on 11
December 2024 when BB made
the allegations. Neither IB nor VB have made any
disclosures against GTX or GTZ. The applicant GTX has denied all the allegations
made against him and has endeavoured to have IB and VB restored to care with
11 December 2024, GTX’s alleged conduct towards his daughter MH and
towards his ex-wife during a handover of the siblings
indicate that he has a
tendency to be intemperate and engaged in threatening
The age of the person at the time the offences or
matters occurred: s 30(1)(c)
applicant was aged between 49 and 50 at the time of the matters alleged by
The age of each victim of any relevant offence or conduct at
the time they occurred and any matters relating to the vulnerability
victim: s 30(1)(d)
was aged between 10 and 11 at the time of the alleged conduct. She was 14 years
of age at the time that she made the allegations.
is no question that BB was vulnerable, being a child placed in foster care, and
reliant on GTZ and GTX for her physical and
emotional safety and
The difference in age between the victim and the
person and the relationship (if any) between the victim and the person: s
age difference between the applicant and BB at the time of the matters alleged
is approximately 39 to 40 years.
was a child placed in foster care with the applicant and GTZ in January 2018
until December 2019 and then from January 2021 until
Whether the person knew, or could reasonably have known,
that the victim was a child: s 30(1)(f)
the applicant knew that BB was a child at the time of the alleged
The person’s present age: s 30(1)(g)
applicant is currently 54 years of age.
The seriousness of the
person’s criminal history and the conduct of the person since the matters
occurred: s 30(1)(h)
applicant’s criminal history is at the lower end of seriousness.
GTX’s conduct since 11 December 2024 has been discussed above under s
30(1)(b). With respect to BB’s allegations
against GTX of sexual assault,
he has been designated by DCJ to be a “Person Causing
The likelihood of any repetition by the person of
the offences or conduct and the impact on children of any such repetition:
Tribunal has found, on the balance of probabilities, that the applicant did not
engage in the conduct as alleged by BB. If he
were to engage in such conduct in
the future, towards a child in his care, it would likely cause emotional and
psychological harm,
and potentially physical harm.
has not participated in an expert assessment of his risk or the likelihood that
he may engage in the nature of the conduct alleged
against him.
advised the Australian Government Solicitor, in connection with the allegations
against him concerning the mismanagement of funds
with a community health
service, that he was being treated by a Clinical Psychologist for severe
depression and anxiety. There is
no evidence before the Tribunal about this
is, also, no evidence before the Tribunal that he has engaged in psychological
counselling to reflect upon the potential triggers
for his occasional,
aggressive, verbal outbursts that appear to be disproportionate in the
circumstances.
is no evidence of an unstable family upbringing, or of any psychological or
psychiatric history or diagnosis, or of any drug
or alcohol abuse.
the benefit of an expert psychological assessment, and in light of our finding
in relation to BB’s sexual assault allegations,
we are not in a position
to assess the applicant’s risk or likelihood of engaging in conduct in the
nature of that alleged
Any order of a court or tribunal
that is in force in relation to the person: s 30(1)(i1)
is not the subject of any order of a court or a tribunal that is presently in
Any information given by the applicant in, or in relation
to, the application: s 30(1)(j)
applicant affirmed an affidavit in support of his position in which he denied
the allegations made against him by BB. He also
denied other allegations which
have been comprehensively addressed above. His oral testimony was generally
consistent with his affidavit
also provided one personal/professional character reference from CC and a
professional reference from MM.
reference from CC dated 16 April 2025 confirms that she has known GTX all her
life (she is his niece) and she appears to know
allegations made against him and court matters, without specifiying any
particular matter.
worked with GTX in two separate organisations and attested to his
professionalism and his commitment and compassionate leadership.
She said he is
passionate about safety for children and adults, not only in his home or work
environment, but for his community as
attested to GTX’s good character, describing him as “trustful,
dependable and authentic”. In her opinion, he
has never been inappropriate
in any way, shape or form, and she has always felt safe in his presence. He is a
respected role model
for his own family and the wider community, and is
respected by elders who have confidence in GTX’s leadership as a young
regard to her familial connection with GTX and her scant reference to
allegations made against him, we have only given a small
amount of weight to
CC’s refernce.
reference from MM dated 10 August 2025 refers to his association with GTX with
respect to a number of professional circumstances.
MH said he was shocked to
learn that GTX’s clearance had been suspended and that he was required to
defend his position.
extract the following from MM’s reference:
“I have found [the applicant] in his time working with my students, staff
and extended community at [name of entity] to be
an honest, co-operative,
organised and self-directed man, who has a good sense of humour and an
understanding of how trauma has affected
a large number of our students and
their families...As a leader within the local community; [the applicant]
demonstrated he was able
to form stronger links and earnt the respect of the
students through his manner and calming and patient influence on them He was
able to guide them through the volatile and reactive behaviours that have caused
them to not be allowed to participate in these days
to gain a successful result
reference attested to the applicant’s involvement in local soccer club
programs. He said that GTX makes it his quest
to learn about each person
involved so they feel valued and an integral part of the squad. He also said
that no job was ever too
menial or challenging for GTX. We extract from the
reference the following comment:
“[The applicant] has earnt the trust, respect and confidence of those
involved in sport as an honest, reliable and dedicated
ambassador of bringing
equality to the playing field for all young people. [The applicant] was also a
respected referrer for the
35 years at all levels.. ”.
also attested to the applicant’s multiple leadership and advisory posts.
He has mentored parents, supporting them in their
domestic challenges. He has
actively volunteered his expertise around suicide prevention, from lived
experience and targeted training.
The following comment attests to the
applicant’s success in mentoring young men to ensure they live healthy
lives, and also
attests to the applicant’s commitment to foster
“A true character of a person is when they are following up on something
out of the public eye without personal gain for them.
[The applicant] has made
it his goal to stay in touch with the many young men who have come out of his
courses and programs over
the past 15 years. Making sure that they are healthy
and their lives are on track and that they know they have someone who they can
speak with in those times when it is needed. He is often taking calls from those
in need of a yarn or advice. These young people
all know this and have often
spoken to me about how it’s special that [the applicant] still remembers
them and how his humour,
his little quotes and genuine nature is very special.
He actively lives out his family values and commitment to a better life for
children including those young children who are ‘bonus’ (foster) and
their daily connections on a daily basis.”
considering this application, we have given a moderate amount of weight to
MM’s reference, discounted because he does not
appear to know the details
of BB’s allegations and of other allegations made against
Any relevant information in relation to the person that was
obtained in accordance with section 36A: s 30(1)(j1)
Tribunal understands there is no other relevant information in relation to the
applicant obtained in accordance with s 36A of
the Act (exchange of information
to bodies in other jurisdictions) to be taken into
consideration.
Any other matters that the Children’s
Guardian considers necessary: s 30(1)(k)
was submitted on behalf of the Children’s Guardian that the allegations
made by BB ought not be viewed in isolation from
the totality of information
available in relation to the applicant. Those other matters were put to GTX in
cross-examination and
have been taken into account, with no significant negative
findings made by this Tribunal that have been evaluated as determining
poses a real and appreciable risk to the safety of
Overall evaluation of risk
a number of respects, GTX impressed the Tribunal as a dedicated foster carer for
a significant period of some 25 years. His oral
evidence demonstrates his
genuine interest in the welfare of foster children and his references confirm
demonstrated that he is highly principled on the need to keep children safe and
protected, and is committed to cultural truth
and custom, referring to
Aboriginal “lore”. He said that his whole life he had adhered to the
“lore” to look
after Aboriginal kids. He has insight into the
vulnerability of children in foster care and the risks associated with their
respondent, in submissions, acknowledged that, in the period since September
2021, GTX has (with GTZ) co-parented two high needs
children, without complaint,
and that neither IB nor VB have made any disclosures about their time in the
care of GTX.
Tribunal is satisfied on the evidence before it that the applicant does not pose
a risk to the safety of children.
Reasonable person and public
interest tests
making an order that has the effect of enabling a person to work with children,
the Tribunal must be satisfied that the reasonable
person and public interest
tests in s 30(1A) of the Act have been met.
applicant presented as a complex person, extremely proud of his First Nations
heritage and, at the same time, confident of his
ability to use the “white
man’s” language. He speaks passionately on matters that concern
disadvantaged people
in the Aboriginal community and appears to have significant
influence as a trusted elder in his community. During his cross-examination
identified some complainants in terms of whether he considered they could
genuinely and truthfully claim their cultural heritage,
appearing to know their
kinship connections. We observed him to be somewhat mercurial, quick to attack
an allegation or argument
if he disagreed with a statement. He challenged
Counsel for the respondent for applying what he described as “white
first to the reasonable person test, the Tribunal must be satisfied that a
reasonable person would allow their child to have
direct unsupervised contact
with the applicant while he is engaged in any child-related work.
reasonable person would need to be acquainted with all of the matters that are
before this Tribunal. That includes:
(1) the applicant’s long history of being an authorised carer for around
100 children, with the two long-term placements of
children with complex
diagnoses and high needs;
(2) the matters considered by the Tribunal with respect to BB’s
allegations including:
(a) the circumstances surrounding the applicant’s separation and divorce
from GTX and the logistical arrangements that he and
GTZ put in place concerning
the applicant’s sleeping arrangements on the occasions when he stayed over
at GTZ’s house.
The logistical arrangements ensured that GTZ was at home
before and after school so that IB and VB were always cared for by her and,
those occasions, the siblings and BB were not left alone with the applicant;
(b) the result of Burrun Dalai’s reportable conduct investigation which
found there was insufficient evidence to substantiate
BB’s allegations;
(c) the fact that BB’s allegations were not corroborated and the police
suspended their investigation with no charges pending;
(3) the allegations made regarding “Other matters” which have been
comprehensively examined by the Tribunal and which
indicate a number of concerns
(a) that the applicant is often easily provoked in situations of conflict in
which he has demonstrated a tendency to respond impetuously,
defensively and
disproportionately;
(b) that he was intemperate in the employment sphere, on the soccer field, and
with his own family;
(c) that he has been the subject of a number of allegations of harassment of
women in the workplace which, cumulatively, suggest
that the applicant’s
conduct and reputation regarding his treatment of women (particularly where the
allegations are sexual
in nature or involve the use of sexualised language) are
matters to be regarded with caution;
(d) that, even allowing for heightened emotions around the anniversary of the
applicant’s and GTZ’s son’s passing,
his conduct towards his
daughter involving the use of extremely offensive and threatening language, and
his behaviour towards his
ex-wife which she perceived to be intimidating,
demonstrates a lack of self-control and a lack of insight into the impact of his
conduct and language upon his daughter and ex-wife. If that conduct occurred in
the presence of children, it could cause emotional
and psychological harm;
(e) that, on a number of occasions, the applicant was reactive and aggressive,
using offensive language which, if it occurred in
the presence of children,
could cause emotional and psychological harm.
balance, we are not satisfied that a reasonable person, fully acquainted with
all the relevant information, would leave their child
to have direct
unsupervised contact with the applicant while he is engaged in any child-related
our view, the test in s 30(1A)(a) of the Act has not been met.
respect to the public interest test, the broad interests of the community are
clearly served by having persons such as the applicant
providing care for foster
children, providing mental health services to youth (under the age of 25), and
volunteering in community
soccer programs.
acknowledge that the applicant’s right to use his experience and expertise
as a carer, to work in mental health for youth,
and provide volunteer services
for community based sport are each of at least equal importance to the public
interest, and is entirely
consistent with the community interests.
to find that it is in the public interest test for this applicant to have the
Interim Bar removed from his clearance, would
undermine our decision that a
reasonable person would not leave their child in his care if engaged in
child-related work. It would
appear to be contrary to the public interest to
remove the Interim Bar.
are therefore satisfied that the public interest test in s 30(1A)(b) of the Act
has not been met.
The decision of the Children’s Guardian dated 20 December 2024 to place
an Interim Bar on the applicant’s working with
children check clearance is
affirmed pending finalisation of the Children’s Guardian’s risk
assessment.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
13 November 2025 - Administrative formatting corrected.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (445 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter