URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCTTT/2013/653.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Owners Corp SP 50785 v Universal Finance Holdings Pty Ltd (Strata and Community Schemes) [2013] NSWCTTT 653 (20 December 2013)
The Owners Corp SP 50785 v Universal Finance Holdings Pty Ltd (Strata and
Community Schemes)
[2013] NSWCTTT 653
(20 December 2013)
CONSUMER, TRADER AND TENANCY
Strata and Community Schemes Division
APPLICATION NO:
SCS 13/07378
The Owners Corporation SP 50785
RESPONDENT:
Universal Finance Holdings Pty Ltd
APPLICATION:
Appeal against the orders made by Strata Schemes Adjudicator
22 August 2013
APPEARANCES:
Mr J Muller, Solicitor, represented the appellant Owners
Corporation;
Mr D Russell, represented the respondent Universal Finance
Holdings Pty Ltd
Is the decision to revoke Special By-Law 42.5 wrong
LEGISLATION:
Strata Schemes Management Act
Special By-Law
Tribunal allows the appeal and revokes orders 1 and 2 made by the Adjudicator in
matter number SCS 12/49745.
application to the Adjudicator for orders 1 and 2 is dismissed.
Tribunal affirms order 3 made by the Adjudicator in matter number SCS
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal
20 December
CONSUMER, TRADER AND TENANCY TRIBUNAL
Strata and Community Schemes
REASONS FOR DECISION
APPLICATION NO:
SCS 13/07378
Plan 50785 is situated on the site of the old Workers Club, Cronulla. The plan
comprises of three buildings.
“A” has five restaurants on the ground level and two levels above
there are twelve apartments. Block “B”
has six one-bedroom
apartments on three floors and two restaurants situated on the first and second
floor. Block “C”
has seventy seven apartments and two levels of
basement car park. The lower level of the car park is shared with Blocks A and
Plan 50785 was registered on 11 September 1995. The building was completed in
1996. The strata plan was registered by the developer
with a Special By-Law 1.
The by-law gave the commercial lot owners in Blocks A and B the exclusive use of
various parts of common
property. The previous owner of Lot 21 was given the
exclusive use of part of the balcony adjacent to his Lot. The by-law permitted
the appellant to place and maintain on the common property area tables and
chairs to be used by customers for the consumption of
food and beverages
purchased from Lot 21.
By-Law 1 placed on the respondent the responsibility for the maintenance and
keeping in good repair and the cleaning of the
defined strip of an open area.
Any maintenance or repair of a structural nature was excluded in the
20 April 1996 the appellant made a new by-law, Special By-Law 21. The by-law was
in substantially the same terms to Special By-Law
1. It conferred on the owner
of Lot 21, exclusive use and enjoyment of the defined open area adjacent to Lot
committee for permission to install roof top ventilation
system above the
restaurant; to have air a conditioning plant and to extend the glazed shop front
out onto the common property balcony
surrounding the
restaurant.
1 September 1997 the Owners Corporation entered into a license agreement with
the previous owner of Lot 21 concerning the installation
of an exhaust system
and an air conditioning system on the common property, adjacent to Lot 21. The
licence agreement was for a period
of five years. The previous owner paid to the
Owners Corporation a licence fee in the sum of $1,000.00 per
licence agreement imposed on the previous owner of Lot 21 an obligation for the
cost of lift maintenance contract for the elevator
servicing the restaurant and
the upkeep of the structure above the elevator.
1998 a by-law was passed to permit Lot 21 to extend the glazed shop front of the
restaurant onto the common property balcony. Due
to an oversight, the by-law was
not registered.
2 May 2003 Special By-Law 2 was passed by the Owners Corporation to remedy the
oversight made in 1998. The by-law compelled Lot
21 to maintain and repair the
common property on which the glazing work and exhaust system were affixed.
Special By-Law 2 came in
to affect a couple of days after five year license
agreement expired.
c(iv) compelled Lot 21 to properly maintain and keep the Elevator Tower in a
state of good and serviceable repair until
Sutherland Council agrees that the
terms of the Development Application in relation to the construction of the
bridge over Gerrale
Street are complied with and the bridge is constructed and
commissioned.
c(vii) stated that Lot 21 must comply with the terms of the licence agreement
dated 1 September 1997.
respondent purchased Lot 21 in August 2003. Lot 21 premises are leased to the
operator of the restaurant known as “Opah”.
The restaurant has about
250m² in area. The restaurant occupies some of the common property balcony
which was granted to Lot
21 as an exclusive use area.
23 March 2005 Special By-Law 42 was made. Clause 42.5 provided for the payment
of the quarterly license fee in the sum of $1,000.00
per quarter in return for
consent to continue to keep and maintain on the common property an exhaust
system and shared grease traps.
property grease traps are shared among the seven commercial lots. They are
situated below the B2 basement car park level. Grease
traps were to be
maintained by the seven commercial lots.
26 March 2008 the Owners Corporation amended Special By-Law 42.5 by increasing
the license fee payable to $2,500.00 plus GST per
quarter. The licence fee is to
be reviewed in accordance with the CPI each year.
42.5 amendment was passed with no vote cast against. However, Lot 21 was not
given an opportunity to consent in writing to
the proposed amendment as mandated
s 65A(5)(b)
of the Act.
dispute arose between the parties around 2009 when the gazebo over the lift
tower deteriorated and repairs were required to it.
The cost of the repair is in
excess of $83,000.00.
the past four years, the parties could not resolve the dispute by way of
first issue to be decided is whether the Adjudicator made an error when he
determined that Special By-Law 42.5 should be revoked.
second issue to be decided is whether the Adjudicator made an error when he
determined that the appellant should reimburse the
appellant the fees collected
under Special By-Law 42.5 to the respondent.
third issue for determination is who has the responsibility under Special By-Law
2 to maintain the gazebo over the Lift
APPLICATION
27 September 2012 the respondent applied for nine orders from a Strata Schemes
Adjudicator. On 18 January 2013 the Adjudicator
granted the respondent’s
application in part.
following orders were made:
by-law 42.5 made in general meeting on 26 March 2008 and registered on 11
September 2008,to the extent that it amends
or repeals by-law 42 that was
registered in 1996 is, pursuant to
s 157(1)(a)
respondent shall calculate the sum paid by the applicant to the Owners
Corporation pursuant to the revoked by-law that is in excess
of the sum payable
pursuant to the previously existing by-law in that regard and shall credit the
excess to the account of the applicant.
respondent shall take all necessary steps to engage suitably qualified
tradespeople to repair and maintain the gazebo as necessary
to ensure compliance
by the respondent with its obligations in that regard under SSMA
work is to be completed within 60 days of the date of these
application is otherwise dismissed.”
appellant is the Owners Corporation.
appellant sought a stay of the Adjudicator’s orders. A stay was granted on
11 February 2013.
appellant sought an order revoking the orders of Strata Scheme Adjudicator and
an order dismissing the application in File No.
SCS12/49745.
appellant’s grounds of appeal are very extensive and they are as
Order 1 – Revoking of Special By-Law No. 42.5
adjudicator erred by finding that he was not bound by, and by disagreeing with,
the reasoning of the Supreme Court as to the proper
section 52(3)
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
James –v- The Owners
Strata Plan No. 11478 (No.4)
[2012] NSWSC 950.
adjudicator should have held that he was bound by, and obliged to follow, the
reasoning of the Supreme Court concerning the proper
section 52(3)
adjudicator erred by holding that the obligation of the applicant to obtain the
written consent of concerned lot owners to the
making or amendment of a special
privileges by-law is not a condition precedent to the making or amendment of
such a by-law and therefore
does not fall within the purview of
adjudicator should have held that the obligation of the applicant to obtain the
written consent of concerned lot owners to the
making or amendment of a special
privileges by-law is a condition or preliminary step precedent to the making or
amendment of the
by-law that falls within the purview of
adjudicator erred by concluding that
section 52(3)
is intended to preclude a
challenge to the validity of a registered by-law more than two years after the
applicant has met its obligations
section 52(1)
because of some
irregularity at or in the notice given for the meeting at which the by-law
adjudicator should have held that
section 52(3)
is intended to preclude a
challenge to the validity of a registered by-law more than two years after the
by-law is made, or purportedly
made, on the basis of a defect in a condition or
preliminary step precedent to the making of the by-law such as a failure to
the written consent of a concerned lot owner to the making of the
adjudicator erred by finding that a concerned lot owner would be powerless to
object to the registration of a special privileges
by-law to which the owner had
not consented in writing.
adjudicator should have held that a concerned lot owner who had not consented in
writing to the making of a special privileges
by-law would be capable of
protecting its interests and preventing the registration of the by-law by
lodging a caveat over the common
property title concerned or obtaining an
injunction to restrain the owners corporation from registering the by-law (as
the applicant
adjudicator erred by concluding that the revoking of Special By-Law No. 42.5
would not be procedurally unfair to the other six
lot owners who benefit under
the by-law when those lot owners were not parties to the adjudication
proceedings.
adjudicator should have held that it would have been a denial of procedural
fairness to the other six lot owners to make an order
revoking Special By-Law
No. 42.5 when those owners were not parties to the adjudication and the
adjudicator should have refrained
from making any such order until those owners
were made parties to the adjudication and given an opportunity to make
submissions
concerning the order sought.
adjudicator erred by making an order revoking Special By-Law No. 42.5
whether pursuant to
section 157(1)(a)
Strata Schemes Management Act
or otherwise.
adjudicator should have held that there were no grounds to make an order
revoking the by-law whether pursuant to
section 157(1)(a)
Order 2 – Credit of Monies Paid Pursuant to Special By-Law No.
adjudicator erred by deciding that the order revoking Special By-Law No. 42.5
would operate retrospectively.
adjudicator should have held that the order revoking Special By-Law No. 42.5
would operate on and from the date on which the order
was made or took effect as
a consequence of which he could not order the applicant to refund the
respondent, or give the respondent
credit for, the sums previously paid by the
respondent to the applicant pursuant to the revoked by-law.
adjudicator erred by concluding that he had power to order, and by ordering, the
applicant to calculate the sum paid by the respondent
to the applicant pursuant
to the revoked Special By-Law No. 42.5 that is in excess of the sum
payable pursuant to the previously
existing by-law and to credit the excess to
the account of the respondent.
adjudicator should have held that by virtue of
section 138(3)(d)
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
he did not have power to order the
applicant to credit any such excess to the account of the
respondent.
Order 3 – Repair of Gazebo
adjudicator erred by concluding that the gazebo does not form part of the
“elevator tower” as that expression is defined
in Special By-Law No.
adjudicator should have held that the gazebo forms part of the “elevator
tower” as that term is defined in Special
adjudicator erred by concluding that the respondent is not obliged to maintain
and repair the gazebo pursuant to Special By-Law
adjudicator should have held that the respondent is obliged to maintain and
repair the gazebo to Special By-Law 2, clause C(iv).
adjudicator erred by concluding that the respondent is not obliged to maintain
and repair the gazebo pursuant to Special By-Law
adjudicator should have held that the respondent is obliged to maintain and
repair the gazebo pursuant to Special By-Law 2, clause
adjudicator erred by concluding that Special By-Law 21 operates to exempt the
respondent from the maintenance or repair of the
adjudicator should have held that the common property covered by Special By-Law
No. 21 does not include the gazebo, that the gazebo
is not a structural element
and that the repairs required to the gazebo are not of a structural nature, and
therefore the provision
in clause A of the by-law exempting the respondent from
any maintenance or repairs of a structural nature did not apply to the
adjudicator erred by concluding that the applicant is responsible for keeping
the gazebo in in a state of good and serviceable
adjudicator should have held that the respondent is responsible for maintaining
and repairing the gazebo pursuant to Special By-Law
2, clauses C(iv) and
adjudicator erred by ordering the applicant to repair and maintain the gazebo as
necessary to ensure compliance by the applicant
with its obligations under
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
Additionally,
the adjudicator erred by failing to specify (with precision or at all) the work
the applicant would be required to carry
out to maintain and repair the gazebo
in order to comply with the order.
APPELLANT’S
appellant relied on the following in his appeal:
documents, submissions and statements in the Adjudication File SCS 12/49745
Submissions,
dated 7 February 2013
Expert Report, M
Molloy, dated 19 March 2013
Report, M Holt, dated 17 April 2013
Replacement
Report, M Molloy, dated 16 August 2013
Submissions in
Reply, dated 22 August 2013
Sworn evidence,
M Molloy, 22August 2013
Submissions,
dated 6 September 2013
Submissions,
dated 20 September 2013
appellant submitted that the Adjudicator erred in order 1 revoking Special
By-Law 42.5 made on 26 March 2008.
By-Law 42.5 amended a clause 42.5 in Special By-Law 42. Special By-Law 42 was
made on 23 March 2005.
rewriting clause No. 42.5 the license fee payable by each of the commercial
owners was increased from $1,000.00 plus GST per quarter
to $2,500.00 plus GST
per quarter and to have the license fee reviewed in accordance with the CPI each
of the Act provides that an owners corporation is only able to amend a
by-law if it does two things: obtain the written consent of
each of the
commercial lot owners who would be affected by the amendment to the by-law and
pass a special resolution at a general
this matter the appellant did not obtain the written consent of the respondent
to the amendment of Special By-Law 42.5.
respondent, owner of Lot 21, argued in the adjudication that the amendment of
the by-law was invalid. The Adjudicator agreed with
the respondent’s
contention. He made an order pursuant to
s 157(1)(a)
revoking the amendment of
the by-law.
appellant contended that the amendment to the by-law was valid. He relied on
of the Act in support of his argument. The section states that after two
years from the making of a by-law such as Special By-Law
42.5 “it is
conclusively presumed that all conditions and preliminary steps precedent to the
making of the by-law were complied
with and performed”.
appellant relied in on the decision of the Supreme Court, James-v-The Owners
Strata Plan 11478 (No.4) NSWSC 590. The court held
section 52(3)
saying (among other things) that that condition or preliminary step precedent is
conclusively presumed to have taken place if
no challenges are made to the
by-law within two years”.
Section 52(3)
reads as follows:
“After 2 years from the making, or purported making, of a by-law to
which this Division applies, it is conclusively presumed
that all conditions
and preliminary steps precedent to the making of the by-law were complied with
and performed.”
Adjudicator held that he did not agree with the proposition in
case. He stated that the decision by the Supreme Court was
made for other reasons (the by-law was in fact defeated because consent
given), the proposition is obiter dicta. He therefore felt that he was not bound
to follow it.
is important to note here that it was common ground between the parties at the
appeal that the Adjudicator’s view about the
James’ case was
appellant submitted that the Adjudicator’s conclusion is wrong. The
decision in James’ case is not obiter dicta. It
and it was therefore binding on the Adjudicator. That is, it is
the case that consent of the owners concerned is a prerequisite to
amending of a by-law and that that consent has to be obtained before the by-law
is approved at a general meeting.
consent is a preliminary step to the making of the by-law. If the preliminary
step of obtaining consent has not taken place,
after two years from the making
of the by-law, the condition precedent is considered conclusively to have taken
place because of
the operation of
of the Act.
appellant argued that the Adjudicator should not have concluded that the amended
by-law may be revoked without affording an opportunity
to the other commercial
lot owners to be a party to the proceedings. The Adjudicator concluded that the
decision to repeal the amended
by-law may be made in the absence of the other
commercial owners because their rights, existing prior to the amendment would
appellant contended that the Adjudicator could not have revoked the amended
by-law pursuant to
section 157
of the Act because he applied the wrong test. The
Adjudicator applied the test used in
which states that written
consent has to be obtained of all owners to have the by-law amended as a basis
to revoke the by-law under
section 157
of the Act. The ground to have the by-law
revoked under
section 157
is that regard had to be had to the interests of all
owners in the use and enjoyment of lots or common property.
relation to order 2 made by the Adjudicator the appellant submitted the
appellant argued that the Adjudicator made an order for the refund of the
additional license fees. The additional license fees
were called for from March
2008 under the amended Special By-Law 42.5. It is contended by the appellant
that that decision is wrong
for three reasons.
there were no grounds for the Special By-Law 42.5 to be revoked for the reasons
given above. That is, if Special By-Law 42.5
could not have been revoked because
of what was held in James’ case, order 2 could not have been made by the
Adjudicator.
the order revoking the Special By-Law No. 42.5 cannot operate
retrospectively.
the Adjudicator had no power to order the appellant to pay or refund to the
respondent, whether by credit or otherwise. The
section 138(3)(d)
prohibits an Adjudicator from making an order that includes the payment by a
person to another person of damages.
relation to order 3 made by the Adjudicator in favour of the respondent, the
appellant submitted the following.
Adjudicator held that the gazebo was not a part of the elevator tower.
Therefore, it was not to be maintained by the respondent
under Special By-Law 2,
granted to the respondent on 2 May 2003. Special By-Law 2 grants special
privilege to the respondent over
the common property that is the elevator,
elevator tower, exhaust system and the glazing works.
appellant argues that the gazebo has to be maintained by the respondent because
of the provisions made in clauses c(iv) and c(vii)
of Special By-Law 2.
c(iv) states that the Owner must maintain and keep the Elevator Tower in the
state of good and serviceable repair until the
Council approves and the bridge
over Gerrale Street, the bridge is constructed and commissioned for public
c(vii) provides that the Owner must comply with the terms of the License dated
the 1 September 1997. The license agreement
mandates the owner of Lot 21 will be
responsible for the upkeep of the structure above the lift.
license agreement clearly imposed on Lot 21 the responsibility for maintaining
and repairing the gazebo. The appellant contends
that there is no reason why
this responsibility, incorporated in Special By-Law 2 should be read down.
appellant stated that Special By-Law 21 which granted the respondent the
exclusive use of part of the common property terrace,
specifically exempted the
respondent from the requirement to carry out any structural repairs. However, it
is submitted further that
the Adjudicator concluded wrongly that any by-law
created after Special By-Law 21 that sought to impose on the respondent an
that did not already exist needed to address expressly the issue of
structural repairs rather than indirectly by reference to an
appellant submitted that the conclusion of the Adjudicator is wrong on this
point because Special By-Law 21 which exempts the
respondent from structural
repairs does not apply to the gazebo. The appellant also contended that the
repairs to the gazebo should
be carried out by the respondent because they are
not of a structural nature.
Additionally,
the appellant submitted that Special By-Law 21 does not affect in any way the
obligations on the respondent under Special
By-Law 2. This is because Special
By-Law 21 does not cover the same common property referred to in Special By-Law
2. The obligation
imposed on the respondent under Special By-Law 21 relates to
exclusive use of 100m² terrace adjacent to the restaurant. The
which is on the northern boundary of the restaurant is not covered by the
appellant contends that the expression and the definition of the elevator tower
in the by-law is intended to have an enlarged
meaning to include gazebo as the
roof of the elevator tower because it sits directly above it.
appellant tendered at the hearing the reports of Jones Nicholson Pty Ltd
Consulting Engineers, dated 19 March 2013 and 16 August
author of the reports Mr M Molloy was called and gave evidence. His evidence was
that the gazebo structure neither supports nor
gains support from the blockwork
lift shaft. They are structurally independent. The gazebo is not connected to
the lift shaft because
if connected there could be damage caused to one another
due to differing thermal movements.
Molloy’s evidence was that despite disconnection between the gazebo and
the lift shaft, the gazebo is a waterproof roof over
the lift structure. He
could not establish another form of roof cover over the lift shaft which would
make the gazebo an independent
structure over the lift
RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE
respondent relied on the following materials in reply:
documents, submissions and statements in the adjudication File SCS 12/49745
Submissions and
supporting authorities, dated 28 August 2013
Expert Report, K
Demlakian, undated.
Supplementary
Submissions and supporting authorities, dated 28 August 2013
Sworn evidence,
K Demlakian 22 August 2013
Submissions,
dated 9 September 2013
Further Written
Submissions, dated 9 September 2013
respondent’s case in support of the Adjudicator’s decision is
detailed and extensive. I will attempt to make a brief
respondent conceded that Special By-Law 42.5 should not have been revoked by the
Adjudicator on his interpretation of the decision
the respondent contended that the Adjudicator’s findings may be upheld on
the alternative ground, because the findings
restrain an abuse of process, or
cure a fraud on the minority, and prevent the
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
from becoming the instrument of a fraud.
respondent submitted that Special By-Law 42.5 was passed in 2008 without the
consent of lot 21. The appellant was notified within
two years that consent has
not been provided. The appellant “slept on that knowledge”. The
deeming provision in
was allowed to take effect.
respondent contends that the appellant should be estopped from relaying on
to prevent the Strata Schemes Act 1996 becoming the instrument of a fraud
on the minority, namely the respondent.
respondent states that if the Adjudicator erred in the application of power
under s 157, the Tribunal is now able to properly
exercise power under s 157,
159, or under s 138 by way of an order that Special By-Law 42.5 has no effect
against the respondent
under section 43(4) of the Act.
monies paid to the appellant by the respondent under Special By-Law 42 should be
refunded under section 138 or 169 of the Act
as a restitution, which is not an
award of damages, not to be made because of the prohibition in section
respondent submitted that the Adjudicator had power under s 138 or 169 to order
restitution of the license fees paid on a cause
of action or unjust
enrichment.
relation to Special By-Law 2, which imposes on maintenance obligations on the
respondent in respect of the lift, lift tower, staircase
and the contested
“roof”, several contentions are made why the obligations are
incompetent and outside power.
first contention is that Special By-Law 2 should be repealed because there is no
corresponding grant of exclusive use. A grant
of exclusive use over the lift was
not possible, in any event, because of the existence of the positive covenant
for public use.
The positive covenant was made in respect of the lift in area A
in 1995 by the Council of Sutherland Shire.
second contention is that Special By-Law 2 is void for uncertainty. The
by-law states that it will remain in force until the
bridge over Gerrale Street
is constructed. There is no time limit imposed in the by-law on the appellant as
to when the Development
Application ought to be made to the Council for the
construction of the bridge. The respondent states that the by-law is therefore
void, due to its reference to an undefined term.
third contention is that a proper interpretation of the relevant provisions of
the Act constrain the Adjudicator from imposing
an individual lot owner to
repair and maintain common property over which exclusive use or special
privilege are granted under
that by-law. Section 62 of the Act mandates that the
owners corporation is responsible for repair and maintenance of the common
The respondent concludes that in this matter there is no clear
allocation to him of the obligation to repair and maintain common
property under
s 54. The obligation to repair and maintain falls to the appellant under s 62 of
respondent argues that in the alternative, Special By-Law 2, on its terms, does
not impose any obligation on the respondent to
repair and maintain the gazebo.
The gazebo is in accordance with the evidence given by Ken Demlakian
structurally separate from the
elevator tower.
respondent argued that Special By-Law 2 should be amended or repealed on the
basis of a finding that the terms and conditions
relating to the maintenance or
upkeep of the common property are unjust. That is, if the terms of the by-law
providing for maintenance
lacked clarity, the by-law may be declared unjust
under s 158 of the Act.
continuing obligation imposed under Special By-Law 2 on the respondent is unjust
because it runs in to the future on a continuing
basis. The temporary increase
in demand for the lift and staircase due to the expansion of the restaurant on
to the common property
provided justification for the respondent to bear the
maintenance cost of the lift and staircase. The indefinite period imposed on
respondent for repair and maintenance by the by-law should now be reverted to
the appellant was intended when the strata scheme
was originally
registered.
respondent further submits that it is unjust to have the obligation to maintain
the lift imposed on him because the grant of exclusive
use of the lift and
staircase cannot be done due to the existing positive covenant for public
respondent says regard must be had to s 158 (2):
interests of all owners in the use and enjoyment of their lots and common
property, and
rights and reasonable expectations of any owner deriving or anticipating benefit
under a by-law of the kind referred to in section
respondent argues that the interest of all owners in the use and enjoyment of
common property would not be harmed by the obligation
to maintain the lift and
the staircase reverting back to the owners corporation. That is, it was intended
at the creation of the
strata scheme that the bridge over Gerrale Street be
constructed. The obligation to maintain the lift and the stairs would have been
the responsibility of the Owners Corporation. Failure to construct the bridge by
the Owners Corporation should not be allowed to
be a penalty on the respondent
by way of imposing the responsibility of repairing the lift and stairs on him
indefinitely.
am satisfied that the appellant has made out the grounds one to six and Order
number 1 has to be revoked.
appellant argued that the Adjudicator had to follow the decision in James case.
This was agreed between the parties at the hearing.
Special By-Law 42 was made
in March 2005. It granted commercial lot owners special privileges to each keep
an exhaust system and
grease trap.
By-Law 42 imposed on each commercial lot owner special condition to pay a
license fee of $1,000.00 plus GST per quarter.
March 2008 the appellant amended Special By-Law 42. Clause 42.5 was rewritten to
increase the license fee to $2,500.00 per quarter
plus GST. The license fee was
to be reviewed in accordance with the CPI each year.
respondent argued before the Adjudicator that By-Law 42.5 was passed in
contravention of s 52(1) (a). That is, the by-law was
amended without the
written consent of the commercial lot owners.
appellant submitted to the Adjudicator that the respondent was out of time to
have section 52(1) (a) invoked because the two years
have passed and s 52(3) is
to be applied. Under s 52(3) it is conclusively presumed after two years of
passing or purported passing
of the by-law that all conditions and preliminary
steps precedent to the making of the by-law, required in s 52(1), have been
appellant relied in support of his argument before the Adjudicator on James case
in which it was held that if more than two years
have passed since the by-law
was amended, it is conclusively presumed that the respondent has consented to
the amendment of the by-law
and it is too late for the respondent to allege
Adjudicator rejected the proposition that he was bound by the decision in James
case. He concluded that what James case had to
say about s 52(3) was obiter
dicta. The Adjudicator revoked Special By-Law 42.5 pursuant to s 157(1) (a). He
held that the by-law
because requirements set out in s
52(1) were not met at the time of its amendment.
appellant submitted that the Adjudicator’s conclusion about James case was
wrong. The respondent conceded as much at the
hearing of the
adopt the appellant’s argument because the Adjudicator was bound and
should have followed the decision in
respondent argued in the alternative that Special By-Law 42.5 should be revoked
because the appellant was notified within two
year period that written consent
was not given for the amendment of Special By-Law 42.5, before any deeming
provision could take
effect. The appellant did not take any steps to correct the
error. He allowed deeming provisions of s 52(3) to take effect.
respondent says that the appellant should be estopped from relaying on s 52(3)
to prevent the
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
becoming the instrument of
fraud, namely the respondent.
am not persuaded that in 2008 when Special By-Law 42.5 was amended, the
appellant avoided its obligation to obtain written consent
for the proposed
amendment under
, exercised the power with intent to be beyond the scope of
power. It seems to me that no one took any action to remedy the omission
for written consent to amend Special By-Law 42 until the dispute arose as to who
is responsible for the extensive repairs
to the gazebo.
view of my decision to revoke Order 1 made by the Adjudicator, it follows that
Order 2 has to be revoked as well. That is, Special
By-Law 42.5 was amended to
increase the quarterly license fee from $1,000 per quarter to $2,500 for having
the exhaust system and
shared grease traps on the common
relation to the credit of monies paid pursuant to Special By-Law 42.5, I am in
agreement and adopt the submissions of the appellant.
That is, even if Special
By-Law 42.5 was repealed, the repeal does not operate retrospectively. The
respondent’s obligation
continued to pay fees under the by-law up until
the date the by-law is repealed.
view of my decision that Special By-Law 42.5 ought not to have been repealed by
the Adjudicator the obligation to pay the quarterly
license fees ought to be
continued. The license fee is not a levy and it may be paid under s 53 of the
Act in consideration for
the right to keep an exhaust system on the common
property roof and to use the common property grease trap.
agree with the Adjudicator that the appellant is responsible for the repairing
and maintaining the gazebo. Hence, the grounds 17
to 28 have not been made
Adjudicator concluded at [66] that it is perfectly clear from the description
and photographs that the repairs to the gazebo are
structural rather than
non-structural. The Adjudicator was referring to Special By-Law 21, passed in
August 1996. He concluded at
[59] that the by-law specifically excludes the
respondent from an obligation to carry out repairs and maintenance of a
Adjudicator stated at [64] that in his view any by-law created after Special
By-Law 21 that sought to impose an obligation on
the respondent an obligation
that did not already exist needed to deal expressly with the exclusion provided
in the by-law rather
than indirectly by reference to an expired agreement. The
appellant submitted that the Adjudicator erred by concluding that the gazebo
does not form the part of the elevator tower as that term is defined in Special
By-Law 2, clauses c(iv) and c(vii).
respondent submitted that s 54(3) expressly provides that, in the case of the
direct imposition of the obligation to repair and
maintain the common property
the owners corporation is excused from its statutory obligation. I am not
persuaded on the material
before me that there has been a direct imposition of
the obligation to repair and maintain the gazebo made on the respondent under
Special By-Law 21 or Special By-Law 2.
By-Law 21 states that the respondent is excluded from any maintenance or repair
of a structural nature. The by-law does not
mention the lift, the lift tower or
the gazebo. The exclusive use and enjoyment granted in 1996 under this by-law
refers to an open
area to be used by the restaurant.
licence agreement made between the parties in 1997 foreshadows that the
respondent will apply to the appellant for exclusive use
of the common property
roof over Lot 21. The appellant would consider the making of a by-law for that
purpose. Furthermore, the license
agreement contemplates that under the by-law
the respondent will be responsible for the cost of lift maintenance contract and
upkeep of the structure above the lift.
appellant contends that under the license agreement the respondent is
responsible for the upkeep of the structure above the elevator
namely, the
gazebo. I do not agree with this conclusion. The license agreement contemplates
passing of a by-law under which the respondent
will be responsible for the
upkeep of the structure above the elevator. The word gazebo is not mentioned in
the license. My view
is that the gazebo, as argued by the respondent, is a
separate structure to the lift tower. The lift tower generally connotes the
motor room, the lift over-run and the lift shaft. The gazebo function is to
provide shelter from the elements or as contended
by the respondent’s
expert they are designed for ornamental or decorative purpose.
By-Law 2 was passed in 2003, after the license agreement had lapsed. The by-law
relevantly imposed on the owner of Lot 21,
the present respondent, the
obligation to properly maintain and keep the Elevator in a state of good and
serviceable repair c(iii),
to properly maintain and keep the Elevator Tower in a
state of good and serviceable repair c(iv) and the owner of Lot 21 must comply
with the terms of the licence dated 1 September 1997 c(vii).
62 of the Act imposes the obligation on the owners corporation to maintain and
repair the common property.
54 of the Act makes clear that the obligation to maintain and repair the common
property under a by-law may be imposed on
either the owners corporation or the
owner or owners concerned.
view is that in this matter Special By-Law 2 does not excuse the appellant from
the obligation to maintain and repair the common
property, namely the gazebo. I
agree with the respondent in that Special By-Law 2 does not impose any
obligation on him to maintain
and repair the
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal
20 December
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (293 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter