URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2024/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bakulev v Bluescope Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd [2024] NSWDDT 15 (21 November 2024)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
Bakulev v Bluescope Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWDDT 15
Hearing Date(s):
20 November 2024
Date of Orders:
21 November 2024
Decision Date:
21 November 2024
Russell SC DCJ
(1) Dismiss the Notice of Motion filed by the defendant on
7 November 2024.
(2) Order each party to pay his or its own
costs of the Notice of Motion.
Catchwords:
DUST DISEASES – notice of motion – claims resolution process
– contributions assessment determination – review
Registrar’s decision not to refer for a fresh determination of
apportionment – Tribunal has no jurisdiction to conduct
proceedings are in the claims resolution process
Legislation Cited:
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
Tribunal Regulation 2019 (NSW), cll 16, 17, 52(1), 52(4), 52(5), 52(9), 52(10),
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW), r 49.19(1)
Cases Cited:
QBE Insurance (Australia) Ltd v Wallaby Grip Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 43
Procedural rulings
Sasho Bakulev (As Legal Personal Representative of the Late Todor Bakulev)
(Plaintiff)
Bluescope Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd (First Defendant)
Representation:
S Tzouganatos (Plaintiff)
D Andersen (solicitor) (First
Solicitors:
Koutzoumis Lawyers (Plaintiff)
HWL Ebsworth
Lawyers (First Defendant)
File Number(s):
DDT 2023/443945
Introduction
a Statement of Claim filed on 7 December 2023 the plaintiff Mr Todor Bakulev
sued Bluescope Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd (Bluescope) seeking
damages for
asbestos-related pleural disease (ARPD) and associated pleural plaques and
diffuse pleural thickening.
Todor Bakulev died on 24 March 2024. These proceedings have been continued by
his son Mr Sasho Bakulev, who is now the plaintiff.
a first cross claim filed on 19 July 2024 Bluescope sought contribution from
Amaca Pty Ltd (Amaca).
a second cross claim filed on 22 July 2024 Amaca sought contribution from CSR
matter is still within the Claims Resolution Process (CRP) and there is a
mediation scheduled to be held on 26 November 2024.
Notice of Motion
7 November 2024 Bluescope filed a Notice of Motion seeking the following
“1. Pursuant to
Rules 49.19
Uniform Civil Procedure
, that the Tribunal review the decision of the Registrar made on 17
October 2024, declining to make a referral to a Contributions
Assessor for a
Determination of Apportionment in these proceedings under clause 52 of the
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
2. Pursuant to
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
Tribunal direct the Registrar to make a referral to a Contributions Assessor for
a Determination of Apportionment in these
proceedings under clause 52 of the
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
3. Such further or other Order as the Tribunal thinks fit.”
support of the Motion Bluescope relied upon the affidavit of its solicitor Mr
Andersen affirmed on 7 November 2024 (DX 1). That
affidavit shows that by a
letter dated 24 September 2024 the Acting Registrar of the Dust Diseases
Tribunal appointed the Contributions
Assessor pursuant to cl 52(1) of the
Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019 (NSW) (the DDTR).
Contributions Assessor provided a document headed “Determination of
Apportionment” which was filed on 10 October 2024
(Determination).
a letter dated 15 October 2024 Mr Andersen wrote to the Registrar of the
Tribunal referring to the Determination.
Andersen said:
“1. We refer to the document titled ‘Determination of
Apportionment’ dated 9 October 2024, sealed on 10 October
Determination
2. On 24 September 2024 this matter was referred to a Contributions Assessor, to
provide a Determination of Apportionment, pursuant
to clause 52 of the
Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
3. It is BlueScope’s respectful contention that the required statutory
task is yet to be performed.
4. Firstly, the Determination was ‘made’ under repealed delegated
legislation.
5. Secondly, the Determination does not contain any process of evaluation and
thus cannot constitute a Determination of Apportionment
as that expression is
used in the Regulation. In particular:
(a) there is nothing in the Determination connecting any of the evidence and
submissions with the ultimate decision to assess BlueScope
‘Category 1’ and ‘Category 2’ tortfeasor;
(b) likewise, there is nothing in the Determination connecting the evidence and
submissions with the ultimate decision not to vary
the Standard Presumptions as
contained in the applicable delegated legislation.
6. In these circumstances, there is a wholesale absence of performance of the
statutory task of issuing a Determination of Apportionment.
7. The privative clause contained in clause 52(9) of the Regulation has no
application to the present circumstances as there is no
Determination of
Apportionment. The function in question under cl 52(4) is yet to be
8. We refer to the decision of the High Court of Australia in
Minister for
Immigration & Multicultural Affairs v Bhardwaj
[2002] HCA 11.
there said:
There is, in our view, no reason in principle why the general law
should treat administrative decisions involving jurisdictional error
or having legal effect unless and until set aside. A decision that involves
legal foundation and is properly
regarded, in law, as no decision at all: at [51], per Gaudron and Gummow
9. To similar effect are the statements at [152]-[153] per Hayne J and
[163]-[165] per Callinan J.
10. We respectfully request that the matter be referred afresh to a different
Contributions Assessor.”
Registrar replied to Mr Andersen by an email dated 17 October 2024. The response
of the Registrar was as follows:
Dust Diseases Tribunal Regulation 2019
does not give me any
powers to ‘refer afresh to a different Contributions
Assessor’.”
view was of course expressed in the context of Bluescope’s request for the
Registrar to consider the Determination, find
that it was defective in the ways
put forward by Bluescope, and refer the matter afresh to a different
Contributions Assessor.
then filed the Notice of Motion on 7 November 2024 seeking a review of this
decision of the Registrar and an order directing
the Registrar to make a
referral to a new Contributions Assessor for a fresh Determination of
Apportionment.
support of the Motion Bluescope filed Written Submissions on 19 November 2024
(MFI 1). Those written submissions set out large
parts of the Replies of
Bluescope, Amaca and CSR. The Replies were some of the documents put before the
Contributions Assessor.
Review of the Decision of a
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) (UCPR) provides as
49.19 Review of registrar’s directions, certificates, orders,
decisions and other acts
(1) Subject to subrule (2), if in any proceedings a registrar
gives a direction or certificate, makes an order or decision or does
act, the court may, on application by any party, review the direction,
certificate, order, decision or other act and make
such order, by way of
confirmation, variation, discharge or otherwise, as the court thinks fit.”
The Claims Resolution Process
of the DDTR is headed “Claims resolution process for asbestos-related
conditions”.
12 of the DDTR sets out the objectives of the CRP as follows:
Objectives of claims resolution
The objectives of the claims resolution process are as follows—
(a) to foster the early provision of information and particulars
concerning claims in respect of asbestos-related conditions,
(b) to encourage early settlement of claims,
(c) to reduce associated legal and administrative costs.”
Division 2 of the DDTR deals with “Claims subject to the claims
resolution process”.
16 of the DDTR provides that a claim in respect of an asbestos-related condition
is subject to the CRP once the claim is filed.
Such a claim remains subject to
the CRP until the claim is settled by mediation or otherwise, if the mediation
has been completed
but is unsuccessful.
17 of the DDTR deals with the “Effect of claim being subject to claims
resolution process”. Clause 17 provides
as follows:
17 Effect of claim being subject to claims resolution process
(1) While a claim is subject to the claims resolution process—
(a) the parties to the claim must comply with the provisions of this Part,
(b) proceedings in the Tribunal to determine the claim are deferred and the
claim is not subject to case management by the Tribunal,
(c) the claim is not subject to the provisions of rules of court, or any
direction or order of the Tribunal under a provision of
the Act, any other Act
or rules of court, as to any steps to be taken in proceedings on the claim or
for the referral of the claim
for alternative dispute resolution, such as
Clause 20 provides for the removal of certain claims from the claims resolution
(2) This clause does not affect the application of the practice and procedures
of the Tribunal with respect to—
(a) the service of the statement of claim or cross-claim, including the service
of the statement of claim outside Australia, or
(b) the amendment of the statement of claim to join a party before the
plaintiff’s statement of particulars is served, or
(c) the amendment of the statement of claim to join a party to the claim at the
request of the plaintiff where the Tribunal is satisfied
that it is necessary to
do so to preserve the plaintiff’s cause of action, or
(d) the amendment of the statement of claim to add a compensation to relatives
claim after the death of the plaintiff, or
(e) the making of cross-claims, except to the extent of any inconsistency with
clause 25, or
(f) the making of orders to give effect to any agreement or arrangement between
the parties, whether resulting from an offer of compromise
or otherwise, or
(g) the issue and return of subpoenas, or
(h) the granting of leave to commence an action under
Liability (Third Party Claims Against Insurers) Act 2017
(i) the making of directions or orders to give effect to, or consequent on, an
amendment of the statement of claim to institute proceedings
against a new party
or to substitute a party, or
(j) the amendment of the statement of claim to discontinue proceedings against a
If a claim is not settled through the claims resolution process, proceedings in
the Tribunal can proceed or the parties can decide
to continue with attempts to
settle the claim.
(3) Without limiting subclause (1), while a claim is subject to the claims
resolution process and before the plaintiff’s statement
of particulars is
served, the plaintiff may, without leave, amend the plaintiff’s statement
(4) Subclause (3) does not apply if the plaintiff’s statement of claim is
filed in conjunction with an application under clause
20 for a determination by
the Tribunal that the claim is urgent and that application results in the making
of a determination.
When a statement of claim is filed in conjunction with an application under
clause 20, clause 23(7) provides that a statement of
particulars is not
Consideration
proceedings have been subject to the CRP ever since they were filed. Until a
mediation has been concluded, either successfully
or unsuccessfully, the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction to determine the claim or make case management
orders for the claim – cl
17(1)(b) of the DDTR. Further, the claim is not
subject to the provisions of rules of court – cl 17(1)(c) of the DDTR.
of course would include the rules contained in the UCPR.
17(2) preserves the jurisdiction of a judge of the Tribunal in respect of listed
matters. A classic example, arising in the
present proceedings, is the power of
a judge to remove the name of the deceased original plaintiff and substitute as
the new plaintiff,
the legal personal representative of the original plaintiff
– cl 17(2)(c) and (i).
a judge of the Tribunal is given power to deal with an interlocutory matter by
cl 17(2) of the DDTR, a judge has no power to
determine the claim, apply the
provisions of any rules, or conduct case management of the proceedings.
in cl 17(2) of the DDTR is a power given to a judge of the Tribunal, while a
claim is subject to the CRP, to review the decision
of a registrar. It would
have been a simple matter to include such a power in cl 17(2), if it was
intended that judges of the Tribunal
should exercise power to review a decision
of the Registrar.
The Tribunal has No Jurisdiction to Make the
Orders Sought
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is limited by cl 17 of the DDTR, and in
particular because no power is given by cl 17(2)
of the DDTR to a judge of the
Tribunal (while proceedings are still in the CRP) to review the decision of a
registrar, I find that
I have no jurisdiction to make the orders sought in the
defendant’s Notice of Motion. For that reason the Motion will be
In the Alternative
on appeal I were found to be incorrect in my conclusion concerning lack of
review of the
decision of the Registrar.
appointment of a Contributions Assessor to conduct a Contributions Assessment
Determination arises from cl 52(1) of the DDTR.
Clause 52 applies where the
parties have failed to agree upon apportionment. Clause 52(1) of the DDTR
provides as follows:
52 Determination of apportionment failing agreement
(1) If an apportionment statement setting out details of the apportionment of
liability agreed to by the defendants has not been
filed with the registrar by
the end of the period within which the defendants are required to reach
agreement as to apportionment,
the registrar is to refer the matter to a
Contributions Assessor for determination on the next business day following the
that period.”
matters to be taken into account by a Contributions Assessor are set out within
cl 52 as follows:
“(4) The Contributions Assessor to whom a matter is referred is to
determine the contribution that each defendant is liable
to make and is to make
that determination on the assumption that the defendants are liable and solely
on the basis of—
(a) the plaintiff’s statement of particulars and the defendants’
replies on the claim, and
(b) standard presumptions as to apportionment determined by the Minister for the
purposes of this clause by order published in the
Editorial note—
For the standard presumptions as to apportionment determined by the Minister see
Dust Diseases Tribunal (Standard Presumptions—Apportionment) Order
(5) In addition to the documents referred to in subclause (4)(a), a
Contributions Assessor may (but need not) take into account any
(a) any of the plaintiff’s statement of particulars and the
defendants’ replies that were amended after they were first
(b) any of the defendants’ replies on the claim that were filed
cl 52(10) of the DDTR, the Registrar is to provide the plaintiff and the
defendant with a copy of the Contributions Assessment
Determination as soon as
practicable after the determination is made. The Registrar did this.
52(11) of the DDTR provides as follows:
“(11) If there is a clerical mistake, or an error arising from an
accidental slip or omission, in a determination of a Contributions
Assessor, the
Contributions Assessor or another Contributions Assessor may correct the mistake
(a) of the Contributions Assessor’s own motion within 7 business days
after the determination is made, or
(b) on the application of any defendant (made to the Contributions Assessor
whose determination is in question within 7 business
days after the
determination is made) as soon as practicable after the application for
correction is made.”
has made no application to the Contributions Assessor to correct a clerical
mistake or an error arising from an accidental
slip or omission. One of the
complaints made by Bluescope about the Determination is that it contains a
heading indicating that it
was made pursuant to a repealed version of the DDTR.
I regard this as purely a clerical mistake or an accidental slip or omission,
which could have been corrected by the defendant applying to the Contributions
Assessor under cl 52(11) of the DDTR. To now say,
as Bluescope does, that this
clerical mistake means that the Determination has not been validly made, would
be a triumph of form
over substance.
52(9) of the DDTR provides as follows:
“(9) A determination of a Contributions Assessor under this Division
cannot be challenged, reviewed, quashed or called into
question before any court
of law or administrative review body in any proceedings. This subclause—
(a) is not binding on the plaintiff, and
(b) does not change any law relating to causation as between the plaintiff and
the defendants, and
(c) does not displace any law relating to the joint and several liability of the
defendants, and
(d) does not prevent the subsequent taking, or determination by the Tribunal, of
a dispute between defendants as to apportionment
in a separate
proceeding.”
a Contributions Assessment Determination cannot be “challenged, reviewed,
quashed or called into question before any court
of law or administrative review
body in any proceedings”, it is hard to imagine that there is any scope
left at all for the
validity of a Contributions Assessment Determination to be
challenged, while proceedings are still within the CRP.
my view the remedy for a party aggrieved by a finding of a Contributions
Assessor is to be found in cl 52(9)(d), which preserves
the right of any party
subject to a Contributions Assessment Determination to bring a dispute about
apportionment before the Tribunal
in separate proceedings. Such apportionment
proceedings would be heard by a judge and determined, not by the artificial
imposed by the CRP, but by the law in relation to apportionment
between tortfeasors, including the
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
Court of Appeal considered an earlier version of the DDTR in
QBE Insurance
(Australia) Ltd v Wallaby Grip Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 43
, where at [15] Handley JA
“Division 5 establishes a procedure for the summary but provisional
determination of contribution claims in order to facilitate
settlement of the
plaintiff’s claim and the satisfaction of any judgment he may obtain by
judicial decision or settlement.
A defendant or cross-defendant who is
dissatisfied with the summary determination can pursue its strict rights and
seek a more favourable
determination at a trial but will be subject to
significant costs sanctions if a substantially better result is not achieved.
the summary determination is immediately enforceable. A clear purpose
of the scheme is to prevent the final determination of the
plaintiff’s
claim being delayed by contribution disputes.”
[42] Handley JA said the following:
“...The Division establishes a procedure for the summary determination of
such claims, on an avowedly rough and ready basis,
which allows disputes as to
liability and quantum to be determined judicially in due course when any
necessary adjustments can be
Theoretical Review of the Registrar’s Decision
previously recited, the Registrar indicated by email that in his view he did not
have any power under the DDTR to refer the matter
afresh to a different
Contributions Assessor, based upon the reasons advanced by Bluescope.
my view that statement is undoubtedly correct as a matter of law. While cl 52(1)
of the DDTR gives the Registrar a power to refer
the matter to a Contributions
Assessor for determination, thereafter the power and obligation of the Registrar
is limited to providing
the plaintiff and each defendant with a copy of the
Contributions Assessment Determination (cl 52(10)).
is to be noted that if there is a clerical mistake or an error arising from an
accidental slip or omission, a party may approach
the Contributions Assessor
directly, and the Registrar is not involved in any way.
the Registrar is given a specific power to make a value judgment about the worth
of a Contributions Assessment Determination,
and thereafter refer the matter
afresh to a new Contributions Assessor, a registrar cannot do either of those
things. There is no
power given to the Registrar to do what Bluescope sought,
and, even on a theoretical basis, if I had jurisdiction to review the decision
of the Registrar, I would have found that his decision was correct in law.
will not embark upon a consideration of the form or merits of the Determination.
I have no power to do so. Nor did the Registrar.
If the contentions of Bluescope
were accepted, then a registrar would be required to scrutinise every
Contributions Assessment Determination
as if he or she were conducting some form
of judicial review of an administrative decision. It goes without saying that if
the Registrar’s obligation, the CRP would grind to a halt, and
the objectives of the CRP set out in cl 12 of the DDTR would
oral submissions Bluescope urged me to “give guidance” to
Contributions Assessors as to whether Bluescope is a Category
1 or a Category 2
defendant, ie whether or not it was in business as a miner, manufacturer,
supplier or installer of asbestos. It
was submitted that Bluescope had been
“long suffering” as the result of many previous Tribunal decisions
and Contributions
Assessment Determinations.
decline to embark upon that task. A Contributions Assessment Determination is
based upon assertions and submissions, not upon evidence.
It is not my role and
it is not within my power to provide judicial advice to Contributions Assessors
generally, particularly in
the absence of evidence and in the absence of a
contradictor (counsel for the plaintiff expressed some sympathy for
Bluescope’s
argument that it was a Category 2 and not a Category 1
defendant).
orders of the Tribunal are:
(1) Dismiss the Notice of Motion filed by the defendant on 7 November 2024.
(2) Order each party to pay his or its own costs of the Notice of Motion.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (270 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter