URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSIRADRS/2020/267.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ARO v AAMI (Merit Review) [2020] NSWSIRADRS 267 (14 December 2020)
ARO v AAMI (Merit Review)
NSWSIRADRS 267
NSW DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE (NSWDRS)
Merit Review
Calculation of weekly payments – third entitlement period - PAWE
– pre-accident weekly earnings – ATO Tax Tables
-net not gross
income in third period – no capacity to work due to the accident –
no legal costs
Legislation Cited
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
, Schedule 1
Schedule 1 clause 4, Schedule 2(1)(a)
Motor Accident Guidelines 2017 cl 7.12
Cases Cited
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Jenkins
[2020] NSWSC 412
Motor Accidents Injuries (Indexation) Amendment Order 2019 [NSW]
ARO – Claimant
AAMI - Insurer
This decision has been edited to remove all Unique Personal
Identification including the name of the Claimant
Merit Review Certificate
Issued under
section 7.13(4)
Motor Accident Injuries Act
__________________________________________________________________________________
Claimant: ARO
Insurer: AAI Limited (trading
Claim Number: 123456
Date of Accident: 16 June 2018
The Reviewable Decision:
Reviewable decision-maker: XYZ
Date of Reviewable decision: 13 March 2020
Nature of Reviewable decision: The calculation of weekly payments of
statutory benefits.
The Merit Review:
SIRA Reference: 10192311
Merit Reviewer:
Stavros Georgiadis
Date of Merit Review Certificate: 14 December 2020
__________________________________________________________________________________
Merit Reviewer’s Determination
This determination relates to a merit review matter, which is a reviewable
decision under Schedule 2(1)(a) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
(“the Act”). T
he Merit Review matter concerns the calculation of
weekly payments of statutory benefits payable to the Claimant under Division 3.3
specifically: calculation of the Claimant’s
Pre-Accident Weekly Earnings (PAWE) and statutory
benefits in respect of the injury sustained on 16 June 2018.
My determination of the Merit Review is as follows:
A brief statement of my reasons for this determination are attached
to this certificate.
Stavros Georgiadis - Merit Reviewer - Dispute Resolution Service
Reviewer’s Reasons for Determination
Claimant, ARO, was injured in a motor vehicle accident on 16 June 2018. He
suffered neck, shoulder and back pain. There was a
dispute between the Insurer
and the Claimant in respect of the amount of weekly payments of statutory
benefits payable to the Claimant
under Division 3.3 of the
Motor Accidents
Injuries Act
2017 (weekly payments of statutory benefits to injured
18 September 2018, the Insurer advised the Claimant by email that his statutory
weekly rate was $3,899.00 - being limited to the
maximum weekly statutory
threshold applicable at that time under Division 3.9 of the
21 December 2019 the Insurer notified the Claimant by remittance advice that his
“gross payment and net payment” for
the period 15/12/2019 -
21/12/2019 was $2,568.00. On 3 March 2020, the Claimant’s solicitors,
Shine Lawyers, disputed that
rate and requested an internal review of the
calculation of weekly payments of statutory benefits.
the time of the accident, the Claimant was a self-employed Program Manager
working via the company XX Pty Ltd and earning $1,350.00
per day. The
Insurer’s internal review decision of 13 March 2020 ultimately concluded
that the Claimant’s Pre-Accident
Weekly Earnings rate is $4,180.00, for
reasons which are discussed below.
making its internal review decision, the Insurer had regard to a Pre-Accident
Earnings Assessment report dated 14 September 2018
provided by Vincents
Accountants (the Vincents assessment). Paragraph 2.10 of the Vincents assessment
sets out the basis of the calculation
of PAWE adopted by the Insurer:
it is reasonable to conclude the
Claimant was earning $1,350.00 per day during the entire 12-month period from 16
June 2017 to 15
June 2018. Adopting this as the key assumption, the table [Table
2] sets out my assessment of the Claimant’s average weekly
earnings for
the 12 months ending on the day immediately prior to the
2 records the Claimant’s total gross income of $321,773 for the year
before the motor accident, less estimated expenses
of $34,541 to arrive at total
income from personal exertion for the 12 months ended 15 June 2018 of $287,232.
Dividing by 52 weeks
equates to $5,523.69 gross earnings per
assessing the Claimant’s Pre-Accident Weekly Earnings, Table 2 of the
Vincents assessment for the Insurer, notes as follows
at paragraph
2.11.1 There
were 11 weekdays (i.e. excluding weekends) in the period from 16 June 2017 to 30
June 2017. Accordingly, for that period,
Gross Income was calculated by
multiplying the daily rate of $1,350.00 by 11 days.
2.11.2 For the
quarters ended 30 September 2017, 31 December 2017 and 31 March 2018, Gross
Income is based on the Sales (excluding
GST) reported in the BAS for those three
quarters (as summarised at Schedule C).
2.11.3 For the
period from 1 April 2018 to 15 June 2018, there was a total of 52 weekdays,
excluding public holidays. Accordingly,
for this period, Gross Income was
calculated by multiplying the daily rate of $1,350.00 by 52
2.11.4 Estimated
Gross Income, before business expenses, of $321,773 for the 12 months ended 15
June 2018 was notes as being almost
identical to the Sales (excluding GST)
reported in the BAS for the 12 months ended 30 June 2018 (i.e.
estimated expenses were deducted based on the expenses reported by XX Pty Ltd
for the year ended 30 June 2017, excluding
salaries and superannuation paid to
the Claimant and his spouse (referring to Table 1 at paragraph
2.11.6 After
deducting estimated expenses and dividing by 52 weeks, the Gross Income was
calculated at a weekly amount of $5,523.69.
2.12 of the Vincents assessment sets out that based on the available records,
the Claimant’s PAWE is $5,523.69 before
tax, being [an] estimate of the
Claimant’s average weekly income before tax (after business expenses) for
the 12 months immediately
before the motor accident, ending 15 June 2018.
the gross weekly earnings of $5,523.69, paragraphs 2.13 and 2.14 of the Vincent
assessment observed
“the aforementioned weekly amount is higher than
the “maximum weekly statutory benefit” of $3,899 per week as set
at Division 3.9 of the Act. ... Accordingly, during the first entitlement period
(i.e. the first 13 weeks after the accident),
if 95% of the difference between
the Claimant’s PAWE (i.e. $5,523.69) and the Claimant’s
post-accident earning capacity
is greater than $3,899.00, the weekly benefit
will be limited to $3,899.00 per week.”
calculation in respect of the first entitlement period was made on the basis
above and is not in dispute.
note that paragraphs 3.2 and 3.3 of the Vincents assessment acknowledge
“the assessment in this report is not an assessment of the actual
weekly statutory benefit payable to the Claimant. ... The
weekly statutory
benefit payable to the Claimant is ultimately a matter for the Insurer to
determine having regard to the Claimant’s
PAWE and other relevant matters
outlined in the Act such as (a) the Claimant’s “post-accident
earning capacity”
and (b) the amounts payable during the different
entitlement periods outlined in the Act.”
Under the heading
Calculating the pre-accident weekly earnings
, the Insurer’s
internal review decision adopted the PAWE figure of $4,180.00
with the findings of Vincents Accounting.”
Relevantly,
on 27 September 2019 the
Motor Accidents Injuries (Indexation) Amendment
[NSW] declared that the “maximum weekly statutory
benefit” amount as at 1 October 2019 was indexed to $4,180.00.
Accordingly,
on 21 December 2019 the Claimant was provided with a remittance
advice setting out his gross weekly payments from 15/12/2019 - 21/12/2019
$2,568.00. He was advised that this was also the net amount per week.
aforementioned, the Insurer’s internal review of 13 March 2020 concluded,
under the headings
Other consideration
... “It appears that you dispute the AAMI Claims Team
reduction of your weekly entitlements by the amount you may have paid
also the method of calculation of your weekly entitlement. The writer therefore
has assessed your dispute under Schedule
2(1)(a); the amount of your
Pre-Accident Weekly Earnings calculation. The writer has decided that the
calculation of your Pre-Accident
Weekly Earnings as the maximum allowed under
Section 3.9 of the
Motor Accidents Compensation Act 2017
(NSW) is correct
and therefore, your Pre-Accident Weekly Earnings is $4,180.00. ...
Other consideration:
... The writer notes that your injuries are
currently classified as ‘minor’ and therefore you are precluded from
benefits and treatment expenses since the 26-week anniversary of the
accident. Therefore, your current weekly payments are Nil.”
material issue is set out in the Claimant’s request of 28 December 2019
for the purpose of calculation of the statutory
benefits, that the Insurer apply
the gross payment (as indexed) of $4,180.00 with no tax deducted or withheld.
Also disputed is the
decision that the Claimant’s injuries are classified
as ‘minor’ and therefore, he is precluded from weekly benefits
treatment expenses since the 26-week anniversary of the accident - resulting in
weekly payments of nil.
11 of the internal review decision sets out the Insurer’s basis for
calculation of the net figure of $2,568.00, as
... “On 25 February 2020, the AAMI Claims Team advised your
Solicitor, Emily Clarke of Shine Lawyers, that the calculation of
your weekly
benefits were as follows: - Maximum Rate: $4,180.00. Third entitlement period
– Net Payment $2,568.00 (Less $1,612.00
as per ATO Tables). The writer
considers that the net amount is $4,180.00 less $1,612.00 (Applicable Tax rate)
= $2,568.00.”
It is evident that tax of $1,612.00 has been
deducted from the maximum weekly statutory benefit rate of $4,180.00 to arrive
weekly payments of $2,568.00 in respect of the third entitlement
Claimant disputes the Insurer’s internal review decision and lodged the
application for Merit Review with SIRA’s Dispute
Resolution Service on 27
March 2020. The application was made in accordance with section 7.12(1) of the
Act and the
Motor Accident Guidelines
Guidelines).
Documents and Information
have considered the documents and annexures provided in the application and the
Insurer’s response and any further information
provided by the parties.
This includes the Claimant’s written submissions in the Application for
Merit Review dated 27 March
2020 and accompanying documentary material, and the
Insurer’s Reply and attachments, together with further written submissions
from both parties as discussed below.
Submissions
The Claimant’s submissions
Claimant’s written submissions attached to the application for Merit
Review are set out below:
... “1. On 16 June 2018,
our client ARO (“The Claimant”) was involved in a
motor vehicle accident in which he suffered injuries to his neck, shoulder
as well as psychological trauma.
2. A claim form was submitted to AAMI (“The Insurer”) on 21 June
3. The claimant’s injuries were deemed non-minor by reason of diagnosed
4. On 7 January 2020, the insurer reversed its decision on minor injury. A
minor injury
DRS dispute is currently on foot.
5. Prior to the change in minor injury decision, our client was in receipt of
wage benefit
payments from the insurer.
6. Since 78 weeks since the accident has passed, the insurer has altered the
payments without rhyme or reason.
7. An internal review was lodged with the outcome received on 13 March
upholding the
decision of the claims manager.
8. On repeated questioning with the insurer as to how this calculation has
been made to
change the claimant’s payments, no clear answer was ever received.
9. The insurer alleges that the amount being received, being $2,658 is the
amount payable under the Act.
10. However, upon querying this with SIRA and CTP Assist, the claimant has
provided with information that has shown that this is in fact incorrect.
11. The legislation provides that the maximum payable is $3,853.00 per week,
claimant argues he should be entitled to as, per the insurer’s
decision, he is entitled
to the maximum payable amount.
12. The Claimant argues that the insurer has failed to provide any real
clarity on how the
amount of $2,658 has been determined. The claimant argues that the insurer
taken previous earnings into account when having determined payment post
13. To date the insurer has underpaid the claimant by well in excess of
14. The Claimant requests a dispute review of the statutory benefits he is to
under the legislation.
15. The claimant is aware that this determination and any payable benefits
may not occur
until the ‘minor injury’ determination has been made but requests
determination of this
issue be made either in conjunction with or prior to the minor injury
decision. ...”
note the figure of $2,658 raised above is a transposition of two digits or a
typographical error of the net figure of $2,568 per
The Insurer’s submissions
Insurers written submissions in Reply is dated 5 May 2020 and sets out as
... “[13] The Insurer notes that the Claimant’s representative
has put forth a DRS application pertaining to the Claimant’s
payments dispute.
[14] The Insurer notes that an internal review was completed pertaining to
the pre-accident weekly earnings dispute on 13 March 2020.
The Insurer relies on
the findings of its internal review regarding the weekly payments dispute.
[15] The Insurer submits that the internal review, with reference to the Act,
the Guidelines, and the Regulation, sets out the available
evidence alongside
the reasons pertaining to why the Insurer made its determination with respect to
its pre-accident weekly earnings
calculation.
[16] The Insurer submits it has reviewed all the information referred to
above. The Insurer calculates the Claimant’s Pre-Accident
Weekly Earnings
in line with the findings of Vincent’s Accounting as follows:
[17] $4,180.00 as per
section 3.6(3)
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(NSW). This is the current maximum entitlement as indexed in October 2019 (as
section 3.9
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
First Entitlement period
Section 3.6(2)
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
states a weekly
payment of statutory benefits under this section is to be at a rate of 95% of
the difference between the person’s
pre-accident weekly earnings and the
person’s post-accident earning capacity if any for the first entitlement
[19] During the first entitlement period your Pre-Accident Weekly Earnings
were paid at a rate of 95%
Second Entitlement period
Section 3.7(2)
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
states that
weekly payment of statutory benefits under this section is to be at the rate
(a) in the case of total loss of earning capacity--80%, or
(b) in the case of partial loss of earning capacity--85%,
of the difference between the person's pre-accident weekly earnings and the
person's post-accident earning capacity (if any) after
the first entitlement
[21] During the second entitlement period the Claimant’s Pre-Accident
Weekly Earnings were paid at a rate of 80% for periods
when the Claimant did not
work due to the accident and 85% for period when the Claimant worked partially
due to the accident.
Third Entitlement period
Section 3.8
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
Weekly payments
after second entitlement period (after week 78)
Section 3.8
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
states that weekly
payment of statutory benefits under
this section is to be at the rate of:
(a) in the case of total loss of earning capacity--80%, or
(b) in the case of partial loss of earning capacity--85%,
of the difference between the person's pre-accident earning capacity and the
person's post-accident earning capacity (if any) after
the second entitlement
[24] During the third entitlement period the Claimant is entitled to be paid
at a rate of 80% for periods when the Claimant have no
capacity to work due to
the accident or 85% for periods when the Claimant worked partial capacity to
work due to the accident. The
Insurer notes that the Claimant’s third
entitlement period commenced on 15 December 2019.
[25] Additionally, the Insurer refers to the Third Entitlement Period (beyond
78 weeks), however, Weekly Benefits are based upon the
Injured Person's "loss of
earning capacity". In
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Jenkins
, the Supreme Court addresses the tax implications arising from the
changing nature of the Weekly Benefit in the Third Entitlement
Period. As any
[benefit] the Claimant receives after 78 weeks is regarded as a capital asset
rather than income. Such payments are
therefore not liable to income tax as they
are made in relation to the loss or diminution of a capital asset being their
[26] The Insurer notes that the Claimant is not required to pay tax on these
payments and the Insurer does not withhold tax, the Insurer
is only obliged to
pay the Claimant for his net loss and the tax component is irrelevant. As the
purpose of the Act is to put the
Claimant back into the position, he was but for
the accident, subject to the relevant provisions of the Act, the Insurer has
only paid the Claimant the net amount as this is what he would have
received but for the accident.
[27] The Insurer notes that Schedule 2 of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
(NSW) refers to the jurisdiction of the DRS. This schedule provides a list
of matters which can be considered for dispute under the
legislation. The
Insurer considers that upon review of the disputable decisions, jurisdiction
does not extend to the Claimant’s
particular dispute. It appears that the
Claimant dispute the AAMI Claims Team reduction of the Claimant’s weekly
entitlements
by the amount the Claimant may have paid in tax and also the method
of calculation of the Claimant’s weekly entitlement.
[28] The Insurer therefore has assessed the Claimant’s dispute under
Schedule 2(1)(a); the amount of the Claimant’s Pre-Accident
Earnings calculation. The Insurer has decided that the calculation of the
Claimant’s Pre-Accident Weekly Earnings as
the maximum allowed under
Section 3.9 of the Motor Accidents Compensation Act 2017 (NSW) is correct and
therefore the Claimant’s
Pre-Accident Weekly Earnings is $4,180.00.
Other consideration
[29] The Insurer submits that the Claimant’s injuries are currently
classified as ‘minor’ and therefore the Claimant
is precluded from
weekly benefits and treatment expenses since the 26-week anniversary of the
accident. Therefore, the Claimant’s
current weekly payments are nil.
[30] The Insurer notes the Claimant has not submitted any additional evidence
in support of the Application to the Dispute Resolution
[31] In accordance with the internal review documents and above, the Insurer
submits the pre-accident weekly earnings determination
should be affirmed.
to the above written submissions, I note the Insurer’s correspondence
dated 4 December 2019 [YY] included at the end
of the Insurer’s Reply
which reiterates the basis for the calculation of net payments of $2,568 weekly
to the Claimant as follows:
PAWE: $5,612
Max PAWE: $4,180
CL 80% over Max
therefore Max of payable
Payment Rates:
$4,180 | 3rd
entitlement period NET PAYMENT:
$2,568 as per ATO Tax
the above, it is again apparent that the net payment to the Claimant of $2,568
per week is derived from ATO Tax Tables relating
to the gross PAWE figure of
$4,180, being the maximum threshold at the material time. This is expanded upon
in the correspondence
Chamberlains
dated 19 February 2020 to the
Claimant that
“it may be the maximum statutory benefit in the first 78
weeks less tax.”
That correspondence also expressed the view
Tax should not be deducted.”
addition to considering the written submissions above in the Application and the
Reply respectively, the parties were invited to
provide to the Merit Reviewer
any further written submissions in light of the reference to the decision in
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Jenkins
[2020] NSWSC 412
(‘Jenkins’).
Claimant responded on 28 October 2020 as follows:
... “1. The application in which this dispute is based was made on the
basis that there was a
fundamental disagreement with the insurer as to the amount of weekly benefits
client was entitled to.
2. We confirm that there is an ongoing dispute as to our client’s
entitlement to receive
weekly benefits and these submissions do not intend to deal with that
3. The dispute in question is to how the insurer has assessed our
client’s average
weekly earnings as to the third period and have used that calculation to
establish his
loss of earnings in the third period at $2,658.
4. The Claimant had repeatedly asked for clarity as to how this calculation
made with no answers ever given.
5. In Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Jenkins
[2020] NSWSC 412
fundamental
issue was to whether tax as payable in the third entitlement period and
gross or net figure should be used in the calculation of weekly benefits in
this period.
6. With respect, that is not what the current dispute relates to. Rather that
the insurer
has used an improper calculation to determine the amount of weekly benefits
paid to the claimant.
7. The Claimant does not submit that the assessment should be made on gross
accident earnings.
8. In the third entitlement period, Section 3.8 (2)
Motor Accident Injuries
that weekly payment of statutory benefits under this section is to be at the
a. (a) in the case of total loss of earning capacity--80%, or
b. (b) in the case of partial loss of earning capacity--85%,
of the difference between the person's pre-accident earning capacity and
person's post-accident earning capacity (if any) after the second
entitlement
9. The Claimant claims a total loss of earnings and an incapacity to work
meaning he is
entitled to 80% of his pre-accident earning capacity.
10. The Claimant submits that his loss of earning capacity is confirmed by
documentation previously submitted to the DRS and the Insurer.
11. The Insurer has conceded in their submissions that they believe the
Claimant’s pre-
accident earnings to be $4,180.00 per week, being the maximum allowed.
12. As per the legislation, 80% of this amount is payable as loss of earning
13. 80% of $4,180.00 is $3,344 per week, which is well in excess of the
$2,658 that the
Insurer was previously paying.
14. If the Insurer has calculated the amount of $2,658 from another source or
is alleging
that the Claimant has a partial earning capacity, then that is not clear from
documentation provided.
15. The Claimant submits that had the insurer made it abundantly clear as to
calculated this amount and had clearly set out the source for this amount,
Claimant would not have been forced to lodge a DRS application.
16. In the alternate, the Claimant submits that his gross annual income was
with an estimated annual tax to be paid of $112,957 leaving a net annual
17. This would equate to a weekly net earnings of $3,798.90. ...”
29 October 2020 the Insurer provided the following further written submissions
in response:
... “4. The recent decision of
handed down by the
Supreme Court on 16 April 2020 pertains to the assessment of statutory benefits
for the third entitlement period
- being benefits post 78 weeks after the
subject accident.
makes clear that ss 3.6 to 3.8 of the Motor Accidents
Injuries Act NSW (2017) (‘the Act’) assess the first two entitlement
periods for statutory benefits (being the initial 13 weeks post- accident, and
then weeks 14 to 78 post accident) on the basis of
a claimant’s
‘loss of earnings’ whereas for the third entitlement period (being
post 78 weeks) statutory benefits
are assessed on the basis of ‘loss of
earning capacity.’
6. As such, it was necessary to consider the distinction between loss of
earnings and loss of
earning capacity.
7. Justice Adamson referred to written advice obtained on behalf of the
plaintiff/insurer from the ATO, dated 30 November 2017, in
response to their
query as to whether weekly benefits paid in respect of the third entitlement
period were taxable. The ATO responded
that in contrast to the initial 2
periods, payments made in the third entitlement period were not taxable. ...
8. Accordingly, as benefits provided during the third entitlement period are
not ‘income’ it follows that the insurer
is not obligated to
withhold tax in the third entitlement period, nor remit same to the ATO.
9. Bearing this in mind, Justice Adamson confirmed that were the third
entitlement period to be assessed on a gross basis, with no
monies remitted to
the ATO, claimants would receive a
windfall and benefits in excess of what they received prior to the subject
accident on a net
basis, which is a consequence that cannot have been intended by parliament
when drafting the legislation.
10. Her Honour reiterated the basis on which the distinction has been made
between the initial two entitlement periods and the third
entitlement period;
the initial two entitlement periods are reflective of compensation for a loss of
earnings, which by definition
includes a taxable component which is required to
be remitted to the ATO. In contrast, the third entitlement period pertains to a
loss of earning capacity, which is viewed as a capital asset and not earnings
per se, and as such, no income tax is payable on the
loss of a capital
11. The decision of
is unequivocal that net (not gross)
earnings are to be considered during the third entitlement period, on the basis
that statutory
benefits paid during this period pertain to a loss of earning
capacity, not a loss of earnings. As such, an insurer is to pay 80%
in cases of
total loss of capacity and 85% in the case of partial loss of earning capacity,
of the difference between the claimant’s
pre-accident earning capacity and
post-accident earning capacity (if any) on a net basis.
12. In light of this decision, the insurer maintains that its assessment of
statutory benefits to date has been made entirely in keeping
with the relevant
Legislation
conducting the merit review, I have considered the following legislation and
guidelines in addition to material referred to in
the Claimant’s written
submissions and review application and the Insurer’s Reply together with
all further written submissions
Accident Injuries Act
(NSW) (“the Act”)
Accident Guidelines
effective 13 July 2018 (“the
Guidelines”)
Accident Injuries Regulation
(NSW) (“the
Regulation”)
application has been lodged as a merit review matter under Schedule 2, Clause
1(a) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
( the Act) regarding the
calculation of the Claimant’s weekly payments of statutory benefits. The
amount of PAWE affects the
amount of weekly payments of statutory benefits
payable under Division 3.3 of the Act (weekly payments of statutory benefits for
injured persons). The dispute relates to the third entitlement period for weekly
payments of statutory benefit from 78 weeks after
the motor accident.
Claimant’s application has been made in accordance with section 7.12 (1)
of the Act and the
Motor Accidents Guidelines
(the Guidelines). I find
the Insurer’s decision is a reviewable decision under Schedule 2(1)(a) of
Pre-accident
weekly earnings is defined by clause 4, Schedule 1 of the Act. Sub-clauses 1 and
2 are in the following terms:
1) Pre-accident weekly earnings,
in relation to an earner who is injured as a result of a motor accident, means
the weekly average
of the gross earnings received by an earner as an earner
during the 12 months immediately before the day on which the motor accident
occurred, unless subclause (2) applies.
2) In the following cases, pre-accident weekly earnings, in relation to
an earner (other than a self-employed person) who is injured
as a result of a
motor accident, means:
(a) If, on the day of the motor accident, the earner was earning
continuously, but had not been earning continuously for at least
12 months - the
weekly average of the gross earnings received by the earner as an earner during
the period from when the earner started
to earn continuously to immediately
before the day of the motor accident,
(a1) If the earner was employed or self-employed during a period or
periods equal to at least 26 weeks during the first year of the
pre-accident
period, but was not obtaining earnings from any source at any other time during
the pre-accident period - the average
weekly gross earnings received by the
earner as an earner during the first year of the pre-accident period,
(b) If subclause (3) applies - the weekly average of the gross earnings
received by the earner as an earner during the period from
when the change of
circumstance referred to in that subclause occurred to immediately before the
day of the motor accident,
(c) If the earner is an earner by reason of having entered into an
arrangement with an employer or other person to undertake employment
commence business as a self-employed person - the average weekly gross earnings
that the earner could reasonable have been
expected to earn, but for the injury,
in employment under that arrangement.
4, Schedule 1 of the Act is construed such that earnings from self-employment do
not attract the exceptions listed in subclause
Motor Accidents Injuries Act
2017 (NSW), Part 3(2) defines
income from personal exertion as:
(a) the amount that is the income of the
person consisting of earnings, salaries, wages, commissions, fees, bonuses,
pensions, retiring
allowances and retiring gratuities, allowances and gratuities
received in the capacity of employee or in relation to any services
the documents and written submissions provided, I find the Claimant was engaged
with NSW Health (via XX Pty Ltd) and being remunerated
on a per diem basis at
the rate of $1,350 gross per day. There is no dispute that the Claimant is
an earner who was injured as a result of a motor accident
and I so find.
evidence of income and expense records and the financial information provided,
including earnings and expenses set out at Table
2 of the report from Vincents
Accountants, shows that the Claimant’s gross earnings received as an
earner during the 12 months
immediately before the day on which the accident
occurred was $321,773. After deducting expenses of $34,451 for that material
the Claimant’s average gross earnings of weekly income equates to
$5,523.69 from his personal exertion (being $287,232 / 52
Claimant’s PAWE rate is derived from the average of his total earnings
over that 12-month period, for the purposes of assessing
weekly payments of
statutory benefits. However, the weekly earnings of $5,523.69 calculated above
are subject to caps or limits applying
at material times under the legislation.
Applying s.3.6 (3) of the Act, I find the Claimant’s Pre-Accident Weekly
(PAWE) are capped at the threshold ‘maximum weekly statutory
benefit’ rate of $4,180.00 - as indexed on 1 October 2019
under s.3.9 of
the Act. This rate is for gross earnings (before tax is deducted).
Accordingly,
during the first entitlement period, being the first 13 weeks after the
accident, where 95% of the difference between
the Claimant’s PAWE
($5,523.69) and the Claimant’s post-accident earning capacity is greater
than $4,180.00, the weekly
benefit will be limited to $4,180.00 per week (as
indexed each October in line with s.3.9 of the Act).
Entitlement period (13 weeks from date of accident):
accordance with Section 3.6(2) of the Act the weekly payment of statutory
benefits under this section applied at a rate of 95%
of the difference between
the person’s PAWE and the person’s post-accident earning capacity,
if any, for the first entitlement
the first entitlement period the Claimant’s weekly payment of statutory
benefits were appropriately paid at a rate of
Entitlement period (week 14-78 weeks after the motor accident):
3.7(2) of the Act provides that weekly payment of statutory benefits under this
section is to be at the rate of:
(a) in the case of total loss of
earning capacity--80%, or
(b) in the case of partial loss of earning capacity--85%,
of the difference between the person's PAWE and the person's post-accident
earning capacity (if any) after the first entitlement period.
the second entitlement period the Claimant’s weekly payment of statutory
benefits are payable at a rate of 80% for periods
when he did not work due to
the accident and to 85% for any period worked partially due to the accident.
This was reduced to nil
on the basis of the Insurer’s notification that
the Claimant sustained a ‘minor’ injury, reversing an earlier
minor’ finding relating to a PTSD psychological injury.
this point, since the Insurer’s internal review decision of 13 March 2020,
the Claimant has undergone a Medical Assessment
in respect of his injury
classification. On 6 July 2020 Medical Assessor Barrett found the
Claimant’s psychological injury
of Somatic Symptom Disorder is not a
‘minor’ injury for the purposes of the Act. This was disputed by the
the ground that the Medical Assessor ignored a differential
10 September 2020, DRS Proper Officer Jones, was not satisfied that there is
reasonable cause to suspect Medical Assessor Barrett’s
assessment is
incorrect in a material respect. It follows that the Claimant has an injury that
is not currently classified as ‘minor’
and therefore, is not
precluded from weekly benefits and treatment expenses since the 26-week
anniversary of the accident. Accordingly,
ongoing weekly payments of statutory
benefits in accordance with the Act are enlivened.
entitlement period (after 78 weeks)
is the period for which the weekly payment of statutory benefits is in dispute.
Section 3.8 of the Act provides for weekly payments
after the second entitlement
period (beyond week 78). In this case, this period commenced from 15 December
3.8 (2) of the Act states that weekly payments of statutory benefits under this
section are to be at the rate of:
(a) in the case of total loss of
earning capacity--80%, or
(b) in the case of partial loss of earning capacity--85%,
of the difference between the person's pre-accident earning capacity and the
person's post-accident earning capacity (if any) after
the second entitlement
the third entitlement period the Claimant is entitled to be paid at a rate of
80% for periods when he has no capacity to work
due to the accident (as is the
case) and to 85% for periods when he has worked with partial capacity to work
due to the accident.
noted, the third entitlement period commenced on 15 December 2019. The Insurer
determined at the time of internal review that the
Claimant’s injuries
were classified as ‘minor’ and therefore, precluded him from
receiving weekly benefits and
treatment expenses since the 26-week anniversary
of the accident. However, as discussed earlier, the Claimant has since been
by a Medical Assessor who has determined that he has a material injury
that is not ‘minor’ and therefore, has an ongoing
entitlement to
weekly payments of statutory benefits. In this regard the Insurer’s
decision that the Claimant’s weekly
payments post 78 weeks are nil should
not be allowed to stand. The issue for resolution is what is the correct
am persuaded by the Insurer’s submissions regarding the treatment of
weekly payments in the third entitlement period in light
of the decision of
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Jenkins
[2020] NSWSC 412.
decision Adamson J referred to written advice dated 30 November 2017, obtained
from the ATO in response to a query as to
whether weekly benefits paid in
respect of the third entitlement period were taxable or not. The ATO’s
response was that, in
contrast to the initial two entitlement periods, payments
made in the third entitlement period were not taxable for reasons that
statutory payments are not of an income character, but capital in nature for the
following reasons:
“Noting that periodicity of payments is
not determinative, these distinct treatments reflect the underlying differing
of the statutory benefits under sections 3.6 and 3.7 versus section
3.8 of the Act, being that between income ("loss of earnings")
and capital
("loss of earning capacity"). Considering the purpose and character of the
statutory payments under section 3.8 of the
Act and the method of calculation it
is concluded that they are not of an income character.”
the authority of this case that I am bound to apply, I find the benefits
provided during the third entitlement period are not
of ‘an income
character’ and the Insurer is therefore, not required to withhold tax from
payments made to the Claimant
in the third entitlement period, nor remit this to
additional comments of Adamson J in that case are of assistance here as these
confirm that were the third entitlement period to
be assessed on a gross basis,
with no monies remitted to the ATO, Claimants would receive “a
windfall” and benefits in
excess of what they received prior to the
subject accident on a net basis. I accept that this is a consequence not
intended by Parliament
when drafting the legislation.
the case of
, Her Honour reiterated the basis on which the
distinction has been made between the initial two entitlement periods and the
entitlement period; “
the initial two entitlement periods are
reflective of compensation for a loss of earnings, which by definition includes
component which is required to be remitted to the ATO. In contrast,
the third entitlement period pertains to a loss of earning capacity,
viewed as a capital asset and not earnings per se, and as such, no income tax is
payable on the loss of a capital asset.”
accept the submission that the
decision requires that net (not
gross) earnings are to be considered during the third entitlement period, on the
basis that statutory
benefits paid during this period pertain to a loss of
earning capacity, not to a loss of earnings. Indeed, I note from paragraph
Claimant’s further written submission that there is no argument with this.
As such, an Insurer is to pay 80% in the case
of total loss of capacity and 85%
in the case of partial loss of earning capacity, of the difference between the
pre-accident earning capacity and post-accident earning
capacity (if any) on a basis
have had regard to the Claimant’s further written submissions that on the
basis of the Claimant’s total loss of capacity
for the purposes here, he
should be paid 80% of his PAWE earnings of $4,180 gross (as indexed from 1
October 2019 under s.3.9 of
the Act), equating to $3,344 per week. I note that
the issue of earning capacity and whether the Claimant’s injuries as a
result of the motor vehicle accident prevent him from returning to work is the
subject of an ongoing dispute that has not yet been
conclusively determined and
remains before the Dispute Resolution Service pending Merit Review. I have
proceeded on the basis that
the Claimant continues to suffer total loss of
earning capacity until that dispute is conclusively determined.
acknowledge that a higher figure of $3,798.00 per week is based on the
Claimant’s alternative calculation of estimated annual
tax to be paid of
$112,957 which would equate to more than the net figure adopted by the Insurer.
However, I prefer not to rely
on estimates of tax payable but on actual ATO
taxation tables relevant to the Claimant’s particular circumstances. Also,
Claimant’s suggested methodology above does not accommodate the
concerns raised in
of a resultant windfall and benefits
potentially in excess of what a Claimant would have received prior to the
subject accident on
a net basis.
find for reasons already discussed, that the Claimant’s weekly earnings in
the 12 months immediately before the motor accident
of 16 June 2018 averaged
$5,523.69 (after expense deductions) and that this reflects his pre-accident
earning capacity for the purposes
of s.3.8(2) of the Act relating to the third
entitlement period. I accept under subparagraph 3.8(2)(a) that the Claimant is
paid, in the case of ongoing total loss of earning capacity - 80% of the
difference between his pre-accident earning capacity (as
defined) and his
post-accident earning capacity (nil) after the second entitlement period ends -
that is, beyond 78 weeks. Calculating
80% of $5,523.69 ($4,418.96) still results
in more than the threshold cap of $4,180.00 per week which must be applied.
cl.3.8 of the Act makes no reference to PAWE but provides for weekly
payment of statutory benefits capped for the purposes of Division
Act, to the maximum weekly statutory benefits amount under cl.3.9(2).
Pre-accident
earning capacity is defined at Schedule 1 cl.7 of the Act as
7 Meaning of “pre-accident earning
(1) Pre-accident earning capacity of an injured person means the weekly
amount a person had the capacity to earn before the motor
accident concerned in
employment reasonably available to the person in view of the person’s
training, skills and experience.
(2) If the amount of an injured person’s pre-accident earning capacity
cannot be determined, the amount is deemed to be the
amount that is equal to 80%
of the average weekly total earnings of adults in full-time employment in New
South Wales last published
by the Australian Statistician.
aforementioned, I am satisfied that the Claimant’s average weekly earnings
in the 12 months immediately before the motor
accident of $5,523.69 reflect his
capacity to earn as I consider, for the purposes of s.3.8(2)(a), these earnings
demonstrate his
capacity to earn before the motor accident concerned, in
employment reasonably available to him in view of his training, skills and
experience - in this case his work with NSW Health via XX Pty Ltd.
aforementioned, for the purposes of Division 3.3 of the Act, the
Claimant’s maximum weekly statutory benefits amount is capped
cl.3.9(2) to $4,180 per week gross (as indexed from 1 October 2019) at the
material times.
light of the authority in
discussed, the correct or preferrable
decision is that the Insurer‘s assessment of statutory benefits for the
third entitlement
period be made on the basis of weekly payments of $4,180.00
(gross) as indexed annually from 1 October 2019, per s.3.9 of the Act,
to the Claimant
in accordance with his particular taxation
circumstances.
have not been provided by either party with any particulars of ATO tax tables
applicable to the Claimant that take into account
his particular taxation
affairs. This may include factors such as any Employer Declarations made,
tax-free thresholds, variations
to the tax tables, and such like. The
calculation of statutory benefits for the third entitlement period is to be made
net of tax,
with reference to the applicable ATO tax tables in accordance with
that set out above. Accordingly, I will set aside the review
decision and remit
the matter to the Insurer to calculate the Claimant’s weekly payments of
statutory benefits in accordance
with my findings and the actual tax tables
relevant to the Claimant’s particular circumstances which may be obtained
review decision referred for Merit Review by the Claimant relates to the
calculation of the amount of his weekly payments of statutory
benefits payable
by the Insurer to the Claimant for the third entitlement period (post 78 weeks)
following the motor accident.
Claimant seeks reimbursement of the discrepancy in payments received to date,
which have been paid based on a PAWE figure calculated
by the Insurer of
$2,568.00 per week referred to (with transposition of two digits) in submissions
as $2,658.00 rather than a gross
PAWE figure of $4,180.00 as indexed from 1
October 2019 and subsequently, per s.3.9 of the Act.
is the function of the Dispute Resolution Service on Merit Review to arrive at
the correct or preferable decision in respect of
the dispute relating to the
reviewable decision that is referred for review.
have found that the Claimant’s weekly payments of statutory benefits in
respect of the third entitlement period are to be
derived from the applicable
capped rate of $4,180.00 (gross) as indexed annually from 1 October 2019 per
s.3.9 of the Act, but paid
to the Claimant
in accordance with ATO tax tables applying to his particular
circumstances. This may include such factors as whether the Claimant
completed an Employer Declaration for this employer, any tax-free thresholds,
variations to the tax tables announced in response
to COVID-19 economic
adjustments, any applicable tax offsets, and other relevant taxation matters
particular to the Claimant which
can be ascertained from the ATO.
way of example only, in respect of $4,180.00 gross payments per week, the tables
on the ATO website show income tax applicable
of $1,402 with a tax-free
threshold applied, and $1,505 without, equating to net weekly figures of $2,778
and $2,674 respectively
Weekly tax table |
Australian Taxation Office (ato.gov.au)
] accessed 14 December 2020.
Insurer is to pay the Claimant the difference between what has already been paid
to him and what he is entitled to be paid in
accordance with this decision
setting the Claimant’s capped rate of weekly payments of statutory
benefits in respect of the
third entitlement period to $4,180.00 (gross) as
indexed annually from 1 October 2019 per s.3.9 of the Act, but paid to the
net of income tax
pertaining to his
particular tax circumstances.
Legal Costs
Claimant was represented by legal practitioners, Shine Lawyers, in these
proceedings. Under
section 8.10
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
Claimant for statutory benefits is (subject to that section) entitled to recover
from the Insurer against whom the claim is made,
the reasonable and necessary
legal costs, and other costs and expenses, incurred by the Claimant in
connection with the claim. Other
costs and expenses may include cost of medical
and other tests and reports. However,
section 8.10
only permits payment of these
legal costs incurred as follows:
The Dispute
Resolution Service can permit payment of legal costs incurred by a claimant but
only if satisfied that:
(a) the claimant is under a legal disability, or
(b) exceptional circumstances exist that justify payment of legal
costs incurred by the claimant.
is no dispute before me presented between the Claimant and the Insurer in
respect of recovery of legal costs under section 8.10
of the Act. There is no
submission that the Claimant is under a legal disability or that exceptional
circumstances exist that justify
payment of legal costs incurred in this case.
Accordingly,
I make no order as to costs.
Determination
My determination of the Merit Review is as
reviewable decision is set aside
and the following decision is made in
substitution for the reviewable decision:
amount of the Claimant’s weekly payment of statutory benefits for the
third entitlement period is $4,180.00 (gross) as indexed
from 1 October 2019 and
subsequently per s.3.9 of the Act, but paid to the Claimant
net of income
as determined with reference to ATO tax tables applicable to the
This determination takes effect from 14 December 2020.
Legal Costs:
No order as to costs.
Stavros Georgiadis
Merit Reviewer
Dispute Resolution Service
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1e+03 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter