URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2011/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
COLQUHOUN R v PSYCHOLOGY COUNCIL OF NSW [2011] NSWPST 3 (25 November 2011)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 159 (1)(a)
ROSS COLQUHOUN
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
SCHEDULE B - NOT TO BE
CITATION: COLQUHOUN R v PSYCHOLOGY COUNCIL OF
[2011] NSWPST
PARTIES: Ross Colquhoun
(Appellant)
represented by Mr Petty SC instructed by Mr D Burston Solicitor.
Psychology Council
(Respondent) represented by Mr Benson of counsel
instructed by Mr G Boyd Solicitor
FILE NUMBER: PS04/2011
CORAM: Ms. Phillipa Gormly (Chairperson)
Dr. David Bright (Psychologist member)
Mr. Brian Sheridan (Psychologist member)
Dr. Siew-Foong Liew (Lay member)
DATE OF HEARING: 14 July, 7 & 8 September, 11 October 2011.
DATE OF DECISION: 25 November 2011
DATE OF ORDERS: 25 November 2011
ORDERS: The Tribunal revokes the suspension and earlier restriction on the
Appellant’s registration and a condition is placed
on his registration.
A suppression order is made.
CATCHWORDS: Interim order, hearing de novo, appropriate for the protection
of person or persons, in the public interest, suspension
or restriction of
registration.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) 2010 No. 86;
Private Health Facilities Act 2007
CASES CITED:
Lindsay v NSW Medical Board
[2008] NSWSC 40
Allesch v Maunz
(2000) 203 CLR 172
at 180 per Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow
and Hayne JJ.
Telstra Corporation Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (No 2)
[2007] FCA 493
(2007) 240 ALR 135
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an appeal, pursuant to section 159 (1) (a) of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) (the National Law
), from a decision of the
Psychology Council exercising an interim power under s150 of the
National Law
which gives the Council authority to suspend or place conditions on a
practitioner’s registration for protection of the health
or safety of a
person or persons or otherwise in the public interest. This matter is protective
of the public rather than disciplinary
against the practitioner.
Suppression Order
Tribunal makes an order, that no details that tend to identify patients of Dr
Colquhoun are to be published.
Nature of the appeal
At the commencement of the case both parties, having provided submissions,
agreed that this matter should be a hearing de novo. The
Tribunal agrees. The
nature of an appeal ultimately depends on the terms of the statute conferring
the right to
Allesch v Maunz
the majority of the High Court noted that there were three
categories of appeal:
an appeal in the
strict sense, in which the function of the appellate body is “simply to
determine whether the decision under
appeal was or was not erroneous on the
evidence and the law as it stood when the original decision was given”,
and in which
the appellate body cannot receive further evidence;
an appeal by way
of rehearing in which the powers of the appellate body “are exercisable
only when the Appellant can demonstrate
that, having regard to all of the
evidence now before the appellate (body), the order that is the subject of the
appeal is the result
of some legal, factual and discretionary error”;
a completely
fresh rehearing, called a hearing de novo, in which the power of the appellate
body is to be exercised “regardless
the word “appeal” in s159 of the
National Law
elaborated on, consideration can be given to the surrounding sections of it to
determine legislative intent. It may also be
necessary and appropriate to
consider the nature of the hearing before the original administrative decision
maker compared with that
of the hearing in the appellate
159 states:
person may appeal to the Tribunal for a health profession—
a suspension by the Council for the health profession under Division 3 or a
refusal to end a suspension; or
conditions imposed by the Council for the health profession on the
person’s registration under Division 3 or 4 or the
alteration of the
conditions by the Council;
In respect to an appeal s159C says:
A tribunal may by order terminate, vary or confirm a period of suspension
or revoke, vary or confirm the conditions, as it thinks
contrast to s159 which is silent as to the type of appeal, other provisions
within Division 6 of Part 8 of the
National Law
, namely ss158 and 160
which specify that the appeal is to be dealt with”
by way of rehearing
and fresh evidence, or evidence in addition to or in substitution for the
evidence received at the inquiry, may
appeals can be further distinguished from the appeal in s159 which is
considering a decision where no reasons are required.
Section 158 deals with an
appeal from a Committee, defined in s146 as a Professional Standards Committee
which must give a written
decision and reasons for the decision pursuant to
s171E. Section 160 is a review from a Performance Review Panel which must
a written decision with reasons pursuant to s156E.
reasons for the decision was given in this matter currently before the Tribunal.
In the absence of reasons for a decision by the
Psychology Council which are
needed to determine whether the council erred, it is reasonable to assume the
intention of the legislation
is for this appeal to be a hearing de novo.
Appeal from an interim order
with the original decisions made by the Psychology Council, this Tribunal must
make an interim order but it’s parameters
are slightly different. It no
longer has the same urgency which the Council had, both parties are represented
and additional evidence
has been tendered. However, these proceedings are not
full adversarial proceedings and this Tribunal is not in a position nor is
required to make factual findings which can be used for any purpose other than
exercising its authority under s150. To do so could
possibly lead to a denial of
natural justice.
150 says: Suspension or conditions of registration to protect the public
(1) A Council
must, if at any time it is satisfied it is appropriate to do so for the
protection of the health or safety of any
person or persons (whether or not a
particular person or persons) or if satisfied the action is otherwise in the
public interest-
(a) by order
suspend a registered health practitioner’s or student's registration;
(b) by order
impose on a registered health practitioner's registration the conditions
relating to the practitioner's practising the
health profession the Council
considers appropriate; or
(2) a suspension
of a registered health practitioner's or student's registration under
subsection 1 has effect until the first
of the following happens ---
(a) the complaint about the practitioner or student is disposed of;
(b) the suspension is ended by the Council
decision making body must firstly be satisfied that it is appropriate for the
protection of the public or an individual thereof.
If satisfied it must
determine what action is appropriate. This is an interim decision which is
limited by subsection 2.
Unfortunately,
National Law
does not specify a period unlike the
Medical Practise
1992 which limits the length of the restriction or suspension to 8 weeks
unless reviewed beforehand.
of proof required
for the Appellant made the submission that the Tribunal was bound by the
decision of Hall J in
Lindsay v Medical
apply the principles enunciated in
Whilst this Tribunal agrees it is bound by that Supreme Court decision it does
not agree that His Honour came to that conclusion
but was merely making an
observation that decision makers should be mindful of the effect an order would
have on the practitioner’s
practice. In that matter Hall J was considering
an appeal of an order made by the Medical Board pursuant to s66(1) of the
Medical Practise Act 1992
which is in almost identical terms to s150 of
National Law
except it uses the word “necessary” rather
than “appropriate” with regard to the measures the Board needs
take which is a more stringent test.
Honour said:
(1) “Although
the process of the board or its delegates in performing its/their functions
under s66 (1) differs in nature from
proceedings conducted by the Medical
Tribunal under the Act, the fact remains that an order under s66(1) may
severely affect a
registered medical practitioners livelihood and
Honour further said:
the present case it is accepted, of course, that the plaintiff had a specific
interest. The seriousness of the consequences
of a decision taken in relation
to the s66(1) powers is a relevant matter in determining the content of the
requirement of procedural
Telstra Corporation Ltd v Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission
[2007] FCA 493
(2007) 240 ALR 135
Bennett J. So also, the specific public interest, the subject of s66, is a
consideration to be considered and balanced in making
a determination of that
nature of the decision before this Tribunal is protective of the public rather
than disciplinary of the practitioner. The interest
of the public must be the
main concern.
Colquhoun filed an affidavit sworn 1 July 2011 and was cross examined. Mr Mark
Anns Consultant Psychologist who provided an expert’s
report dated 28 June
2011 was cross examined. Ms Myra Nikolich swore an affidavit on 6 June 2007 and
was cross-examined.
Documentation
18. Documents relied on by the parties can be found in Annexure
A to this decision.
Colquhoun, who the Tribunal notes is a Doctor of Health Science and does not
hold a degree in medicine, commenced his career as
a psychologist in 1996. Two
years later he became involved in the treatment called Rapid Opioid
Detoxification (ROD). In 2000 Dr
Colquhoun became the principal of the company,
R and D Counselling Group Pty Ltd which operated a clinic at various locations
in 2006 settled into the current premises at Ultimo. ROD is practiced at
the clinic and involves an invasive medical treatment
which requires a doctor
of medicine to perform. The professional role of the assessing psychologist at
the clinic included the need
to adequately assess each patient’s
suitability for ROD including giving due consideration to contraindicators;
develop and
discuss an appropriate treatment plan for each patient (including
discussing alternate treatment options) and making provision for
follow-up care after the ROD procedure.
16 May 2007, a patient of Dr Colquhoun’s, Patient A, attended the Ultimo
clinic for ROD treatment and was discharged by the
treating doctor later that
day into the care of his father, his support person, in a
“disorientated” state. Later that
evening Patient A was admitted to
the Prince of Wales Hospital where he was treated in the high dependency unit
for symptoms of opiate
withdrawal.
28 February 2008 another patient of Dr Colquhoun’s, seeking ROD treatment,
Patient B, sent an e-mail to Dr Colquhoun explaining
that although he had an
elderly aunt in Sydney he would not be able to stay with her after the procedure
was completed on Friday,
March 7 and therefore needed to stay at the facility
6 March 2008, Patient B, signed a Psych n Soul “Treatment Agreement and
Informed Consent” form but the section headed
“Support Person
Compliance” was not signed as normally required. On 7 March 2008 Patient B
was admitted to the Ultimo
Clinic for his scheduled ROD treatment and remained
overnight under observation. Patient B was discharged from the Ultimo Clinic
driven by Dr Colquhoun to a house in Randwick and dropped at the front gate
which turned out to be a boarding house. There was
no support person at that
gate to meet Patient B.
Colquhoun gave evidence that he thought he was delivering Patient B to his
aunt’s place who was to be his support person.
He gave evidence to this
Tribunal that Patient B was quite coherent and was able to tell him the address.
On the basis of the conversation
between Patient B and Dr Colquhoun on 7 March,
the Tribunal considers it was possible for Dr Colquhoun to draw the conclusion
Patient B could stay with his Aunt after the night of the procedure.
contrary to the clinic’s procedures at that stage there had been no direct
communication between Dr Colquhoun and any
support person for Patient B. In
response to a call from a manager at the boarding house, on 10 March 2008
Patient B was taken by
ambulance to the Prince of Wales Hospital with apparent
symptoms of drug use and Patient B subsequently died in hospital on 29 March
2008. The autopsy did not include the R0D treatment as a cause of death.
4 April 2008 a complaint was made by the Prince of Wales Hospital to the HCCC
concerning the discharge of Patients A and B from
the Psych n Soul Clinic whilst
they were still in acute opiate withdrawal and delirium. There was limited
evidence regarding this
complaint however material before the Tribunal suggests
that Patient B was not in such a state on discharge and that Dr Colquhoun
not present at the clinic when Patient A was discharged by Dr Tan. However as
stated earlier in this decision this is not fact-finding
26 June 2009 the HCCC determined to have the care and treatment of Patients A
and B investigated. This investigation was carried
out by Ms Angela
O’Gorman and her Investigation Report formed part of the evidence of the
Psychology Council. Ms O’Gorman
concluded that the evidence indicated that
there were a number of specified aspects of Dr Colquhoun’s treatment of
A and B that were “below the standard reasonably expected”.
12 November 2009 a Medical Professional Standards Committee Inquiry,
investigating a complaint relating to a Dr Tan, expressed
a number of concerns
Dr Colquhoun. In cross-examination
before this Tribunal Dr Colquhoun testified
that he had considered the Committee’s comments and expressions of concern
notwithstanding those concerns, determined that he did not need to change
any practices at the clinic. It is relevant that at that
Inquiry it was clear
that Dr Tan discharged Patient A. Evidence before this Tribunal also indicated
that Mr Colquhoun was not present
at the clinic when Patient A was discharged
16 December 2009 Mr D. McGrath, Director, Mental Health and Alcohol Office of
NSW Health wrote to Dr Colquhoun advising of proposed
amendments to the
Private Health Facilities Regulation 2009
Private Health
Facilities Act, 2007
. Mr McGrath specifically advised that amendments
relating to the provision of ROD treatment, stipulated that Private Health
conducting ROD must:
Comply with the
NSW Drug and Alcohol Withdrawal Clinical Practice Guidelines 2008;
Have access to
an intensive care (level 1 or 2) class private health facility (either within
the same or another private health facility)
or public hospital in which cardiac
surgery transfer can occur in less than 30 minutes;
suitably equipped vehicle to be available at all times where a ROD procedure is
being conducted if transfer to another facility
is required; and
Provide for
overnight accommodation of patients who are admitted for more than 24 hours.
Accommodation must comply with the overnight
accommodation standards.”
McGrath further advised that facilities currently conducting ROD procedures
would have until 1 May 2010 to comply with the amended
Regulation.
Notwithstanding the letter from Mr McGrath, Dr Colquhoun stated that he looked
at the Act, Regulations and Guidelines
referred to and concluded his clinic was
not required to be licensed.
Colquhoun said that on 26 April 2010 he applied for a license under the
Private Health Facilities Act
, 2007, although NSW Health indicated that
Dr Colquhoun only made “initial inquiries about becoming licensed on 26
April 2010”
and that he in fact lodged the initial paperwork for the
licence with the Department on 17 June 2010.
and from 1 May 2010 when the new licensing requirements came into effect, Dr
Colquhoun continued to offer and carry out ROD procedures
in the unlicensed
clinic at Ultimo. In evidence Dr Colquhoun estimated that between 2 May 2010 and
15 June 2010 the clinic would
have carried out, on average, about 2 or 3 ROD
procedures per week.
15 June 2010 Mr Greg McAllan, Associate Director, Private Health Care, NSW
Health faxed a letter to Dr Colquhoun requiring him
“to cease providing
rapid opioid detoxification services until the premises at the Ultimo
Rehabilitation Service are licensed
Private Health Facilities Act,
”. Mr McAllan requested Dr Colquhoun provide “written
confirmation of the cessation of rapid opioid detoxification”
by close of
business 16 June 2010 and advised it was an offence under Section 33 of the Act
to conduct a private health facility
without a license.
16 June 2010 Dr Colquhoun sent Mr McAllan a written undertaking that he would
not be conducting any ROD “... before the License
is granted as per your
letter” and expressed his hope that the licensing process could be
completed in the next two weeks.
The Tribunal notes that no formal application
for a licence was lodged until the next day.
cross-examination Dr Colquhoun stated that he accepted “absolutely”
the advice from Mr McAllan that he needed to cease
ROD services until the
premises were licensed and acknowledged that his undertaking was
“unequivocal” and knew the Department
of Health was expecting to be
able to rely on that undertaking.
Colquhoun said in evidence that he ceased ROD for about 6-8 weeks from 16 June
2010 before resuming towards the end of July 2010
and carried out about 20 ROD
procedures between resuming ROD treatment and ceasing that practice on 29
September 2010.
Notwithstanding
his written undertaking not to carry out any more ROD procedures at the clinic
without the appropriate license, Dr
Colquhoun has asserted that he
“assumed” he had been issued with a license “in
principle”. He did concede
in cross-examination that he never received
written notice of a license “in principle” which is required by
Section 7(5)
Private Health Facilities Act
Health wrote to Dr Colquhoun on 26 August 2010 advising him of a number of
issues in the architectural plans that needed to be
addressed to comply with
29 September 2010 three patients of Dr Colquhoun underwent ROD procedures. One
of those patients (Patient C) suffered a cardiac
arrest at the clinic leading to
an emergency ambulance transfer from the clinic to the Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital for emergency
care. Patient C died some period later and a Coronial
inquest is to occur some time in 2012.
would appear that 29 September 2010 was the last date on which Dr Colquhoun
carried out ROD procedures at his clinic.
5 October 2010 NSW Health wrote to Dr Colquhoun advising that he must cease the
provision of ROD treatment immediately and that
the Department would carry out
inspections of the clinic to ensure that ROD was not being undertaken in
contravention of the Act.
29 October 2010 a formal complaint was made by Associate Professor Conigrave
(from the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital) to the HCCC
regarding the treatment of
Patient C on 29 September 2010 by Dr Colquhoun. Professor Conigrave identified
the main issues that concerned
her as being:
Choice of a
risky procedure where safer options existed;
setup of the clinic appears to involve inadequate medical supervision
for a heavy sedation regime and inadequate
onsite resuscitation arrangements;
advertising for the procedure and the staffing of the clinic
that she wanted:
a review of the suitability of Psych and Soul to provide rapid detoxification
and a review of the conditions (if any) under which
any clinic should routinely
offer rapid detoxification.
Colquhoun’s Counsel submitted that because Associate Professor Conigrave
assumed a “heavy sedation regime” when
there was evidence that only
light sedation was required for ROD, the entire report should be rejected. This
Tribunal disagrees.
For the purposes of exercising these interim powers and not
being in apposition to make determinative findings of fact, such formalities
are unnecessary and inappropriate.
Events surrounding Council’s decisions to restrict and
then to suspend
November 2010 June Garcia the then Executive Officer of the Psychology Council
of New South Wales wrote to Dr Colquhoun informing
him that pursuant to S 150
(1)(b) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)No86A his
practice as a psychologist had
been restricted to the extent that he is not to
work with substance abuse dependent people.
letter said that the Council was notified among other things (unspecified) that
he was practising rapid opioid detoxification
treatment at a clinic (Psych n
Soul Clinic) which was not licensed and that he was aware of the licensing
requirements. The letter
said the complainant, the New South Wales Department of
Health complained of a “potential breach” of the
Private Health
Private Health Facilities Regulation
letter explained the decision was based upon the “gravity of the
allegation”. The letter also explains that pursuant
to s150A of the
National Law
he may apply to be Council for a review of its decision.
November 2010 Dr Colquhoun wrote to the Council requesting a review of its
decision to impose a restriction on his practice. On
20 November 2010 he wrote
to the Council with further reasons why he should not have his practice
restricted.
26 November 2010 Ms Nikolich, the new Executive Officer of the Council, sent an
e-mail to Dr Colquhoun informing him that his request
for a review of the
restriction on his practice would not be reconsidered at the next meeting of the
Council on 14 December 2010
because of the seriousness of the allegations and
that the Health Care Complaints Commission was conducting an investigation into
the matter and until that was completed the condition would need to remain. She
quoted section 150(1). In the same letter she then
contradicts herself by
completing the letter with the following paragraph:
“The Council will consider the matter in consultation with
the Health Care Complaints Commission at the next meeting on 14
December 2010.
I will be in touch with you soon after that date to inform you of any new
developments.”
that meeting on 14 December 2010 Ms Nikolich claims to have written a letter to
Dr Colquhoun on 16 December informing him of
the Council’s decision to
suspend his registration. It found this necessary for the protection of the
health or safety of any
person or is otherwise in the public interest. The
letter says this decision follows the Council's decision on 12 November 2010 to
restrict his licence. Relevantly the letter said what the Council was provided
with when it made its decision to suspend his registration:
The HCCC was
considering disciplinary proceedings in regard to the complaint by Prince of
Wales Hospital in February 2010 (regarding
Patients A and B)
Notification by
the Department of Health on 8 October 2010 that ROD was being administered on
unlicensed premises – Psych n
Soul Clinic:
Complaint to
HCCC from Royal Prince Alfred Hospital on the 24 November 2010 identifying
Patient C who received ROD treatment and was
not expected to live.
The Council was
informed by HCCC that Patient C had since died.
evidence Ms Nikolich admitted the letter was not sent by priority post as per
usual procedures when the Council made a decision
to suspend a registration. In
fact she was unable to confirm the letter had been sent at all. This Tribunal
finds the Council failed
to give written notice of its decision to suspend Dr
Colquhoun made on 14 December 2010 as required under s150(6) of the National
Colquhoun sent a letter to June Garcia incorrectly dated 20 November 2010,
referring to his own letter to the Council of 20 December
2010, providing
further submissions as to why his practice ought not be restricted. By that
stage Ms Nikolich was the Executive Officer.
It is clear from the wording of the
letter that the parties were at cross purposes. Had that letter been read
properly, Ms Nikolich
would have realised Dr Colquhoun was unaware of his
suspension.
13 January 2011 Ms Nikolich wrote to Dr Colquhoun. This letter incorrectly
refers to his submissions of 20 December 2010 as seeking
a review of the
Council's decision “to suspend the Psychologist’s
registration”. The letter then invites him to
send any further material
which would be reviewed by the Council on 1 February 2011.
Colquhoun sent further submissions in two letters on 19 and 20 January 2010 to
Ms Nikolich which both clearly referred to the restrictions
on his licence
rather than the suspension.
3 February 2007 Ms Nikolich wrote to Dr Colquhoun referring to his
“requests dated the 20 December 2010 and 19 January 2011
for a review of
the Council's decision of 14 December 2010 to suspend your
registration......” She then says “As you
are well aware the Council
made its (sic) decision after the death of Patient C in late 2010.”
Ms Nikolich was confident he received the letter of 16 December 2010 one must
wonder why she found it necessary to introduce the
issue of the death of Patient
C. It is particularly poignant that Dr Colquhoun’s correspondence only
ever referred to the license
of the clinic.
one would expect Dr Colquhoun addressed this revelation as to why his
registration was restricted (as he thought) in his letter
7 February 2011. Ms
Nikolich’s next letter on 24 February 2011 does not mention this 7
February letter but merely informs him
of his right of review to this Tribunal.
On 3 March 2011 Dr Colquhoun writes to the Council informing it of his decision
an appeal to the Psychology Tribunal.
11 March 2011 again incorrectly referring to a letter of 31 March instead of 3
March, Ms Nikolich confirms receipt of that letter
and informs him that the
suspension remains in force until the complaint to the Health Care Complaints
Commission is finalised or
the Coroner has handed down their (sic) findings. She
says “the Council will reconsider his request for review at the conclusion
of the Coronial Inquiry.”
an e-mail on 17 March 2011 Ms Nikolich refers to a telephone conversation she
had with Mr Colquhoun and explains his right of review
to the Council as
compared to his right of appeal to the Tribunal. In light of Ms Nikolich’s
version regarding the letter of
16 December 2010 and the subsequent
correspondence one wonders why she thought this discussion and e-mail were
Colquhoun sent an e-mail on 4 April 2011 again confirming that he had not
received notice of the council's decision to suspend
him. On 15 April 2011 he
had not received a response from that e-mail so he sent another which Ms
Nikolich did reply to. She confirmed
that she had extended the time for
lodgement of his appeal. She also included an extract from her referral letter
to the Tribunal
in which, extraordinarily, she failed to mention Dr
Colquhoun’s claim that he had never received notice of the suspension.
13 July 2011 the Director of Proceedings for the HCCC determined to prosecute a
disciplinary complaint against Dr Colquhoun before
the Psychologists Tribunal.
– Complaint has been filed and is set down for hearing in April 2012.
Issues at time of the suspension and the steps taken to address
were a number issues at the time of the complaints which in this Tribunal
opinion were addressed by Dr Colquhoun by the time
this matter was heard.
standard of assessment and documentation were below the standard expected,
treatment plans were inadequate and the exploration
of depression and suicide
ideation was below the standard expected. In response to these particular issues
Dr Colquhoun arranged
for Mr Anns an appropriate expert, to formulate a new
psychosocial assessment dated August 2011.
Colquhoun failed to contact the support person for Patient B prior to the ROD
treatment and did not ensure he was placed in the
care of a support person.
Although Mr Anns has included this in his new clinic documents, in evidence Dr
Colquhoun gave reasons why
an ROD patient did not always have a support person
available. This Tribunal does not think it appropriate that anyone without a
support person should receive the treatment.
was insufficient discussion of alternative treatment options with patients prior
to ROD procedure and a failure to contact other
treating professionals regarding
suitability for ROD treatment. Dr Colquhoun should ensure that each patient is
suitable for the
procedure and that patients with contraindications do not
receive ROD treatment.
Tribunal is of the opinion that when giving his evidence Dr Colquhoun was aware
of the need for proper assessment including the
completion of the psychosocial
assessment prepared by Mr Anns. The Tribunal is also of the view that the
completed psychosocial assessment
must be provided to the doctor who is
prescribing the medication for the ROD treatment. The Tribunal notes that, as
discussed by
the Medical Tribunal in Dr Tan’s disciplinary matter, the
prescribing doctor of ROD should make his own assessment and determination
regarding a patient's clinical suitability for ROD.
Patient A received the treatment he was not kept overnight. Since then Psych n
Soul Clinic has a mandatory overnight stay for
all ROD patients.
Tribunal is also confident that Dr Colquhoun is fully aware of needed to only
perform the procedure on licensed premises and that
he does not have any form of
licence in principle or otherwise at the moment.
Suppression Order
Tribunal makes an order that no details that tend to identify patients of Dr
Colquhoun are to be published.
B annexed to this decision and containing these details should be attached to
the original Reasons for Decision and to the
copies that are forwarded to the
parties. This schedule should not be reproduced if copies of the Reasons or
copies of any other
documents used in these proceedings are made for any purpose
other than to provide it to an appeal body. The parties are directed
care to ensure that the schedule is not copied.
The Tribunal orders that :-
order to restrict the Appellant’s registration made by the Psychology
Council on 9 November 2010 be revoked.
order to suspend the Appellant's registration made by the Psychology Council on
14 December 2010 be revoked.
Appellant’s registration as a psychologist is conditional to the extent
that he practise under the supervision of a supervisor
approved by the
Psychology Council until the Psychology Tribunal hands down the decision of the
disciplinary proceedings that are
Supervision
provided by the supervisor is to include two hours per fortnight face to face
supervision that focuses on:
quality and comprehensiveness of the psychologist’s assessment.
adequacy of record keeping.
recommendations by Mr. Anns re clinic documentation be fully implemented.
Appellant may only practice Rapid Opioid Detoxification on premises licensed to
perform ROD treatment.
the end of ROD treatment, the patient is to be placed directly into the care of
the support person.
Publication
A copy of these Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the
Registry to:-
1) The Appellant
2) The Psychology Council
25 November 2011
__________________________
Phillipa Gormly (Chairperson)
__________________________
David Bright
__________________________
Brian Sheridan
__________________________
Siew-Foong Liew
Coal and Allied
Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
[2000] HCA 47
(2000) 203 CLR
at 11 Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby
Allesch v Maunz
(2000) 203 CLR 172
at 180 per Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne
[2008] NSWSC
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Lindsay v NSW
Medical Board
[2008] NSWSC 40
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (590 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter