URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/856.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited v Zafirovski [2025] NSWPICMP 856; (5 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF REVIEW
QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited v Zafirovski [2025] NSWPICMP
Ljupco Zafirovski
QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
REVIEW PANEL
SENIOR MEMBER:
Susan McTegg
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Melissa Barrett
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Himanshu Singh
DATE OF DECISION:
5 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS –
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; assessment of whole person impairment (WPI); the claimant suffered
injury in a motor vehicle accident; Medical Assessor (MA) assessed
7% WPI as a
result of post-traumatic stress disorder caused by accident; insurer sought
– certificate of MA revoked; history provided by
claimant unreliable;
Whisprun Pty Ltd v Dixon
cited; 7% WPI as a result
of a chronic adjustment disorder caused by the accident.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
Whether the degree of permanent impairment of the injured
person as a result of the injury caused by the motor accident is greater
Certificate issued under
Accident Injuries Act 2017
Review Panel revokes the certificate of Medical Assessor Yu Tang Shen dated
24 April 2024 and issues a new certificate determining that the following
injuries caused by the motor accident give rise to a whole
person impairment of
adjustment disorder.
REVIEW PANEL REASONS FOR DECISION
INTRODUCTION
13 January 2022 Ljupco Zafirovski (the claimant) alleges he sustained injury in
a motor vehicle accident (the accident).
Zafirovski has brought a claim for common law damages under the
Accident Injuries Act 2017
(the MAI Act).
Insurance (Australia) Limited (the insurer) is the relevant insurer with
liability to pay any damages to Mr Zafirovski under the
4.11 of the MAI Act provides that there is no entitlement to damages for
non-economic loss unless the degree of permanent impairment of the injured
person as a result of the injury caused by the accident
is greater than
dispute is in relation to whether the degree of permanent impairment sustained
Mr Zafirovski as a result of the injury caused by the accident is greater
than 10%. This constitutes a medical assessment matter pursuant
to Schedule 2,
cl 2 of the MAI Act.
medical assessment matter is determined in accordance with Division 7.5 of the
MAI Act by a Medical Assessor.
dispute as to permanent impairment in respect of the claimant’s
psychological injury was referred to Medical Assessor Shen.
He issued a
certificate dated 24 April 2024.
DOCUMENTS CONSIDERED BY THE
REVIEW PANEL
Review Panel issued a Direction to the parties on 7 March 2025 (the Direction)
requiring each party to file an indexed, paginated
bundle of documents. In
response to this Direction the solicitor for the insurer uploaded to the portal
a bundle of documents paginated
from pages 1 to 745 (insurer’s documents).
The solicitor for the claimant uploaded to the portal a bundle of documents
from pages 1 to 74 (claimant’s documents).
RELEVANT LEGAL AUTHORITY
7.21 of the MAI Act provides that the degree of permanent impairment of an
injured person is to be assessed in accordance
with the Motor Accident
Guidelines (the Guidelines).
Guidelines were issued pursuant to Division 10.2 of the MAI Act. Clause 6.213 of
the Guidelines requires the impairment to be
attributable to a psychiatric
diagnosis recognised by the current edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders,
that is, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders 5th Edition Text Revision (DSM-5) or the current edition of the
International Statistical Classification of Diseases & Related Health
Problems (ICD). The assessment of mental and behavioural
disorders must be
undertaken in accordance with the psychiatric impairment rating scale (PIRS) as
set out in the Guidelines.
of injury is addressed under Part 6 of the Guidelines dealing with permanent
impairment:
“6.6 Causation is defined in the Glossary at page
316 of the AMA 4 Guides as follows:
'Causation means that a physical, chemical or biologic factor contributed to
the occurrence of a medical condition. To decide that
a factor alleged to have
caused or contributed to the occurrence or worsening of a medical condition has,
in fact, done so, it is
necessary to verify both of the following:
alleged factor could have caused or contributed to worsening of the impairment,
which is a medical determination.
alleged factor did cause or contribute to worsening of the impairment, which is
a non-medical determination.'
This, therefore, involves a medical
decision and a non-medical informed judgement.
6.7 There is no simple common test of causation that is applicable to all
cases, but the accepted approach involves determining whether
the injury (and
the associated impairment) was caused or materially contributed to by the motor
accident. The motor accident does
not have to be a sole cause as long as it is a
contributing cause, which is more than negligible. Considering the question
this injury (or impairment) have occurred if not for the accident?' may
be useful in some cases, although this is not a definitive
test and may be
inapplicable in circumstances where there are multiple contributing
CERTIFICATE OF MEDICAL ASSESSOR SHEN
a certificate dated 24 April 2024 Medical Assessor Shen certified the following
injuries give rise to a permanent impairment of
post-traumatic
injuries referred to Medical Assessor Shen for assessment were:
psychiatric
condition – major depressive disorder.
Assessor Shen reported since the accident the claimant had lost friends as he
had withdrawn from them. Prior to the accident
he had many friends as he was a
musician performer. He now spends most of the time in bed and has not been
attending social events
or gatherings. When asked about surveillance footage
showing him walking alone with his dog on several occasions appearing reactive
and smiling, he stated he was on his phone to his daughter and son the entire
claimant stated the accident occurred when his vehicle was rear-ended by a
semi-trailer at high speed. He was wearing his seat
belt, the airbags did not
deploy, and he hit his head on the headrest. He may have lost consciousness. His
car was written off. The
claimant stated he sustained physical injuries
including to his neck and back and developed psychological symptoms in the days
the accident.
claimant described recurrent intrusive memories of the accident and nightmares.
He has been avoiding triggers of the accident
such as when it's raining, he
feels someone will hit him. He reported he avoids talking to his family and has
diminished interest
in his previous activities and relationships. He reported he
found it hard to experience positive emotions, had ongoing hypervigilance
was easily startled with poor sleep and concentration. The claimant reportedly
felt depressed all the time. He reported his appetite
had been reduced although
he had put on 22kg since the accident. He reported feeling hopeless and
Assessor Shen reported it was difficult to reconcile the claimant’s
reported description of his level of functioning
with the surveillance footage
noting significant discrepancies regarding self-care and grooming, social and
recreational functioning,
travel, concentration and adaptability. He noted that
reports from the psychiatrists and psychologists are consistent with the
self-reported
symptoms and relate to a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress
Assessor Shen concluded the claimant’s symptoms were consistent with
post-traumatic stress disorder although he noted the extent of the
symptomatology was unclear due to the reliability of his self-reporting.
found there was a nexus between the accident and the psychiatric injury having
regard to the plausible mechanism of injury and
found a temporal and thematic
association between the claimant’s psychiatric symptoms and the
Assessor Shen found class 2 for self-care and personal hygiene, class 2 for
social and recreational activities; class 1 for
travel, class 2 for social
functioning, class 2 for concentration, persistence and pace and class 2 for
adaption after taking into
account the evidence apparent from the surveillance
footage. He made an adjustment of 2% for the effects of
REVIEW PROCEDURE
insurer has sought a review of the medical assessment of Medical Assessor Shen
dated 24 April 2024.
application was lodged on 22 May 2024 within 28 days of the date on which the
certificate of Medical Assessor Shen was made available
3 July 2024 the delegate of the President being satisfied there was reasonable
cause to suspect that the medical assessment was
incorrect in a material respect
referred the medical assessment to the Review Panel (the
127 to 130 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (PIC Rules) are made
pursuant to
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
A review panel determines how it conducts and determines the proceedings and may
determine the proceedings solely based
on the written
application.
review is by way of a new assessment of all matters with which the medical
assessment is concerned.
10 June 2025 the Panel agreed an examination was necessary.
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE PANEL
Application for personal injury benefits
the Application for personal injury benefits dated 18 January 2022 the claimant
“I stopped at a red light for about 3 - 5 seconds
before a truck hit the back of my car. The car slided in the middle of the
intersection. I got out of the car to speak with the driver at fault when he
informed me that his breaks were not working and the
truck hit the back of the
car.... [sic]”.
And further:
“I have excruciating pain in my neck and lower back. I have pins and
needles in both arms and pain radiating down the right
leg. I have massive
migraines. I can’t turn my neck without feeling any pain. I'm restricted
in movement with both my lower
back and neck. I'm unable to drive for longer of
15 mins without having a break and being in a lot of pain. I'm unable to sleep
sit in one position for a longer period of
Medical evidence
claimant presented to Canterbury Hospital following the accident on 13 January
2022 where it was reported he ”did not hit
head on steering wheel, no LOC,
remembers entire event, whiplash injury to neck, now complains of pain down
midline neck as well
as both sides.”
18 January 2022, the claimant attended upon Dr Gulyaeva of Belmore Medical
Centre with complaints of “neck pain” and
lower back pain radiating
to the right leg.
24 February 2022 Dr Gulyaeva referred the claimant to Ms Ewa Nowinska in respect
of “depression? PTSD.”
On 7 March 2022 Dr Gulyaeva referred the claimant to Ms Elica Najdenska in
anxiety/depression.
Allied Health Recovery Request (AHRR) of Elica Najdenska, psychologist
26 March 2022 stated a preliminary assessment indicated symptoms of
anxiety with low mood triggered by injuries sustained in the
The claimant reported
he was in constant pain and was isolating himself at home.
28 March 2022, Professor James Van Gelder, treating neurosurgeon reported neck
pain radiating diffusely into his arms with
He also reported back
pain and paraesthesia radiating to his legs with numbness. Professor Van Gelder
reported investigations revealed
degenerative disc disease although he also
concluded the claimant had cervical radicular symptoms that correlate with nerve
compression
in his cervical spine.
5 May 2022, Dr Antoun noted that the claimant had sustained only soft tissue
injuries in the accident, and he questioned why the
claimant was being certified
as completely unfit for work.
25 May 2022, Professor Van Gelder reported the claimant had back pain and
radicular symptoms affecting particularly his right leg.
He thought cervical
spondylosis may be the cause of the mechanical neck pain. He reported a normal
range of motion in the shoulders,
and normal strength, reflexes and sensation in
8 June 2022, Mr Thomas O’Neill, psychologist, undertook a document review
and noted that the primary complaints and symptoms
16 July 2022 Elica Najdenska, psychologist reported the claimant had symptoms of
low mood, lack of motivation, nightmares, rumination
feelings of hopelessness and
He reported
irritability, lack of concentration, and deterioration in function with suicidal
ideation. She reported he did not leave
him to all appointments and had stopped communicating with friends. The claimant
he attempted to go for a short walk after the accident and felt dizzy
and faint and since then had felt too scared to go out again
in case he falls
and injures himself.
claimant saw Dr Con Yiannikas on 19 July 2022 and again on 12 September 2022 in
respect of back pain. He reported improvement
in right leg pain with a right
L4-5 per-radicular cortisone
9 August 2022, Dr Alan Nazha, treating pain specialist, took a history of
cervical spine pain radiating into the arms and lumbar
spine pain but with no
significant pain in the lower
He reported the claimant
demonstrated some fear-avoidant behaviour in relation to both the cervical and
lumbar spine.
notes of Mr Goran Josifoski, psychologist as of 23 August 2024 detail treatment
between 9 September 2022 and 19 October
On 9 September 2022 the
clinical notes record a history of the accident, intrusive thoughts and
flashbacks of the accident; nightmares
and night terrors and waking up in a
sweat, struggling to fall asleep and stay asleep, weight gain, memory problems,
low mood and
motivation, avoiding communication with family and friends,
currently at home with blinds close, hasn’t driven at all since
accident noting his children drive him to doctor appointments. Mr Josifoski
reported the claimant appeared unshaven, disheveled
with depressed and anxious
mood which was congruent with his affect.
3 January 2023 Mr David Young, physiotherapist undertook an independent
assessment.
He reported the
claimant did not drive because his licence had been cancelled. He did not
socialise and was unable to play the keyboard
or guitar as he was unable to
press the strings of the guitar with his left hand.
10 May 2023 the claimant underwent a lumbar medial branch radiofrequency
ablation under the care of Dr Nazha. On 20 July 2023 Dr
Nazha reported no
significant reduction in
notes of Dr Stevans document the claimant’s attendances between 25 July
2022 and 7 September 2023.
a report dated 1 April 2023, Dr Stevans, treating psychiatrist reported the
claimant had been under his care since 25 July 2022.
He diagnosed post-traumatic
stress disorder. He reported the circumstances of the accident as follows:
“While waiting on a red light, a truck with trailer hit him
at 80km/hr without breaking. This happened on King George's Rd.
flew 10 metres”. There were no other cars involved as it was early
morning. The airbag did not deploy. He lost
consciousness and recalls opening
the door and trying to get out. He felt pains in the neck and back. They didn't
call the police.
The ambulance didn't come either. He drove his damaged car to
his house which was within a
kilometre.”
Stevans reported the claimant has nightmares, he had gained weight, his mood was
terrible, and he could not get out of the house
due to his pains. He reported
sleep disturbance, inability to control his emotion, low mood and impairment in
cognitive functions.
He reported feeling defeated and was fearful someone will
hit him from behind. Dr Stevans described the claimant as unkempt and poorly
groomed, with some psychomotor slowing. He had low mood and restricted affect,
but no formal thought disorder. Negative cognitions
were present, and he was
orientated to time, place and person.
5 May 2023 Dr Stevans reported the claimant had constant pain and was
indifferent to things.
reportedly not shaving and not looking after himself. He considered his life
worthless and had lost interest in music. Nightmares
had reduced with Minipress,
his appetite was “forced” and his energy level was “exhausted
all the time.”
His mood was “not good”, his concentration
terrible and short time memory absent. Dr Stevens reported he was more unkempt
than last time he saw him. He diagnosed post-traumatic stress disorder with a
partial response to Lexapro.
5 December 2023 Dr Stevans reported the claimant cannot move around the house
due to pains.
His sleep was said
to be “OK”. His appetite was not the best, his weight had increased,
his energy level was low, his
mood “not good” and concentration
“very poor”. He reported his short-term memory was terrible, and he
social interactions.
Medico-legal evidence
Dr Andrew Keller, occupational physician
a report dated 6 June 2023 Dr Keller diagnosed the claimant with a
“temporary cervical spine soft tissue strain with or without
exacerbation
of his pre-existing degenerative
viewing the surveillance footage, Dr Keller provided a supplementary report
3 April 2024.
described the footage as follows:
3 Jan 2023:
- walking freely
with normal gait up to 10 minutes, and
- lumbar flexion
90 degrees to pick up and throw stick right-handed.
5 Jan 2023:
- driving/parking
shopping, carrying a light basket in right hand.
5 Sep 2023:
- walking in
shops more than 15 minutes;
- raising left
arm overhead height;
- driving/parking
- deep squat,
- looking up
with neck extension exceeding 30 degrees.
6 Sep 2023:
- driving a car,
- sitting and
playing guitar in shop.
Keller concluded that the claimant’s physical capacity was greater than he
Dr Keller stated the claimant appeared independently mobile, he
can drive a car, and no disability was observed that suggested he
assistance with self-care. Dr Keller concluded there was no objective evidence
for any persisting injuries relating to the
accident, and no evidence to support
any physician need for treatment or work restrictions.
Hooi-Benh Teoh, psychiatrist
Teoh assessed the claimant at the request of his lawyers and provided a report
15 July 2023.
Teoh recorded the claimant reported insomnia and avoidant behaviour. He had
intrusive memories of the accident, was easily startled
by noises. He had been
agitated and did not feel safe as a passenger in a car. He reported the claimant
had not been able to drive
at all. The claimant reported he preferred to be in a
dark room where he felt safe. He did not care about how he looked, and did
want to be with friends. He was irritable and argumentative. He reported his
daughter has to force him to shower and cut his
Teoh reported the claimant appeared dishevelled and sluggish. He was not
communicative and had poor eye contact. He diagnosed a
major depressive disorder
caused by the accident which had resulted in chronic pain and disability.
Teoh calculated a 24% WPI. He assessed class 2 for self-care and personal
hygiene, class 3 for social and recreational activities;
class 3 for travel,
class 3 for social functioning, class 3 for concentration, persistence and pace
and class 5 for adaption.
Dr Abhishek Nagesh,
psychiatrist
a report dated 2 May 2023 Dr Nagesh diagnosed the claimant with a major
depressive disorder giving rise to 7%
He reported:
pain affected
his mood and he became anxious:
he had panic
he lost interest
in things he previously enjoyed;
he lost his
appetite, has gained weight;
he has to rely
on his daughter’s boyfriend to have a shower;
he is tired all
day, he is socially withdrawn and spends the majority of the time lying
mobilise like before;
he has not been
able to drive since the accident;
he cannot travel
on his own due to anxiety but is able to go for short walks locally, and
he has lost
interest in hobbies, which is his music.
Nagesh concluded the claimant did not meet criteria A for post-traumatic stress
disorder and diagnosed major depression.
Nagesh provided a supplementary report dated 9 April 2024 after viewing the
surveillance footage.
noted that the footage showed the claimant “being quite active, where the
claimant has been observed travelling in
his car, he has been observed going for
walks with his dog, he has been observed throwing a stick and playing with his
He noted the footage showed the claimant going to shopping centres
independently, spending time in the presence of large crowds without
anxiety. Dr Nagesh also noted that the claimant was seen to freely mobilise.
Nagesh diagnosed an adjustment disorder with depressed and anxious mood although
he considered the claimant’s behavioural
and psychological symptoms had
resolved and that no further treatment was necessary. Dr Nagesh also considered
that the claimant
had capacity for suitable duties and revised his whole person
impairment assessment from 7% WPI to 0% WPI.
Activities of Daily Living Assessment Report
Elisha Coster of Procare undertook an assessment of the claimant’s
activities of daily living on 19 April 2023 and provided
a report dated 10 May
reported the claimant stated pre-accident he enjoyed playing the keyboard and
guitar, going on walks with and without his daughter's
dog, and socialised with
friends and family frequently. Currently he reported he spent most of his day in
bed. He reported he no
longer wants to play his instruments and “he has no
enjoyment”. The claimant stated he was independent with shopping
the accident but now he no longer wants to go anywhere. The claimant reported he
had a sitting tolerance of 30 minutes and
a standing tolerance of
claimant advised he had not returned to driving since the accident. He reported
currently his daughter was driving him to and
from all appointments and other
engagements.
Sarah O’Donnell, psychologist of
Sarah O’Donnell, psychologist of IPAR undertook a psychological functional
assessment of the claimant on 3 April
She concluded the claimant
did not have the psychological capacity to return to work at the time of the
assessment. She noted that
the claimant’s reported symptoms were
consistent with post-traumatic stress disorder.
stated the claimant reported he had not engaged in social activities with
friends or colleagues since sustaining injury noting
he was ashamed of his
current circumstances and had withdrawn socially.
recorded the claimant stated he spends most days in his room with the lights off
and that his adult daughter forces him to complete
self-care tasks such as
eating meals, showering and getting dressed. He reported he rarely leaves his
in hobbies such as playing the keyboard. He
struggles to sleep at night and his sleep is disturbed by nightmares, vivid
falling and being woken by startle responses. His appetite is reduced.
Occasionally his daughter drives him to the grocery store
and forces him to
purchase groceries while she sits in the car but he noted he struggles to do
this. The claimant reported he has
not driven since the accident and depends on
his adult daughter to drive him to all
appointments.
Surveillance
Procare Investigations
Investigations provided a report dated 13 January
The investigator undertook
97.5 hours of surveillance and recorded approximately 69 minutes of video
footage of the claimant. The
footage showed the following:
on 3 January
2023 the claimant was seen to walk a small dog outside. He then attended an
appointment accompanied by a female (presumably
his daughter);
on 4 January
2023 the claimant was seen to emerge from his address at 8 am and to take a
small dog for a walk. At 8.34am he was seen
to make a video call before throwing
a stick to the dog with his right arm multiple times. He was seen to pat another
dog in conversation
with a passing walker. After checking his mailbox, the
claimant returned inside at about 9.34am, and
on 5 January
2023 the claimant was seen to emerge from his address at 8.35am walking the
small dog, throwing a stick to the dog and
using his phone. He returned to his
address at 9.53am. At 11.27am the claimant drove from the area to a Speedway
Service Station
in Roselands before proceedings to Clempton Park Shopping
Village where he shopped at Coles. He returned to his vehicle at 11.58am
drove back to his address.
Investigations provided a report dated 18 September
The investigator undertook
38 hours of surveillance and recorded approximately 27 minutes of video footage
of the claimant. The footage
showed the following:
on 5 September
2023 the claimant accompanied by a female left his address at 10.14am and
travelled by car as a passenger to the Queen
Victoria Building. At 11.49am the
claimant accompanied by the female left the area and drove to the Campsie
Centre. The claimant
was seen to shop with his female companion at Chemist
Warehouse, Big W and Campsie Gift Land. At 12.52pm the claimant and his
returned to the car travelling to his address, and
on 6 September
2023 the claimant left his address at 11.06am and drove to Westfield Liverpool.
He inspected items at Unique Accessories,
before entering the mall area where he
attended Silver Chin Jewellery and Bravas Music City where he was observed to
play a guitar.
He then inspected Gold Land jewellery store before browsing
men’s garments in Kmart. He exited and returned to the carpark
at 12.46pm.
CERTIFICATE OF MEDICAL ASSESSOR KENNA
Assessor Kenna assessed the claimant on 19 April 2024 and issued a certificate
dated 11 May 2024 in which he certified the
following injuries caused by the
accident had resolved and gave rise to no assessable impairment:
cervical spine
– soft tissue injury, and
lumbar spine
– soft tissue
Assessor Kenna certified the following injuries referred for assessment were not
caused by the accident:
right shoulder,
Assessor Kenna reported:
“I noted the surveillance tapes
involving 3 November 2022 and 4 and 5 January 2023. This indicated an individual
who appeared
fit, active, mobile and was not restricted. This was different to
the embellishment at the time of my examination when he carried
a walking stick
and states that he had difficulty walking, when in actual fact he was observed
carrying a case and jogging across
a road, similarly with no restrictions while
also noted marked inconsistencies on examination repetition and marked pain
behaviour. He concluded the claimant self-limited his
performance in all of the
test items of the assessment and concluded:
“There was no
objective physical signs of restriction associated with his self-limited
performance and that was confirmed by
subsequent viewing also of the
surveillance tapes.”
SUBMISSIONS
Insurer’s submissions
insurer provided submissions dated 22 May 2024 in support of the application for
insurer submits Medical Assessor Shen erred in his psychiatric diagnosis where
he failed to address the specific diagnostic criteria
required by the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th Edition Text Revision
insurer submitted Medical Assessor Shen failed to identify or raise key
inconsistencies with the claimant in accordance with cl
6.41 of the Guidelines.
Medical Assessor Shen took a history that the claimant hit his head on the
headrest and may have lost consciousness
and that he was left unconscious
following the accident. The insurer submits this is inconsistent with the
records of Canterbury
Hospital which explicitly state there was no head strike
or loss of consciousness.
insurer submits Medical Assessor Shen appeared to accept the claimant’s
self-reporting that he developed psychological symptoms
days after the accident
where clinical records confirm psychological symptoms were not raised until more
than two months later.
insurer submits Medical Assessors Shen’s reasons were conflicting and
inconsistent, noting he stated:
“It is difficult to reconcile
his self-reported description of his level of functioning, despite multiple
opportunities to do
so in the interview, with the surveillance reports and the
surveillance footage, with significant discrepancies regarding his level
self-care and grooming, social and recreational functioning, travel, and
concentration, and adaptability, and detracts from the
reliability of his
self-reporting. The surveillance footage and reports also provide contrasting
evidence to the Activity of daily
living report.
The reports from his psychiatrist and psychologists are consistent with his
self-reported symptoms, related to a diagnosis of Post-Traumatic
insurer submits Medical Assessor Shen undermined his diagnosis by stating
“the extent of the symptomatology is unclear due
to concerns regarding the
reliability of his self- reporting.” The insurer submits that the parties
are unable to ascertain
whether the correct diagnosis was made.
insurer provided submissions dated 12 April 2024 in respect of the substantive
insurer relies upon surveillance footage of the claimant throughout 2023 which,
it is alleged, revealed inconsistencies compared
to the claimants self-reporting
and presentation to treatment providers and medical experts. The insurer notes
the Procare reports
13 January 2023, and 18 September 2023 show the
claimant engaging in the following activities:
walking freely
with normal gait up to 10 minutes;
lumbar flexion
90° to pick up and throw stick right-handed;
driving and
parking a car;
shopping, carrying a light basket in right hand;
walking in shops
for more than 15 minutes;
raising left arm
above head height;
engaging in a
deep squat;
looking up with
neck extension exceeding 30°, and
sitting and
playing a guitar in a shop.
insurer submits the capacity demonstrated by the claimant in the surveillance
footage is inconsistent with the following presentations:
in March 2022,
Professor Van Gelder noted the claimant had an “in mobile back, with
clutching at furniture on attempting to
flex... When distracted, the claimant
sat and walked normally with normal spontaneous back and neck movements”;
the claimant
told his physiotherapist in March 2022 that he could sit for only
minutes, experienced pain when “bending over to pick things up” and
that he could not drive as he “can't turn
head without pain”;
the claimant
told his psychologist in March 2022 that he was in constant pain which was
aggravated by “moving, reaching for
items, changing his clothes pain
increases sharply.” The claimant reported he was avoiding friends and
isolating himself at
in June 2022 the
claimant told Work Focus Australia that he experiences “lower limb
numbness, pins and needles and loss of balance
leading to near falls”;
on 16 July 2022
the claimant told Ms Najdenska that:
highly active person who spent most of his free time outdoors, walking long
distances as regular exercise, he reported
attempting to go for a short walk
after the accident and he felt dizzy and faint after which he feels too scared
to go out again
in case he falls and injures himself more seriously”;
on 9 August 2022
Dr Nazha noted that the claimant “demonstrates a very awkward gait ...
range of motion of his cervical spine
is limited ... he is quite tender to even
light palpation of [the cervical spine and lumbar spine] ...;
on 18 October
2022 Dr Stevans reported the claimant told him he tries to walk around the unit,
but pain prevents him;
physiotherapist, reported the claimant told him he does not drive because his
licence was cancelled. He also reported that
the claimant is unable to open a
door because of the numbness in his hand, he has difficulty descending stairs
because of back pain
and he does not carry items;
in January 2023
Mr Young reported the claimant told him he was unable to play the guitar as he
was unable to press the string of the
guitar with his left hand;
in May 2023
Procare Injury Management reported the claimant said he can't turn his neck
without feeling any pain and he was restricted
in movement with both his lower
back and neck;
in May 2023
Procare reported the claimant said prior to the accident he enjoyed playing the
guitar, going on walks with and without
his daughter's dog but that he no longer
enjoys or wants to play his instruments and has no enjoyment;
Procare also
reported in May 2023 that the claimant had not returned to driving since the
in May 2023 the
claimant told Procare he rarely left the unit complex only in regard to
in April 2023
Ipar Psychological Services reported the claimant had reduced capacity to
interact with the public;
in April 2023
Ipar Psychological Services reported the claimant was unable to independently
complete daily tasks such as showering,
preparing meals, changing his bedding or
cleaning. The insurer submits the surveillance footage shows the claimant
engaged in activities
that would be equal to or greater than the capacity
required for basic self-care activities;
reported in June 2023 that the claimant said he could only sit for 30 to 60
minutes, stand for three to five minutes, walk
for three to five minutes, lift
no more than 0.5 kilograms and had not returned to driving. Dr Keller reported
the claimant required
assistance with showering and dressing, that he spent most
of the day sleeping in bed and that he had only gone to the shops twice
last year and never to socialise;
the claimant
told Dr Nagesh in May 2023 that he “cannot mobilise, life is not normal as
before, he has to rely on his daughter's
boyfriend to have a shower”. He
also reported the claimant stated he could not drive since the accident. Dr
Nagesh reported
that the claimant said he spends the majority of his time lying
down and is now completely socially withdrawn;
reported the claimant cannot travel on his own due to anxiety;
on 27 July 2023
the claimant reported he “doesn't go anywhere and doesn't see the need to
self-care”, and
in particulars
dated 5 September 2023 the claimant asserts he suffers aggravation of pain when
standing, sitting, or walking for long
periods of time. He has difficulty
walking, agoraphobia, was restricted in his preferred hobbies of running,
attending the gym and
playing the guitar and had been restricted in a wide
variety of work, sport, social and hobby activities.
insurer relies upon the opinion of Dr Keller who stated:
is clear from the observed footage that [the claimant’s] physical capacity
is greater than he reports. He appears
independently mobile, he can drive a car,
no disability was observed that suggests he needs assistance with self-care. It
clear to me that he has any physical work restrictions”.
Keller revised his opinion. He stated, ‘there is no objective evidence for
any persisting injuries relating to the accident,
and no evidence to support any
physician need for treatment or work restrictions”.
Nagesh considered the claimant’s psychological symptoms had resolved, no
further treatment was necessary, and the claimant
had capacity for suitable
duties where the footage did not demonstrate somebody suffering from severe
depressive and anxiety symptoms.
to r 109 of the
Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021
, the insurer submits that
exceptional circumstances exist in this claim which justify the inclusion of the
surveillance material.
Claimant’s submissions
claimant provided submissions dated 18 June 2024 in response to the application
for review.
claimant submits the criteria for a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder
were addressed by Medical Assessor Shen in his
claimant also submits Medical Assessor Shen identified and put to the claimant
the various inconsistencies alleged by the insurer
in arriving at his
MEDICAL EXAMINATION
claimant was assessed via videoconferencing by Medical Assessors Barrett and
Singh. He was located at home and was assessed unaccompanied.
interpreter, Olga Nikolvska, NAATI number 32439, was present for the duration of
the assessment.
Introduction
Zafirovska is a 61-year-old man, who lives in a unit in Belmore with his adult
daughter and her boyfriend. He has an adult son,
who lives in Erskine Park. He
is not in receipt of any income. He reported that he did not know why he was not
in receipt of Centrelink,
except for referring to having accessed his
superannuation
Personal history
Zafirovski was born in Macedonia, as the only child of his parents. He reported
normal birth and achievement of milestones.
described childhood trauma, physical abuse from his father, who he stated,
“constantly belted” him. He completed 12
years of schooling and was
an average student. At 18-years-old he entered military service, in live
artillery, for 15 months. He
denied exposure to active fighting.
then worked as an electrician in a metal factory. He married at 23-years-old,
and they had two children together, now aged 38 and
34-years-old. After seven
years of marriage, his wife left the marriage to pursue a relationship with
another man, leaving their
children, then six and two with Mr Zafirovski. He
then raised his children alone. He reasoned, “That’s why they look
after me now”.
formed a second marriage when he was about 40-years-old. He and his wife
considered that there were better opportunities to work
as an electrician in
Australia and migrated together. His second marriage endured for about eight
years and broke up because of his
wife’s gambling.
denied any history of previous workers compensation or motor accident claims. He
denied any forensic history.
started smoking at 18-years-old and currently smokes two to three cigarettes a
day. Prior to the accident, he used one standard
drink only, at social events.
He has never used alcohol daily. He denied any other drug use history.
denied any family psychiatric history.
denied any pre-accident medical history, describing his pre-accident health as,
“perfect”. He denies regular medications.
denied any past psychiatric history.
to 2019, he was living alone in rented accommodation. He had been working as an
interstate truck driver, full time, up to 12
hours a day, for the same company
since 2012. He formed a new relationship at about 52 years old. He travelled to
Macedonia for a
holiday in 2019. Whilst he was away, the COVID -19 pandemic
began, and Australia’s borders were closed. During that period,
his Sydney rental accommodation, his relationship broke up as they grew apart,
and he lived with his parents in Macedonia,
who supported him financially. In
September 2021, soon after Australia’s borders were opened, he returned to
Sydney and moved
into his daughter’s home. He resumed fulltime work with
his former employer.
completed chores, was clean shaven, wore his hair short and showered twice a
day. He went on daily walks, for an hour. He played
piano and would play other
instruments in Macedonian and Serbian restaurants for friends. He had many
friends. He denied previous
motor accidents.
History of the
accident occurred on 13 January 2022. He was driving a Honda Jazz but could not
recall the year model. He was returning home from
work, alone, and was
stationary at a red light. He first noticed a “big sound of a bump”
and realised he was hit by a
truck from the rear. No airbags deployed. After the
collision, he remained in the car for a period. He found it difficult to exit
the car but did so eventually by leaning on the seat. He exchanged details with
the other driver and took photos of the cars.
returned to his car and attempted to drive but had to stop after about 100m
because his, “head was not clear”. He called
his daughter, and his
son came to him. They left the car parked and his son drove him home, then to
Canterbury Hospital for investigation
of chest pain.
car was taken for repair but was written off for a value of $6000 or $7000.
History of symptoms following the accident
Physical symptoms
reported constant back pain, at an average severity of 6/10, up to 10/10, on a
scale from 1 to 10, where 10 is most severe.
has been treated with radiofrequency treatment. He states that two specialists
recommended surgery but has not pursued this because
he is apprehensive,
explaining, “Don’t wasn’t to lose the strength I
takes Tramadol, 50mg to 100mg daily. He takes Lyrica, two to three tablets mane.
He takes another medication, but he does not know
its name because his daughter
manages his medications as she is apparently fearful that he may take an
overdose of medications. Whilst
he initially shrugged his shoulders when asked
why she would be fearful of this, he acknowledged that when she criticises his
participation
in hygiene, an argument is triggered, during which he tells his
daughter, “I don’t want to
Psychiatric symptoms
reported that he used to be fit, healthy and able to work 12 hours a day, but
that he, “lost faith”, “because
I don’t want to live
this life”, about two years ago.
reported that he is fearful, “very, very scared”, when it rains,
because it was raining at the time of the accident.
He is fearful of
“being hit”, including if he is inside his home when it is raining,
but he could not explain the basis
for those fears inside a home.
reported that he has only driven about three times since the accident, when his
son forced him to do so to confront his phobia.
want anyone to look at me this way”, stating
he was previously known as a
happy and good person, but that he perceives he would now be regarded as,
“an idiot”. Since
the accident, he said “I have disconnected
myself from everyone” because “I don’t want them to see me
this”. He reported avoiding speaking with anyone and is only content
when on his own.
attempting to initiate sleep he described, “I feel a sense of sinking in a
deep, black hole”, “As though children
jumping on mattress around
legs”, as though, “My feet stuck on mattress, as though children
jumping”. He reported
looking around to check the source but that he does
not see anyone. He reports some relief from the sensation if he kicks his legs.
He sleeps only three to four hours a night. He is uncertain why he wakes but
wakes wet with sweat.
reports sensitivity to surrounding noises, such as doors in his unit block
banging closed, which he finds, “annoying”,
“fear about being
hit from rear”.
appetite is poor, which he attributes to constipation, but has gained weight,
“because don’t burn energy”.
reported passive suicidal thoughts, stating, “I don’t want to live
this life”, referring to his loss of capacity,
but has taken no
saw a psychologist once every two weeks for about three to four months, before
the treatment was terminated when she went on maternity
has been under the care of a psychiatrist, Dr Goran Stevens, who he has seen for
150mg daily and
Escitalopram 20mg daily. With medication, he reports the sensation of his feet
“stuck on the mattress”,
has reduced in frequency and that his
suicidal ideation is reduced, explaining that before he saw Dr Stevens he felt
like jumping
off the third floor because he had felt like a burden upon his
Current functioning
reports no engagement in household chores, explaining, “I can’t
bend”, “difficult to kneel down”,
things” and “I might leave the gas on”. His daughter cooks for
him and leaves a plate. He denied
attending the supermarket but added,
“Sometimes, very rarely”, he will go to the chemist and then to the
shops. He says
he needs his son to support him by the arm when walking to the
chemist. He showers once every three to seven days, explaining, “I’m
OK like this”. When he showers, his daughter’s boyfriend will put a
chair in the shower for him because he has suffered
with balance issues since
the accident. For this reason, he reports needing two chairs, either side of a
treadmill, “I might
lose balance”.
spends his day lying in bed. He will sometimes have a cigarette on his balcony.
He denied going on any recent walks. He denied
any social outings with friends
or holidays.
reports driving only three times in the last three years, explaining that he is,
“scared of being hit by someone” and
especially scared when at a red
relationship with his adult children remains intact and they are supportive and
caring of him. He described his daughter as determined
to make him change. He
has not had any subsequent relationships.
does not read and rarely watches TV, despite encouragement. He reports a loss of
interest in playing music.
has not worked since the accident. He reported that it was because his heavy
vehicle licence was suspended due to analgesic use
and because he is
“disoriented”, by which he meant “scattered” and at
times unsure where he is.
Mental state examination
Zafirovski was assessed via video conference.
presented as an overweight man, wearing dark-coloured pants and long-sleeved top
and eyeglasses. He had long grey hair and a long
grey beard, which was clean
looking. He interacted in an animated manner and displayed normal gestures.
speech was normal in rate and volume but over inclusive and he required
prompting to pause so that the interpreter could interpret
and so there was an
opportunity to ask questions.
affect was dysphoric and lacked reactivity. He described his mood as depressed
and anxious.
reported a strong sense of loss regarding his physical restrictions, which have
resulted in him giving up and withdrawing. He reported,
“I wanted to try
to go back to normal life, especially with cortisone injection, but overall, the
trend is getting worse and
worse”. He reported fear of another accident,
of being hit from the rear when the weather is rainy, even when he is at home,
without explanation as to why rainy weather would cause him to fear such an
event in circumstances where he is inside. He reported
unusual experiences, of
his feet stuck to the bed and children jumping on his bed at night, which he
reports he responds to by checking,
but he denied other perceptual
abnormalities. There was no formal thought disorder.
was able to concentrate well for the duration of the assessment of more than one
and half hours. He answered questions confidently
and tended to repeatedly
since the accident, rather
than respond to the question asked. He was oriented
to time, place and person.
reported chronic, passive suicidal ideation, because he feels that he is a
burden to his children, but without any plan. He did
not report any risk to
reported compliance with ongoing follow-up with his treating psychiatrist and
with psychotropic medications.
Comments on consistency
Assessors Barrett and Singh put to Mr Zafirovski that his observed appearance on
video surveillance images was markedly different
to his current appearance as
observed at assessment. He agreed that he formerly dyed his hair, but stopped,
“after I locked
myself up”.
elaborated that for a period after the accident he had remained optimistic and
tried to recover by attending physiotherapy. He
reported he then experienced
“noise in my head” and then fell whilst in front of his unit
building. On a subsequent occasion,
he attempted to walk with his son and almost
fell again but was rescued by his son. He reported that following these
incidents, he
“locked myself up”, but could not provide an estimated
timeframe. At that time, he stopped dying his hair.
Medical Assessors raised with him the inconsistency between his reported
activities and his activities observed on video surveillance
images. It was
specifically raised with him that he was seen walking a dog and sitting on a
park bench, which he acknowledged, but
again stated he stopped doing so after
agreed there was surveillance footage of him driving, but he reported that the
images did not confirm that he was driving alone,
insisting he has, “Never
been alone in car”. It was put to him that footage of him exiting a
vehicle in a car park appeared
to show him alone, and he responded that it might
have occurred prior to his second fall, after which he asserts his psychiatric
condition deteriorated. He added that he has not been in any cars for the last
one and half years and only goes to the shops with
Medical Assessors drew his attention to the surveillance footage of a man
crossing a road, carrying a small suitcase, then using
public transport. He
denied this footage depicted him.
at the commencement of the assessment, he made an error with his unit number,
then self-corrected, explaining he had difficulty
remembering names and numbers.
It was put to him that it would be very unusual for a person to not know their
address of many years,
and he responded, “I don’t even know
registration number”, which did not explain his error with basic
demographic
data. Similarly, he gave his age initially as 60-years-old, then
said, “No, no, 61-years-old”. It was put to him that
it would be
very unusual for a person to not know their age, and he reiterated,
“61-years-old”. On further exploration
he reiterated that he had
difficulties recalling such things.
Panel noted the timeline of information regarding his symptoms, clinical course
and functioning as reported by Mr Zafirovski at
previous assessments, at this
assessment and compared to the observations on surveillance:
(a) 13 January 2022 – the accident;
(b) 7 June 2022 – Ms Najdenska, recorded an increase in symptom severity
and worsening functioning. Unmotivated to get out
(c) July 2022 - falls (as recorded in the ADL assessment report dated 10 May
2023). Mr Zafirovski told the Medical Assessors that
after the falls, he lost
hope for his recovery, and his psychiatric condition worsened, he stopped
driving and stopped dying his
(d) 16 July 2022 – Ms Najdenska recorded progressive worsening mood due to
lack of improvement. The claimant disclosed that
he had attempted a short walk,
become dizzy and faint, and was subsequently too scared to go out again;
(e) 26 July 2022 - Dr Stevens wrote that the claimant reported he had not been
able to drive since the accident. Dr Stevens reported
on mental state
examination that the claimant was unkempt and poorly groomed;
(f) 3 November 2022 – surveillance video – the claimant stated he
was not the person in the video. Procare also wrote
that the images were not of
the claimant. This video was therefore disregarded;
(g) 4 November 2022 – surveillance video – no sighting of the
(h) 3 January 2023 – surveillance video – claimant seen outside
walking. Dyed hair and clean shaven;
(i) 4 January 2023 – surveillance video - claimant seen outside walking
dog. Dyed hair and clean shaven;
(j) 5 January 2023 – surveillance video - claimant seen outside walking
dog, driving a silver Mercedes Benz and shopping alone
at a supermarket. Dyed
hair and clean shaven;
(k) Dr Keller - commented that the claimant’s gait was normal on
surveillance video.
(l) 30 January 2023 - Dr Stevens recorded that the claimant reported needing his
daughter’s boyfriend to help him dress and
(m) 2 May 2023 - Dr Nagesh wrote that the claimant had made an effort to improve
but that, six months after the accident when he
had not improved, he was
“getting upset with everything because things not getting better”.
Dr Nagesh recorded that he,
“cannot mobilise” and that he was
dependent on his daughter’s boyfriend to shower, that he went for short
locally but was not able to drive since the accident. Dr Nagesh commented
that his self-care was, “reasonable”;
(n) 10 May 2023 - ADL assessment report. His daughter reported that he no longer
shaves and compared the appearance of his beard
to that of Santa Claus. He
reported no interest in musical instruments, he was observed to be ungroomed in
bed, he spent most of
his day in a dark bedroom and he was observed to mobilise
(o) 15 July 2023 - Dr Teoh wrote that the claimant reported he had not been able
to drive at all. Dr Teoh described him as disheveled
and sluggish on mental
state examination;
(p) 5 September 2023 – surveillance video reveals the claimant walking
around a chemist and shops, including a musical instrument
shop, neatly groomed,
with a trimmed beard, hair in a ponytail and a black cap;
(q) 6 September 2023 – surveillance video shows the claimant driving a
silver Mercedes Benz, and
(r) 9 April 2024 - Dr Nagesh provided a supplementary report after viewing the
surveillance videos and concluded that the claimant’s
condition was in
remission but maintained that he had suffered a period of adjustment disorder.
Panel considered Mr Zafirovski’s explanation of the surveillance video
content but did not accept that it was plausible
that the investigator had
captured events on two of the three only times he conceded he had driven since
the accident. Further, his
explanation did not explain his repeated assertion to
doctors that he had not driven at all since the accident.
Zafirovski sought to explain the level of activity depicted in the surveillance
footage on the basis it occurred prior to the worsening
of his mood after the
post-accident falls. The Panel does not consider this a plausible explanation,
where the falls were recorded
to have occurred in July 2022 and the surveillance
was undertaken in January 2023 and
September 2023.
the Panel also notes this explanation does not explain the inconsistency between
the level of activity depicted in the surveillance
footage and that reported to
medical assessors within weeks or months of that activity.
DETERMINATION
the significant inconsistencies between Mr Zafirovski’s account of his
post-accident symptoms and activity and the surveillance
video, which was not
explained by the claimant’s responses, the Panel considered his history,
as provided to both treating
doctors, independent medical examiners and the
Medical Assessors, to be unreliable.
High Court in
Whisprun Pty Ltd v Dixon
held there was no requirement to
give any weight to a medical opinion premised on an acceptance of history and
complaints which were
established.
Furthermore, in
Boateng v Dharamdas
Gleeson JA referring to
“The medical opinions were premised on an acceptance of the
appellant’s account of his history and complaints. Such an
opinion would
only be as acceptable as the history on which it was
regard to the Panel’s concern about the reliability of the
claimant’s evidence, the Panel considered whether there
post-accident diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder. When he was assessed,
Mr Zafirovski did not report sufficient symptoms
to fulfill the DSM 5 criteria
for post-traumatic stress disorder. His account of somatic hallucinations of
children jumping on the
bed and his feet stuck to the bed, were unusual and not
features of post-traumatic stress disorder.
Panel did not accept the plausibility of his account that he had only driven on
three occasions over the past three and half years
since the accident, given
there were two instances of driving proven on video surveillance, and noting the
unreliability of his account
to other doctors, including his treating
psychiatrist, between July 2022 and July 2023 that he had not driven at all
since the accident.
Noting the objective evidence that he has not avoided
driving, which would be a key and required feature of accident-related
post-traumatic
stress disorder, the Panel considered that there is insufficient
evidence that he had post-traumatic stress disorder at any time
Panel accepts that Mr Zafirovski has experienced pain since the accident and
notes that his commercial license was suspended on
medical grounds, confirmed in
the treating GP’s notes. The Panel accepts that these factors represent
significant stressors
to Mr Zafirovski. In this context, he reports an initial
effort to recover, then loss of hope in recovery and despondency. Noting
reported low mood, frustration about his condition, “I don’t want to
live this life”, sleep disturbance and
reported social withdrawal, even
when the surveillance images are considered the Panel accepts this still
represents a reduction
compared to his pre-injury pattern of socialising and
activity. Given those findings and the objective findings at this assessment,
and the previous psychiatric assessments of dysphoric affect, the Panel
considers his symptoms do meet the threshold for the diagnosis
of a psychiatric
disorder given his reported distress and impairment. The Panel considers the
most appropriate diagnosis is of a
chronic adjustment disorder, where his
condition is triggered by stressors.
Panel considered but excluded a diagnosis of major depressive disorder as
proposed by Dr Teoh. The Panel considered the history
provided to Dr Teoh to be
unreliable. Whilst the symptoms reported to the Panel were taken with caution,
they did not include physiological
symptoms of depression such as weight loss or
anhedonia. Further, given the inconsistencies, the Panel put greater weight on
findings on mental state examination by the Medical Assessors, where there
was no evidence of reduced rate or volume of speech, instead
increased speech such that he required interruption, and noting there was no
objective evidence of impaired concentration,
and where his reported
difficulties with immediately recalling his age and address were not consistent
with any mood or anxiety condition.
Panel cannot explain his disheveled appearance at assessment but considering the
evidence of at least average grooming in the
most recent surveillance in
September 2023, 20 months after the accident, the Panel excluded a causal
association between the accident
and his current self-care.
accordance with cls 6.5 to 6.7 of the Guidelines the question is whether the
accident could have caused or contributed to the claimant’s
psychological
injury and whether, in fact, it did so.
the accident the claimant had not experienced a significant mental health
problem or impairment due to a psychological condition.
He reports that he
developed symptoms in the weeks following the accident and these have persisted.
There have been no subsequent
accidents or development of any relevant
condition. The Panel is satisfied the accident could and did cause the diagnosed
psychological
Panel finds the claimant has sustained a chronic adjustment disorder caused by
the accident.
Permanent impairment
Panel determined that the claimant’s condition had stabilised and that his
current level of impairment was permanent in
that it was unlikely to change
substantially or by more than 3% over the next year.
Psychiatric
Impairment Rating Scale
PIRS Category
Reason for Decision
Self-Care and personal hygiene
The Panel concluded that the data Mr Zafirovski has provided about his
functioning across all domains, at this and other assessments,
is unreliable.
Therefore, it is difficult to be certain of his actual functioning.
Guidelines 1.214 and 1.215 state that the PIRS must not be used to measure
impairment due to a physical injury or pain.
Isolating only impairment due to the accident-related psychiatric
condition, noting his engagement in some exercise, his ability to
do groceries
and his neatly groomed self-care on video surveillance, the Panel finds there is
at most a mild impairment.
For these reasons the Panel does not find a causal link between the
accident and his dishevelled appearance on the day of their assessment.
Social and recreational activities
The Panel concluded that the data Mr Zafirovski has provided about his
functioning across all domains, at this and other assessments,
is unreliable.
Therefore, it is difficult to be certain of his actual functioning.
Guidelines 1.214 and 1.215 state that the PIRS must not be used to measure
impairment due to a physical injury or pain.
The Panel noted the video surveillance images show the claimant going out
for walks in the neighbourhood, alone and with a pet dog
and apparently
maintaining some interest in musical instruments.
However, he states that he no longer socialises with friends or goes on
holidays. He reported sitting in the dark with his blinds
closed, having
disconnected himself from everyone.
Isolating the accident-related psychiatric condition, there is at most a
moderate impairment.
The Panel do not accept the validity of Mr Zafirovski’s account that
he has only driven three times since the accident.
The Panel note there is clear evidence from the surveillance video that he
can drive alone, even if he did so with ongoing symptoms.
The Panel notes there are non-psychiatric issues impacting his ability to
drive longer distances, including the impact of opioid analgesics.
Isolating only the effect of the accident-related psychiatric condition,
there is no impairment.
Social functioning
He continues to live with his daughter and her boyfriend, without being
asked to leave his daughter’s home. He has regular contact
He reports that he has been single since separating from his previous
partner during COVID.
The Panel considered that there is at most a mild impairment, accepting his
account of tension in his relationship with his adult
children and loss of
friendships.
Concentration, persistence and pace
He was noted to concentrate well during the assessment of duration more
than 1.5 hours. The Panel found that his reported difficulty
immediately
recalling his age and unit number were not features of any psychiatric
The Panel considered that there was at most a mild impairment
Employability
There are a number of non-psychiatric barriers to him resuming work,
including that his heavy vehicle licence has been suspended,
apparently on the
basis of non-psychiatric factors.
At its highest, when the accident-related psychiatric condition is isolated
it was the Panel’s clinical judgment that he had
the psychiatric capacity
to work part-time hours in a different and less demanding role.
Median Class
Aggregate Score Impairment
Apportionment – pre-existing/subsequent impairment
is no pre-existing or subsequent impairment.
Panel considered that there was no evidence of improvement with
Panel revokes the certificate of Medical Assessor Shen dated 24 April 2024 and
issues a new certificate determining that the following
injuries caused by the
motor accident given rise to a whole person impairment of 7%:
adjustment disorder.
OutcomeDocumentSignee
OutcomeDocumentSignature
Section 7.20 of the MAI
Insurer’s documents p
Section 7.26(1)(b) of the
Section 7.26 of the
MAI Act; Claimant’s bundle p
Rule 128 of the PIC
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents pp
316 and 542.
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents pp
620 and 623.
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents pp
698 and 699.
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Claimant’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Claimant’s documents p
Whisprun Pty Ltd v Dixon
[2003] HCA 48
per Gleeson CJ, McHugh and Gummow JJ.;
[2003] HCA 48
(2003) 200 ALR
(2003) 77 ALJR 1598.
Boateng v Dharamdas
[2016] NSWCA 183
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (641 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter