URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2019/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Roberts [2019] NSWMHRT 2; (20 May 2019)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO ROBERTS AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF
THE TRIBUNAL
ON 21 MAY 2019
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2019] NSWMHRT 2
s 162 Publication or Broadcast
Judge Richard Cogswell SC
Dr Gregory Steele
Psychiatrist
Dr Sally McSwiggan
Other Member
DATE OF HEARING:
Mental Health Review Tribunal
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. The applicant is the father of the late victim. The victim was tragically
stabbed to death. Mr Roberts was arrested and charged
with murder. Ultimately a
limiting term was imposed by the Supreme Court.
2. The applicant and his wife have written a book about the victim’s
death and the legal processes which followed. They found
those processes
demanding and extremely frustrating. Naturally the book will make extensive
reference to Mr Roberts and the various
proceedings he has been engaged in.
Those proceedings have taken place in two jurisdictions: the Supreme Court and
the Mental Health
Review Tribunal. There is no restriction on the applicant and
his wife making reference to Mr Roberts’ Supreme Court proceedings.
writing about Mr Roberts and his proceedings in the Mental Health Review
Tribunal is another matter.
Section 162
Mental Health Act 2007
prohibits that. The section relevantly provides:
“(1) A person must not, except with the consent of the Tribunal,
publish or broadcast the name of any person:
(a) to whom a matter before the Tribunal relates,
whether before or after the hearing is completed.
(3) For the purposes of this section, a reference to the name of a person
includes a reference to any information, picture or material
that identifies the
person or is likely to lead the identification of the person.”
3. Mr Roberts is a person “to whom a matter before the Tribunal
relates”. Hence although the applicants need no one’s
permission to
publish information in their proposed book about the Supreme Court proceedings
involving Mr Roberts, they need the
Tribunal’s consent for any reference
to his involvement in proceedings before the Tribunal.
4. They are seeking the Tribunal’s consent.
REPRESENTATION,
EVIDENCE AND SUBMISSIONS
5. At the hearing, the applicant was represented by Mr Dauid Sibtain of
and Mr Roberts was
represented by Mr Paul Coady of counsel. They both put on evidence in advance of
the hearing as well as leading
evidence at the hearing. Both made very helpful
written and oral submissions. It is convenient to refer to the evidence and
submissions
in annexures [not included in this official report]. Hence annexure
A is a summary of the evidentiary material and annexure B is
a summary of the
parties’ submissions.
AN IMPORTANT DISTINCTION
6. As Mr Sibtain points out, one has to distinguish between publicity
concerning, on the one hand, the death of the late the victim
consequential court proceedings and, on the other, the proceedings in the
Tribunal once Mr Roberts became a forensic patient.
The Tribunal has no power to
prohibit the former. My impression is that the overwhelming impact of any
publicity from the book’s
publication will stem from material concerning
the death of the victim and the court proceedings. This is reflected in the book
Most of its content relates to the tragic death of the victim and its
aftermath in the courts. There are references to the Tribunal
as an institution,
its procedures and some communications. Many of these references involve no more
than what is already available
in the public domain and do not touch on Mr
Roberts personally.
7. There is an obvious concern amongst those supporting Mr Roberts in his
ongoing rehabilitation that his name will be thrust again
into the public view
and linked (following the Court’s finding that he was responsible) with
the tragedy of the victim’s
death. As Mr C [Mr Robert’s clinical
case manager] said, the “publication is unlikely to be positive for [Mr
and is more likely to create concerns related to his care and
treatment”. This would happen in any event if the book was limited
events and processes through the courts and up to Mr Roberts becoming a forensic
patient. This is an example of where the
Tribunal must distinguish between such
an impact resulting from publicity about the court proceedings as distinct from
acknowledged is the same difficulty facing the Tribunal: the nature
and severity
of the crime in the public’s view can impact on the availability of
services; but Mr C could not point to any
effect beyond a
service provider’s knowledge of past criminal behaviour (which is already
in the public domain).
8. This may be regrettable for Mr Roberts and it may frustrate his progress,
but the Tribunal has no power to prevent such exposure.
It is a discourse about
a very public and tragic event with a high public interest. The impact on Mr
Roberts follows from those events
and the legal court processes. The public has
a legitimate ongoing interest. Frustration of Mr Roberts’ progress or
rehabilitation
resulting from actions by cautious service providers are, the
evidence suggests, more likely a response to what is already in the
domain. Such public interest in and responses to an ‘index event’
will follow many forensic patients. By definition,
such events must involve
behaviour that attracted a serious criminal charge by the police and court
proceedings to determine that
9. As Mr Sibtain argues, the “veil of privacy” extends to
Tribunal proceedings and not to the court proceedings.
10. Mr Sibtain referred to the public interest in “open justice”
and relied on the proposition that “[Mr Roberts’]
right to privacy
ought yield to open justice”. This submission along with references to the
Court Suppression and Non-Publication Orders Act 2010
leads to another
question to which it is convenient to now turn.
DOES THE TRIBUNAL
ADMINISTER JUSTICE?
11. Whether or not the
Court Suppression and Non-Publication Orders Act
applies to these proceedings raises the question of whether the
Tribunal is engaged in “the administration of justice”.
The MHRT has
not been prescribed as a court by any regulations under that Act: see the
definition of “court” in
of the Act. When one has regard
of that Act, a reason for not prescribing the MHRT as a
“court” appears.
of the Act is as follows:
“6 Safeguarding public interest in open justice
In deciding whether to make a suppression order or non-publication order,
a court must take into account that a primary objective
of the administration of
justice is to safeguard the public interest in open justice”.
12. It seems to me that proceedings such as regular reviews of patients under
mental health legislation do not amount to “the
administration of
justice”. They are proceedings under public health legislation. The
Tribunal is not dispensing “justice”.
By this I mean that the
Tribunal is not handing down verdicts or sentences or determining rights between
individuals (personal or
corporate) or individuals and the State. But the
State’s public health legislation - which includes the
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act -
grants wide coercive powers that affect the
lives of citizens. To say that the Tribunal does not dispense
“justice”, in
the sense described above, is still consistent with
the Tribunal having to act according to the rules of natural justice. Any public
administrator or institution making decisions which may impact unfavourably upon
the life of an individual must act in accordance
with natural justice. Such
rules govern the procedure. But the subject matter of Tribunal proceedings is
public health, rather than
the adjustment of rights and liabilities between the
State and its citizens or between citizens.
Mental Health Act
makes its own provision for openness. The
Tribunal must act informally, does not have to apply the rules of evidence and
“proceedings
... must be open to the public”
(section 151(1)
(3)). Reasons for the requirement of openness must include the protection of the
individual, the reassurance of the public
and the principled exercise of powers
given to doctors and the Tribunal. The subject matter concerns administration of
coercive health
powers. The Act provides that the exercise of such powers should
be undertaken or reviewed in public. On the other hand, balance
is provided by a
requirement that personal information identifying the patient cannot be
disclosed, published or broadcast.
14. The objects of both pieces of public health legislation
Mental Health Act
and section 40 of the
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act
) focus on the patient, the nature of his/her illness, care
and treatment and the safety of the public. In that sense, the focus is
the administration of justice as such.
15. It is therefore hardly surprising that details about a patient are kept
confidential. Patients are public patients: forensic patients,
involuntary
patients or patients on a Community Treatment Order. They receive compulsory
mental health care. They have no choice
before the Tribunal and the presentation to the Tribunal of reports about their
history, treatment
and progress. In addition, despite public policy and
developments in community attitudes, there remains some stigma attached to
illness, so publicity could be prejudicial to a patient.
16. There is therefore a distinction between, on the one hand, the
administration of justice in a court and, on the other hand, review
proceedings
in the MHRT. There is a real public interest in how a charge of murder has been
dealt with in court and the outcome is
important. But once the person charged
with that murder is found “not to be responsible according to law, for his
or her action”
(section 38 of the
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions)
), or that “on the limited evidence available” the accused
person “committed the offence charged” (section
22(1)(c)) which is a
“qualified finding of guilt” (section 22(3)(a)), then the
circumstances change. The person is no
longer an accused person, but a public
patient. It is quite reasonable that the person would not want publicity to do
diagnoses, treatment, progress, medication and its effects. It is
that interest that the law (section 162 and
section 189
Mental Health
) protects, given that the person has to undergo a compulsory review by
an agency of the State which has coercive powers to direct
detention and
compulsory treatment. Oversight of the exercise of those coercive powers is
provided for by public access to the proceedings.
They “are to be open to
the public.”
17. It follows from the focus on the patient in the objects of the
legislation and the coercive treatment that can be imposed, that
the attitude of
the patient would be a paramount consideration in determining whether the
Tribunal should consent to an application
to publicise or broadcast details. (In
this regard, the Tribunal accepts Mr Coady submissions.) If the patient objects,
simply saying that they want the protection afforded to them by the
legislation to be maintained and there should not be an exception
in their case.
18. In this case Mr Roberts objects to his progress in the Tribunal being
publicised.
19. The decided cases where the patient himself or herself consents to
publicity (
A v Mental Health Review Tribunal
[2012] NSWSC 293
and the published MHRT reports) are in a different
category. Consent by a patient does not lead to an automatic consent by the
Factors then relevant to the Tribunal would include whether the
patient has the appropriate capacity to consent and also whether
consent by the
Tribunal would cause unacceptable damage to the patient’s care, treatment
and rehabilitation.
20. I am not saying that a patient’s consent is a necessary
prerequisite to the Tribunal granting consent under
section 162.
The Tribunal
cannot add such a requirement as a gloss to the statute. But the purposes of the
legislation and how the legislation
affects a patient must be taken into
account. It could be that other circumstances outweigh such considerations. It
is not fruitful
to speculate on what might amount to such
circumstances.
THE RATIONALE OF THE
SECTION 162
PROHIBITION
21. The prohibition itself is clear: a person “must not ... publish or
broadcast the name of any person” the subject of
a Tribunal hearing or who
is a witness or who is mentioned. But there is an exception: persons are
prohibited “except with
the consent of the Tribunal”. Being an
exception, it is dependent on the main prohibition and not an independent
enacting clause.
It should “not be interpreted as if it were a substantive
provision independent of the provisions to which it is a proviso”
Minister of State for the Army v Dalziel
[1944] HCA 4
(1944) 68 CLR 261
at 274, acknowledging that his Honour was speaking of a proviso and not an
exception).
22. What then informs the prohibition? The answer to that question must
assist the Tribunal in deciding whether or not to make an
23. Many years ago, persons now regarded as forensic patients were locked up
at the “Governor’s pleasure”. They
were taken out of the
community (thereby protecting the community) and given treatment with limited
scrutiny. Similarly, persons
who had serious mental illnesses or intellectual
disabilities – but who had not done anything to attract the attention of
police or the courts and were not forensic patients – were often
locked up out of sight or scrutiny. They could be exposed
to compulsory
treatment and serious abuses of their civil rights by the exercise of
unregulated power over them.
24. Then in moves informed by a greater tolerance, recognition and acceptance
of mental illness as just that (an illness affecting
many community members),
Legislatures developed a more humane approach which focused on a patient’s
rehabilitation and reintegration
into the community. The patients were seen as
very vulnerable members of the community who were not responsible for their
who were a risk to themselves or others or who did not understand the
legal processes to which they were exposed as a result of their
actions. Given
improvements in treatment, rehabilitation and wellness became achievable goals.
Protection of the community from any
risks posed by its mentally unwell or
intellectually disabled members could be achieved by their effective treatment
(including medication)
and reintegration into the community (with supervision).
The community would learn to accept people living with mental illness or
intellectual disability, just as it accepted other illnesses and disabilities
suffered by its fellow members.
25. The treatment and reintegration into the community comprise a far more
complex and sensitive process than simply locking up patients.
It is a process
which focuses on the individual patient and his/her environment. Like any
medical or behavioural treatment, there
will be progress and setbacks. This
treatment process occurs in private and within a restrictive environment. It
involves trust and
non-judgemental interventions. This is not a process that is
likely to be successfully conducted in the public domain. Hence broadcasting
publicising Tribunal hearings where progress and setbacks, diagnoses and
treatment are discussed would be unlikely to assist in
a patient’s
progression and may well be detrimental.
26. There is another dimension to be considered. The Tribunal itself needs to
be able to effectively exercise its jurisdiction. A
Tribunal panel reviewing a
forensic patient needs to gather and test information provided by the patient,
the treating team and other
sources. This information needs to be expressed in
open and frank detail for assessment and judgements to be examined and formed.
Its jurisdiction includes making recommendations and orders about a
patient’s care, treatment and control. It also has power
patient’s release or leave from a mental health facility. Sometimes
applications for such orders are opposed. The
Tribunal needs to be confident
that the information it is receiving and testing is not compromised by a lack of
frankness brought
on by a fear of disclosure. This is a key factor in the
Tribunal providing effective oversight of the State’s forensic patients
and therefore exercising its jurisdiction.
27. So, in deciding whether to make an exception to the prohibition in any
given case, the Tribunal will make its decision in the
context of those purposes
for the primary prohibition. Those purposes underlie the public policy that
informs the prohibition; so
where the Tribunal is asked to make an exception, it
must take into account that policy and the justification for the policy being
compromised in the particular case.
RESOLUTION IN THIS CASE
28. Having made those remarks, it is appropriate to observe that the
applicant’s application relates to a number of references
Roberts’ Tribunal proceedings in the chapters I have referred to at [2] in
annexure A. None of those references canvases
any detail about treatment or
behavioural therapy. Parts of it set out correspondence between the applicant
and the Tribunal.
29. Bearing in mind the policy considerations informing the prohibition and
therefore the exception as well, it seems to me that there
would be no reason to
deny publication of certain material including:
(a) the fact that Mr Roberts is a forensic patient over which the Tribunal is
exercising its jurisdiction. Those circumstances follow
from the public verdict
and the legislation;
(b) correspondence from officers of the Tribunal which set out the Tribunal
procedures and the legal context; (My preference would
be to delete the names of
those officers, except for the Registrar’s. If the applicant wants to
press for their inclusion then
a further submission should be made specifically
on that point: see
Commissioner of Police v District Court of
(1993) 31 NSWLR 606 at 625, 638-639.)
(c) criticisms of the Tribunal by the applicant. The fact that some
criticisms may be arguably ill-informed or misdirected is no reason
to prohibit
them. The remedy for any such criticisms is not their suppression by the
Tribunal, but responses by the Tribunal or the
Minister for Mental Health to any
public comment or any concern arising from the criticisms. The prohibition is
there to protect
the patient and the patient’s progress, not the
Tribunal’s reputation or perceived competence.
30. It also seems to me that the publicity already in the public domain about
Mr Roberts through his trials must be an important context
in this decision. The
public already know a lot about Mr Roberts and about what he has done. There is
a legitimate public interest
in the processes of the Tribunal being subjected to
public scrutiny by a participant (the applicant). What the Tribunal should not
permit by way of an exception is any publicity which could adversely impact on
the important process of Mr Roberts’ treatment
and rehabilitation. It is
not easy to distinguish between, on the one hand, passages in the
applicant’s proposed publication
that would be innocuous so far as Mr
Roberts’ treatment and rehabilitation are concerned and, on the other,
passages that may
have, even potentially, an adverse impact.
31. With those considerations in mind, Annexure C comprises extracts of the
book. The passages marked with pink highlighter are those
which, on balance, I
regard as impacting (or having the potential to do so) on the treatment or
rehabilitation of Mr Roberts.
32. I propose to allow a limited period for Mr Roberts’ and the
applicant’s legal representatives to make any further
submissions on the
specific proposal that was not before them at the hearing.
Signed at Sydney, 20 May 2019
His Honour Judge Richard Cogswell
The Tribunal notes with appreciation to
both that Mr Sibtain of counsel appeared pro bono for the applicants facilitated
by the Arts
Law Centre of Australia.
Mental Health Review Tribunal
Deputy President Anina Johnson sets out the following examples in Endnote 20 to
her article “The
Value of Procedural Fairness in Mental Health Review
Tribunal Hearings” in AIAL Forum No. 86: “New South Wales, Royal
Commission on Callan Park Mental Hospital,
Report of the Hon Mr Justice
McClemens Royal Commissioner Appointed to Inquire into Certain Matters Affecting
Callan Park Mental Hospital
(1961). See also Australian Broadcasting
Commission, Radio National, ‘Behind the Ha-ha Walls’
6 October 2015 (Stan Alchin)
http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/earshot/behind-the-ha-ha-walls-mental-as/6807712
Australian Broadcasting Commission, Radio National, ‘Closing
Gladesville’
5 October 2014 (Fred Kong and Janet Meagher)
http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/hindsight
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (315 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter