URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/45.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ferella v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue (RD) [2013] NSWADTAP 45 (3 October 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Ferella v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue (RD)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 45
Hearing Date(s):
20 August 2013
Decision Date:
03 October 2013
Appeal Panel - Internal
RL Seiden, Deputy President
A Verick, Judicial Member
J Schwager,
Non-Judicial Member
Appeal dismissed
Catchwords:
Land tax - whether dominant use of land for primary production - standing
of discharged bankrupt to whom assessments had been issued
- different uses of
land - whether finding activities undertaken as a hobby open - onus of
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Land Tax Management Act 1956
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Taxation Administration Act
Trustee Act 1925
Cases Cited:
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v Print National Pty Ltd
[2013] NSWCA
Collector of Customs (NSW) v Brian Lawlor Automotive Pty Ltd
[1979] FCA 21
Cornish Investments Pty Limited v Chief Commissioner of State
[2013] NSWADTAP 25
Ferguson v FCT
[1979] FCA 29
(1979) 9 ATR 873
Ltd as Trustee of The Starr Family Trust v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2011] NSWADT 251
Leda Manorstead Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State
[2010] NSWSC 867
(2010) 79 NSWLR 724
Leda Manorstead Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of
State Revenue
[2010] NSWSC 867
(2011) 85 ATR 775
Lombard Farms Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner
of State Revenue
[2013] NSWADTAP 42
McCallum v Commissioner of Taxation
[1997] FCA 533
(1997) 75 FCR 458
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
Re Sherriff
[1971] 2 NSWLR 438
Thomason v Chief Executive,
Department of Lands
(1994-95) 15 QLCR 286
Principal judgment
Gustavo and Nida Ferella (Appellants)
Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue (Respondent)
Representation
JT Svehla (Appellants)
E Bishop (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Crown Solicitor's Office (Respondent)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
Revenue Division
- Date of Decision:
27 February 2013
- Citation:
Ferella v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue 2013 [NSWADT] 46
- Court File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
is an appeal from a decision of the Tribunal in
Ferella v Chief Commissioner
of State Revenue
[2013] NSWADT 46
(the Decision). The underlying proceedings
concern the Appellants' entitlement to exemption from land tax during land tax
to 2011 (the Relevant Period). The Appellants contend that land
situated at 6 Alan Street, Box Hill (the Land) was land used for
production, as that expression appears in
Land Tax Management
(NSW) (LTMA).
was common ground that the Land is non-urban rural land. Therefore, the only
question for the Tribunal, at first instance, was
whether the dominant use of
the Land was for the "maintenance of animals ... for the purpose of selling them
or their natural increase
...". The Tribunal held at [40] of the Decision:
Regarded on an objective basis it is clearly not possible to
conclude that the Property was during the relevant years utilised for
purpose of conducting a thoroughbred horse breeding activity. Having regard to
all of the evidence before me a conclusion that
the Applicant has not discharged
the onus is mandatory and in the circumstances the objection decision under
review must be affirmed.
Appellants' appeal on questions of law. The notice of appeal sought leave to
extend the appeal to the merits. However, the leave
application was not pressed.
we can consider the substantive issues in the appeal it is necessary to digress
briefly to deal with the question of the standing
of Gustavo Ferella (Gustavo),
one of the Appellants. The assessments, the subject of the review, concern land
tax years 2007 to 2011
(the Assessments). During that entire period Gustavo and
Nida Ferella (Nida) were the registered proprietors of the Land. A Sequestration
Order was made against the estate of Gustavo on 14 October 2005 and pursuant to
Bankruptcy Act 1966
(Cth) (Bankruptcy Act) the joint
tenancy between Gustavo and Nida was severed. Gustavo's interest in the Land
vested in the Official
Trustee in Bankruptcy (Official Trustee). Subsequently,
the bankruptcy was discharged although by operation of law, the property
bankrupt estate remains vested in the Official Trustee for six years after the
date of discharge of bankruptcy:
s 129AA(3)(a)
Bankruptcy Act
debt the subject of the Assessments, relates to years after the date of the act
of bankruptcy and is not part of the bankrupt
issues arise:
(a) Was Gustavo
an "owner" of the Land at the time the Assessments were issued so that he was
assessable to land tax, even though
his property vested in the Official
Gustavo have standing to seek review of the Assessments?
to the first issue, it was not contended that the mere fact that the assets of
Gustavo had vested in the Official Trustee deprived
the Commissioner of the
entitlement to issue the Assessments to Gustavo. The Respondent was entitled to
issue assessments to the
"owner" of land. Under the LTMA "owner" has an expanded
definition (s 3) and includes:
in relation to land, every person who jointly or severally, whether
at law or in equity.... is entitled to land for an estate of freehold
possession....
registered proprietor of the Land, Gustavo was assessable. Even if this was not
the case, jurisdiction of the Tribunal would be
enlivened because purported
assessments had issued, an objection had been lodged and determined and Gustavo
was "dissatisfied" with
the objections:
Taxation Administration
(NSW) (the TAA). Even if the Assessments were issued beyond power,
this would not have deprived the Tribunal of jurisdiction.
Section 6(3)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(NSW) (ADT Act) defines a
decision which can be the subject of review in the Tribunal to include one made
without power: see as well
Collector of Customs (NSW) v Brian Lawlor
Automotive Pty Ltd
[1979] FCA 21
(1979) 41 FLR 338
at 343-344.
to the question of standing, in
McCallum v Commissioner of Taxation
[1997] FCA 533
(1997) 75 FCR 458
a majority of the Full Court of the Federal Court held that a
bankrupt may have no standing to bring proceedings, under
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth) (Cth TAA) for review of an
objection against an assessment under the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth), for the reason that he will be unable to show that he is "dissatisfied
with the Commissioner's objection decision": per Whitlam
J at 470C; see too
Lehane J at 475D. This is for the reason that the bankrupt is divested of
liability for his provable debts. The
present case is distinguishable from
because, if the assessments are upheld, Gustavo will be liable
for the debt. The debt does not form part of the bankrupt estate.
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue v Print National Pty Ltd
the Court of Appeal held that the expression dissatisfied in the TAA is
to be given its ordinary meaning of "displeased": at [34]
per Gzell J (Bathurst
CJ and Beazley P agreeing). This may be broader than the meaning ascribed to the
expression "dissatisfied"
as used in the Cth TAA in
case it can be said that Gustavo is displeased with the decision (the issuing of
the Assessments) because he contends that
the Land is exempt from land tax.
Accordingly,
there is jurisdiction to review the Assessments and Gustavo has standing to
prosecute the appeal.
Official Trustee was apparently notified of these proceedings, but did not
appear. In any event, we do not see that the Official
Trustee has any interest
in the proceedings.
Land is approximately 1.324 hectares. A residence and curtilage is on
approximately 700 square metres (approximately 5% of the
Land) and is fenced off
from the remainder of the Land, with its own entrance. The residence was
tenanted during the Relevant Period
for $185 per week. The remainder of the Land
is available for use for the primary production activity, which is described
The horse breeding activity
primary production activity is described as thoroughbred horse breeding and is
conducted by Mr Angelo Ferella (Angelo) on behalf
of the Trustee (the Trustee)
of the Agusta Trust (formerly known as the Modena Family Trust). The Land that
is not taken up by the
cottage and curtilage is available for that activity and
leased to the Trustee for $1 (there was an issue as to whether the whole
was leased to the Trustee, we return to this below). The Land available for the
primary production activity represents approximately
95% of the Land.
the commencement of the Relevant Period there were two horses on the Land, but
they were ill and sold to a knackery for $360 during
the 2008 income tax year.
Shortly thereafter there was a public announcement about equine flu. It was not
until over a year later
that another horse was brought onto the Land. This was a
yearling. It was not possible to attempt to breed that horse until it had
reached three years. Thereafter, there were problems with impregnation. At the
end of the Relevant Period there was only one horse
on the Land.
Grounds 1 and 2
1 and 2 of the Notice of Appeal are as follows:
1.Judicial Member Block erred in finding in the Reasons at [25]
that it is an inescapable conclusion that the horses on the Property
constituted
nothing more than a hobby, as:
(a)this finding was not one available to be made as the use of the vast
majority of the land on the Property for thoroughbred horse
breeding activity
was by the trustee for the time being of the Modena Family Trust, which trust
changed its name to the Agusta Trust
on 1 June 2007, and at all material times
was a discretionary trust ("
(b)in the land tax years in issue, namely, 2007 to 2011 ("
2007 to 2011
Land Tax Years
"), the trustee of the Trust was a company, namely:
(i) from the commencement of the 2007 land tax year to part way through the
2011 land tax year (15 July 2011), the trustee was Agusta
Industries Pty Ltd
Agusta Industries
(ii) for the balance of the 2011 land tax year (from 15 July 2011), the
trustee was Agusta Pty Ltd ("
(c) the corporate trustee for the time being of the Trust did not have legal
power to carry on a hobby and in so finding, Judicial
Member Block erred in
2.Further and in the alternative, Judicial Member Block erred in impliedly
finding in the Reasons at [25] that because the vast majority
of the land
comprising the Property, accepted to be rural land, in the 2007 to 2011 Land Tax
Years had stables, tack room and other
structures for use by horses and in most
of these land tax years had one or two thoroughbred horses with steps taken to
bear progeny,
in the nature of a hobby or otherwise, that use precluded the
Property from being "
land used for primary production
" within the meaning
sections 10AA(1)
and (3) of the
Land Tax Management Act 1956
Breach of trust
[25] of the Decision the Tribunal said:
On the evidence before me it is not possible to conclude that the
Property during the relevant years was used for the dominant purpose
thoroughbred horse breeding. On the contrary and as contended by Ms Bishop, a
conclusion that horses constituted nothing more
than a hobby is inescapable. It
is relevant to note that no business or other plans or relevant material in
respect of such a business
was tendered at the hearing. (During closing
submissions Ms Bishop drew attention to the fact that the section 58 documents
a number of instances of information sought of the Applicant by the
Respondent but not furnished.)
the heart of grounds 1 and 2 is the finding made by the Judicial Member at [25]
that the horse breeding activity was a mere hobby.
The Appellants contend that
not only was this finding not open, it infected the entirety of the Tribunal's
reasoning process.
Appellants contend that, properly construed, the Trust Deed of the Agusta Trust
(the Trust Deed) did not allow the Trustee to
engage in a hobby: to do so would
constitute a breach of trust. The Trust was not a charitable (or purpose) trust
and therefore the
Trustee had duties to the beneficiaries. It is apparent, so it
was contended, that the Judicial Member did not have regard to this
the finding that the Trustee had engaged in a hobby. It was contended that the
Tribunal Member ought to have started from
the premise that the Trustee was not
authorised to engage in a hobby. Having started with that premise, it would have
been necessary
for the Tribunal to make some very serious findings of fact about
the conduct of the Trustee in order to arrive at a conclusion that
the Trustee
was engaged in a hobby, which was tantamount to a breach of trust. Put another
way, it was submitted that if the Tribunal
had correctly appreciated that the
conduct of a hobby was a breach of trust, the Tribunal would not have made the
finding it did
and in any event, the finding was not open without the antecedent
finding (which was not made) that there had been a breach of trust.
were taken to the Transcript, to make good the proposition that the Judicial
Member, in deciding that the Trustee was conducting
a hobby, did not have regard
to the fact that it would be a breach of trust to do so and that therefore the
necessary antecedent
finding was not made. At page 63 at line 39 the Judicial
Member said:
A trust can do anything at all if the trustee has power can't it?
at line 42 the Judicial Member said:
Nothing as a matter of law prevents a trust from conducting a
hobby. It might be a bit unusual but it does happen. If you look at
deed, you will see it's cast in general form. It can do virtually anything it
likes. It can do what an actual person can
Respondent, on the other hand, submitted that the Trust Deed allowed the Trustee
to engage in a hobby.
we consider whether it would be impermissible for the Trustee to conduct a
hobby, it is necessary to determine what the Judicial
Member meant by this. The
expression "hobby" is not one of fixed meaning. It is often used in
contradistinction to a business. In
Ferguson v FCT
[1979] FCA 29
(1979) 9 ATR 873
877, Bowen CJ and Franki J stated:
The fact that, concurrently with the activities in question, the
taxpayer carries on the practice of a profession or another business,
preclude a finding that his additional activities constitute the carrying on of
a business. The volume of his operations
and the amount of capital employed by
him may be significant. However, if what he is doing is more properly described
as the pursuit
of a hobby or recreation or an addiction to a sport, he will not
be held to be carrying on a business, even though his operations
substantial.
the same case, Fisher J variously noted at 882-883:
I would be of opinion that the size of the operation could be of
significance for the purpose of testing whether a taxpayer is conducting
rather than a business, but that size is certainly not the determining
factor.....
The courts have, from time to time, grappled with the question whether the
taxpayer is engaged in carrying on a business, and a number
of tests have been
suggested..... [such as whether] a certain activity of the taxpayer..... did not
have "a significant commercial
purpose of character" and thus was not a business
activity...... it is certainly relevant to ascertain if the operations of the
have a commercial purpose ie pursuit of profit or gain rather than
pleasure or recreation..... if the transactions which go to make
up the activity
or operations of the taxpayer have an element of regularity or repetitiveness,
this factor assists in concluding
that the taxpayer is carrying on a business
rather than indulging in a recreational or hobby activity.
the context of the question before the Tribunal, whether the dominant use of the
Land was for the purpose of selling thoroughbred
horses or their natural
increase, it is discernible that the Tribunal was using the expression "hobby"
to convey something about
the size and scale of the horse breeding operation. We
did not apprehend the Appellants to contend that there was any error in
considering
the size or intensity of the primary production use.
is also discernible that the Judicial Member was conveying something about the
motivation for the outlay of funds with respect
to the primary production
activities. The Judicial Member was conveying that the Trustee was concerned, at
least in part, with the
personal satisfaction of one of the beneficiaries: i.e.
the horse breeding activities had a private or recreational motivation. It
this connotation that the Appellants contend demonstrates the error alleged.
Such a connotation does not however mandate a conclusion
that there has been a
breach of trust. First, a finding that the activity is a hobby is not tantamount
to a finding that the pursuit
would have been undertaken irrespective of
financial outcome. Secondly, whether the activity is permitted depends on an
of the Trust Deed and relevant legislation.
Trust Deed provides that the Trust Fund is held for the benefit of general
beneficiaries and remainder beneficiaries identified
in the schedule. The
general beneficiaries are natural persons related to Nida and related
corporations, partnerships or trusts,
including the trustee of a superannuation
fund. There are no remainder beneficiaries nominated. Distribution of income is
absolute discretion of the Trustee, as is the application of the Trust
Fund on vesting day.
6 of the Trust Deed deals with the powers of the Trustee and the preliminary
words to clause 6 states as follows:
The Trustee will have the legal capacity, powers and privileges of
a natural person.
Appellants highlighted that the mere fact that the Trustee had all the powers of
a natural person, did not mean that it could
carry on a hobby: one had to
consider that the Trustee always had fiduciary duties to the general
beneficiaries. So much may be accepted.
However, the Appellants also submitted
that this led to the conclusion that the Trustee was precluded from undertaking
a hobby, especially
since this was not a purpose trust. We were not directed to
any authorities that specifically supported this view.
Trustee has extremely wide powers. Clause 6(a) of the Trust Deed gives power to
the Trustee to vary all investments and assets
of the Trust Fund and to
reinvest. Clause 6(b) of the Trust Deed provides that the Trustee may, inter
alia, either alone or jointly,
use or deal with any real property. Clause 6(f)
provides that the Trustee may carry on, acquire, establish, and/or dispose of
business. By clause 6(h) the Trustee may permit any beneficiary to reside in
a dwelling house, the subject of the settlement, on
such conditions as to rent
and other expenses as the Trustee decides. By clause 6(l) the Trustee may permit
any beneficiary to have
use of any chattels on such terms as the Trustee decides
and by clause 6(j) the Trustee may lend the whole or any part of the Trust
to any beneficiary interest free. By clause 6(k) and regardless of commercial
benefit, the Trustee may guarantee, indemnify
or become surety for payment of
debts of a beneficiary. By clause 6(m) the Trustee may exercise any power
regardless of whether personally
interested in the result. By clause 6(n) the
Trustee may take any action it thinks fit for the "adequate protection" of the
powers indicate that the Trustee, in the specified circumstances, is empowered
to act in a way contrary to maximising commercial
return. The horse breeding
enterprise does not fall into one of the specified categories. Nevertheless, the
power to invest and vary
investments in clause 6(a) is wide enough to encompass
investing in a thoroughbred horse breeding enterprise.
governing law of the Trust is New South Wales ([item 6] of the Schedule)
accordingly, the
Trustee Act 1925
Trustee Act
is relevant to the powers of a Trustee. It authorises the
Trustee to invest and vary any investment. The term "investments" is not
defined. In
Re Sherriff
[1971] 2 NSWLR 438
at 442 it was said by Helsham
J that ordinarily "investment of trust funds" will mean "the laying out of trust
moneys in acquisition
of property with the object or purpose of obtaining some
return by way of income or pecuniary return for the benefit of those ultimately
term "investment" is capable of applying to the outlay of funds to pursue a
thoroughbred horse breeding activity. As we have mentioned,
labelling an
activity as a hobby is not the same as making a finding that there was no
genuine belief that the enterprise could produce
a financial gain. Ordinarily,
would govern the Trustee's duties with respect to investment. A
trustee, who is not a professional, must in deciding to invest, exercise
care, diligence and skill that a prudent person would exercise in managing the
affairs of other persons:
Trustee Act
Section 14C
factors that a trustee may take into account when exercising the power of
investment. However, the Trust Deed expressly
Trustee Act
from applying. This does not mean that the Trustee could apply
the Trust Fund unthinkingly. We accept that the Trustee has duties
beneficiaries. However, the question of whether there has been a breach of duty
by the Trustee is not answered by the conclusion
that the adventure was in a
nature of a hobby.
than focussing upon the distinction between hobby and business, the question of
whether there was a breach of trust requires
attention on whether the Trustee
has acted prudently, with the objects of the Trust in mind. That question is not
answered by labelling
the activity as a hobby or a business.
therefore reject the submission that a valid finding that a Trustee carried on a
hobby must be preceded by a finding, or have as
an unstated premise, that the
Trustee was engaged in a breach of trust.
The wrong test
was, on appeal, no real dispute about the correct statutory test, or that the
Tribunal correctly articulated it. The issue was
whether, despite articulating
the proper test, the Tribunal nevertheless misdirected itself.
Appellants submit that the Tribunal misdirected itself and that the error is
revealed in the Tribunal's preoccupation with whether
there was a business of
horse breeding. The question of what is the dominant use of the Land is not
answered by looking at whether
a particular use is businesslike and by focussing
on that, so it was contended, the Tribunal revealed an error in approach. The
was revealed, so it was contended, because the finding that the activity
was a hobby was said by the Tribunal to be "on the contrary"
to the conclusion
that during the relevant years the Land was not used for the dominant purpose of
thoroughbred horse breeding. It
is the way in which the Tribunal referred to
"hobby" in contradistinction to dominant use that the Appellants point to, to
demonstrate
the Tribunal's error.
Appellants also pointed to [39] of the Decision which, it was asserted, was
linked to the finding of hobby. At that paragraph,
the Tribunal did not refer to
a hobby, but there is a reference to the primary production activity not being
indicative of a business
activity. Also, the Appellants pointed to the Judicial
Member's extensive use of the Trust tax returns. It was submitted that the
Judicial Member was overly concerned with whether the Trust was conducting a
business and to that end, was overly concerned with
whether there were
supportive documents of the Trust tax returns and whether they were properly
prepared. These matters, it was contended
are not relevant to use. It was
contended that the Tribunal Member's concern with whether the Trust was
conducting a business or
a hobby, shows that the Judicial Member misapplied the
test and that the Judicial Member asked himself the wrong question.
the other hand, the Respondent contends that there is no error disclosed in the
Tribunal's reasoning. First, the intensity of a
particular use is relevant to
determining dominant use: the Respondent referred, for instance, to
Pty Ltd as Trustee of The Starr Family Trust v Chief Commissioner of State
[2011] NSWADT 251
. Secondly, the finding of hobby was simply
a finding in relation to the intensity of the use and that the use lacked the
scale necessary
to conclude it was the prevailing use of the Land. Thirdly, the
Tribunal's concern with the Trust tax returns was consistent with
the way the
then Applicants ran their case. A large part of the evidence was made up of the
Trust tax returns and supporting documents.
the Respondent submitted that the Judicial Member was not preoccupied with
whether there was a business of primary production,
but simply did not accept
the then Applicants' evidence. The Respondent also contended that the Tribunal
had regard to the correct
question: the Tribunal was concerned with what was the
prevailing use.
a different but related point, the Appellants submitted that the decision was
infected with error, by putting too much weight on
income from the cottage. In
this regard our attention was directed to
Thomason v Chief Executive,
Department of Lands
(1994-95) 15 QLCR 286
) at 304.7 where
the Land Appeal Court, Ambrose J, Mr Trickett and Mr Neate said:
We have reservations about adopting an income approach to determine
the question of dominant use, although it may be relevant in considering
criteria contained in
To apply a test related to relative incomes
could, in the majority of cases, distract the enquirer from the primary question
of determining
the dominant use of land. On some limited occasions income may be
determine the
question, but care must be taken not to allow income generated by a use to
become the primary determinant.
the extract demonstrates, income may be considered in an appropriate case.
Resolution of grounds 1 and 2
have already stated that the finding that the primary production activity was
carried out in a hobby-like fashion was not tantamount
to a finding that there
was a breach of trust. We are also satisfied that such a finding was open even
though there was no anterior
finding of a breach of trust. As intensity of use
is a relevant inquiry, the question of whether the horse breeding activity was
conducted in a hobby-like manner was not an irrelevant inquiry.
Judicial Member was interested in the scale and intensity of the horse breeding
operation. There is ample authority for the proposition
that in determining the
prevailing or dominant use it is relevant to look at the intensity of the use.
at page 303 it was said:
In our view, the proper approach to be taken when ascertaining the
dominant use of land is to consider such matters as the amount
of land actually
used for any purpose, the nature and extent and intensity of the various uses of
the land, the extent to which land
is used for activities which are incidental
to a common business or industry of the type specified in
, the extent to
which land is used for the purposes which are unrelated to each other, and the
time and labour and resources spent
in using the land for each purpose. In
undertaking this exercise, one cannot ignore the conclusion that an objective
observer would
reach from viewing the land as a whole.
Leda Manorstead Pty Ltd v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2010] NSWSC 867
Gzell J at first instance stated that dominant use requires a
determination of the main, chief or paramount use (at [69]). The reasoning
Gzell J was supported by the Court of Appeal in
Leda Manorstead Pty Ltd v
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2010] NSWSC 867
(2011) 85 ATR 775
a question of fact and degree.
the authorities disclose that having regard to the relative income from
competing uses is not an irrelevant concern. Income
is one factor that can be
weighed in the balance, as was done here by the Tribunal. Accordingly, there was
no error in giving weight
to the income produced by rental of the cottage.
any event, even if we are wrong and the finding of hobby was not open, the
finding in relation to hobby was not central to the
reasoning of the Tribunal
and does not disclose that the Tribunal misdirected itself or applied the wrong
test. It was not for the
reason that the activity was conducted in a hobby-like
fashion that the Tribunal dismissed the application.
regard to the structure of the Decision, it is apparent that the Tribunal
reviewed, in detail, the evidence and identified
concerns with the evidence. For
instance at [18] to [20] of the Decision, the Judicial Member identified his
concerns with relying
upon the tax returns. In particular, as to whether certain
expenses were properly deductible because invoices for work done referable
the horse breeding activity (such as stables and a tank room) were rendered by
the Trustee to another entity. There was also an
absence of supporting material
such as profit and loss accounts, which the Tribunal expected to be available.
the Tribunal summarised the evidence of Angelo regarding the horse
breeding activities and again noted a dissatisfaction with aspects
evidence. For instance, at the commencement of the Relevant Period there were
only two horses, despite the fact that the Land
could sustain considerably more
horses: at [21] of the Decision. At [23] of the Decision the Tribunal indicated
reservations about
accepting the explanation for the fact that there were no
horses on the Land for over a year. The explanation given was that there
been an outbreak of equine flu. The Judicial Member was sceptical about the
explanation because the mare and colt were sold before
the public announcement
was publically announced that
equine flu was under control. Further, at [24] of
the Decision the Tribunal indicated some doubt as to Angelo's attendance on the
Land. His evidence was that he attended every day for two hours. However, the
Tribunal doubted this was necessary when there were
so few horses on the Land
and for over a year there were no horses on the Land.
to the statutory test, the Tribunal started from the position that the then
Applicants had to satisfy the onus imposed on
of the TAA. As
explained in
Cornish Investments Pty Limited v Chief Commissioner of State
[2013] NSWADTAP 25
, this means that the then
Applicants had to move the Tribunal from the position that the dominant use of
the Land was not primary
production. In light of the use of the Land as a
residential property (which involves both a residential use and an investment
the then Applicants had to satisfy the Tribunal that the use by the Trustee
of the Land for horse breeding, predominated over the
residential or investment
use. In light of the concerns expressed by the Tribunal about the Applicant's
evidence (referred to above
at [47]) it is apparent that the Tribunal was not
persuaded to move from the starting position that the dominant use of the Land
was not primary production.
Ultimately,
the Tribunal was not satisfied that the evidence established that the dominant
use of the Land was primary production.
The Tribunal was also not satisfied that
the horse breeding activity could be described as a business, absent supporting
such as business plans or profit and loss statements.
Tribunal said at [36] of the Decision:
The Tribunal accepts the contention of the Respondent that the
Applicant has failed to establish a competing and dominant primary
use. (See also in this context
Romano v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2011] NSWADT
Tribunal's conclusions (at [40]) are based upon a failure of the then Applicants
to satisfy their burden.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal did not misdirect itself and was not, in effect, waylaid by the
question of whether there was a hobby or
a business being conducted on the Land.
3 of the Notice of Appeal states as follows:
3.The finding by Judicial Member Block in the Reasons at [37] that
the land's (the Property's) dominant use in the relevant years
(2007 to 2011
Land Tax Years) was as an investment property earning income from the letting
was a finding which failed to take into
account, or give sufficient weight to,
relevant considerations, namely, that in the 2007 to 2011 Land Tax Years:
(a)just over 5% of the land comprising the Property was available for use as
an investment property;
(b)almost 95% of the land comprising the Property was available for use for
thoroughbred horse breeding activity;
(c)the separate parts of the land on the Property comprising these two uses
were fenced off from each other with separate rights of
ingress and egress;
(d)these two uses were undertaken by separate persons, namely:
(i)the investment property income producing activity was conducted by the
appellants, Gustavo Ferella and Nida Ferella ("Ferellas"),
who were the owners
of the Property;
(ii)the use of thoroughbred horse breeding activity was conducted by the
trustee of the Trust for the time being, namely, Agusta Industries
(e)the Ferellas, for nominal consideration, leased approximately 95% of the
land comprising the Property to the trustee of the Trust
for the time being,
namely, Agusta Industries and then Agusta who then used it for the thoroughbred
horse breeding activity;
(f)the income from the investment property income earning activity and the
expenses in respect of that activity were incurred by the
(g)the income from the thoroughbred horse breeding activity and the expenses
in respect of that activity were incurred by the trustee
for the time being of
the Trust, namely, Agusta Industries and then Agusta;
(h) expenses were incurred in relation to the horse breeding activity by the
trustee for the time being of the Trust, namely, Agusta
Industries and then
(i)the expenses in paragraph (h) incurred by the trustee for the time being
of the Trust exceeded the expenses incurred by the Ferellas
in the investment
property income earning activity;
(j)the expenses in paragraph (h) incurred by the trustee for the time being
of the Trust exceeded the income derived by the Ferellas
in the investment
property income earning activity in some of the 2007 to 2011 Land Tax Years;
(k) the time spent on and in relation to the thoroughbred horse breeding
activity by:
(i)Mr Angelo Ferella on a daily basis (inspection and maintenance of horses,
stables, bedding, water tanks/troughs, fencing, feed,
(ii) Mr Angelo Ferella and others in relation to the construction of
improvements (stables, tack room, awnings, wash bay, water tanks/troughs,
irrigation, fencing) on that part of the Property upon which the thoroughbred
horse breeding activity was conducted;
(I)the minimal time spent by the Ferellas in relation to the investment
property income earning activity.
is apparent that the Tribunal did not ignore any of the matters referred to in
ground 3. For instance (as to (a) to (c)) the fact
that the Land on which the
cottage was situated was only 5% of the Land and that 95% of the Land was
available for horse breeding
was referred to at [4] and [5] of the Decision, as
was the fact that the remainder of the Land is fenced off.
to ground 3(d), the fact that the different uses were undertaken by separate
persons, was plainly not ignored by the Tribunal.
It was implicit in the
discussion about the ambit of the lease of the Land. It is apparent that the
Tribunal was not satisfied that
only the Land the subject of the horse breeding
activity was leased to the Trust: at [8] of the Decision. In any event, we do
see this as a "relevant factor" (or mandatory consideration) in the sense
described in
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
Peko-Wallsend
) at 39-41. As the question of dominant use is
one of fact and degree of the use of the Land, whether or not the distinct uses
undertaken by distinct entities, is not a factor that must be taken into
to (e) the fact that the horse breeding Land was leased for nominal
consideration is referred to at [4] and not ignored (though
the submission that
only 95% of the Land was leased was rejected). In relation to ground 3(f) the
question of whether the income
from the investment property was that of Gustavo
and Nida, as opposed to the Trust was also rejected, so it was not taken into
in any positive sense. However, it was not a mandatory consideration for
the reason outlined in relation to ground 3(d). Failure
to have regard to it
does not disclose an error of law.
relation to grounds 3(g), (h), (i) and (j) the fact that the income and expenses
were incurred by the Trust is reflected in
of the Decision and plainly
not ignored, as is the level of expenses. As to ground 3(k) the fact that in
addition to Angelo spending
time daily on the premises, there was time spent on
construction and improvement relevant to the primary production activity
the period was not ignored by the Tribunal although the evidence was
not entirely accepted (at [19] and [24]) and little weight was
ascribed to it.
In relation to ground 3(l), it is asserted that only minimal time was spent by
the Appellants in relation to the
investment property, but we were not directed
to specific evidence about this (although it is unlikely to have been
contentious).
These last factors are of minor significance and there is no error
disclosed in the Tribunal failing to mention them.
are therefore not satisfied that there is any error of law disclosed in relation
to ground 3.
4 of the Notice of Appeal states as follows:
4.Judicial Member Block erred in finding and/or taking into account
as a material consideration that:
(a)for the 2007 to 2011 Land Tax Years:
(i)the Trust tax returns did not appear to have been in conformity with the
requirements of relevant tax legislation: Reasons at [20];
(ii)the tax returns of the Trust were not audited: Reasons at [20];
(b) the information provided in the Trust tax returns for the 2007 to 2011
income years in respect of primary production is quite
clearly not indicative of
a business activity: Reasons at [39];
(c)the Ferellas had not put into evidence information which supports the
Trust's tax returns for the 2007 to 2011 income years: Reasons
(d)the only evidence as to the breeding of thoroughbred horses relates to the
yearling acquired in the 2008 land tax year: Reasons
(e)no relevant material in respect of the thoroughbred horse breeding was
tendered by the Ferellas at the hearing: Reasons at [25].
the extent it is contended that these are wrong findings of fact, this is not
articulated as a question of law. A wrong finding
of fact is not an error of
law, unless the conclusion is not open:
Lombard Farms Pty Ltd v Chief
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2013] NSWADTAP 42
we do not consider the factors referred to in ground 4 as being irrelevant in
the sense contemplated in
Peko-Wallsend
. Factors (a), (c), (d) and (e)
are relevant to the reliability of the evidence led by the Appellants and
whether it is sufficient
to discharge the onus. Grounds (b) and (d) relate to
intensity of the primary production activity.
error of law is disclosed in relation to ground 4.
5 of the Notice of Appeal states as follows:
5.Judicial Member Block erred in failing to separately and
independently consider whether the Ferellas had satisfied the requirements
sections 10AA(1) and (3) of the LMTA for each of the 2007 to 2011 Land Tax
Years, but treated and considered the 2007 to 2011
Land Tax Years as a composite
is alleged that the Tribunal Member erred in failing to separately and
independently consider whether the requirements of the section
satisfied on a year by year basis and that the Tribunal approached the issue as
a composite whole. However, if one reviews
the Decision, the evidence in
relation to each year was considered. Read fairly, a year by year approach was
adopted by the Tribunal.
Overall the Tribunal was concerned that the evidence
did not satisfy the Appellants' burden of proof and that on a year by year basis
it could not be said that there was a dominant use of primary production. No
error of law is disclosed in relation to ground 5.
fair reading of the Tribunal's decision indicates that the Tribunal considered
that the then Applicants had not satisfied their
burden of proof.
are not satisfied that there has been any error of law. The Judicial Member
explained why he was dissatisfied with the level of
evidence. In circumstances
where there was a competing use of the Land (the rental of the cottage) the
Tribunal was not satisfied
that the Appellants had proved that the prevailing or
dominant use, which is a question of fact and degree, was primary production.
appeal is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (236 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter