URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/444.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Richard Schaaf [2025] NSWDC 444 (30 October 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
R v Richard Schaaf
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 444
Hearing Date(s):
17 October 2025
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Decision Date:
30 October 2025
Mahony SC DCJ
Intensive Correction Order imposed. For orders see [79]-[86]
Catchwords:
SENTENCE – Stalk/intimidate intend fear physical etc harm –
Assault occasioning actual bodily harm in company of others
– Aggregate
sentence – Intensive Correction Order
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Domestic and Personal) Violence Act 2007
Crimes (Sentencing and Procedure) Act 1999 (NSW)
Cases Cited:
Bugmy v The Queen (2013) 249 CLR 571; [2013] HCA 37
Cahyadi v R
168 A Crim R 41
[2018] NSWCCA 138
Mandranis v R
[2021] NSWCCA 97
Sarhene v R
[2022] NSWCCA
[2012] NSWCCA 214
Veen v R [No. 2] (1998) 164 CLR 465
[2025] NSWCCA 165
Richard Schaaf (the offender)
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) (The
Representation:
Mr T Woods (the offender)
Ms E Blizard; Mr A Isaacs (the
Solicitors:
Mr G Goold (the offender)
Ms D Horsley (the
File Number(s):
2021/00124978
Publication Restriction:
Nil. There is however a non-publication order regarding the name of the
co-accused who is referred to as MS
REMARKS ON SENTENCE
offender who was born in 1992 is to be sentenced in respect of the following
offences for which he has pleaded guilty:-
Count 1 – Offence
pursuant to
Crimes (Domestic and Personal) Violence Act 2007
(“the CDPVA”) of stalk/intimidate intend fear physical etc harm. The
maximum penalty for this offence is 5 years
imprisonment and/or $5,500 fine and
there is no standard non-parole period prescribed.
Count 2 – Offence pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
(“the CA”) of assault occasioning actual bodily harm in company of
others. The maximum penalty prescribed for this
offence is 7 years imprisonment
and there is no standard non-parole period prescribed.
offences occurred on 14 April 2021, and the offender was arrested on 5 May 2021.
At the time of the offence the offender was subject
to an Intensive Correction
Order (“ICO”) and Community Correction Order (“CCO”).
The ICO had been imposed
for a period of 2 years and 2 months commencing on 21
March 2021 for offences of knowingly direct activities of criminal group and
supply prohibited drug greater than the indictable quantity. The CCO had been
imposed for a period of 18 months, commencing on 1
September 2020 for an offence
of stalk/intimidate intend fear physical etc harm (domestic).
ICO was revoked by order made on 1 June 2021 with effect from 14 April 2021. The
offender was therefore in custody serving a term
of imprisonment for those
offences for a period of 1 year, 4 months and 25 days. He was bail refused from
the date of his arrest
on 5 May 2021 until 11 August 2022 and has spent 1 year,
3 months and 7 days (464 days) in custody in respect of the index offences.
The sentence hearing
sentence hearing took place on 17 October 2025. The Crown Sentence Summary
became Exhibit A and included a Statement of Agreed
Facts which may be
summarised as follows.
or about 14 April 2021, a co-accused MS organised for a supply of 2 kilograms of
cocaine to another drug dealer referred to as
“Person A”. Person A
took the 2 kilograms of cocaine and handed over a block of paper of $50 notes on
one end and otherwise
contained blank paper instead of $660,000. MS held Stuart
MacGill (“the victim”) responsible for Person A’s theft
drugs because he had introduced MS to Person A. On 14 April 2021, MS met with
the victim telling him that the victim needed
to pay money to cover the theft or
provide information as to the whereabouts of Person A. The victim denied
responsibility for the
debt left by Person A’s theft.
conduct constituting the two offences commenced on 5:50 p.m. on 14 April 2021
when a co-offender, Frederick Schaaf was tasked
to drive from his home in the
Sutherland area to Cremorne with the intention of intimidating the victim into
providing money or information
joined the co-offender, and they left Caringbah arriving at Cremorne just before
purchased a pair of long handled garden shears, three
sets of gloves, cable ties
and rope. The garden shears were later found in Frederick Schaaf’s car.
Feilo then travelled from
Rouse Hill to Bringelly arriving there at 7:20 p.m.
the afternoon and after the second meeting with the victim, MS waited outside
the victim’s apartment building in
Cremorne in his car. At about 7:00 p.m.
the victim escaped his apartment in the boot of another resident’s car,
met with friends
and went to a friend’s house nearby. The victim was then
lured back to his apartment by MS just before 8:00 p.m. under the
looking at photographs to identify Person A. The victim met MS on a street close
by his home and MS took his phone and said,
“The big guys are here to see
you”. The victim kept walking towards his home and came across the
offender who was standing
in the street outside of a car. The offender said to
the victim, “I don’t want to hurt you, we know you have nothing
do with it, we just want to talk to you, get in the car”. The victim
resisted and the offender said, “Don’t
make it difficult” and
placed his hand on his own waist.
is an agreed fact that the victim got in the car because he thought that gesture
meant that the offender had a firearm. The victim
did not see a firearm, nor did
he communicate his belief to either the offender or co-offender and the Crown
does not contend that
the offender intended to imply possession of a firearm.
Nor does the Crown contend that either offender or co-offender had a firearm.
Nor does the Crown contend that either offender or co-offender actually knew or
were reckless to the victim’s lack of consent
to enter the car.
victim got in the car and the offender sat next to him. The offender said,
“We’ve got a problem because they (a reference
to the drugs) were
mine”. However it is not contended that the offender was actually involved
in the failed cocaine deal or
that the drugs in fact belonged to the offender.
victim told the offender that the drug deal had nothing to do with him. The
offender asked the victim about the whereabouts of
Person A and the victim told
him that he had been trying to contact Person A all day without success.
co-offender Frederick Schaaf drove the car from Cremorne to Bringelly arriving
at about 9:00 p.m. The car pulled over and the
co-offender Feilo got in the car
with a bag containing the garden shears. Feilo was wearing a balaclava and sat
in the front passenger
seat. It is an agreed fact that the intimidation
commenced at the time that Feilo entered the car.
car was driven to premises at Bringelly, being an unoccupied house with a
driveway which led to a shed. When they arrived the
offender and co-offenders
got out of the car leaving the victim in the car for about 10 minutes. The
victim was then told to go to
the shed, photos of which are contained in Exhibit
A. The co-offenders demanded proof that the victim was not wearing “a
and searched the victim which caused him to be intimidated. The
garden shears were placed on the floor near the victim, and the offender
the victim across the face causing him to fall down. The offender asked the
victim again about the whereabouts of Person
A and was told that he didn’t
know where he was. The offender then said, “They want me to take your
fingers” and
said they needed $150,000 and asked where he would get it
from and how long it would take. The offender then asked for the victim’s
phone which was provided.
offender and co-offender Feilo punched the victim multiple times in the head. In
this assault the victim suffered a cut lip. The
offender then said it was
enough, and the co-offender Frederick Schaaf then asked the victim, “Are
co-offenders and victim then returned to the car and Frederick Schaaf drove to
Belmore arriving at 10:30 p.m. The offender then
had a conversation with the
victim by the side of the road telling him that someone would provide a phone to
him the following morning
and that he should not leave home. The victim then
took a taxi back to his home and the next day told his partner what had
The matter was reported by way of formal report to police on 20 April
A contained photographs of the garden shears and the inside and outside of the
shed at Bringelly. It also included the NSW
Police Force report of convictions
relating to the offender. Omitting offences in the Children’s Court, in
2011 he was convicted
of a traffic offence for which a fine was imposed. In 2012
he was convicted of various driving offences. In 2013 he was convicted
offences of drive whilst disqualified and police pursuit/not stop-drive
dangerously-first offence for which he was sentenced to
concurrent terms of
imprisonment of 9 months with a non-parole period of 4 months imprisonment. In
2016 the offender was convicted
of offences of intimidate police officer in
execution of duty and excluded person fail to leave premises when required to do
which he was fined.
2018 the offender was sentenced to the Conditional Release Order referred to
above for an offence of drive motor vehicle during
period of disqualification.
In 2018 he was convicted of two offences of dishonesty for which he was
sentenced by way of Community
Correction Orders for periods of 12 months
respectively. In 2019 a further Community Correction Order for 18 months was
imposed for
an offence of stalk/intimidate intend fear physical etc harm
(domestic). In 2019 he was convicted of two drug related offences for
convictions were recorded but no other penalty pursuant to s10A of the Crimes
(Sentencing and Procedure) Act 1999 (NSW) (“the
CSPA”). On 25 March
2021 he was convicted of the two offences in respect of which the ICO referred
to above was imposed by
way of an aggregate sentence, namely knowingly direct
activities of a criminal group and supply prohibited drug greater than
quantity but less than commercial quantity.
2015 the offender had a driving whilst disqualified offence in the Northern
Territory for which he was fined.
A included the sentencing remarks of Judge C Smith SC dated 25 March 2021
imposing the Intensive Correction Order for a period
of 2 years and 2
A also included the breach report in respect of the ICO under the hand of Ms L
Bennett dated 21 May 2021, and the order of
the State Parole Authority revoking
the ICO dated 1 June 2021.
A also included the order rescinding revocation of the ICO on 7 September 2022
and a bail chronology.
The offender’s evidence
offender tendered a bundle of documents which became Exhibit 1 and comprised
four documents, Exhibit 1.1 to 1.4. Exhibit 1.1 is
an affidavit of Mrs B Fifita
sworn on 17 October 2025 who is the mother of the offender and co-offender
Frederick Schaaf. She deposed
to the family history in which the offender, as
the eldest of 5 children was exposed to domestic violence perpetrated by her
towards the deponent and the offender which was alcohol fuelled and
regular. Both the offender and his brother were exposed to and
experimented with
drugs from an early age and exposed to violence in the community. When the
offender was 17 years of age, he was
subject to an assault in which he was
stabbed 4 times in the stomach. The offender completed school leaving after year
12. His parents
separated in 2012 when the offender was 20 years old. The
deponent developed a number of health issues including severe chronic diabetes
which requires regular monitoring and has suffered a heart attack and a kidney
infection. She deposed that the offender has assisted
her with transportation to
all of her medical appointments and she remains in daily contact with him.
Fifita deposed that since his release from custody, the offender has worked hard
to turn his life around and has devoted himself
to his family, work and 4 young
children. She deposed that she has encouraged and provided support for her two
sons to ensure that
they do not offend again.
1.2 is an affidavit sworn by the partner of the offender setting out their
relationship history. They have 4 children aged
between 8 years and 1 year. Ms
Miles deposed to the difficulties faced by the offender during his remand
custody during the COVID-19
pandemic. For a period of 14 months the family were
unable to see the offender.
Miles provided particulars of the offender’s previous conviction for an
offence of intimidate with intent to cause fear and
harm for which he was
convicted on 12 March 2020 and received an 8 month CCO. This concerned text
messages exchanged between the
offender and Ms Miles during a heated argument.
She deposed that whilst the message exchanges were unacceptable, she had never
experienced
any physical violence from the offender, and she regarded the
messages as empty threats said in the heat of the moment, and she did
for an AVO nor did she report the matter to the police.
Miles also deposed to the difficulties the offender faced during his childhood
and whilst he has been on strict bail conditions
awaiting finalisation of these
proceedings. Further she deposed that the publicity surrounding the offending
significantly impacted
on her family’s lives and that the 5 year delay
since his arrest has caused significant distress and anxiety for the offender
“physically, emotionally and financially”.
the offender has been on bail, Ms Miles deposed that he has been working in his
brother’s concreting business and “he
is doing everything he can to
be a good citizen and not get into trouble with the law”. He now
understood the gravity of his
offending conduct and wishes to be a good role
model for his two sons. Ms Miles deposed that the offender now regrets his
and that she will do everything she can to ensure that he does not
reoffend again.
1.3 is a testimonial from Mr C Tamplin dated 8 October 2025. Mr Tamplin writes
that he has known the offender for the past
5 years having met him through a
friend. He described the offender as “a very nice guy, who has committed
his time to building
a concreting empire with his brother” and who loves
to network and win new business. Mr Tamplin stated that the offender has
expressed deep regret for his offences, that he has learnt from this “life
lesson” and expressed his belief that the
offender will not re-offend.
1.4 is a letter from the offender dated 9 October 2025 expressing his apology
for being involved in the two offences. He states
that he regrets his actions
and is remorseful about the decisions he made in April 2021. The offender
outlined the difficult and
onerous conditions of his remand in custody during
COVID-19 in 2021 and 2022 and acknowledged that his childhood exposure to
drugs and violence from an early age had impacted on the choices that
he had made.
offender states that he wants to be the best person and father that he can be
and contribute as a good member of his community.
He expressed gratitude for the
support of his family, accepting full responsibility for his offending and
expressing his sincere
apology to the court, the community, to his family and to
the victim.
The Crown submissions
Crown relied on a written and detailed outline of submissions setting out the
procedural history and noting that the offender
is entitled to a 25% discount in
respect of Count 1 and a 5% discount in relation to Count 2 for his pleas of
Crown noted the offender had spent 464 days in pre-sentence custody but
submitted that for the entirety of the time bail refused,
he was also serving a
term of imprisonment after revocation of the ICO imposed on 21 March 2021. The
revocation of that ICO was consequent
on the commission of the index offences.
The Crown accepted the Court’s discretion to backdate any sentence to be
In doing so, the Court must give effect to the principle of totality to
avoid the imposition of a disproportionate sentence.
Crown submitted that in assessing the objective seriousness of the offence where
there is a joint-criminal enterprise the Court
must assess the degree of
participation of the offender. The Crown referred to Somba v R
[2012] NSWCCA 214
where Hall J held that it was necessary to refer to and take into account
particular conduct of each participant in a joint-criminal
enterprise with a
view to determine the level of culpability for which each must be sentenced. The
Crown referred to the judgment
of Latham J in KR v R
[2012] NSWCCA 32
respect to the distinction between the offender’s responsibility for
criminal conduct and his moral culpability for the
Crown submitted the following features were relevant to the assessment of
objective seriousness of the offences:-
(a) The offences were not spontaneous and involved a significant degree of
planning and organisation, as evidenced by:
(i) The surveillance of the victim by co-accused MS and attendance at his
personal residence by Frederick Schaaf and the offender.
(ii) The use of a ruse to lure the victim back to his home where the offender
and Frederick Schaaf were waiting.
(iii) The purchase by Feilo of items for use or possible use in the offending,
namely a pair of long handled garden shears, three
sets of gloves, cable ties
(iv) The victim’s phone was taken by MS from him to isolate him and
prevent him from calling for help.
(v) Prior arrangements had been made for Frederick Schaaf and the offender to
pick up Feilo in Bringelly, and on the way to Robinson
Road, Bringelly.
(vi) Feilo was wearing a balaclava when he entered the car.
(vii) The victim was transported to an isolated and semi-rural property,
approximately 70kms from his home.
(b) Regarding the intimidation:
(i) The victim was in the presence of three unknown males, unable to contact
police or other parties for assistance.
(ii) The victim was taken to an unoccupied property and directed to go with the
offenders to a dilapidated shed type structure.
(iii) On entering the shed, the offenders demanded proof the victim was not
wearing a wire and searched him. This caused him to be
intimidated.
(iv) Feilo put the garden shears on the floor near the victim.
(c) Regarding the AOABH:
(i) Extent and nature of the injuries:
The victim suffered a cut lip as a result of the assault.
(ii) Degree of violence:
Richard Schaaf commenced the conduct comprising the assault by slapping the
victim across the face and causing him to fall down.
Richard Schaaf and Feilo punched the victim multiple times to the head. The
assault ended when Richard Schaaf said words to the effect
“That’s enough”.
(iii) Intention of the offenders:
The offenders intentionally caused harm to the victim. The offenders were
motivated by obtaining information as to the location of
Person A, or $150,000
from the victim.
Crown submitted that this offender had the most significant role and was the
leader among the co-offenders. He had travelled with
Frederick Schaaf from
Caringbah to Cremorne and had engaged with the victim outside his home. Further
the offender had sat next to
the victim in the back seat of the vehicle and
asked about the whereabouts of Person A. He had assaulted the victim by slapping
across the face causing him to fall down and was otherwise primarily engaged
with the victim as evidenced by his questioning of the
victim and him requesting
and being provided the login to the victim’s phone.
Crown submitted that the offender, with Feilo, punched the victim multiple times
to the head and directed that the assault end.
At Belmore, the offender told the
victim that someone would come by the victim’s home the next morning with
a phone and that
he should not leave home. The offender had also participated,
with the other co-offenders, in the search of the victim to ensure
wearing a listening device.
Crown submitted that it was an aggravating factor pursuant to s21A(2)(c) of the
CSPA that the offence involved the threatened
use of a weapon, namely the garden
Crown submitted that the offender committed the offences whilst on conditional
liberty being subject to both an ICO and CCO at
the time of the offence. The
Crown submitted this militated in favour of a sentence that reflects the need
for specific deterrence
as well as forming part of the assessment of the
likelihood of reoffending on the offender’s part.
Crown submitted that the offender’s criminal history disentitled him to
Crown submitted that the threshold in s5 of the CSPA had been crossed and no
penalty other than imprisonment was warranted in
the circumstances.
his oral submissions the Crown accepted the evidence of the offender’s
mother that he suffered disadvantage in his childhood
years. However it was
submitted the offender had shown clear improvement in his life given that he had
completed his schooling, the
nature of his family arrangements and his care for
his mother. The Crown submitted this evidence demonstrated he had an
understanding
of responsibility in his life in which he had enjoyed some measure
of stability which allowed him to progressively take on responsibility
eldest child. For these reasons, the Crown submitted the Bugmy principles were
moderated to some degree. An example of this
was the description of him at
school as a “gentle giant”.
Crown referred to the evidence of Ms Miles concerning adverse publicity arising
from the offender’s arrest to submit that
the extent and impact of the
publicity was not of a type or nature to amount to a mitigating factor to a
significant degree. There
were three media clips constituting 51 minutes in
which the accused’s name was not mentioned.
Crown submitted that it was open beyond reasonable doubt to infer there was a
degree of planning given the agreed facts. Whilst
this could have been planning
by others, the offender must have been appraised of it.
offender’s submissions
for the offender relied on a detailed written outline of submissions noting that
both offences were capable of being dealt
with in the Local Court with the lower
specially aggravated
kidnapping contrary to s86(3) of the CA had been withdrawn
upon the offender entering pleas of guilty to the index offences. He had
offered to plead guilty to the offence of intimidation, but that offer was
refused. Therefore he is entitled to a discount
of 25% for Count 1 and 5% for
the heading “Objective circumstances” counsel submitted that the
offenders were engaged by somebody else to do a
job (possibly MS or someone
connected to him, although the evidence is silent as to whom). The Crown does
not contend that the co-offenders
were involved in any drug transaction. Rather,
the intimidation offence is said to have commenced when Feilo entered the
wearing the balaclava, the relevant criminal act for Count 1 being the
submitted that the victim felt intimidated because he thought the offenders
might not trust him, which was contrasted with
acts of intimidation, consisting
of threats of physical harm. That search was not particularly long nor was
inappropriate force used
offending in Count 2 involved a cut lip which constituted actual bodily harm.
The specific conduct upon which the Crown relies
is that the offender and
co-offender, Feilo punched the victim multiple times to the head. It was
submitted that this must mean that
the offenders punched the victim at least two
or three times but it is not possible to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
the punches were more numerous than that.
submitted that planning was not a significant aggravating feature in this case.
The evidence concerning the surveillance of
the victim by MS, the use of a ruse
to lure the victim back to his home and the fact that MS took the victim’s
phone could
not be used to aggravate the offender’s offending
was further submitted that by placing the garden shears on the floor near the
victim so as to constitute a threat was not a finding
available to be made
beyond reasonable doubt. Although of the three co-offenders, this offender
communicated and engaged with the
victim most, it was submitted he became
involved because he was engaged “to do a job and did not play the role of
the instigator”.
referred to the evidence of childhood and adolescent disadvantage that engaged
the principles in Bugmy v R and rendered him
less morally blameworthy.
referred to the previous sentencing of this offender by Judge C Smith SC by way
of an ICO. The offender accepted that his
breach of conditional liberty warrants
consideration, however the Court should exercise its discretion to afford him a
full backdate,
namely, to give him credit for the entire 490 day period of
pre-sentence custody. Outside of the periods of actual custody, the offender
been on stringent conditions of bail, although those conditions had been relaxed
between 25 March 2021 and his arrest on 5 May
2021 when he was serving his ICO
in the community.
referred to the good qualities demonstrated by this offender who was capable of
acting responsibly and looking after his siblings,
mother, de-facto wife and
children. Counsel relies on the evidence of Ms Miles who painted a portrait of a
good man. He had not re-offended
since being released on bail in September 2022,
which supported, on the balance of probabilities, that he has good prospects of
rehabilitation
and is unlikely to re-offend. Counsel submitted that his progress
and rehabilitation should not be interrupted by him being returned
his letter of apology the offender had acknowledged the impact of the offending
on the victim. He had accepted responsibility for
his offending and expressed
contrition for it.
also noted that during the period in which the offender was bail refused in 2021
and 2022, coincided with the COVID-19 lockdown
periods. Therefore his 490 days
of pre-sentence custody ought to be regarded as longer and more severe than
custody served in normal
circumstances. It was submitted that a period of
further incarceration would have an adverse impact on his wife and children
whilst not constituting exceptional circumstances, would justify some
weight in the mix of subjective circumstances relying on Carter
referred to the 4.5 years the offender has been either on remand bail refused or
subject to highly restrictive bail conditions
as relevant to both backdating the
sentence and moderating its length. When granted bail on 11 August 2022 he was
subject to a curfew,
a prohibition on him communicating with the co-accused
which included his brother, Frederick and cousin Elijah, an abstinence condition
and a prohibition on him using an internet capable mobile device. These
conditions were endured for years in relation to a charge
that was ultimately
withdrawn. If he had been initially charged with the offences which he is now
being sentenced, it was submitted
he would not have been subject to such strict
bail conditions, and the proceedings would have reached a conclusion much
submitted that the appropriate disposition is a sentence which does not require
the offender to return to custody. He had
now been on bail for more than three
years without re-offending and his rehabilitation is progressing well. He has
family support
in the community, and his risk of re-offending is
diminishing.
submitted there ought to be substantial concurrency between the sentences which
are to be discounted by 25% and 5% respectively.
In the event of a full-time
custodial sentence, a finding of special circumstances was warranted because of
the long delay, COVID-19
era custodial hardship and to ensure the offender has
adequate time for supervision on parole. Giving full credit to his pre-sentence
custody would produce a commencement date for the sentence of 14 June 2024,
however the Court had a discretion to make allowance
for the strict bail
conditions referred to above.
his oral submissions, counsel referred to the genuine remorse expressed by the
offender in his letter of apology and accepted that
publicity regarding this
matter did not amount to extra-curial punishment as a significant mitigating
rehearsed his submissions regarding backdating of any sentence.
respect to the assessment of objective seriousness of the offending, counsel
submitted that it was not necessary that the Court
would find a point on a
notional range of seriousness. The agreed facts involved a degree of vagueness,
for example regarding the
number of punches to the head of the victim. On the
other hand, the offender had an impressive subjective case which demonstrated
was capable of acting in a responsible way. It was submitted that his risk of
re-offending had diminished, he was now 33 years
old and had taken on increasing
family responsibilities. Counsel rehearsed his submissions regarding the
structure of the sentence,
advocating an allowance for stringent bail conditions
which was of increasing significance given that the way that events have
namely that the original charge did not proceed.
rehearsed his submission regarding the Crown’s reliance on planning as an
aggravating factor to submit that it was not,
and further submitted that a
finding of special circumstances should be made in the event of a sentence of
full-time custody.
Determination
3A of the CSPA
sets out the purposes of sentencing as follows:-
“3A The purposes for which a Court may impose a sentence on an offender
are as follows:
(a) To ensure that the offender is adequately punished for the offence,
(b) To prevent crime by deterring the offender and other persons from committing
similar offences,
(c) To protect the community from the offender,
(d) To promote the rehabilitation of the offender,
(e) To make the offender accountable for his or her actions,
(f) To denounce the conduct of the offender,
(g) To recognise the harm done to the victim of the crime and the
community.”
assessing the objective seriousness of the offending in Count 1, the offence of
intimidation, I have had regard to the fact that
this offending took place
against a background of a drug rip-off which resulted in the victim being held
responsible for the loss
involved by those suffering the loss who were keen to
locate the person responsible, namely, Person A. While the agreed facts shortly
summarise the context, I accept the Crown submission that the index offences
were not spontaneous but did involve a significant degree
of planning and
organisation, but not by any of the co-offenders including this offender. The
joint-criminal enterprise involving
the offending conduct in both offences must
therefore be assessed with respect to the role of each of the co-offenders
assessed by
what they did according to the agreed facts. Those facts support a
finding beyond reasonable doubt that the offender had the most
significant role
in the offending conduct and was the leader among the co-offenders. He travelled
with his brother, Frederick Schaaf
from Caringbah to Cremorne and it was the
offender who engaged with the victim outside his home at Cremorne at about 7:00
14 April 2021 after the victim had been lured there by MS. It was the
offender who then encouraged the victim to get in the backseat
of the car and
then sat next to him and questioned him as to the whereabouts of Person A. The
intimidation commenced when Feilo entered
the car at Bringelly wearing a
balaclava and continued when the victim was taken to the dilapidated shed
structure on the property
at Bringelly and was searched to ensure that he was
not wearing a wire. The offender had told the victim, “They want me to
take your fingers” and at the shed, Feilo put the garden shears on the
floor near the victim.
regard to the circumstances of the offending and the offender’s role, I am
satisfied that this offending was within the
mid-range for an offence pursuant
to s13(1) of the CDPVA.
assessment of objective seriousness of the offending in Count 2 must be assessed
by having regard to the conduct of the offender.
The offender commenced the
assault by slapping the victim across the face causing him to fall down. The
offender and the co-offender
Feilo then, according to the agreed facts, punched
the victim multiple times to the head. No finding could be made as to the number
of times that involved, however the assault ended when the offender said words
to the effect of, “That’s enough”.
I am satisfied that the
offenders intentionally caused harm to the victim, and the victim suffered a cut
to his lip. This assault
fell in the middle of the low range for an offence
pursuant to s59(2) of the CA.
find that the following aggravating factors must be taken into account pursuant
to s21A of the CSPA:-
The offence involved the actual or threatened use of a weapon, namely the garden
shears which were placed in the
presence of the victim.
The offence was committed while the offender was on conditional liberty, namely
the ICO and CCO imposed on 21 March
2021 and 1 September 2020 respectively.
The offence was part of a planned or organised criminal activity. Whilst the
planning for the involvement of the
co-offenders may have been initiated by
others, and possibly by MS, I am satisfied that the offender must have been
aware that he
was being engaged with others in an organised criminal activity
arising from the failed drug transaction. I accept, however, that
the evidence
does not support a finding that the offender engaged in planning the criminal
have taken into account the maximum penalties prescribed for the offences of 5
years imprisonment for Count 1 and 7 years imprisonment
for Count 2. The maximum
penalties indicate the seriousness with which Parliament regards such criminal
conduct and are guideposts
in the sentencing synthesis.
deterrence is important in sentencing for both intimidation and assault
offending. A clear message must be sent to like-minded
members of the community
that Parliament has prescribed relatively lengthy maximum sentences of
imprisonment for such offences, and
that the Courts will impose condign
punishment in appropriate cases. Specific deterrence is also important here
given this offender’s
history of prior offending.
note that the offender is entitled to a 25% utilitarian discount on sentence in
respect of Count 1, and a 5% discount in respect
of Count 2 for his pleas of
guilty. The pleas demonstrate some remorse on his behalf, however I accept that
in his letter of apology
to the Court the offender has expressed genuine remorse
for his offending conduct.
are a number of subjective features which need to be taken into account on
sentence. First, the offender was 29 years of age
at the time of the offending
and is now 33 years old. He has an unenviable prior history of offending as set
out above which culminated
in his conviction for two serious offences of
knowingly direct activities of a criminal group and supply a prohibited drug
than indictable but less than commercial quantity for which he was
sentenced by way of an ICO on 25 March 2021, less than a month
prior to the
index offending. He was also subject to a CCO at the time of the offending for a
domestic violence related offence.
Little weight can be given to the exculpatory
explanation provided for that offending conduct by Ms Miles. In Veen v R [No. 2]
164 CLR 465 at 477 the plurality said:-
"The antecedent criminal history of an offender is a factor which may be taken
into account in determining the sentence to be imposed
but it cannot be given
such weight as to lead to the imposition of a penalty which is disproportionate
to the gravity of the instant
offence. The antecedent criminal history is
relevant, however, to show that the incident offence is an uncharacteristic
or whether the offender has manifested in his commission of the
instant offence a continuing attitude of disobedience to the law.
In that case
retribution, deterrence and protection of society may all indicate that a more
severe penalty is warranted."
It is clear from the offender’s prior criminal history that he had, at
the time of the offending, a disregard for the law which
disentitles him to
leniency on this occasion.
accept, as the Crown conceded, that the offender suffered childhood
disadvantage. In Bugmy v The Queen (2013) 249 CLR 571; [2013]
HCA 37 the High
Court held:-
1. The circumstances that an offender has been raised in a community surrounded
by alcohol abuse and violence may mitigate the sentence
because his/her moral
culpability is likely to be less than the culpability of an offender whose
formative years have not been marred
in that way [40].
2. The effects of profound deprivation do not diminish over time and repeated
offending and should be given full weight in determining
the sentence in every
case [42-44].
3. A background of that kind may leave a mark on a person throughout life and
compromise a person’s capacity to mature and
learn from experience [43].
The application of these principles, and their impact in diminishing the
offender’s moral culpability for the offending and
how that further
impacts the purposes of sentencing set out in s3A of the CSPA was recently
explained by Weinstein J (with whom Wright
and Sweeney JJ agreed) in YZ v R
[2025] NSWCCA 165
to [68]. The reduction in this offender’s moral
culpability must therefore be given “full weight” in the sentencing
synthesis (per Bugmy at [44]).
offender has demonstrated since his release to bail a level of responsibility
for his family members and has not re-offended.
He has been subject to onerous
bail conditions with which he has complied and has thus progressed his
rehabilitation whilst accepting
responsibility for his offending conduct. I do
not accept the Crown submission that the application of the Bugmy principles
be tempered by the fact that he completed high school and has
demonstrated increasing responsibility in his life since this offending.
the escalating nature of his criminal conduct leading up to the index offending
warrants the Bugmy principles being given
full effect in sentencing.
further accept that during the time he was in custody for the index offences
between 5 May 2021 and 11 August 2022, he was subject
to onerous conditions due
to the COVID-19 protocols applied in NSW prisons and I have taken that into
am satisfied that the threshold in s5 of the CSPA has been crossed and no
sentence other than imprisonment is warranted in all of
the circumstances. I
intend to impose an aggregate sentence pursuant to s53A of the CSPA and provide
the following indicative sentences:-
Count 1:- Offence pursuant to
s13(1) of the CDPVA, 18 months imprisonment
Count 2:- Offence pursuant to s59(2) CA of assault occasioning actual bodily
harm in company – 1 year and 11 months imprisonment
assessing the aggregate sentence, I must have regard to the principle of
totality. In Cahyadi v R
[2007] NSWCCA 1
168 A Crim R 41
, Howie J stated at
“There is no general rule that determines whether sentences ought to be
imposed concurrently or consecutively. The issue is
determined by the
application of the principle of totality of criminality: can the sentence for
one offence comprehend and reflect
criminality for the other offence? If it can,
the sentences ought to be concurrent otherwise there is a risk that the combined
will exceed what is warranted to reflect the total criminality of the
two offences. If not, the sentences should be at least partly
cumulative,
otherwise there is a risk that the total sentence will fail to reflect the total
criminality of two offences. Similarly,
where they are part of a single episode
of criminality with common factors, it is more likely that the sentence for one
of the offences
will reflect the criminality of both.”
the offences occurred in the same course of criminal conduct over a period of a
few hours. There should be substantial concurrency
having regard to the totality
of criminality involved and I intend to sentence the offender to a term of
imprisonment of 2 years
and 6 months. The sentence would ordinarily be
backdated, and I note the divergence between the Crown assessment of
pre-sentence
custody of 464 days during which the offender was bail refused for
the index offences, and the offender’s calculation of 490
days, being the
term of imprisonment served by the offender following revocation of the ICO
imposed on 21 March 2021.
the sentence is less than 3 years, I have had regard to s66(1) of the CSPA and
note that community safety remains the paramount
consideration in assessing
whether the sentence should be served by way of an ICO or by full-time
detention. The determination is
which of the two modes of serving his sentence
is more likely to address this offender’s risk of reoffending, having
both to the purposes of sentencing set out in s3A of the CSPA, and
community safety. Having regard to the offender’s progress
rehabilitation, his onerous conditions of pre-sentence custody and his
compliance with onerous bail conditions over a lengthy
period of time, I have
concluded, on balance, that this is an appropriate case for making an ICO
pursuant to s7(1) of the CSPA. I
am entitled to take the period of pre-sentence
custody into account in adjusting the period for an ICO which must commence on
day that it is made, namely today - See Mandranis v R
[2021] NSWCCA 97
Sarhene v R
[2022] NSWCCA 79
exercising my discretion regarding the period to be taken into account, I have
had regard to the fact that the index offending
occurred a very short time after
the previous ICO was imposed on this offender and he served a substantial period
of his imprisonment
following the revocation of that ICO as well as being bail
refused in respect of the index offences. I find that the appropriate
the ICO is a term of 1 year and 8 months.
are convicted of the following offences:-
Count 1 – Offence
pursuant to
Crimes (Domestic and Personal) Violence Act 2007
of stalk/intimidate intend fear physical etc harm.
Count 2 – Offence pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
assault occasioning actual bodily harm in company of others.
sentence you by way of an aggregate sentence pursuant to s53A of the CSPA to a
term of imprisonment of 2 years and 6 months.
of the CSPA, that sentence is to be served by way of an Intensive
Correction Order, commencing today for a period of 1 year and 8
standard conditions of the order will apply:-
(a) You must not commit any offence; and
(b) You must submit to supervision by a Community Corrections Officer.
The following additional conditions apply:-
(c) That you perform community service work for 200 hours.
am satisfied pursuant to 17D(1)(a) of the CSPA that I have sufficient
information before me to justify the making of the above Intensive
Order without obtaining an assessment report.
you fail to comply with the conditions of this order sanctions may be imposed by
the Commissioner of Corrective Services or State
Parole Authority. Those
sanctions may include a formal warning, imposing more stringent conditions or it
may include revocation of
this order.
the order is revoked, you may be required to a serve all or some of the period
of your sentence in full-time custody.
you are now directed to attend the court registry where a copy of this order
will be explained and given to you.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (304 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter