URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2017/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Thomas, Hayden, Rumble [2017] NSWNMPSC 1 (28 April 2017)
Our Ref: 4603/17
Professional Standards Committee Inquiry
Constituted Under Part 8 of
Health Practitioner Regulation National
to hold an Inquiry into a
Complaint in relation
Mr Abraham Thomas
Registration No:
NMW0001711533
Ms Donna Hayden
Registration No: NMW0001406174,
presently unregistered
Ms Julie Rumble
Registration No:
NMW0001010046, presently unregistered
Date/s of Inquiry:
October – 27
October 2016
Committee members:
Ms Julie Hughes
Mrs Christine Selkirk
Mr Brett Clarke
Appearance for
Health Care Complaints Commission:
Mr Shah, Legal Officer
Appearance for
Mr Abraham Thomas:
Ms Toose from the Nurses and Midwives Association
Decision date:
28 April, 2017
The Committee made findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct, and
determined to reprimand, imposed conditions, and made educative
Publication of decision:
Legislation cited:
Suppression order applies
- refer to page 46 of this decision for
details of non-publication directions.
Health Care Complaints Act
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW), No 86a; Mental
Introduction
must be said at the outset that this case is laced with utter tragedy. It
concerns the conduct of nursing staff on the afternoon
on 28 February, 2014 when
a young man tragically took his own life while an involuntary patient in the
Mental Health Inpatient Unit
(“MHIPU”) at Dubbo Base Hospital. By
extension, it reveals endemic failures of clinical practice, procedure and
in the hospital at that time.
Patient A, as he will be named in these reasons for decision, had a history of
depression and suicidality. He was admitted as a voluntary
patient to Bloomfield
Hospital in January 2014 but was later scheduled under the
Mental Health
(NSW) to be detained as an involuntary patient, and was
transferred to Dubbo Base Hospital on 30 January, 2014. His illness was
characterised,
according to the hospital records, with symptoms of depression,
hopelessness, somatic pre-occupation, and suicidality. He was a beloved
friend who tragically took his own life on the afternoon of 28 February, 2014,
at some time between 14:41 hours and 17:19
central issues that give rise to these proceedings are ascertaining the exact
obligations of the nursing staff to observe Patient
A, and to record such
observations honestly and accurately. The complaint by the HCCC includes
allegations that the relevant nursing
staff did not attend to the observation of
Patient A at the proper intervals. The regularity of such observations is
dictated by
the Psychiatrist’s assessment of the patient’s level of
suicidality, a scaled ranking that is to be ascribed by the psychiatrist
recorded in the file. Further, the complaint includes allegations the nurses
falsified medical records, or recklessly made records,
to indicate completion of
observations that did not occur.
complaint concerns the conduct of three of the nursing staff at Dubbo Mental
Health In-Patient Unit (“MHIPU”) –
Ms Donna Hayden (Registered
Nurse “RN”), Ms Julie Rumble (Enrolled Nurse “EEN”), and
Mr Abraham Thomas (RN).
Although Ms Hayden and Ms Rumble were not registered to
practice at the time of these proceedings, they are occasionally referred
their nursing titles in these reasons for decision for purposes of professional
identification applicable at the time of the
relevant events.
Hayden and EEN Rumble were working afternoon shift. The allegations against them
centre around their failure to complete observations
of Patient A at fifteen
minute intervals, and the false entries indicating that thirty minute
observations took place.
Hayden and EEN Rumble chose to not engage with these proceedings. They did not
attend the hearing, nor did they submit any written
evidence. There were no
written admissions to the complaints or submissions.
Legal Officer for the Nursing Association, Ms Toose, handed up at hearing
statutory declarations from both Ms Hayden (Exhibit
B) and Ms Rumble (Exhibit
C). The general tenor of each of these declarations was to inform the
Professional Standards Committee
(“the Committee”) that they had
each allowed their nursing registrations to lapse and that neither of them
intended to
seek registration as a nurse in the future. Each undertook to
refrain from practising nursing again, acknowledging that should such
undertakings be breached that the HCCC could proceed with disciplinary action
against them for unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Ms Toose was not
instructed to make any submissions on behalf of Ms Hayden and Ms Rumble as to
final orders.
assurance by the two nurses of the HCCC’s ability to bring future
disciplinary action is somewhat ill-placed. The fact
of the matter is that a
complaint of unsatisfactory professional conduct had already been made by the
HCCC, and the self-cessation
of registration or the failure of the nurses to
engage with the hearing process does not make the present complaint against them
simply disappear. The HCCC is entitled to press the complaint before the
Committee, and the Committee is entitled to preside over
that complaint and make
appropriate orders if it finds the complaints proved (Part 8, Division 3,
Subdivision 3 of the National Law).
The Committee has therefore made findings in
relation to the two ‘absent’ nurses, and consequential orders. The
basis for proceeding in the manner is outlined later in these reasons for
Thomas worked the morning shift. The essence of the complaints against him flow
from allegations that he implemented the incorrect
observation regime for
Patient A throughout the day (that is, that he made half hourly rather than
fifteen-minute observations),
and that he incorrectly recorded an observation
which occurred at around 14:41 hours as having occurred at 15:00
Thomas attended the hearing and gave evidence under examination in chief and
cross examination.
reasons for decision will first deal with the conduct of RN
A was a 29-year-old man who presented to Bloomfield Hospital on 27 January,
2014, following some three months of worsening
depressive symptoms and the
development of suicidal ideation.
A’s psychiatric history included admissions to St John of God hospital in
Burwood in 2006 and 2009. During the 2009
admission, he had attempted suicide by
hanging at a time when he says he was stressed and overworked.
A was a professional person, but had not worked since late 2013. Medical
evidence suggested a deterioration in mental state
that was possibly
precipitated by a reported sexual encounter in November 2013. It would seem that
following this encounter, amongst
other symptoms, Patient A became irrationally
obsessed with the notion that he had a sexually transmitted disease, despite
medical / pathology evidence to the contrary. It would seem that there
may have been a delusional component to this belief, as well
as the stated
belief that the encounter had ruined his life.
Suicidality
had been a feature of this episode of mental illness, as with previous episodes.
On transit to Bloomfield hospital in
early 2014 Patient A attempted to leap from
the car while it was travelling at 100km/hr in an attempt to end his life.
Although initially
admitted as a voluntary patient, that status was changed to
involuntary after a self-inflicted 5cm razor cut to his neck on 28 January,
2014. On 30 January, 2014 the psychiatrist’s entry in the medical records
regarding Patient A read: “life was not worth
living due to a life long
illness related to herpes infection... sees no future or cure. [Patient A] is
severely depressed and suicidal.”
stated, Patient A was transferred to Dubbo Mental Health Inpatient Unit from
Bloomfield Hospital. This was for reasons of proximity
to his home and because
of bed pressure at Bloomfield Hospital. The psychiatrist’s recommendation
was for close observation
due to the suicide risk.
7 February, 2014 Patient A went before the Mental Health Review Tribunal. The
report to the Mental Health Review Tribunal of the
Psychiatric Registrar, Dr
Ranasinghe, dated 7 February, 2014, stated “...He needs to be treated as
an inpatient considering
the high risk of suicide and poor insight and judgment
impaired by depression....”. [CV2, Tab 66, p.12]. An involuntary patient
order was made by the Tribunal on 12 February, 2014 with a four-week review
date. Suicidality and poor insight were features of the
psychiatry evidence
before the Tribunal. Risk to self was found to be “significant”,
with involuntary detention being
found to be the “least restrictive
environment for safe and effective care.”
assurances from the sexual health physician on 11 February, 2014 that there was
no pathology to indicate a sexually transmitted
disease, Patient A’s
beliefs around this matter persisted. The hospital progress notes are strewn
with commentary of Patient
A’s persistent rumination over the belief he
had contracted such a disease, and his belief that it would have devastating
on his life and prospects for future happiness.
21 February, 2014 the psychiatry review document [CV2, Tab 66, pp.18-19]
indicated that Patient A remained pre-occupied with the
notion of a sexually
transmitted disease, that his mood was depressed, and that he had only partial
insight into his psychiatric
medical records indicate a fairly consistent picture of Patient A’s mental
state. The Clinical Handover document for 22-27
February repeatedly indicates
that Patient A was flat in affect, low in mood / depressed, fixated about belief
that he had a sexually
transmitted disease. On 28 February, 2014, the day of his
death, the notes of the morning shift indicated “low mood”
he requested weekend leave.
hospital contained a high dependency unit (“HDU”) and sub-acute unit
(“SAU”), the general idea being that
the former is a lower stimulus
area tailored more to higher risk and acutely unwell patients, and the latter is
tailored to patients
who are either at lower risk or further along in their
recovery, with the possibility of group sessions and less restriction. The
dependency unit can accommodate six patients, and the sub-acute caters for up to
twelve patients.
A was latterly moved to sub-acute ward from the intensive care unit. As later
discussed, the shift from intensive care to
the lower security unit may have
created in some staff (noted in evidence by RN Thomas) the impression that
suicidality was no longer
a prime risk. However, the evidence bore out that a
move to the lesser security ward did not necessarily signify the alleviation
suicide risk, and that historically there had been patients in the that ward who
remained suicidal, despite their transfer from
intensive care.
28 February, 2014 RN Thomas was the nurse in charge of the day shift in the
sub-acute ward. This meant that his shift officially
ran from 7:00am to 3.30pm
(‘A shift’). RN Hayden and EEN Rumble were rostered and worked the
afternoon shift, which ran
from 1.30pm to 10.00pm (‘B shift’).
the day of his death Patient A was seen pacing the corridors in the ward for
some time after lunch. The evidence obtained from
the hospital closed circuit
television (“CCTV”) footage indicated that Patient A was last seen
entering his room at 14:41
hours, and that he did not leave his room again. No
members of the nursing team appeared to have observed him until around 17:19
around that time RN Hayden opened the door of Patient A’s room and noted
that he was sitting on the floor in the dark with
his back resting against the
end of the bed. She presumed him to be meditating or sleeping. RN Hayden left
the room and sought the
assistance of a male nurse, EEN
Thomas (not
the Respondent), to go in and check on him, her thoughts being that it might not
be safe if she startled Patient A (Statement
RN Hayden, CV1, Tab 28 [34]). EEN
Thomas came to the room to assist. This was when the dreadful
discovery was made that Patient A had hanged himself using the bed
sheet rigged
to the end of the bed, which he electronically elevated to effect the process.
Resuscitation was attempted without success,
the process ensuing for some
thirty-five minutes until 17:58 hours.
Thomas (nurse-in-charge of the morning shift) had signed the observation chart
that Patient A was observed at 15:00 hours. This
was effectively the end of his
shift. Such observation is not evidenced by the CCTV footage. RN Thomas
acknowledges that this entry
was an approximation of time and that Patient A was
more likely observed around 14:40 hours. RN Thomas’ recorded observations
for the shift indicate half-hourly observations, rather than fifteen-minute
observations which were required under the treatment
Hayden signed on the observation chart that she had observed Patient A at 15:00
hours. This is not borne out by the CCTV footage.
Rumble had signed in the observation chart that she had observed Patient A at
15:15 hours and 15:45 hours. She also claimed to
have seen Patient A walking up
and down the corridors at 15:30 hours. None of these events are confirmed by the
CCTV footage.
events gave rise to a complaint made on 26 February, 2016 by the NSW Health Care
Complaints Commission that the three nurses
were guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. The Complainant sought leave at the outset of the hearing
to amend the complaint
with respect to RN Thomas. The amendment was to reflect
the Complainant’s position that if RN Thomas hadn’t knowingly
an incorrect observation entry, he had recklessly done so. A timing
clarification was also made. There was no objection and
the complaint was
accordingly amended.
Complaints and particulars are set out in Attachment 3.
law as to findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct
of unsatisfactory professional conduct are made with respect to all three of the
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is defined in section 139B of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) [the National
Law (NSW)], in the main, as conduct
that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care exercised,
by the practitioner
in the practice of the practitioner’s profession is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner
equivalent level of training or experience. The full text of section 139B of
the National Law (NSW) and other relevant provisions
is at Attachment
accordance with authority, the Professional Standards Committee (“the
Committee”) firstly considers whether the conduct
particularised in the
Complaint has been made out in point of fact on the balance of
probabilities.
It must then
evaluate whether, if established, the conduct amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct within the meaning of the
burden of proof is upon the complainant and is to the civil standard of proof on
the balance of probabilities, to the Committee’s
comfortable
satisfaction
. This does not
import a ‘heightened’ standard of proof beyond the normal civil
standard, but rather reinforces the need
for sufficient evidence of quality to
discharge the civil standard of
can be a vexed matter to discern the type of conduct that amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct. The National Law does
not go beyond its
description of conduct that is “significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of
an equivalent level of training or
experience”.
plainly, it may be said that “significantly below” is a measure of
conduct departure/s beyond the realm of slight
, and must be read in light
of the guiding principles and objects of the National Law. Therefore, in
considering the reach of a finding
of unsatisfactory professional conduct the
Committee must take into consideration such matters as protection of the public
in ensuring
suitably trained and qualified, competent and ethical practitioners
populate our health system.
The relevant considerations as
to consequential orders
of the public is the paramount considerations. In
Re Dr Parajuli
Medical Tribunal extrapolated that, in keeping with the paramount purpose of
protecting the health and safety of the public,
five matters may be
considered:
need to protect the public against further misconduct by the practitioner;
need to protect the public through general deterrence (of other
practitioners);
need to protect the public by reinforcing high professional standards and
denouncing transgressions;
maintenance of public confidence in the profession; and
desirability of making available to the public any special skills possessed by
the practitioner.
Complainant Commission tendered two volumes of evidence which were admitted
without objection as CV1 (Tabs 1-57) and CV2 (Tabs
58-68) (Complainants Volumes
1 and 2). A redacted copy of the document index is attached to these reasons for
decision (Attachment
complainant also tendered at hearing the Nursing and Midwifery Council Reasons
for Decision from the proceedings held under s.150
National Law
dated 20 October, 2014 and marked “Exhibit A”.
evidence of the Complainant contained, among many other documents, separate
expert reports from Mr Shaw covering the conduct of
all three nurses: RN Hayden
[CV1, Tab 40]; RN Thomas [CV1, Tab49]; EEN Rumble [CV1, Tab 52]. Also admitted
was an expert psychiatry
report by Dr Parsonage concerning EEN Rumble [CV2, Tab
57]. No experts were called for examination at hearing, so this evidence stands
untested and unchallenged.
the body of the Complainant’s evidence are also witness statements,
including two statements from Patient A’s girlfriend
(“Patient A
GF”) [CV1, Tabs 25, 26] and TEN (trainee enrolled nurse) Kerry Wadley
[CV1, Tab 31] and EEN Peter Thomas
[AV-1, Tab 33].
Thomas’ Legal Officer Ms Toose, tendered a bundle of evidence on his
behalf, and it was admitted as RV-1 (Respondent’s
Volume 1). The index is
contained in Attachment 2.
Toose also tendered two statutory declarations. That of Donna Maree Hayden,
dated 10 October, 2016, was admitted without objection
and marked as
“Exhibit B”. A statutory declaration of Julie Anne Rumble, dated 24
July, 2016, was admitted without objection
and marked as “Exhibit
only person to give oral evidence was RN Thomas. No expert witnesses were
The Complaint against RN Abraham
should be said at the outset that it was confirmed at hearing that RN Thomas
admits the particulars of the amended complaints,
and, while acknowledging the
seriousness of the complaints themselves, does not make admissions as to
possible the
of unsatisfactory professional conduct under
sections 139B(1)(a) and (l) of the National Law. It is upon the Committee to
determination.
particulars are admitted, the Committee considers it prudent to outline the
evidence here in proof of factual issues, as
it is of significance when it comes
to considering the appropriate consequential orders.
Essentially
the factual issues flowing from the particulars are:
fail to observe Patient A every fifteen minutes
throughout his
shift on 28 February, 2014?
in the alternative, did RN Thomas
fail to clarify the care level
Patient A with other staff or by review of the file?
RN Thomas, as the nurse-in-charge of the morning shift,
fail to resolve any
care level requirements
fail to ensure that such were
communicated
to the nursing team?
RN Thomas knowingly or recklessly
incorrectly sign the observation sheet for
15:00 hours
the entry by RN Thomas at 15:00 hours
create an inaccurate and misleading
in Patient A’s records?
the patient Observation Sheet there are initials indicating observations every
half hour for the “A” shift (the morning
shift of 07:00 to 15:00
hours), which would be observation at Level 3, which required half-hourly
observations. So, at the outset,
the clinical standard of the nursing staff had
not met the requirements dictated by the designated Level 2
observations.
the “B” shift (13:30 to 22:00 hours) there are initials on the
observation sheet indicating that Patient A was observed
by nursing staff at
15:00, 15:15, 15:30, and 15:45 hours. The reality of these observations is not
borne out by the CCTV footage,
as stated above. Indeed, on the evidence it is
found that the first attempted observation of Patient A by the B shift afternoon
(starting at 15:00 hours) was at the time leading to the awful discovery
of his death after 17:00 hours.
key factual matter bringing this matter to proceedings before the Professional
Standards Committee is, therefore, not only
the failure to conduct proper
observations at the correct intervals
fifteen minutes
fact that the observation charts in Patient A’s file bore signatures of
the three nurses which
appear to be a false record
of what had actually
occurred (or had not occurred).
Thomas first registered as a nurse in India, having obtained a Bachelor of
Science in Nursing from the Indian Academy College of
Nursing. Between 2009 and
2011 he worked as a registered nurse in India, and moved to Australia in 2012.
At that time he undertook
a three-month bridging course, upon completion of
which he became qualified to practise as a registered nurse in Australia, and
so registered.
2012 RN Thomas commenced employment at Dubbo Base Hospital within the Mental
Health Inpatient Unit (“MHIPU”). He had
been working in that unit
approximately seventeen months at the time of Patient A’s
that day RN Thomas was the nurse-in-charge for the A (morning) shift. He
commenced work at 07:00 hours and left work at 15:40 hours.
He was responsible
for co-ordinating the shift for the two units, both HDU and SAU. In the SAU he
was supervising Trainee Enrolled
Nurse (“TEN”) Wadley, and newly
graduated RN Kaur. He was responsible for the administration of all medication
discharge of three patients that day. He also was allocated the specific
care of five patients on the SAU.
the care of Patient A, with a strong history of suicidal ideation, was allocated
to a trainee, TEN Wadley. The evidence
did not yield a satisfactory answer as to
why this occurred.
way of context to the Complaints, in his statement and in oral evidence, RN
Thomas painted the picture of both the ward on the
day in question and the
culture of nursing in the MHIPU. The day seemed to be a typically fulsome day,
with meetings, discharges,
patients needing gate leave arranged, medication
administration, patient care, and so on - many different tasks -but tasks that
routinely occur in such a ward. There is no doubt that RN Thomas was
having a typically busy day at work.
Thomas indicates in his statement (RV, Tab 1) that he had nursed Patient A on a
few occasions prior to 28 February, 2014. RN Thomas
did have interaction with
Patient A on that day:
“...I did ask Patient A how he was feeling, to which he responded he
was feeling ‘good’ and that he ‘wanted
to go home’.
Patient A also stated that he was ‘bored’ and that ‘nothing
was happening at the hospital’.
Patient A expressed concern about his
pending blood results as he was concerned that he had contracted a sexually
transmitted disease
from a sex worker. I attempted to reassure him that his
previous blood results were all clear... During this conversation, I made
specific enquiry about whether he had any suicidal thoughts and I was assured
that he did not.”
(RV, Tab 1, p.6).
a general principle in the MHIPU, the degree of wellness and safety would inform
the allocated observation level for a patient:
Level 1 – a nurse must observe the patient constantly, not leaving
their side.
Level 2 – observations every fifteen minutes.
Level 3 - observations every thirty minutes.
Level 4 – observations every two hours.
The observation level is to be indicated in the medical record by the doctor.
The progress notes for Patient A on the morning of 28
February, 2014 at 09:00
hours bear the large stamp indicating observation Level 2. It seems that an
unknown person at an unknown
time had erroneously circled Level 4 on the actual
observation chart, however the progress notes are very clear that the doctor had
considered the observation level on that day and had made it Level 2. Risk
status was described as “S2” and leave status
though RN Thomas points to an indication of Level 4 observations on the file,
his entries for observations were actually at Level
3 (half hourly), so it would
seem that there was little thought or care given to the matter.
care plan in the medical record very clearly indicated that for 26,27, and 28
February observations were Level 2 and leave status
is required for all observation levels is clearly described on one side of each
Mental Health Inpatient Unit Observation Sheet
(the document where daily
observations are recorded by nursing staff, CV1, Tab 68, pp.186 ff).
This description is taken directly from the Greater Western Area Health
Service ‘Standard of Practice (SOP) Patient Care Levels,
Specialling and
Risk Assessment for Mental Health Inpatients’ dated August 2009 (CV2, Tab
58, p.5), which was in place at the
relevant time.
Level 2 observations are described thus:
Clinical indicators
assessed as a medium risk of suicide or self-harm
Patient cannot
be safely managed in a less restrictive area
Patient is at
risk of absconding
significant risk to the patient’s personal reputation, financial affairs
or sexual safety
Patient to be
reviewed by a Medical Officer daily (Monday to Friday) in consultation with
nursing staff.
Description
Patient is to be
contained in a locked facility and checked every 15 minutes
Patient to be
checked for signs of life (e.g. respiration) each 15 minute interval throughout
Patient must be
escorted by a Registered Nurse when out of the ward. An Enrolled Nurse could be
used at the discretion of the Nurse
Unit Manager
observations chart kept as part of the patient’s medical
was some confusion on the part of RN Thomas as to the correct level / frequency
of observations required for Patient A. RN Thomas
says he held the erroneous
belief that the observation level must have dropped because Patient A was
transferred from the HDU to
the SAU, and because the observation sheet had
“Level 4” circled at the top of the page. That certainly was not the
available evidence of the current observation level for that day, as there
was no indication of day or time that Level 4 was circled
– that could
have been done any day in a four-day period.
RN Thomas says he was unclear / mistaken on the matter. His statement
“... Throughout the shift, I attended to all care level observations
for Patient A. I performed these at 30 minute intervals
which is Care Level 3
observations. My reasoning for attending care level 3 observations for Patient A
was that I understood he was
not actively suicidal and because he was
transferred from the HDU to SAU. Further, Patient A had been on escorted gate
previous day with his mother. My understanding at the time was that
when a patient is approved by the treating medical team for gate
leave; where
they are not actively suicidal; and where they have been transferred to the SAU,
then their observation level is either
care level 3 or care level 4...”
(RV, Tab 1, p.7)
Thomas’ careless and unchecked beliefs, however, genuine, cannot be
justified. It is true that the Observation Charts indicate
that a person on
Level 2 observations could not go off the ward without a registered nurse, or an
enrolled nurse with the authorisation
of the nurse unit manager. However, it is
too great a leap to assume that because Patient A had been out on leave with his
around that time that this negated the doctor’s allocation of Level
2 observations.
presumption
of diminished risk, based on surrounding circumstances
(possibility of leave, the transfer from HDU to the less restrictive ward),
rather than operating under
clarified certainty,
that has potentially
allowed such tragedy to unfold on this day. It is not
acceptable to
presume observation levels, despite the plausibility of the presumption in the
surrounding circumstances. If RN Thomas
was uncertain at all, a simple perusal
of the file would have answered the question. If, in his view, ambiguity
remained, the matter
should have been clarified with the doctor. Given the
documented history of suicidality, failure to check this point was careless
possibly costly.
short, the evidence bore out that Patient A had been designated by the doctor as
Level 2 Observations (every 15 minutes), and this
was written clearly at around
9:00am after the morning meeting in the boxed stamp in the progress notes. This
entry is very clear
and in the middle of the page. The doctor’s later file
entry at 13:40 that day includes the entries “no suicidal feelings
thoughts” and “Obs 2”. Further, the level of care to be taken
for a patient ascribed this observation level is
clear from both the relevant
area health service policy and it is actually printed on the observation
file evidence was objectively clear. It is the doctor that sets the observation
level to be followed by the nursing staff, and
that the level had been set at
Level 2 that morning. It was very clear in the progress notes from the day
before, where it was stamped
and marked as Level 2 in the middle of the page,
and it was very clear on the 28 February, 2014, by use of the same stamp entry
the file at 09:00 hours that the observation level for that day was to remain
at level 2.
Committee accepts the evidence of the Complainant Commission’s expert, Mr
Warren Shaw. The expert evidence addresses the
position of RN Thomas that the
observation level was confusing for the reasons already outlined. He
“...The standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or experience, applicable at the time
of the conduct, would
include establishing a clear understanding of the patients under one’s
care including the specific requirements
to maintain safety and support patient
recovery congruent with the treatment plan and relevant Policy and Procedural
frameworks.
There would also be an expectation that a nurse would report any
deviation from these constraints.
It is the Reviewer’s opinion that the conduct of RN Thomas is
significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner of
an equivalent
level of training or experience. This departure from the standard invited the
strong criticism
...” (CV1, Tab 49, p.8)
Shaw describes a lack of clinical leadership on behalf RN Thomas in his failure
to familiarise himself with the care requirements
through clinical handover and
review of the medical record, clarify any discrepancies, and allocate staff to
best achieve optimum
monitoring, ensuring the team understood and adhered to the
treatment plan. (CV1, Tab 49, pp.10-11).
Thomas documented in Patient A’s file that he had observed him at 15:00
hours. He said in oral evidence that he had thought
it was around that time
because of the coincidence in his mind of sighting Patient A and the timing of
afternoon tea. The objective
evidence showed that the time RN Thomas, or any
other staff member, could have last sighted Patient A was around 14:41 hours
he was observed walking past the nurses’ station. This is verified by
the CCTV footage RN Thomas conceded that this was correct
and that the time of
15:00 hours he had signed on the observation chart was
In his statement and in oral evidence RN Thomas spoke candidly of what might be
described as a uniformly cavalier attitude to making
and recording patient
observations in MHIPU at Dubbo Hospital. His statement reads as
“Prior to Patient A’s death, there was a significant culture of
lack of adherence to policy and poor professional practice
in the unit. It was
common practice in the unit to not observe patients for long periods of time,
even in the HDU.” (RV, Tab
RN Thomas also noted that there had been great systemic procedural and
cultural improvements in this area since the death of Patient
said that, RN Thomas’ statement and oral evidence was layered with
admissions of his own fault:
Re Complaint 1
“I accept that I failed to exercise an appropriate level of care for
Patient A...
...I accept I should have ensured I was aware of the care level assigned to
Patient A. Also, that I adequately observed Patient A
in accordance with that
Level. I should have also ensured that any observation was conducted in
accordance with the ... Policy.
...I believe that at the time I undervalued the importance and significance
of personally undertaking a care level observation in
strictly accordance with
the Policy. I had also become complacent because I had interacted with Patient A
on numerous occasions...
...I admit that I failed to familiarise myself with the correct care level
allocated to Patient A. On review of the medical records
it is clear that
Patient A was allocated a care level 2 on 27 February and again on 28
February...
...Despite the observation sheet being ambiguous, I did not make any attempt
to clarify what the correct level was either through
discussion with his
treating psychiatrist or by reviewing his progress notes...
...I accept that I did not effectively prioritise my workload on that day or
seek any support or assistance from senior staff to alleviate
my workload or
allow me to complete the necessary tasks on the day...
...I should have gone through the clinical files on the day in order to
update the care levels for each patient in the MHIPU...
...I accept that as the in-charge of shift, I had an overriding
responsibility to ensure that care level observations were either
appropriately delegated and undertaken by another member of staff. As in-charge,
I also had a responsibility to effectively
communicate with other members of the
treating team to ensure that there was a clear care plan in place and that the
plan was communicated
to all members of staff...
...On reflection, I should not have accepted the responsibility to act as
in-charge that day. At the time of the incident, I did not
possess the skills
and knowledge necessary to undertake the additional responsibilities that came
with the role... (RV, Tab 1, passim).
Complaint 2:
[While RN Thomas made a qualification to his admission in his originally
tendered statement, he made a full admission in oral evidence
to the amended
particulars, whereby the amended times in the complaint recognised that he was
not responsible for observations after
15:00 hours when the “B”
shift took over, and that he left work at around 15:40pm.]
RN Thomas added: “I would like to emphasise to the Committee that it
was never my intention to create a false or misleading
record [for] Patient
A...” (RV, Tab 1, p.14).
is clear from the evidence that the particulars 1, 2, and 3 of Complaint One,
and particulars 1 and 2 of Complaint Two are proved
on the balance of
probabilities and to the Committee’s comfortable satisfaction. While
normally more minute coverage of the
evidence for each individual particular
would be extrapolated in these reasons for decision, the Committee is satisfied
that, given
the admissions, the oral testimony of RN Thomas, and the uncontested
expert and other evidence, it is not necessary on this
Committee would like to make some comment, however, above Particulars 1 and 2 of
Complaint 2, essentially that RN Thomas knowingly
or recklessly signed the
observation sheet for 15:00 hours without visualising Patient A after 14:41
hours, thereby causing there
to be created an inaccurate and misleading entry in
the clinical records. On the evidence the entry was indeed reckless and it did
create an inaccurate and misleading patient record.
the particular is proved on the balance of the evidence, the Committee accepts
that RN Thomas did not
intentionally
set out to create a deceptive record
with respect to the incorrectly signed observation at 15:00 hours. This conduct
differs from
that of Ms Hayden and Ms Rumble in ways that will later be
Committee accepts that, although RN Thomas was acting carelessly under the wrong
observation timing regime and with little regard
for accuracy, that his entry of
15:00 hours was seen by him as an approximation, and that this was common
practice on the ward. That
is not to say that it was in any way acceptable
– either on this occasion or as a general culture on the ward - but it is
by the Committee to clarify matters relating to
Observation Sheets have set time slots of fifteen minute intervals and there is
no room to indicate an exact time outside the
intervals given. RN Thomas’
conduct was lacking and indifferent to the proper standards, but the Committee
was satisfied by
his evidence and demeanour that the intent was not duplicitous.
RN Thomas had erroneously signed at thirty minute intervals all day.
intended to falsify records to make them appear correct, he could have falsely
signed off for fifteen-minute observation intervals
across the span of his
shift. The unacceptable consequence of this conduct, however, is that the record
stood as an indication to
the oncoming staff that an observation had occurred
later than what really happened. We do not know the ‘knock-on’
of this, or exactly when Patient A took his own life, but the potential
cost of an incorrectly timed entry for a patient with suicidal
ideation who is
designated for fifteen minute observations, cannot be underestimated.
DETERMINATION AND ORDERS
reliance on the Respondent’s admissions and the matters considered above,
the Committee answers to the factual issues as
Did RN Thomas
fail to observe Patient A every fifteen minutes
throughout his shift on 28 February, 2014?
Or, in the alternative, did RN Thomas
fail to clarify the care level
of Patient A with other staff or by review of the file?
Did RN Thomas, as the nurse-in-charge of the morning shift,
resolve any care level requirements
fail to ensure that such were
communicated
to the nursing team?
Did RN Thomas knowingly or recklessly
incorrectly sign the observation
sheet for 15:00 hours
Did the entry by RN Thomas at 15:00 hours
create an inaccurate and
misleading entry
in Patient A’s records?
Consequently,
the Committee is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the particulars
are proved, and, indeed, admitted. This
leaves the task of discerning whether
the conduct amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Committee comfortably makes that finding - that the conduct particularised,
proved, and admitted for Complaints One and Two amounts
to unsatisfactory
professional conduct under sections 139B(1)(a) and 139B(1)(l) of the National
failures around obtaining and operating from a secure knowledge of the
patient’s care and observation levels, and of ensuring
that the nursing
team were fully apprised of those matters, is conduct by RN Thomas that
demonstrates judgment and care in the practice
of nursing that is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
failures that led to reckless creation of a false time record amount to improper
and unethical conduct in nursing.
deficits in RN Thomas’ conduct were not concerning sophisticated aspects
of nursing. They were not related to performance
of technical procedures or
matters outside the normal realm of mental health nursing. They are matters
relating to ascertaining the
correct treatment and care plan and accurate
recording of observations. Matters which are fundamental to the practise of
and which are fulfilled by exercise of diligence in care and of
integrity with record keeping. A finding of unsatisfactory professional
is inescapable.
finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct triggers under s.146B of the
National Law the power of the Nursing and Midwifery
Professional Standards
Committee to, among other things, make orders to impose conditions on the
practitioner’s registration,
order the practitioner to complete a
specified education course or be placed under various sorts of supervision with
reporting requirements,
or to give a caution or reprimand.
legislation is very clear that orders are to be shaped in a way to protect the
public, not to punish the practitioner. It is undeniable,
however, that a
protective order may feel punitive to the practitioner. As outlined earlier in
the treatise on the relevant law,
the Committee must consider the protection of
the public, maintaining public confidence in the profession, general and
specific deterrence,
and the desirability or making available to the public any
special skills possessed by the
practitioner.
Submissions as to Consequential
Complainant’s submissions
Shah, for the Health Care Complaints Commission, points to what he sees as
deficits in the responses of RN Thomas to the complaints.
Thomas indicated in his statement he had plans to apply for a Masters in Mental
Health Nursing, and that he indicated to the hospital
during the investigation
process that he would undertake postgraduate study in mental health. Mr Shah
notes that the continuing professional
development records of RN Thomas reveal
that most of his courses have related to general nursing, rather than mental
health. Mr Shah
submits that the Committee cannot be confident that RN Thomas
will pursue further study without the coercive power of an
Shah also points to a lack of evidence of reflection upon the relevant policies
and matters pertaining to leadership and supervision
of junior staff. Although
RN Thomas has been working under close supervision from a Clinical Nurse
Specialist, the Committee has
not been supplied any supervision reports, only
two references.
importance of general deterrence is raised, bringing to the attention of the
Committee the concerns summarised in
Health Care Complaints Commission v. Do
[2014] NSWCA 307
regarding general deterrence to other practitioners,
upholding the standards of the profession, and the public’s confidence
the profession.
Complainant accordingly seeks:
Restrictions
on practice of at least twelve months from working in charge of a shift, ward or
unit; working in a High Dependency Unit;
having any supervisory
responsibilities; working as a sole practitioner; or working on night shift.
obligations on any employer to notify the Nursing and Midwifery Council of any
breaches of conditions or unsafe practice.
supervision requirements for day-to-day nursing.
supervision requirements by a Nurse Manager with reporting obligations.
performance assessment requirement before any application under s.163A of the
National Law for review of the practitioner’s
supervision
requirements.
and completion in a Masters Degree in Mental Health Nursing, at the
practitioner’s own expense.
the Nursing and Midwifery Council (or inter-state equivalent) be the designated
review body for the purposes of s.163-163C of
the National
Respondent’s submissions
Toose, for the Respondent Practitioner, acknowledges that the Committee is bound
to consider the health and safety of the public
as paramount, and is to take
into account the protection of the profession and the maintenance of public
confidence in the high standards
of the profession. The element of general
deterrence to other practitioners is significant.
Toose submits that the Committee, in making its determination, should take all
relevant matters into consideration. This includes
RN Thomas’ admissions
to the particulars of the complaint, relative inexperience at the time of the
incident, skill mix of
the shift and his remorse for his conduct.
death of Patient A has been the catalyst for significant change in the way that
RN Thomas practices as well as the operation of
the entire MHIPU at
Toose cites various practice enhancing activities following the events of 28
February, 2014. Since that time, RN Thomas has worked
as supernumerary for a
period of one month and was seconded to Bloomfield Hospital to engage in
supervised practice for six months.
RN Thomas also won a grant to participate in
the Bob Fenwick Memorial Mentoring Grants Program where he was paired with a
and spent a week with them at Blacktown Hospital. RN Thomas has also been
a project leader in the Productive Mental Health Wards
project for which Dubbo
MHIPU won a Qualitas Award from NSW Health.
Toose submits that in the event of a finding of unsatisfactory professional
conduct that a caution would be appropriate. This position
is put on the grounds
that it would sufficiently act as a specific and general deterrent. Ms Toose
notes the unlikelihood that RN
Thomas would ever repeat such conduct.
terms of the possibility of conditions, Ms Toose urges that such should be
remedial and not restrictive. She points to the conditions
proffered by the
Complainant and argues that certain among them are overly restrictive, punitive,
or with the likely effect of robbing
RN Thomas of employment.
preventing RN Thomas from supervising staff, it is submitted, are punitive.
Conditions requiring supervision would be excessive,
given the extensive periods
of supervised practice, both within Dubbo and Bloomfield Hospitals, undergone by
RN Thomas since the
Committee notes from the evidence the undated update from the employer as to RN
Thomas’s supervision, which reads:
“Mr Thomas has completed a 3 months rotation in the Adult Acute Unit at
Bloomfield Hospital and is about to commence a 3 month
rotation in the Mental
Health Intensive Care Unit (MHICU) at Bloomfield. This entails working within
strong teams who can closely
supervise and mentor.
Mr Thomas attends group supervision sessions and also one on one supervision,
both conducted by a senior accredited clinical supervisor
within the Mental
Health and Drug & Alcohol Service. He has attended and observed admissions
to Bloomfield MHICU.
The clinical Nurse Educator works with Mr Thomas and keeps a regular note of
his training. Training has included MH-OAT (Mental Health
Outcomes Assessment
Tools), suicidal awareness and aggression minimization programs.” (CV1,
Toose points to the fact that RN Thomas’ two professional referees (RV,
Tabs 5 & 7) are senior staff members already
working with RN Thomas, who
would likely be his supervisors, and who “give nothing but praise for RN
Thomas, despite their
knowledge of the complaints against him.” Mentoring
is suggested rather than supervision, as something that would enable him
develop his practice through education and reflection as a senior mental health
condition against working nightshift may result in termination of RN
Thomas’ employment, as one of the requirements of his
role is the ability
to work a ‘rotating roster’.
Toose speaks against a performance assessment as lacking in foundation given
that there have been no competence issues identified
concerning his practice
since the events that led to the complaint. The Committee notes that no specific
evidence has been led on
this specific matter, but there is certainly no
evidence of performance inadequacies after this time that has been put before
RN Thomas offers further information to the Committee on this point, if
the Respondent’s submissions indicate a willingness to engage in further
education, albeit with two reasonable caveats.
Firstly, that any stipulated
education be geographically practical. Secondly, it is noted that RN Thomas is
currently an Australian
resident, and has applied citizenship. Only when
citizenship is approved would he be eligible for any educational loan from the
Government. It is for this reason, and the that of uncertainty
surrounding his career until the resolution of the Complaints, that
already commenced postgraduate study in mental health
Orders and Conditions
Committee has given careful deliberation to the seriousness of the conduct
concerned, the written and oral evidence, the critical
matters outlined within
these reasons pertaining to the protective jurisdiction, and the submissions of
the legal representatives.
Acknowledging
that there seemed to be some subtle confusions due to language within the formal
context of the cross examination in
the hearing process, the Committee was
satisfied both that the conduct was serious and that the Respondent was
Committee acknowledges RN Thomas’ admissions in relation to the complaint
and his conduct generally in relation to the nursing
care of Patient A and his
supervision of staff.
is prudent, in the interests of
of the public and to
the standards of nursing
to the public and the profession, that the
practitioner is reprimanded, that further education be ordered, and that certain
be placed on the practitioner’s registration for a period of
twelve months, including mentoring.
reprimand is preferred over a caution. If one accepts that a reprimand is in the
order of an official rebuke, and a caution is a
warning to not repeat the
conduct, then a reprimand is the appropriate order to uphold the reputation of
the nursing profession,
and as a specific and general deterrent. (See
Psychologists Board of Australia v Coleman
[2013] VCAT 738
order (below) with respect to education requires completion of a course that is
at a level of a postgraduate certificate in nursing,
which is the level of
further education that the Professional Standards Committee deems to be required
to meet the issues arising
from the unsatisfactory professional conduct, the
surrounding circumstances, and the degree of supervised practice that has taken
place since the death of Patient A. RN Thomas has expressed the desire to
undertake a Masters of Mental Health Nursing, subject to
matters of geographical
proximity and the determination of his application for Australian citizenship
(which would affect the level
of the tertiary fees). This may mean that RN
Thomas would prefer to satisfy the education orders by completing the course at
higher Masters level.
Committee, however, did not consider that, in this matter, an
complete study at Masters level was needed to achieve the objectives of the
National Law.
should RN Thomas wish to study at Masters level, it would not be helpful if the
orders read such that a graduate certificate
in nursing would additionally be
required. The orders are also crafted to recognise that the Nursing and
Midwifery Council may deem
that, at a certain point through a Masters level
course, that the practitioner has completed sufficient study to satisfy the
Committee’s
education order.
Committee prefers a mentoring condition over a supervision condition. We are of
the view that it is extremely unlikely that RN
Thomas would ever regard
observation of patients as anything but a serious matter. There has been much
supervised practice since
the events of 28 February, 2014. A mentoring
relationship would create a place for honest professional reflection and
maturation,
and support RN Thomas as he develops into a more senior mental
health clinician.
Committee orders that RN Abraham Thomas be reprimanded.
Committee orders RN Thomas to successfully complete an educational course at the
level of no less than a graduate certificate
in mental health nursing that has
been approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales. The
following provisions
nominated course should be submitted to the Council for approval no later than
three months of the date of these orders.
registrant must submit to the Council no later than three months of the date of
these orders a proposed course commencement date
for approval, and if this date
is not approved the commencement should be at a date to be determined by the
registrant must submit to the Council no later than three months of the date of
these orders a proposed course completion date
for approval, and if this date is
not approved the commencement date should be at a date to be determined by the
registrant may, if desired, submit for approval a course that is of a higher
level than a graduate certificate in mental health
the Council approves and the registrant undertakes a course that is of a higher
educational level to the graduate certificate in
nursing and longer in duration,
at the proper stage of the course programme the registrant may submit to the
Council evidence that
he has completed a portion of the course that is at least
equivalent in time and academic rigour to a graduate certificate in mental
health nursing. If the Council is satisfied as to the equivalency of the portion
completed of the registrant’s study with a
graduate certificate in mental
health nursing, the Council may, at its sole discretion, determine that the
education order has been
course(s) must be taken in addition to the 20 hours of Continuing Professional
Development hours required by the Nursing and Midwifery
Australia’s Registration
registrant must not, for a minimum period of 12 months:
the nurse in charge of any shift, ward or unit;
supervisory responsibilities for any other nurse or trainee nurse;
as the sole practitioner on any shift, ward, or
Notice to Employers
registrant must only be employed as a nurse in circumstances where the employer
has agreed to notify the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales of any
breach of the conditions or unsafe practice, and exchange information with the
Council related
to compliance with the
conditions.
registrant must engage in a mentoring relationship for a period of at least 12
months with a registered nurse (Division 1, who
does not have conditions on
her/his practice). The registered nurse mentor must be approved by the Nursing
and Midwifery Council
5.1 It is not necessary that the mentor work at the same location with the
registrant and mentoring may take place by telephone,
Skype, or other like
communication service.
5.2 The registrant must:
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW with the name, contact details and
resume of the registered nurse within four weeks
of the date of these orders who
has agreed to act
mentor, and
specified in the conditions;
to notify the Council of any breach of the conditions, including repeated
failure to attend meetings; and
to exchange information with the Council in relation to the registrant’s
compliance with the conditions.
to the Council a copy of the conditions signed by the registrant and by the
mentor indicating awareness of the conditions
authorisation.
within four weeks of the mentor being approved by the Council, a mentoring plan
that is developed in consultation with the
mentor which meets the standards
required by the Council’s mentoring policy.
a mentoring report to the Council every six months for a period of at least
twelve months, and until the Council has advised
the registrant in writing. The
mentoring report is to be co-signed by the approved mentor and meet the
standards required by the
Council’s mentoring
Administrative modifications
Nursing & Midwifery Council of NSW may modify conditions where necessary for
administrative purposes.
registrant is responsible for the costs associated with complying with the
conditions unless otherwise specified.
APPEAL AND REVIEW
Abraham Thomas has the right to appeal this decision to the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal.
appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of receipt of these
written reasons.
Abraham Thomas also has the right to seek a review by the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW of the Committee’s order to
impose conditions. The Nursing
and Midwifery Council of NSW is the appropriate review body for the purposes of
Part 8, Division 8
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
where the practitioner’s principal place of practice is
125 to 127 of the National Law are to apply should Mr Abraham Thomas’
principal place of practice be anywhere other
than NSW at the time of seeking a
review of conditions, and in such case Mr Abraham Thomas may make an application
for review to
the National Board.
RN DONNA HAYDEN & EEN JULIE RUMBLE
Committee has not been supplied evidence
on behalf of
the two nurses who
nursed on the afternoon shift and who were the subject of Complaints. That said,
there is indirect evidence in
the Complainant’s volumes in following
A’s medical records from the admission
written responses of RN Hayden (18 June, 2014) and EEN Rumble (14 March, 2014)
to the investigation.
documents concerning the nurses’ employment records.
statements.
reports concerning each nurse from Mr Warren Shaw, both dated 12 May, 2015.
of Dr Parsonage, psychiatrist, concerning EEN Rumble dated 9 March, 2015.
Health and Western NSW Local Health District policy directives and
guidelines.
for Decision from the Nursing and Midwifery Council in the proceedings
concerning EEN Rumble pursuant to s.150 of the National
Law (“Section 150
Proceedings”) (Exhibit A).
previously stated, Ms Toose handed up at hearing statutory declarations
(Exhibits B & C) from Ms Hayden and Ms Rumble to the
effect their
registrations had lapsed and that they had no intention of returning to nursing
in the future. They undertook to refrain
from seeking registration as a nurse
again and to refrain from practising nursing again, acknowledging that a breach
of these undertakings
would allow the Health Care Complaints Commission to bring
proceedings alleging unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Committee understands that practitioners may find the prospect of facing
disciplinary proceedings utterly overwhelming. Such investigations
hearing process are, indeed, a huge personal strain.
it is important to recognise that proceedings under Part 8 of the National Law
concerning conduct allegations of a health
professional are a tangible
expression of the objective and guiding principle of the paramountcy of
protection of the health and
safety of the public (section 3A). This objective
is diminished if practitioners may escape the process at their behest, and avoid
any findings about their conduct, by simply refusing to engage and offering
undertakings. If such refusal causes the trier of fact
to readily resile from
robust consideration of the conduct, and the making of findings, there is pause
for concern. General deterrence
and preservation of the reputation of the
profession may thereby be obscured.
4D, clause 12 of the National Law provides:
12 Certain complaints may not be heard [NSW]
(1) A Committee or the Tribunal may decide not to conduct an inquiry, or at
any time to terminate an inquiry or appeal, if-
(a) any of the following circumstances apply-
(i) a complainant fails to comply with a requirement made of the complainant
by the Committee or the Tribunal;
(ii) the person about whom the complaint is made ceases to be a registered
health practitioner or student;
(iii) the complaint before the Committee or the Tribunal is withdrawn;
(b) in the opinion of the Committee or the Tribunal it is not in the public
interest for the inquiry or appeal to continue...
Chairperson or presiding tribunal member may exercise the power on behalf of the
Committee or Tribunal (clause 12(3)).
HCCC may apply to withdraw a complaint and is guided by
Care Complaints Act
(NSW), however no such application has been made.
Indeed, the Complainant asks the Committee to make findings as a matter of
interest. There is, submitted the Complainant, no other forum in which
the matters as to conduct may be tested and weighed. The Complainant
make any submissions as to the appropriate orders in the
circumstances.
the time a matter has been brought to hearing there has been extensive effort
and expense invested by many bodies in composing
and gathering evidence. The
Professional Standards Committee was empanelled for a projected three days of
hearing time to allow for
the Complaints and responses to be ventilated. No
admissions have been made in writing. The Committee contends that it is in the
public interest for there to be public findings.
would seem that determination of whether findings should be made in relation to
RN Hayden and EEN Rumble hinges on consideration
of the fullness of the
objectives of the National Law, that is, the broad consideration of the concept
of protection of the public.
The determination of the public interest is a
matter for the Committee, which is not bound by the views of the parties, even
they agreed that the matter should not proceed to findings and final
the matter of
[2014] NSWCA 307
the NSW Court of Appeal
considered whether the Medical Tribunal in the first instance had erred in
deciding not to make a disqualification
order in circumstances where the
practitioner was not presently registered. The HCCC appealed the order
principally on the ground
that the Tribunal failed to give proper consideration
its objective of protecting the health and safety of the
Court of Appeal found that the Tribunal had fallen short in that it had
the unlikelihood of the practitioner repeating the
conduct, rather than making orders that would effectively denounce to the public
the gravely unacceptable conduct:
“...The objective of protecting the health and safety of the public is
not confined to protecting patients or potential patients
of a particular
practitioner from the continuing risk of his or her malpractice or incompetence.
It includes protecting the public
from the similar misconduct or incompetence of
other practitioners and upholding public confidence in the standards of the
profession.
That objective is achieved by setting and maintaining those
standards and, where appropriate, by cancelling the registration of
practitioners
who are not competent or otherwise not fit to practise, including
those who have...” (at [35]).
conduct that was the subject of the
case was very
different to that of RN Hayden and EEN Rumble, and it is not to be suggested
that disqualification orders are appropriate
in the present case.
point is that, in making decisions about disciplinary matters under the National
Law, a Professional Standards Committee or Tribunal
can lose its way in focusing
on the risk of the practitioner’s future repetition of the bad
conduct without also considering the questions of general deterrence
protection of the public that derive, in part, from disciplinary
decision-makers’ consistent reinforcement of stringent
conduct standards.
This reinforcement of standards is achieved, in some cases, by an order that
shouts out to the public and the
profession that the practitioner’s
conduct is completely unacceptable.
Tribunal in
HCCC v. Duggan
[2015] NSWCATOD 142
was faced with the request
from a practitioner to terminate proceedings upon the practitioner’s (an
osteopath) undertakings
to, among other things, surrender his registration and
undertake not to re-apply for registration as a health practitioner in the
that case the Tribunal noted that the various grounds for terminating such an
inquiry. These include where the HCCC was withdrawn
the complaint, or in
frivolous or vexatious matters or those lacking in substance, or where it is in
the public interest to withdraw.
Other features of past cases have been where
the practitioner has undertaken not to re-apply for registration, or is of
age and plans to retire form work altogether, and where the
practitioner has admitted the misconduct or impairment. (at [40-45],
the present case, the Committee sees nothing in the public interest that would
to justify ceasing the inquiry. On the material
that is before the Committee it
is clear that the Complaints are not frivolous, vexatious, or lacking in
substance, or wanting in
any of the matters in
Health Care
Complaints Act 1993
Although the two practitioners have given
undertakings to refrain from seeking future registration, there have been no
written admissions
of the misconduct.
allegations against the Respondents are principally around failure to conduct
proper observations on a patient with a known profile
of suicidal ideation and
previous plans and attempts to end his own life. It is alleged that these
failures are compounded in the
likely duplicitous actions of RN Hayden and EEN
Rumble of purposely falsifying the medical record of Patient A to indicate
observations
that were never performed. The conduct, although in the realm of
very basic nursing tasks, is grave. Somewhere in a two hour and
forty minute
period a young man died at his own hand, a terrible occurrence that may have
been avoided had the nurses simply checked
him at the correct intervals and made
honest timing entries in the file to record those observations.
is not the first time in New South Wales that failure to observe patients and
falsification of records of observations have ended
in the death of a patient. A
megaphone needs to sound to the profession that such conduct is not acceptable.
It is not in the public
interest, or in the interests of the integrity of the
nursing profession, that such complaints be wrapped in undertakings swept under
the carpet. Accordingly, the Committee proceeds to make findings in relation to
the conduct of Ms Hayden and Ms Rumble, and consequential
The Complaint against RN Donna
Hayden started work on 28 February, 2014 at 13:30 hours for the afternoon shift.
She attended the handover meeting from the morning
to the afternoon shift.
Complaints against RN Hayden and the particulars are reproduced in an annexure
to these reasons for decision marked Attachment
Hayden signed the observation sheet to indicate she had seen Patient A at 15:00
hours. After reviewing the CCTV footage she accepted
that she saw him earlier
than this, but understood that she could sign for the observation within fifteen
minutes either side of
the time she actually observed the
RN Hayden made her Police Statement (CV1, Tab 28 [12], dated 5 March, 2014), her
memory the handover from RN Thomas and another
nurse was vague. She recalled
that both had said that Patient A had requested weekend ‘gate leave’
but that the treating
team had refused. There was no change in presentation, and
Patient A’s mood remained low. She said that “there was nothing
stated he was a high risk of suicide by morning staff” (at
Hayden expresses conflicting views in the Police Statement and the Response to
the Health Care Complaints Commission under
s.34A(1)(a)
Health Care
Complaints Act 1993
(NSW) (CV1, Tab 35 – the “
Response”) concerning the content of a nurse’s duty to report
patient observations.
initial appears in the 15:00 column on the B shift evening on the 28/2 ... It
means that I have seen the patient since
the last occasion up until that point
or including that point. I remember when I came over at 3. I remembered seeing
him prior to
that point. So if I initial at 3.00pm it doesn’t mean that at
3.00pm I saw them, it just means that I remembered seeing them
time.” (Police Statement, CV1 Tab 28).
are no written admissions to the Complaints. There is no written response to the
actual Complaints before the Committee. There
is no evidence submitted on behalf
of Ms Hayden. The determination of the complaints will be based on the various
statements, the
expert report, the medical evidence and other related documents.
The analysis with respect to RN Hayden will necessarily be limited
in scope and
in length by these factors.
Essentially
the factual issues flowing from the particulars are:
fail to observe Patient A every fifteen minutes
relevant time on the afternoon shift on 28 February, 2014?
in the alternative, did RN Hayden
fail to clarify the care level
Patient A with other staff or by review of the file?
RN Hayden, as the nurse-in-charge of the morning shift,
fail to resolve any
care level requirements
fail to ensure that such were
communicated
to EN Julie Rumble?
RN Hayden knowingly
incorrectly sign the observation sheet for 15:00
, without having visualised Patient A between 14:41 and 17:00
the entry by RN Hayden at 15:00 hours
create an inaccurate and misleading
in Patient A’s records?
balance of the documents concerning RN Hayden indicates that she adopted an
inexact and subjective estimation of the level of
rigour required concerning
both the timing of observations and their record.
Circumstances
of Patient A being in the SAU, of his room being situated away from the
nurses’ station, and the fact that there
had been some family leave, were
taken by RN Hayden as indicators that suicidality risk was low.
Hayden was first registered as an enrolled nurse in 2008 and as a registered
nurse in 2010. She commenced working in the MHIPU
at Dubbo Base Hospital in
2008. At the relevant time she was employed on a full-time
Hayden had been on leave and had returned to work on 25 February, 2014. She was
working the afternoon shift on 28 February, 2014,
having commenced at 13.30
hours and attended the handover meeting from the morning shift, as noted above.
Importantly, she was the
nurse-in-charge of the shift, and thereby carried
heightened responsibilities of clinical leadership. After Patient A’s
she was unable to recall who had been specifically allocated as his nurse
for that shift, and she stated that she had not been allocated
as his nurse on
any occasion prior to that day (CV1, Tab 35, [5] & [8]).
her statement to the police (CV1, Tab 28, passim) RN Hayden describes a busy
afternoon attending to various tasks, including discharges
(which were noted to
be a time-consuming “sore point” on the unit), sorting out matters
with a patient’s belongings,
some administrative tasks that were
frustrated by email problems, checking patient files, arranging gate leave, and
various patient
described 15:00 to 15:30 hours as typically the worst time of the day. The
statement details a string of activities that kept
RN Hayden occupied constantly
until about 17:10 hours when she went with EEN Rumble onto the ward to lock the
patients’ doors.
arriving at Patient A’s door she saw him sitting on the floor with his
back leaning against the end of his bed. She did
not enter the room but stood in
the doorway, calling his name two or three times. When there was no answer she
said to EEN Rumble
that Patient A was either asleep or meditating and that she
would get a male nurse to come to the room to help rouse him. She thought
if she startled Patient A he might become “physical” (although it is
not clear why this was assumed), and that a
male nurse might be
she returned with a male nurse a minute or so later they both entered the room
and saw that Patient A had a sheet around his
neck. His lips were blue and his
hands and arms were by his side. The male nurse attempted to hold Patient A to
release the pressure
from his neck while she ran to get the ‘911 resus
tool’. She activated the duress call and assistance came. On returning
the room the sheet had been removed from Patient A’s neck and he had been
laid on the floor.
Hayden ran back to the nurses’ station to get the resus trolley and
oxygen, and on return to the room she saw that another
staff member had
commenced cardio pulmonary resuscitation (“CPR”) (at around 17:22
hours). The medical emergency team
arrived and commenced working on Patient A.
The medical records indicate that these efforts were continued until 17:58 hours
time of death was called.
that the CCTV footage establishes that no-one could have observed Patient A from
14:41 hours to the time RN Hayden and EEN Thomas
entered his room around 17:10
hours, it is problematic when the medical records contain entries from nursing
staff indicating that
he was observed during that time period.
Hayden signed Patient A’s observation sheet next to the time where 15:00
hours was pre-printed. The CCTV footage establishes
the falsehood of that entry.
Response states:
“...Although RN Hayden sighted Patient A closer to 14:45 hours, someone
had already signed next to that pre-printed time and
so RN Hayden signed in the
next available space. RN Hayden recalls seeing Patient A walk down the hallway
past the nurses’
station shortly before 15:00 hours. After reviewing the
CCTV footage, RN Hayden accepts that she saw him at approximately 14:41 hours.
It was RN Hayden’s understanding at the time that she could sign next to
the pre-printed time when she had seen the patient
within the 15 minutes either
side of that time...”
Response further states that RN Hayden’s understanding prior to these
devastating events was that Patient A’s harm/suicide
risk was low. The
Response demonstrated her confusion about the level of observation
required, noting the circling of Level 4 on the top of the observation
was discussed in relation to RN Thomas. Past leave, room location, and being in
the SAU contributed to a perception in
RN Hayden that suicidality was not a high
concern. RN Hayden acknowledged that, on reflection, she should have sought to
with the medical officers the correct observation level and then ensure
that the medical record clearly communicated the correct
level to all
expert report of Mr Shaw, dated 12 May, 2015, does not find sufficient reason or
excuse for the deficits in nursing practice that
were the subject of the
complaints (CV1, Tab 40). The following are extracts from the report that go
directly to the particulars
of the Complaint.
appears limited information about just exactly what RN Hayden was confused about
regarding the Care Level allocated
to Patient A....
...The file
indicated clearly that Patient A’s Care Level allocated by the
psychiatrist was Level 2 requiring 15 minute observations.
If RN Hayden believed
that the stamped entry in the progress note conflicted with the Observation
sheet this should have prompted
immediate inquiry with the higher Care Level
maintained until this was clarified.
The standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience, applicable at the time of the
conduct, would include
establishing a clear understanding of the patients under one’s care
including the specific requirements
to maintain safety and support patient
recovery congruent with the treatment plan and relevant Policy and Procedural
frameworks.
There would also be an expectation that a nurse would report any
deviation from these constraints...
... the conduct of RN Hayden is significantly below the standard expected of
a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience ... invit[ing]
the reviewer’s
strong criticism
... Whether RN Hayden’s assertion that she believed she was able to
record any observation of Patient A in the periods either
side of a pre-recorded
time or that she knowingly falsified the record to cover the sub-standard
practice in relation to Care Level
observation, it is the Reviewer’s
opinion that either practice is unacceptable...It is the Reviewer’s
opinion that this
represents misleading behaviour and falsification of medical
records regardless of whether it was a result of poor procedural orientation
deception ...
The standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience ... would include establishing
a clear understanding of
the patients under one’s care, including the specific requirements to
maintain safety and support
patient recovery frameworks. There would also be an
expectation that a nurse would report any deviation from these constraints.
.. the conduct is significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner
of an equivalent level of training or experience ...
invit[ing] the
strong criticism
...The Reviewer also notes RN Hayden’s response in her (unsigned)
statement made to Police the day after the incident ... RN
Hayden suggest that
her signing at a particular point meant she had ‘seen the patient since
the last occasion up until that
point or including that point. “I remember
when I came over at 3. I remembered seeing him at that point. So if I initial at
3:00pm it doesn’t mean that at 3:00pm I saw them, it just means that I
remembered seeing them at that time.” This statement,
whilst confusing,
suggests a further concerning variable to RN Hayden’s understanding of
contemporaneous recording.
Signing for any form of clinical activity in relation to patient care in the
absence of clear time reference is unacceptable, particularly
in terms of
clinical accountability and professional nursing standards. In the instance of
Care Level observations recording there
is a clear understanding that these will
reflect an accurate level of accountability individually. Additionally, working
variance practices carries potential to confuse other members of the
Nursing team and would reflect poorly when scrutinised retrospectively...
The nurse should record what they do and when. There would also be an
expectation that a nurse would report any deviation from these
constraints...
...The In-Charge of Shift generally is expected to provide clinical
leadership in familiarising themselves with the patients’
requirements for the shift, allocating staff to best achieve this and monitor
that this is in fact the case.
It would appear that RN Hayden failed in her In Charge of Shift role in three
RN Hayden was not sufficiently oriented to the Care Level Policy and made
several false assumptions as a result.
RN Hayden misrepresented her own activity in relation to Care Level Observations
RN Hayden did not fully assume the role of In Charge of Shift in that she did
not demonstrate clinical leadership by:
establishing patient requirements through Clinical Handover and review of the
medical record.
clarification of her perception of discrepancies in allocated Care
...RN Hayden had adopted a naïve approach to care, informed by
assumptions rather than fact. This is evidenced by her comments
patient was being nursed and that during the handover she was ‘not
informed that Patient A was actively suicidal’
nor ‘any potential
risks pertaining to Patient A’s mental state’. A more sophisticated
approach would include ensuring
that one receives an adequate and detailed
Clinical Handover that includes interaction and enquiry, with any unanswered
resolved through further inquiry, including contact with the treating
Psychiatrist or review of the medical record. Having a sound
understanding of
the patients under one’s care and the requirements and rationale for the
individual care plan, encourages
active ‘ownership’ monitoring and
interpretation of behaviours, resulting in more responsive and anticipatory
this case, it would seem that care was led by ignorance of the care
plan leading to assumptions regarding the required level of vigilance
resultant minimisation...”
her Police Statement RN Hayden devotes several paragraphs to the effect of
recent staffing cuts, reducing the number of nursing
staff on the ward. She
notes that, by way of example, it would seem, that although someone from the
nursing staff is meant to observe
patients take medication while another
administers it, that standard is never observed because there is insufficient
staff. She describes
understaffing with high performance expectations from
management. Similar sentiments are echoed in the Police Statement of another
nurse from the MHIPU (CV, Tab 33).
Hayden’s Police Statement concludes:
“...There wasn’t anything I did on Friday that I wouldn’t
have done differently. I am a good nurse, I am good at
what I do, and I care
is physically impossible with
only two staff on the ward. It was difficult with
three, and now there is only two it makes it impossible.”
DETERMINATION AND ORDERS
would hope that with the passage of time for reflection on practice Ms Hayden
would resile from her claim that she would not have
done anything differently on
is vexing that the Committee had no opportunity to hear from Ms Hayden at the
hearing. Had she chosen to engage with the process
there would have been
opportunity for her to demonstrate any increased wisdom in clinical care,
understanding of the relevant policies,
and in decision making. There may have
been opportunity for demonstration of further learning and contrition. There is
not the benefit
of reports from supervisors or colleagues, or any referees. As
it stands the Committee’s best evidence is through statements
close in time to the event, the bare face of the medical records, a
Response, and the expert report of Mr Shaw, untested by oral
the balance of the available evidence the Committee answers as
fail to observe Patient A every fifteen minutes
relevant time on the afternoon shift on 28 February, 2014?
in the alternative, did RN Hayden
fail to clarify the care level
Patient A with other staff or by review of the file?
RN Hayden, as the nurse-in-charge of the morning shift,
fail to resolve any
care level requirements
fail to ensure that such were
communicated
to EN Julie Rumble?
RN Hayden knowingly
incorrectly sign the observation sheet for 15:00
, without having visualised Patient A between 14:41 and 17:00
the entry by RN Hayden at 15:00 hours
create an inaccurate and misleading
in Patient A’s records?
is inescapable that the Committee find Complaints One and Two proved. The
conduct particularised is proved to the Committee’s
comfortable
satisfaction. This leads inevitably to a finding of unsatisfactory professional
conduct under sections 139B(1)(a) and
139B(1)(l).
and naivety have guided RN Hayden’s clinical practice, rather than
professionalism, diligence, knowledge of patient
care plans and needs, or
implementation of the correct policies and protocols that governed Patient
the nurse in charge of the shift she had a responsibility to be well-oriented to
the patient needs at the time, and to demonstrate
clinical expertise, care and
leadership. While the Committee is sympathetic to the strains created by
ever-decreasing staffing levels,
and notes that hospitals must take account that
increasing numbers of adverse outcomes may flow from staff allocation decisions,
sub-standard nursing care cannot be sanctioned on this basis. This is
particularly so when the deficits are found in fundamental
levels of basic
nursing – knowing the care plan, observing appropriately, making honest
and contemporaneous records.
have been made that require further education (at the level of a postgraduate
certificate in mental health nursing), for supervision,
and conditions on
practice. A reprimand is made to sanction the practitioner and to denounce the
conduct before the public and the
profession.
orders and conditions would come into effect should Ms Hayden become registered
again under the National Law as a nurse any level
– registered or
enrolled. A period of twenty-four months has been attached to supervision
conditions The longer duration of
the conditions, and more stringent requirement
of supervision rather than mentoring, reflect the fact that there has been no
or rehabilitation, nor has the Committee the benefit of evidence of
any maturing insight into the deficiencies in the
Committee orders that Ms Donna Hayden be reprimanded.
following shall apply should Ms Donna Hayden become registered as a nurse under
the National Law:
Committee orders the registrant to successfully complete an educational course
at the level of no less than a Graduate Certificate
in Mental Health Nursing
that has been approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales.
The following provisions
nominated course should be submitted to the Council for approval no later than
one month of the date of the commencement of registration,
or at a date
determined by the Council.
registrant must submit to the Council no later than one month of the date of
registration a proposed course commencement date
for approval, and if this date
is not approved the commencement should be at a date to be determined by the
registrant must submit to the Council no later than one month of the date of
registration a proposed course completion date for
approval, and if this date is
not approved the commencement date should be at a date to be determined by the
registrant may, if desired, submit for approval a course that is of a higher
level than a graduate certificate in mental health
the Council approves and the registrant undertakes a course that is of a higher
educational level to the graduate certificate in
mental health nursing and
longer in duration, at the proper stage of the course programme the registrant
may submit to the Council
evidence that she has completed a portion of the
course that is at least equivalent in time and academic rigour to a graduate
certificate
in mental health nursing. If the Council is satisfied as to the
equivalency of the portion completed of the registrant’s study
graduate certificate in mental health nursing, the Council may, at its sole
discretion, determine that the education order
has been satisfied.
course(s) must be taken in addition to the 20 hours of Continuing Professional
Development hours required by the Nursing and Midwifery
Australia’s Registration
registrant must not, for a minimum period of 24 months:
the nurse in charge of any shift, ward or unit;
supervisory responsibilities for any other nurse or trainee nurse;
as the sole practitioner on any shift, ward, or
registrant, for a minimum period of 24 months, must not engage with an agency
for the purpose of nursing.
Notice to Employers
registrant must only be employed as a nurse in circumstances where the employer
has agreed to notify the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales of any
breach of the conditions or unsafe practice, and exchange information with the
Council related
to compliance with the conditions.
Supervision
registrant must, for a minimum period of 24 months, practise under the indirect
or direct supervision of a registered nurse (Division
1) who does not have any
conditions on his/her practice.
The supervisor must be:
and working in close proximity within a ward or unit with the registrant;
to oversee and provide advice about the registrant’s practice when
Supervision
registrant must within 28 days of registration commence being supervised by a
nurse manager (or equivalent) approved by the Nursing
and Midwifery Council of
New South Wales who has agreed to oversee supervision and designate
supervisors.
The registrant must:
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales with the name, contact
details and résumé of the nominated
nurse manager within two weeks
of commencing work;
the nurse manager to
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales of any breach of the
conditions or unsafe practice; and
information with the Council related to compliance with the conditions and
the Council with a copy of the conditions signed by the registrant and by the
nominated nurse manager indicating awareness
of the conditions and
authorisation.
the nurse manager to provide a written report about the registrant’s
performance against the competency standards
for a registered nurse (Division 1)
approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia at three-monthly
Administrative modifications
Nursing & Midwifery Council of NSW may modify conditions where necessary for
administrative purposes.
registrant is responsible for the costs associated with complying with the
conditions unless otherwise specified.
APPEAL AND REVIEW
Donna Hayden has the right to appeal this decision to the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal.
appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of receipt of these
written reasons.
Donna Hayden also has the right to seek a review by the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW of the Committee’s order to
impose conditions. The Nursing
and Midwifery Council of NSW is the appropriate review body for the purposes of
Part 8, Division 8
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
where the practitioner’s principal place of practice is
125 to 127 of the National Law are to apply should Ms Donna Hayden’s
principal place of practice be anywhere other
than NSW at the time of seeking a
review of conditions, and in such case Ms Donna Hayden may make an application
for review to the
National Board.
The Complaint against EEN
Julie Rumble
we finally turn to consideration of the conduct of EEN Rumble, it must be
acknowledged that the factual matrix has already been
laid down in the
deliberations concerning RN Thomas and RN Hayden. Those matters will not be
laboured as we turn to the conduct concerning
EEN Rumble, who stands accused of
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
key factual matters upon which the allegation of unsatisfactory professional
conduct are based are that EEN Rumble purportedly
signed in the observation
chart that she had observed Patient A at 15:15, 15:30, and 15:45 hours. She
further claimed seeing Patient
A walking up and down the corridors at 15:30
hours. None of these events are confirmed by the CCTV footage. In fact, these
are disproved by the footage.
Complaints against RN Hayden and the particulars are reproduced in an annexure
to these reasons for decision marked Attachment
with RN Hayden, there are no written admissions, and no evidence has been
tendered on her behalf. Bereft of an appearance from
EEN Rumble, the Committee
relies on the witness statements, the untested expert report of Mr Shaw, the
medical records, a psychiatrist
report from Dr Parsonage, a letter dated 24
November, 2014 from EEN Rumble to the Health Care Complaints Commission in
response to
its questions, and other surrounding documents tendered in the
Complainant’s volumes of evidence.
factual issues for determination are:
fail to observe Patient A every fifteen minutes
relevant time on the afternoon shift on 28 February, 2014?
in the alternative, did EEN Rumble
fail to clarify the care level
Patient A with other staff or by review of the file?
EEN Rumble knowingly
incorrectly sign the observation sheet for 15:15, 15:30,
and 15:45 hours
, without having visualised Patient A between 14:41 and 17:00
the entry by EEN Rumble at 15:00 hours
create an inaccurate and misleading
in Patient A’s records?
Rumble was first registered as enrolled nurse in 2008. She commenced working in
the MIHPU at Dubbo Base Hospital in 2009. She
was studying towards her Bachelor
of Nursing through Central Queensland University and had almost completed
Rumble’s registration had been allowed to lapse at the time of the
hearing. Her employment at Dubbo Base Hospital was terminated
in June 2014,
however she had stopped working at the Hospital in March 2014 after the events
that gave rise to the Complaints.
28 February, 2014 EEN Rumble was working a double shift. She had commenced the
day from 07:00 hours in the HDU and then she transferred
to the SAU on 15:30
hours. She did not receive a formal handover, only a verbal one from RN Donna
Hayden, nurse in charge of the
shift. the afternoon shift being the second
shift. She recalls being told that the leave level was Level 3 and that if
family came
over the weekend he was allowed to go out with them. EEN Rumble says
there was no mention of mental state (CV1, Tab 51, p.2, letter
of practitioner
to Health Care Complaints Commission in response to questions, dated 24
November, 2014).
Rumble stated that RN Hayden was the nurse allocated to Patient A. The letter of
response to questions from the Health Care Complaints
Commission, sent on
instruction by the NSW Nurses and Midwives Association made the following
concession:
“EN Rumble Accepts that it was her responsibility to attend and record
observations for Patient A at 15:15 hours, 15:30 hours
and 15:45 hours and that
where she signed for these observations, she did not recall seeing Patient A at
these times.” (CV1,
the same document, she effectively conceded that she falsified the entries when
she recorded the observations but didn’t
recall seeing Patient A at those
the proceedings under s.150 of the National Law (held on 20 October, 2014,
Exhibit A), when confronted with the CCTV footage, EEN
Rumble conceded that she
had not left the nurses’ station but had simply signed the chart. Further,
she admitted to regularly
signing observation charts for observations that she
had not made, indicating this was standard practice, particularly on night
there was any confusion about the mandated observation levels for Patient A at
that time, there is no evidence before the Committee
that EEN Rumble made any
attempts to clarify the position.
EEN Rumble eventually conceded making the entries without any memory of having
seen Patient A and the given times, there is
no explanation before the
seems that there was a general culture of a worryingly low regard for the
seriousness of observation requirements. In an early
interview with the hospital
EEN Rumble stated:
“Just because a patient in HDU might be on level 2 observations,
doesn’t mean we actually see them every 15 minutes –
particularly
during the night.”
expert reviewer, Mr Shaw, noted this comment to be “disturbing”,
“...The statement suggests firstly that care levels may not be
maintained at the allocated level in the HDU and use of the word
“we” would indicate EN Rumble is suggesting this practice has
happened previously and is more widespread than just that
of herself. Secondly,
if this is the case, then this would suggest that recognition of the importance
of the Care Level allocation
process, inclusive of the Psychiatrist’s
assessment of the patient, is somehow diminished within the Nursing team.
if this in indeed the practice within the HDU then this would indicate
a culture where misreporting clinical activity is accepted
by the team...”
(CV1, Tab 56, p.8)
the proceedings under s.150 of the National Law the view was taken that EEN
Rumble’s practice represented a risk to patient
safety due to her failure
to care for a patient with active suicidal ideation. It accordingly placed
supervision and other conditions
on her registration.
was no evidence of mitigating factors found that may have impacted EEN
Rumble’s conduct. The investigation concluded that
she felt no remorse,
demonstrated no insight and accepted no responsibility for the patient’s
care. It was acknowledged, however,
that she had suffered mentally and
emotionally from the effects that unfolded that day, and that she did express
remorse with her
therapist in what she felt was a “safe
environment”.
the Complainant’s evidence is the report of Dr Parsonage, Psychiatrist,
who assessed EEN Rumble at the request of the
Nursing and Midwifery Council
(CV1, Tab 57). Although there was no evidence of impairment in the period
leading up to Patient A’s
death, Dr Parsonage made diagnoses of
psychological conditions, directly related to the issues surrounding Patient
that had caused significant impairment, particularly impaired
concentration. Dr Parsonage considered such impairment to come within
defined in s.5 of the National Law. Because these proceedings are not concerned
will allegations of impairment it does not behove
the Committee to analyse this
matter further. Suffice to say that this is a matter that may have relevance to
any possible registration
conditions.
DETERMINATION AND
On the available evidence before the Committee the summarised factual issues are
determined as follows:
fail to observe Patient A every fifteen minutes
relevant time on the afternoon shift on 28 February, 2014?
in the alternative, did EEN Rumble
fail to clarify the care level
Patient A with other staff or by review of the file?
EEN Rumble knowingly
incorrectly sign the observation sheet for 15:15, 15:30,
and 15:45 hours
, without having visualised Patient A between 14:41 and
17:00 hours?
the entry by EEN Rumble at 15:00 hours
create an inaccurate and misleading
in Patient A’s records?
evidence again leads the Committee to the firm conclusion that the particulars
are proved on the balance of probabilities. Complaints
One and Two are
accordingly proved to the Committee’s comfortable satisfaction, with a
finding of unsatisfactory professional
conduct under sections 139B(1)(a) and
139B(1)(l).
is no doubt that EEN Rumble has suffered distress and mental turmoil at the
death of Patient A. It has affected her career as
she is unable to work as a
nurse, as well as affecting her emotional wellbeing. However, EEN Rumble has not
given the Committee anything
with which to work towards her professional
rehabilitation or restoration. Once again, a failure to engage with the process
that there has been no attempt at professional re-education or clinical
improvement. The Committee does not have the benefit of references
supervision reports that post-date the death of Patient A. It was not able to
assess the level of insight of the practitioner
or gauge contrition.
facts speak rather plainly. A mentally disturbed young man with a recent active
history of suicidal ideation, with past actual
plans and attempts, was assessed
by the psychiatrist as requiring observations at fifteen minute intervals. This
is a very regular
observation regime. It would not be imposed without due
consideration of the risk of harm, particularly in a busy hospital unit.
strict regime imposed by the treating doctor seems to have been regarded as a
negotiable suggestion rather than a strict protocol
observance.
given the ebb and flow of any ward there may be stray minutes here and there
that are lost. But we aren’t talking
completely ignoring observing the patient for at least the best part of two
hours, on the back of
regular shabby adherence to observation requirements. At
best EEN Rumble simply signed the observation charts at fifteen minute intervals
while she worked in the nurses’ station during the periods they covered,
without actually checking the patient. At worst, the
entries were made after the
discovery of Patient A’s demise. On either view, unsatisfactory
professional conduct is found with
cultures may be better in some facilities or units than others. That does not
allow the individual nurse to slip to a level
of conduct that is below the
professionalism and clinical excellence required. It is never an answer to
claims of unsatisfactory
professional conduct that “everyone was doing
it”. Those are the sorts of excuses might be heard from children, but they
have no weight in the context of a professional healthcare. It is for reasons of
protection of the public, specific and general deterrence,
and by way of
denouncing the conduct and upholding the standards of integrity of the
profession, that these findings of unsatisfactory
professional conduct are
with Ms Hayden, the Ms Rumble has not really worked in nursing since the
incident. The assessment by Dr Parsonage indicates that
the emotional toll of
the death of Patient A has potentially decreased her powers of concentration,
perhaps to the level of impairment
within the meaning of s.5 of the National
Law. The Committee deems that, in addition to a reprimand to denounce the
conduct, it is
prudent to order further education, conditions as to mode of work
and professional supervision, and a performance assessment.
is difficult to assess the most appropriate form of education for Ms Rumble. She
was, at the time of the death of Patient A, quite
close to completing her
Bachelor of Nursing. There was no evidence before the Committee as to completion
or otherwise of the degree.
Considering the failings that were the subject of
the complaints against Ms Rumble, education specific to mental health nursing
seem appropriate. There are not a great many mental health study options
available for an enrolled nurse. A number of providers do
offer a Certificate IV
in Mental Health Nursing, some with distance study options. This would seem to
be the most appropriate form
and level of further education to improve
professional care, clinical proficiency, and personal insight.
Rumble is not registered at the time of this decision, and has indicated by way
of statutory declaration (Exhibit B) that she does
not intend to apply for
registration in the future. Should there be a change of heart such that Ms
Rumble became, again, registered
under the National Law, these orders and
conditions will come into force.
Committee orders that Ms Julie Rumble be reprimanded.
following shall apply should Ms Julie Rumble become registered as a nurse under
the National Law:
Committee orders the registrant to successfully complete an educational course
at the level of a Certificate IV in Mental Health
Nursing (or equivalent) that
has been approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales. The
following provisions
nominated course should be submitted to the Council for approval no later than
one month of the date of the commencement of registration,
or at a date
determined by the Council.
registrant must submit to the Council no later than one month of the date of
registration a proposed course commencement date
for approval, and if this date
is not approved the commencement should be at a date to be determined by the
registrant must submit to the Council no later than one month of the date of
registration a proposed course completion date for
approval, and if this date is
not approved the commencement date should be at a date to be determined by the
course(s) must be taken in addition to the 20 hours of Continuing Professional
Development hours required by the Nursing and Midwifery
Australia’s Registration
Role in the
registrant must not, for a minimum period of 24 months:
supervisory responsibilities for any other nurse or trainee nurse;
as the sole practitioner on any shift, ward, or
registrant, for a minimum period of 24 months, must not engage with an agency
for the purpose of nursing.
Notice to Employers
registrant must only be employed as a nurse in circumstances where the employer
has agreed to notify the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales of any
breach of the conditions or unsafe practice, and exchange information with the
Council related
to compliance with the conditions.
Supervision
registrant must, for a minimum period of 24 months, practise under the indirect
or direct supervision of a registered nurse (Division
1) who does not have any
conditions on his/her practice.
The supervisor must be:
and working in close proximity within a ward or unit with the registrant;
to oversee and provide advice about the registrant’s practice when
Supervision Report
registrant must within 28 days of registration commence being supervised by a
nurse manager (or equivalent) approved by the Nursing
and Midwifery Council of
New South Wales who has agreed to oversee supervision and designate
supervisors.
The registrant must:
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales with the name, contact
details and résumé of the nominated
nurse manager within two weeks
of commencing work;
the nurse manager to
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales of any breach of the
conditions or unsafe practice; and
information with the Council related to compliance with the conditions and
the Council with a copy of the conditions signed by the registrant and by the
nominated nurse manager indicating awareness
of the conditions and
authorisation.
the nurse manager to provide a written report about the registrant’s
performance against the competency standards
for an enrolled nurse (Division 2)
approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia at three-monthly
Administrative modifications
Nursing & Midwifery Council of NSW may modify conditions where necessary for
administrative purposes.
registrant is responsible for the costs associated with complying with the
conditions unless otherwise specified.
APPEAL AND REVIEW
Julie Rumble has the right to appeal this decision to the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal.
appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of receipt of these
written reasons.
Julie Rumble also has the right to seek a review by the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW of the Committee’s order to
impose conditions. The Nursing
and Midwifery Council of NSW is the appropriate review body for the purposes of
Part 8, Division 8
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
where the practitioner’s principal place of practice is
125 to 127 of the National Law are to apply should Ms Julie Rumble’s
principal place of practice be anywhere other
than NSW at the time of seeking a
review of conditions, and in such case Ms Julie Rumble may make an application
for review to the
National Board.
NON-PUBLICATION ORDER
non-publication order made on 25 October, 2016 in respect of the patient and the
names of any relatives that may identify the
patient and this order continues so
that the names and addresses of those persons in this written statement of
decision are not to
be published.
DISTRIBUTION OF
We will provide a copy of this written statement of our
decision to:
Abraham Thomas,
Donna Hayden,
Julie Rumble,
Health Care Complaints Commission,
National Board,
parents of Patient A.
District Director of Nursing & Midwifery Services, Western NSW Local Health
Executive Officer, Western NSW Local Health District
of Clinical Governance, Western NSW Local Health District
Nursing Officer, Ministry of Health, NSW
_________________________
Julie Hughes
Chairperson
Attachment 1
139B Meaning of “unsatisfactory professional conduct” of
registered health practitioner generally [NSW]
"Unsatisfactory
professional conduct"
of a registered health practitioner includes each of
the following-
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of
the practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
(b) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
provision of this Law, or the regulations under this Law
or under the NSW
regulations, whether or not the practitioner has been prosecuted for or
convicted of an offence in respect of the
contravention.
(c) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of-
(i) a condition to which the practitioner’s registration is subject;
(ii) an undertaking given to a National Board.
(d) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
decision or order made by a Committee or the Tribunal in
relation to the
practitioner.
(e) A contravention by the practitioner of
section 34A(4)
Care Complaints Act
(f) Accepting from a health service provider (or from another person on
behalf of the health service provider) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or
reward for-
(i) referring another person to the health service provider; or
(ii) recommending another person use any health service provided by the
health service provider or consult with the health service
provider in relation
to a health matter.
(g) Accepting from a person who supplies a health product (or from another
person on behalf of the supplier) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or
reward for recommending that another person use the health product, but does not
include accepting a benefit that
consists of ordinary retail conduct.
(h) Offering or giving a person a benefit as inducement, consideration or
reward for the person-
(i) referring another person to the registered health practitioner; or
(ii) recommending to another person that the person use a health service
provided by the practitioner or consult the practitioner
in relation to a health
(i) Referring a person to, or recommending that a person use or consult-
(i) another health service provider; or
(ii) a health service; or
(iii) a health product;
if the practitioner has a pecuniary interest in giving that referral or
recommendation, unless the practitioner discloses the nature
of the interest to
the person before or at the time of giving the referral or recommendation.
(j) Engaging in overservicing.
(k) Permitting an assistant employed by the practitioner (in connection with
the practitioner’s professional practice) who is
not a registered health
practitioner to attend, treat or perform operations on patients in respect of
matters requiring professional
discretion or skill.
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(i), a registered health
practitioner has a
"pecuniary interest"
in giving a referral or
recommendation-
(a) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
which the referral or recommendation relates is a public
company and the
practitioner holds 5% or more of the issued share capital of the company; or
(b) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
which the referral or recommendation relates is a private
company and the
practitioner has any interest in the company; or
(c) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
whom the referral or recommendation relates is a natural
person who is a partner
of the practitioner; or
(d) in any circumstances prescribed by the NSW regulations.
(3) For avoidance of doubt, a reference in this section to a referral or
recommendation that is given to a person includes a referral
or recommendation
that is given to more than one person or to persons of a particular
(4) In this section-
means money,
property or anything else of value.
"recommend"
a health product
includes supply or prescribe the health product.
146B General powers to caution, reprimand, counsel etc
(1) A Committee may do one or more of the following in relation to
a relevant health practitioner the subject of a complaint referred
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b) direct that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s
practising of the practitioner’s profession, it considers
appropriate be
imposed on the practitioner’s registration;
(c) order that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric
treatment or counselling (including, but not limited to, psychological
counselling);
(d) order that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by
the Committee;
(e) order that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice
at the times, in the way and to the persons specified
by the Committee;
(f) order that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner’s practice, from the
persons specified by
the Committee.
(2) If the relevant health practitioner is not registered, a direction
may still be given under this section but has effect only so
as to require the
conditions concerned to be imposed when the health practitioner is
registered.
(3) If a Committee acting under this section makes an order
or directs that any condition be imposed on a health practitioner’s
registration, the Committee may order that a contravention of the order or
condition will result in the health practitioner’s
registration in the
health profession being cancelled.
(4) The order or condition concerned
"critical compliance order or condition"
Attachment 2
List of documents considered by the Committee
in relation to proceedings regarding
RN Abraham Thomas; Ms
Donna Hayden; Ms Julie Rumble
held on 25-27 October, 2016
Documents admitted for the Complainant (CV-1,
Complaint against RN Thomas
Complaint against RN Hayden
Complaint against EEN Rumble
REGISTRATION CERTIFICATES
AHPRA certificate and Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW certificate for
AHPRA certificate and Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW certificate for
AHPRA certificate and Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW certificate for
INITIATING COMPLAINT
Letter of complaint from Mr Adrian Fahy, District Director of
Nursing & Midwifery, Western NSW Local Health District (WNSWLHD)
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW dated 30 July 2014
WNSWLHD INVESTIGATION DOCUMENTS
Letter from the Commission to WNSWLHD dated 23 September
Letter from WNSWLHD to the Commission dated 27 October 2014
with attachments (see below) – for attachments 4 and 5 see volume
Attachment 1
WNSWLHD investigation report
Addendum to Investigation report dated 8 July 2014
Written response of RN Abraham Thomas dated 11 June 2014
Written response of RN Donna Hayden dated 18 June 2014
Written response of EEN Julie Rumble dated 14 March 2014
Review document of patient workload issues as at 28 February 2014
Attachment 2
Risk Assessment of RN Hayden dated 4 March 2014
Attachment 3
Copy of in service training history for RN Hayden
Attachment 6
Update on RN Hayden and RN Thomas’s supervision
Attachment 7
CD-ROM of CCTV footage of Dubbo Mental Health Unit for 28 February
Letter from the Commission to WNSWLHD dated 4 November 2014
Letter from WNSWLHD to the Commission concerning RN Rumble, with
attachments (see below)
Attachment 1
HR records for EEN Rumble
Attachment 2
Copy of the in-service history of training for EEN Rumble
Attachment 4
IAIMS Incident detail dated 3 March 2014
WITNESS STATEMENTS
Statement of Patient A GF dated 1 April 2014
Additional statement of Patient A GF dated 16 April 2014
Email from Patient A GF to NSW Police dated 3 April 2014
Unsigned police statement of RN Hayden dated 5 March 2014
Document authored by RN Hayden signed on 5 March 2014
Diagram of floor plan of MHIPU (authored by RN Hayden)
Statement of EEN Kerry Wadley dated 5 March 2014
Staff Handover Sheet from Ms Wadley (2 pages)
Statement of EN Peter Thomas dated 6 March 2014
Correspondence
letter and notice from the Commission to RN Hayden dated 22 December
2014 and letter dated 4 February 2015
Letter from the NSW Nurses and Midwives Assoc. on behalf of RN Hayden to
the Commission dated 18 February 2015
CV of RN Hayden
Letter from the Commission to NSW Nurses and Midwives Assoc. dated 2 July
Letter to the Commission from NSW Nurses and Midwives Assoc. on behalf of
RN Hayden dated 30 July 2015
Expert report
Letter of instruction to Mr Warren Shaw dated 9 April 2015
Expert report of Mr Shaw dated 12 May 2015
Mr Shaw’s CV
Email from the Commission to Mr Shaw dated 19 May 2015 (see tab 64 for
attachment)
Correspondence
Letter from the Commission to Commission to NSW Nurses and Midwives Assoc.
on behalf of RN Thomas dated 18 November 2014
Letter from the NSW Nurses and Midwives Assoc. on behalf of RN Thomas to
the Commission dated 25 November 2014
CV of RN Thomas
Letter from the Commission to NSW Nurses and Midwives Assoc. dated 2 July
Letter to the Commission from NSW Nurses and Midwives Assoc. on behalf of
RN Thomas dated 28 July 2015
Expert report
Letter of instruction to Mr Warren Shaw dated 9 April 2015
Expert report of Mr Shaw dated 12 May 2015
Correspondence
Letter from the Commission to EEN Rumble dated 18 November 2014
Letter from EEN Rumble dated 24 November 2014
CV of EEN Rumble
Letter from the Commission to EEN Rumble dated 2 July 2015
Letter to the Commission from NSW Nurses and Midwives Assoc. on behalf of
EEN Rumble dated 31 July 2015
Expert reports
Letter of instruction to Mr Warren Shaw dated 9 April 2015
Expert report of Mr Shaw dated 12 May 2015
Expert report of Dr Bernard Parsonage dated 9 March 2015 attaching letter
from Dr Rowshon Johan dated 10 February 2015
GUIDELINES / POLICIES
GWAHS 'Patient Care Levels, Specialling and Risk Assessment for Mental
Health Inpatients', dated August 2009
NSW Health Policy Directive PD2009_060 'Clinical Handover — Standard
Key Principles' dated 28 September 2009
WNSWLHD Policy Directive WN_PD2013_043 — 'Clinical Handover
—Standard Key Principles' dated 6 June 2013
GWAHS Policy Directive GW_PD_2010_074 — 'Suicidal
Behaviour—Management of Patients with Possible Suicidal Behaviour' dated
December 2010
NSW Health Policy Directive PD2005_121 — 'Management of Patients with
Possible Suicidal Behaviour' dated 25/01/2005 following
onto NSW Health 'Policy
Guidelines for the Management of Patients with Possible Suicidal Behaviour for
NSW Health Staff and Staff
in Private Hospital Facilities' dated 4 May
WNSWLHD 'Risk to Action in Suicide Detection — A short interactive
workshop designed to aid clinicians in converting static,
dynamic and protective
risk factors into action' dated November 2012
Designated Nurse / ICS list of duties, Dubbo Base Hospital MHIPU
NSW Ministry of Health Policy Directive PD2012_018 — 'Code of
Conduct' dated 29 March 2012
CLINICAL RECORDS
WNSWLHD Mental Health Inpatient Unit (
) progress notes for
Patient A for 28 February 2014
WNSWLHD MHIPU Observation sheet for Patient A from 24 February 2014 to 28
February 2014
Medical records of Patient A from MHIPU from 27 January 2014 to 28 February
Documents admitted for the Respondent, RN Abraham Thomas (RV1)
Statement of Abraham Thomas
14 October, 2016
Curriculum Vitae of Abraham Thomas
Continuing Professional Development Portfolio
Letter from NSW Nurses and Midwives Association to Priscilla Makombo
21 September, 2016
Reference from Priscilla Makombo
27 September, 2016
Letter from NSW Nurses and Midwives Association to Catherine Bayliss
21 September, 2016
Reference from Catherine Bayliss
3 October, 2016
Attachment 3
Complaint and Particulars
COMPLAINT ONE
Mr Abraham Thomas ...
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under
section 139B(1)(a) of the National Law in that the practitioner has:
(i) Engaged in conduct that demonstrates the judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of nursing
is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience...
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
28 February 2014 during his shift, the practitioner failed to exercise an
appropriate level of care and judgment in his monitoring
of Patient A, in that
he did not visualise Patient A every 15 minutes in accordance with the care
level assigned to Patient A under
Greater Western Area Health Service’s
‘Patient Care Levels, Specialling and Risk Assessment for Mental Health
Inpatients’
(the Policy).
the alternative to particular 1, on 28 February 2014 during his shift, the
practitioner failed to ascertain or familiarise himself
with Patient A’s
care level in that he did not:
clarification from other nursing staff at handover or at any time after the
commencement of his shift, concerning Patient A’s
suicide risk status and
care requirements under the Policy;
Patient A’s clinical file in sufficient detail to ensure he was aware of
Patient A’s care level requirements under
the Policy;
to a medical officer or senior nursing staff to clarify what Patient A’s
care level was.
28 February 2014 during his shift, the practitioner failed to exercise an
appropriate level of care and judgment as in-charge of
shift concerning his
supervision of the nursing team in the sub-acute side of the Unit, in that he
any discrepancy he observed in Patient A’s clinic file concerning Patient
A’s care level requirements; and/or
that Patient A’s observation level and care requirements were clearly
communicated to the nursing team.
COMPLAINT TWO
Mr Abraham Thomas...
...is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under s.139B(1)(l) of the National Law in that the
practitioner has:
(i) engaged in improper and unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of nursing.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
28 February 2014, the practitioner signed Patient A’s observation sheet in
the 15:00 hours column knowing
or being reckless that
visualised Patient A at any time
approximately 14:41 hours
and 1700 hours
his conduct in particular 1, the practitioner caused to be created an inaccurate
and misleading entry in the clinical records for
Complaint and Particulars
COMPLAINT ONE
Mrs Donna Hayden ...
being a nurse formerly registered under
the National Law (“the practitioner”)
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under
section 139B(1)(a) of the National Law in that the practitioner has:
(i) engaged in conduct that demonstrates the judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of nursing
is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience...
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
28 February 2014 during his shift, the practitioner failed to exercise an
appropriate level of care and judgment in her monitoring
of Patient A, in that
she did not visualise Patient A every 15 minutes in accordance with the care
level assigned to Patient A under
Greater Western Area Health Service’s
‘Patient Care Levels, Specialling and Risk Assessment for Mental Health
Inpatients’
(the Policy).
the alternative to particular 1, on 28 February 2014 during his shift, the
practitioner failed to ascertain or familiarise herself
with Patient A’s
care level in that she did not:
clarification from other nursing staff at handover or at any time after the
commencement of his shift, concerning Patient A’s
suicide risk status and
care requirements under the Policy;
Patient A’s clinical file in sufficient detail to ensure he was aware of
Patient A’s care level requirements under
the Policy;
to a medical officer or senior nursing staff to clarify what Patient A’s
care level was.
28 February 2014 from approximately 15:15 hours, the practitioner failed to
exercise an appropriate level of care and judgment
as in charge of shift
concerning her supervision of EN Rumble in the sub-acute side of the Unit, in
that she did not:
any discrepancy he observed in Patient A’s clinic file concerning Patient
A’s care level requirements; and/or
that Patient A’s observation level and care requirements were clearly
communicated to EN Julie Rumble.
COMPLAINT TWO
Mrs Donna Hayden...
...is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under s.139B(1)(l) of the National Law in that the
practitioner has:
(ii) engaged in improper and unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of nursing.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
28 February 2014, the practitioner signed Patient A’s observation sheet in
the 15:00 hours column knowing
he had not visualised Patient A at any
time between 14:41 hours and 17:00 hours
her conduct in particular 1, the practitioner caused to be created an inaccurate
and misleading entry in the clinical records for
Complaint and Particulars
COMPLAINT ONE
Mrs Julie Rumble ...
being a enrolled nurse formerly
registered under the National Law (“the practitioner”)
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under
section 139B(1)(a) of the National Law in that the practitioner has:
(i) engaged in conduct that demonstrates the judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of nursing
is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience...
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
28 February 2014 from approximately 15:30 hours, the practitioner failed to
exercise an appropriate level of care and judgment
in her monitoring of Patient
A, in that she did not visualise Patient A every 15 minutes in accordance with
the care level assigned
to Patient A under Greater Western Area Health
Service’s ‘Patient Care Levels, Specialling and Risk Assessment for
Health Inpatients’
(the Policy).
the alternative to particular 1, on 28 February 2014 during his shift, the
practitioner failed to ascertain or familiarise herself
with Patient A’s
care level in that she did not:
clarification from other nursing staff at handover or at any time after the
commencement of his shift, concerning Patient A’s
suicide risk status and
care requirements under the Policy;
Patient A’s clinical file in sufficient detail to ensure he was aware of
Patient A’s care level requirements under
the Policy;
to a medical officer or senior nursing staff to clarify what Patient A’s
care level was.
COMPLAINT TWO
Mrs Donna Hayden...
...is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under s.139B(1)(l) of the National Law in that the
practitioner has:
in improper and unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice
of nursing.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
28 February 2014, the practitioner signed Patient A’s observation sheet in
the 15:15 hours column knowing
he had not visualised Patient A at any
time between 14:41 hours and 17:00 hours.
28 February 2014, the practitioner signed Patient A’s observation sheet in
the 15:30 hours column knowing
he had not visualised Patient A at any
time between 14:41 hours and 17:00 hours.
28 February 2014, the practitioner signed Patient A’s observation sheet in
the 15:45 hours column knowing
he had not visualised Patient A at any
time between 14:41 hours and 17:00 hours
her conduct in particular 1, the practitioner caused to be created an inaccurate
and misleading entry in the clinical records for
Lucire v HCCC
per Basten JA at [43]. See also
Medical Board of Australia v. Judge
Horeman-Wren & Leggett
Briginshaw v.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Gianoutsos v. Glykis
(2006) NSWLR 539 at 547-9, applied by the Medical Tribunal in
[2006] NSWMT 1
at 10, and variously in the case law in this
Re a Medical
Practitioner and the Medical Practice Act,
unreported, NSWMT, 3 September,
2007, per Deputy Chairperson Judge
Approved in
Bours (No. 1)
[2104] NSWCA
Re Dr Parajuil
[2010] NSWMT 3
Kennedy, Thomas, Parker, Dowsett
(NSWPSC 2015) and
HCCC v. Mullen
(NMWPSC 2016) are also referred to in this regard.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.21 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter