URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ALISON PERRIN V HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION [2013] NSWNMT 16 (12 September 2013)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Matter No: 034/2013
CITATION: ALISON PERRIN V HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
[2013] NSWNMT 16
APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 163 (1) (a1) OF THE
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW)
Alison Perrin
: Health Care Complaints
The Hon. Jennifer Boland AM,
Chairperson
Date of Hearing:
By written submissions of Nursing and Midwifery
Council dated 1 August 2013, correspondence from the Health Care Complaints
dated 27 July 2013, and documents provided by the NSW Nurses and
Midwives’ Association including submissions of the applicant
dated 29 July
Date of orders:
12 September
Appearances at directions hearing held on 26 July
Ms Linda Alexander of the NSW Nurses and
Midwives’ Association appeared on behalf of the applicant.
Complainant:
Ms Christine Campbell, Solicitor, appeared on behalf
of the Health Professional Council Authority.
Ms Samantha King appeared
on behalf of the Health Care Complaints
Commission.
Application under
s 163 (1) (a1) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
for review of conditions imposed on practitioner’s
registration by a Professional Standards Committee to be heard by a Health
Profession Council rather than the Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal - whether
Tribunal or Council most appropriate body to hear review.
HELD review should
be determined by Council.
Legislation cited:
Practitioner Regulation National Law
Health Legislation
Amendment Act 2012
Nurses and Midwives Act 1991
Cases cited:
Marks v Health Care
Complaints Commission [2012]NSWNMT 16
Coe v Health Care Complaints
[2013] NSWNMT 11.
McAuley v Health Care Complaints
[2013] NSWNMT 13
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal decided
12 September 2013, in my capacity as Chairperson of the Nursing and Midwifery
Tribunal, I ordered that a review of conditions
on the registration of Ms Alison
Perrin imposed by orders made by a Professional Standards Committee on 18
August 2008 under the
now repealed
Nurses and Midwives Act 1991
(“the repealed Act”) , should be conducted by the Council rather
than the Tribunal.
Reasons for decision
are the reasons for my orders. In these reasons, for convenience, I will refer
to relevant persons and entities as follows:
(a) Ms Alison Perrin as “the applicant”;
(b) the Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal as “the Tribunal”;
(c) the Health Care Complaints Commission as “the HCCC”;
(d) the Health Professional Council Authority as “the HPCA”;
(e) the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales as “the
(f) The New South Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association as “the
Association”;
(g) Ms Linda Alexander as “Ms Alexander”. Ms Alexander is a
solicitor employed by the Association;
(h) Ms Christine Campbell as “Ms Campbell”. Ms Campbell is a
solicitor in the employ of the HPCA.
(i) Ms Samantha King as “Ms King”. Ms King is a solicitor in the
employ of the HCCC; and
(j) The Professional Standards Committee as “the Committee”.
stated to be an allegation the following facts were accepted by me as
established to the requisite civil standard.
applicant completed a Bachelor of Nursing degree at the University of Western
Sydney in 2001. She undertook a New Graduate Programme
at Royal North Shore
Hospital (“RNSH”) in 2002, and was employed in that hospital in the
neurosurgery ward from February
2003 until July 2006.
parents of a teenage girl (Patient A) lodged a complaint with the HCCC about the
care and treatment of their daughter at RNSH
in November 2005. Patient A
sustained a head injury (depressed skull fracture and contusion of the brain) as
a result of an accidental
injury. She was transferred from Hornsby Hospital to
RNSH for neurological management on 6 November 2005. Patient A died at RNSH
8 November 2005.
Committee was convened on 1 July 2008 to conduct an inquiry into a Complaint
brought against the applicant by the HCCC. On
18 August 2008 the Committee
provided written reasons for its determination that the applicant was guilty of
unsatisfactory professional
conduct. The applicant was reprimanded under
(1) of the repealed Act, and ordered to comply with four conditions (Orders 2 to
5) as follows:
the Respondent resumes practice in the acute care clinical setting that she not
be placed in charge of a shift for a period of
six months.
the respondent prior to undertaking in charge of shift be mentored by senior
nursing staff in the charge role and responsibilities
for a minimum period of
six months.
Respondent is required to inform her current employer and her first employer,
should she return to the acute care setting, of
these proceedings and the
decision of the Committee including conditions applying to her
registration.
Respondent’s first employer in the acute care setting must not be a
nursing agency.
In 2008 the applicant, through the association, requested the then Nurses and
Midwives’ Board to clarify certain aspects of
Orders 2 to 5 of the orders
made on 18 August 2008.
letter dated 20 October 2008 the Council explained:
In relation to Order 3
, the clarification is as follows:-
As you have not
worked in the acute care clinical role for some time;
- should you
resume nursing practice in the acute care setting, you should initially work in
the role of a registered nurse and not
in the “in charge role” nor
in any in charge of shift role for a period of 6 (six) months (Ref. Order 2).
During this
period of employment you are to be mentored in your work by senior
nursing staff.
- Subsequently,
should you undertake “higher duties” in the acute care clinical
settling, and if this work is in the “in
charge role” or the
“in charge shift role”, you should at the outset be monitored for a
minimum period of 6 (six)
months by senior nursing staff while you are in the
“in charge” position.
Council also provided further explanation of Orders 2, 4 and 5 and noted
“These Orders are to remain in place until each
of the conditions has been
met and the Orders fully complied with”.
letter dated 12 August 2009 the applicant wrote to the Board (by letter
addressed “To Whom it May Concern”), and advised
she was commencing
a 12 month Temporary Full Time contract position as a registered nurse at
Blacktown Hospital. The applicant advised
her employment would be in the
Intensive Care Unit and that she intended to take leave from her then employment
at St Joseph’s
Hospital, Auburn where she was employed as a “TEN
CNE”. The applicant’s employer was advised of the orders, and
Director of Nursing and Midwifery at the Blacktown Hospital advised the Council
that the applicant would be working within the
restrictions placed on her
registration.
6 April 2011 the applicant wrote to the Council noting that she had been
employed in the acute care area from 12 August 2009 “to
the present”
without taking an “in charge of ward position”. The applicant asked
that Order 2 of the orders be
discharged. The applicant further explained that
she had obtained a part-time secondment position at Blacktown Hospital, and if
the opportunity to take an in charge of shift position occurred, she would seek
monitoring from senior staff, a situation she explained
that the Nurse Unit
Manager was happy to support.
28 April 2011 the Council wrote to the applicant, and having noted the
applicant’s employment at Blacktown Hospital in an
acute care area since
August 2009, requested that she provide evidence that her work was monitored
during the first six months of
her employment, and “that you have not
worked in an ‘in charge role’ or ‘in charge of shift
role’ since
commencing employment in an acute care
its letter dated 28 April 2011 the Council also advised:
In relation of Order 3, a suitable mentor may be identified by you however
the mentor must be approved by the Council before commencing
the role. You are
therefore requested to prove a Curriculum Vitae (CV) of your proposed mentor
prior to commencing the “in
charge” role. A copy of the
Council’s Mentor Policy is attached for your information. The Council
will write to both
you and your mentor once the mentor is approved.
8 February 2012 the applicant wrote to the Council in response to a letter from
the Council dated 31 January 2012 (which sought
an urgent update of the
applicant’s compliance with the conditions imposed by the orders). The
applicant advised she had been
monitored by senior staff in the ICU at Blacktown
Hospital for a period of six months from the commencement of her employment in
August 2009. She also confirmed she had not taken any “in charge of
shift role” since commencement of her employment
at Blacktown Hospital.
The applicant also advised she had made arrangements for a senior nurse to act
as a mentor for her for a
period of six months during which period she would be
attending ALS training and a 12 week Team Leader Development course run by
Blacktown Hospital.
applicant subsequently provided the Council with a curriculum vitae for her
proposed mentor.
6 March 2012 the applicant’s Nurse Unit Manager wrote to the Council
confirming the actions undertaken by Blacktown Hospital
to monitor the
applicant’s performance during the first six months of her
employment.
30 April 2012 the Council wrote to the applicant confirming approval of the
applicant’s proposed mentor, and made recommendations
mentoring plan. The applicant responded to the Council’s comments and
set out the steps she proposed to
undertake during the forthcoming six months to
prepare for an “in charge” role. She explained that she had
a Critical Care 6 week Short Court in November 2009. She also
explained she had undertaken a “Team Leader Roles and
Responsibilities”
course through the Royal College of Nursing (Feb
21 June 2012 the Council wrote to the applicant acknowledging her mentoring plan
and provided feedback on that plan. While noting
the satisfactory aspects of
the plan, the Council explained that the plan did not “identify the goals
which underpin the activities
you have listed”. The applicant was
requested to submit a revised plan, which she did on 30 July
28 November 2011 the applicant wrote to the Council enclosing copies of her
mentoring report, performance appraisal and reflection
journal. She advised
that she had arranged with her Nurse Unit Manager to commence taking in charge
nursing shifts with monitoring
by senior nursing staff from 3 December 2012 for
a period of six months. The applicant submitted that, on compliance with the
period and appropriate confirmation of monitoring, the conditions
imposed on her registration be lifted.
letter dated 28 December 2012 the Council wrote to the applicant. The letter
advised the applicant of the requirement for a Tribunal
to consider whether the
conditions imposed by the orders should be lifted as provided in the
Profession Regulation National Law
(NSW) (“the National Law”)
and the availability of an application under s 163 (1) (a1) of that law to the
Chairperson
of the Tribunal to determine the appropriate review body. The
letter also pointed out that “the letter from the Nursing and
Board dated 20 October 2008 specified that the monitoring be for a minimum
period of six months, and an appropriate review
body could require a further
period of monitoring ‘before your conditions are lifted’”.
27 July 2013 Ms King, on behalf of the HCCC, wrote to Dr Margaret Cooke,
Executive Office of the Council advising that the HCCC
would not oppose the
matter being dealt with by the Council as the appropriate review body and said:
“It is a matter for the
Chairperson of the Tribunal”.
letter dated 1 August 2013 and received by the Tribunal on 6 August 2013 the
Council indicated its willingness to act as the review
body. Further, the
Council supported this application being dealt with “on the papers”
without the need for a formal
hearing of the application.
Procedural History
directions hearing in respect of the application under s 163 (1) (a1) was
conducted by me on 26 July 2013. I made directions for
the filing of any
relevant documents and submissions. I was subsequently provided by the
Association with a copy of the reasons
for decision of the Committee, and copies
of the documents summarised by me under the heading “Background” in
these reasons.
All concerned with the application agreed the matter could
appropriately be dealt with “on the papers” without a formal
thus minimising costs.
163A, which is found in Division 8 of the National Law, provides that a person
may apply to the appropriate review body for,
inter alia,
a review of a
relevant order made in relation to the person. Person is not defined in the
National law, but it may be implied a person
for the purpose of the section is a
person affected by an order made by “an appropriate review body”.
The definition
of appropriate review body includes the both the Council and the
s163A(3) places constraints on when an application for review may be filed.
Those constraints are irrelevant in the circumstances
of this application.
163A (4) defines the subject matter of a review in that it explains what
constitutes “a relevant order”, and immediately
after s163A(4) the
National Law defines the bodies who are a “decision making entity”.
The relevant sub-sections of
s163A to be considered in this application are
s163A (1) and (4). They provides as follows:
(1) A person may apply to the appropriate review body for a review of
(b) a relevant order made in relation to the person
(4) In this section –
............
relevant order
, in relation to a person, means any of the
orders made by a decision-making entity –
(c) an order that conditions be imposed on the person’s registration
in a health profession
“decision making entity” is defined in s163A (4) as
(4) In this section--
"decision-making entity"
means the following--
(a) a Committee;
(b) a Performance Review Panel;
(b1) a Council, but only in relation to orders made under this Division or
under Subdivision 5 of Division 3;
(c) the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson of a Tribunal;
(d) a Tribunal;
(e) the Supreme Court.
determination of the appropriate review body to deal with any properly brought
review is set out in s 163. That section was amended
Legislation Amendment Act 2012
. It provides as
Appropriate Review Body NSW
(1) For the purposes of this Division, the "appropriate review body" is-
(a) if the order being reviewed provides that it may be reviewed by a
Council, the Council; or
(a1) if the Chairperson of the Tribunal decides, on application by the person
the subject of the review or the Commission, that a
Council is the appropriate
review body, the Council; or
(b) if the Chairperson of the Tribunal decides, on application by the person
the subject of the review, that a National Board is the
appropriate review body,
the National Board; or
(c) otherwise, the Tribunal.
(2) An application for review by a person must be lodged with the Executive
Officer of the Council for the health profession in which
the person is or was
registered.
(3) The Executive Officer must refer the application to the appropriate
review body.
Marks v HCCC
[2012] NSWNMT 16
I explained:
The powers to be exercised on a review are set out in s163B. The language of
the section makes it plain that appropriate review body
is mandated to conduct
into the application for review. Inquiry is not defined in
the legislation, but in my view and without the benefit of any argument
topic, it appears the type, or perimeters of, the inquiry are guided by the
provisions set out in the s163C. As that provision
is relevant to the exercise
of discretion under s163 (a1) I now set out that section:
163C Inquiry into review application [NSW]
(1) A review under this Division is a review to determine the
appropriateness, at the time of the review, of the order concerned.
(2) The review is not to review the decision to make the order, or any
findings made in connection with the making of that decision.
(3) In addition to any other matter the review may take into account, the
review must take into account any complaint made or notified
to a Council or a
National Board, or a former Board under a repealed Act, about the person,
whether the complaint was made or notified
before or after the making of the
order that is the subject of the review and whether or not the complaint was
referred under Subdivision
2 of Division 3 or any other action was taken on the
The written submissions
material provided to me includes the applicant’s written submissions.
These submissions do not directly address the question
of the appropriate review
body, but rather are principally directed as to why she submits the orders
imposing the conditions should
be discharged. She notes that, following the
decision of the Committee, she was reprimanded because of the finding she was
of unsatisfactory professional conduct which arose from her care of
Patient A on 8 November 2008, and that four other conditions
were placed on her
registration. The applicant submits:
As the Committee expected I have learnt from the incident, but not only the
incident. I have also learnt from the conditions that
were placed on my
Registration.
noted the Council and the HCCC, do not oppose the applicant’s position
that the Council be the appropriate review body.
three previous decisions to determine the appropriate review body I have
canvassed, without providing an exhaustive list, relevant
criteria to be taken
into account in dealing with applications under s163 (1) (a1) (see
Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWNMT 16
Coe v Health Care
Complaints Commission NSWNMT [2013] 11 and McAuley v Health Care Complaints
Commission NSWNMT [2014] 13.
I explained
considerations include the nature of the original complaint which led to the
orders imposing conditions, to the imposition
of costs to the parties, and the
proper use of the Tribunal and the Council’s resources. In
[46-47], in determining the review should be by the Tribunal, I
Factors in favour of the Tribunal remaining the review body include:
The fact the
order imposing the condition restricting the nurse’s authority to possess
and supply Schedule 4D and Schedule 8
drugs was made by a Tribunal after hearing
and determination that complaints of professional misconduct and unsatisfactory
professional
conduct were proven;
proceedings before the Tribunal were not the first proceedings before the
Tribunal, the nurse having been subject of complaints
in 2001 also of
professional misconduct and unsatisfactory conduct which were conceded by the
the Tribunal did
not find the order imposing the condition in paragraph 1 should automatically
expire in 3 years (as with other conditions
imposed). This is indicative the
Tribunal thought a review by a Tribunal after a minimum period of three years
would be appropriate;
available to the Tribunal in conducting the review include the power to issue
summons for production of documents or the
calling of witnesses;
the fact the
Council was not the decision making entity who made the order now the subject of
the review;
the ability of
the Tribunal to inquire and determine whether the nurse was psychologically able
to cope at the time of her infant
son’s tragic and untimely death without
resort to illicit drugs or that she abused prescription drugs at about that
not, whether there is presently an ongoing concern about past or
potential drug addiction noting that the review is to determine,
at the time of
the review, the appropriateness of the order concerned.
I have balanced the above factors with the following matters:
involved for the nurse, the relevant bodies and the public in a review hearing
before the Tribunal compared to those before
the assertion
the matter may be dealt with in a more timely way by the Council rather than the
Discussion and findings
163(1)(a1) does not set out any criteria to be take into consideration in
determining if the Council, or the Tribunal,
is the appropriate review body. In
other words, the determination of the appropriate review body is a matter of
discretion, which
must be exercised judicially, having regard to the underlying
factual matrix”.
this case I have placed weight on the following matters. First, the original
hearing which dealt with the Complaint brought by
the HCCC was heard and
determined by the Committee, not by the former Tribunal. Notwithstanding that
fact, as the reprimand imposed
at the conclusion of the hearing demonstrates,
the issues of inappropriate or inadequate appropriate professional care of
A by the applicant raised in the Complaint were very serious ones.
the evidence provided by the applicant demonstrates that during the period from
2008 to date she has been in regular contact
with the Board and since 2010 with
the Council in its role as successor of the Board. She has responded to
correspondence and requirements
of the Council. The Council has effectively
monitored the conditions imposed in the orders including contact with both the
and her employer. The relationship between the Council and the
applicant, on the material before me, discloses a very appropriate
professional
role undertaken by the Council in monitoring the conditions imposed by the
orders, and also an appropriate professional
attitude to compliance by the
applicant. In short, the Council has been actively involved with the applicant
and has relevant and
up to date knowledge of her circumstances, including her
employment history, mentoring relationship, and compliance with the conditions.
it is appropriate for the review of conditions imposed by the orders to be
considered in a timely manner. Because of the Council’s
involvement to date in supervising the conditions, it is uniquely placed to deal
with the review in a timely way and in a
manner proportionate to the matters now
in issue. This is a particularly relevant factor given the evidence of the
courses undertaken
by the applicant, her compliance with the conditions, her
work history since 2008 and the time which has elapsed since the complaint
determined.
the costs to all parties, and the Tribunal will be minimised if the Council is
the appropriate review body.
I have taken into account this matter was determined by the Committee prior to
the introduction of the National Law. As
I discussed in
in future years for applications such as the instant one, will be avoided by a
Council, Performance Review Panel or Committee
nominating in relevant orders the
appropriate review body to undertake the review of any order imposing
conditions.
have also placed weight on the fact that the Council, and the HCCC, do not
oppose the Council being the appropriate review body.
each of the considerations enunciated above in account, I am satisfied on the
evidence before me, that the Council should be
the review body.
to s163(1)(a1) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
the NSW Nursing and Midwifery Council is the appropriate review
body to review the conditions set out in Orders 2-5 of the Professional
Standards Committee dated 18 August 2012.
The Hon Jennifer Boland AM
Chair, Nursing and Midwifery
12 September 2013.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (197 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter