URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMRP/2022/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v Rymer [2022] NSWPICMRP 7; (13 April 2022)
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v Rymer
[2022] NSWPICMRP 7
Christophe Rymer
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
MERIT REVIEW PANEL MEMBERS:
Merit Reviewer Belinda Cassidy
Merit Reviewer Susan
Merit Reviewer Katherine Ruschen
DATE OF DECISION:
13 April 2022
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS-
Motor Accident Injuries Act
(MAI Act); final
decision as to assessment of costs following interim decision as to
of medical disputes awarded at
first instance on an exceptional basis under section 8.10(4) of the MAI Act and
assessment of those
costs; application by insurer for review of merit review
decision; issue as to scope of costs; whole of claim or whole of medical
assessment process or limited to Medical Review Panel matter only; issue of
interpretation of original decision; issue of quantification
Merit Review Panel has no power to review any part of the merit
review decision made in respect of section 8.10(4) of the MAI Act
including the
scope of cost; Member’s decision allowed exceptional costs of Medical
Review Panel matter only; assessment of
costs in a scheme where CTP premiums are
compulsorily levied requires a level of scrutiny; itemised bill of costs
submitted by claimant;
original claim for costs in excess of $69,500, original
decision certified reasonable and necessary costs of $35,255; Merit Review
Panel’s assessment of reasonable and necessary costs of $16,642.50;
regulated costs of $1,710 allowed for the review of the
Merit Review
Determinations made:
The Review Panel:
1. Revokes that part of the Certificate dated 7 October 2021 issued by
Merit Reviewer Plibersek.
2. Assesses the reasonable and necessary costs and expenses incurred by the claimant and recoverable from the insurer for the purposes
section 8.10
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
in the sum of $19,849.50 (inclusive of GST).
3. Allows the sum of $1,881 (inclusive of GST) for the claimant’s costs in connection with this review of Merit Reviewer Plibersek’s
REASONS FOR DECISION
INTRODUCTION
General introduction
1. Christophe
Rymer was involved in a collision between the motorcycle he was riding and a car
on 8 December 2018. He made an application
for personal injury (statutory)
benefits on Allianz Australia Insurance Limited, the third-party insurer of the
car which Mr Rymer
says caused his accident.
2. Two medical disputes were referred to the Dispute Resolution Service (DRS)
of the State Insurance Regulatory Authority (SIRA) and
those disputes were
resolved in the claimant’s favour.
3. A dispute arose between Mr Rymer and the insurer about the payment of the
claimant’s legal costs and that dispute was referred
to the Personal
Injury Commission (the Commission). On 7 October 2021 General Member and Merit
Reviewer Plibersek
determined that
dispute about costs
4. Allianz lodged an application to review that decision and the
President’s delegate determined that there was reasonable cause
an error in Mr Plibersek’s
and a Review Panel (the
Panel) has been constituted by the President of the Commission to conduct the
Review of Mr Plibersek’s
decision (the
The background to the costs dispute
5. Mr Rymer’s statutory benefits claim was made
on Allianz on or about 20 December
and was made under the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(the MAI Act). Allianz accepted
liability for the statutory benefits claim and paid Mr Rymer his entitlements up
to a point 26 weeks
after the accident.
6. Allianz denied any liability to pay ongoing statutory benefits in a notice
dated 19 March 2019
. While Allianz
admitted its insured caused the accident that injured Mr Rymer and accepted that
Mr Rymer was not wholly or mostly
at fault, Allianz was of the view Mr Rymer had
only sustained minor injuries in the accident and was not entitled to any
benefits in accordance with sections 3.11(1) and 3.28(1) of the MAI Act.
The allegation of minor injury appears to have been made
on the basis of Mr
Rymer’s pre-accident medical history.
7. Mr Rymer sought an internal review of the insurer’s “minor
injury” decision and on 9 April 2019, the original
decision was affirmed
8. On 17 April 2019, Mr Rymer requested Allianz pay for surgery to his neck.
Payment of that surgery was refused by Allianz and an
internal review of that
decision was requested and presumed to be dealt
9. On 2 July 2019, Mr Rymer applied to DRS referring the following disputes
for assessment:
(a) whether surgical decompression and stabilisation of C7/T1 (with an anterior
cervical discectomy and fusion) relate to the injury
caused by the accident and
whether that surgery was reasonable and necessary in the circumstances, and
(b) whether the injuries caused by the motor accident are minor injuries for the
purposes of the Act.
10. Medical Assessor Bodel determined the above disputes in favour of the
claimant issuing three certificates and one set of reasons
in a combined
document dated 9 October 2019. An aspect of Assessor Bodel’s decision that
loomed large in the Review of Assessor
Bodel’s decision was his
consideration of a pre-accident CT scan which was said to have shown no C7/T1
pathology and the claimant’s
development of symptoms in that region after
the accident.
11. On 6 November 2019, Allianz lodged with DRS, an Application for Review of
that decision and on 3 October 2020, the Medical Review
Panel (MRP) confirmed
Assessor Bodel’s certificates in respect of the surgical procedure (that
had been undertaken by Dr Davor
Saravanja) and issued a revised certificate in
respect of the minor injury decision maintaining the outcome (an injury was
but noting a different diagnosis.
12. On 15 September 2020, the claimant’s solicitor sent an email to DRS
and to Allianz that due to:
“... the unusual degree of factual and legal complexity associated with
these disputes [being determined by the MRP] ... more
substantial legal costs
have been incurred and we seek pursuant to section 8.10(4) of the Act for DRS to
permit costs over and above
the regulated amounts to be recovered from the
13. On or about 27 January 2021, the claimant lodged an application for costs
with DRS. The dispute about costs relates to some or
all of the costs concerning
the claimant’s statutory benefits claim and in particular some or all of
the costs concerning the
work done in connection with the medical disputes
outlined above. It was that application that was the subject of Mr
Plibersek’s
decision of 7 October 2021 which is, in turn, the subject of
the proceedings before the Panel.
Preliminary issue as to jurisdiction
14. The extensive submissions lodged by the parties
in the application that was before
Mr Plibersek and in the application for
review before the Panel, reveal there was a dispute between Mr Rymer and Allianz
(a) whether the claimant should have been permitted to be paid legal costs
beyond the sums specified in the Motor Accident Injuries
Regulation 2017 (the
Regulation) that is whether costs should have been allowed on the
“exceptional circumstances” basis
(b) the amount that should have been allowed that is what costs were
“reasonable and necessary”.
15. The Panel identified a preliminary issue as to the Panel’s
the above matters.
After receiving submissions from the parties, the Panel determined it only had
power to consider the second of
. The basis of the decision
as to jurisdiction was that an “exceptional circumstances” decision
can only be made by the
Commission, and in accordance with
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
, the Commission is constituted by one
or more division Members (as listed in
section 8).
Merit Reviewers are decision
makers but not division Members of the Commission. The Panel determined that
Merit Reviewers including
Merit Review Panels only have power under Schedule
2(1)(aa) of the MAI Act to determine whether costs and expenses incurred by a
claimant are reasonable and necessary.
16. Following the issue of the jurisdiction decision, the Panel held a
teleconference with the parties. The parties agreed that the
“exceptional
circumstances” decision of Member Plibersek is not amenable to review
within the Commission.
17. The Panel confirmed with both parties that it would proceed on the basis
that the Commission had permitted the claimant’s
costs to be assessed
outside the amounts provided for in the Regulation in accordance with section
8.10(4) and therefore the only
matter to be considered by the Panel was the
quantum of the costs claimed.
WHAT COSTS ARE TO BE ASSESSED?
The scope of costs issue
18. The submissions lodged by
the parties with the application identified another issue, that is of the scope
of the costs in dispute
and therefore the work in respect of which costs are to
be assessed.
19. The claimant was of the view that what was being claimed and what was in
dispute were the claimant’s costs of the
of the medical
assessment process. The itemised costs
commenced with an item
of work done on 1 July 2019 and Assessor Bodel’s certificate was not
issued until 9 October 2019.
20. The insurer’s submissions in support of the application for review
suggest that the insurer has paid for the costs of the
original disputes that
had been assessed by Assessor Bodel and that therefore the costs in dispute for
assessment by the Panel are
to those reasonable and necessary
costs of the review of the medical assessment.
21. The Panel has termed this issue about the whole costs or the limited
costs as the “scope of the costs” issue. This
issue is, in summary,
an issue about whether costs are to be assessed by the Panel for only the work
done in respect of the medical
review matter (as argued by the insurer) or
whether costs are to be assessed for all of the work claimed in the medical
dispute (including
the original medical assessment and the medical review
matter) by Mr Rymer.
22. This preliminary point concerning jurisdiction will depend on what Mr
Plibersek determined, whether he was allowing costs for
the whole of the medical
assessment process or whether he was limiting costs to the work done limited to
the medical review, and
in which role he was making that determination.
23. If Mr Plibersek’s decision as to the scope of costs is a decision
made by him as a Member of the Commission, then for the
reasons set out in the
Panel’s jurisdiction decision, that decision is not amenable to review by
this Panel.
Who has power to determine the scope of the costs to be
24. Neither the claimant or the insurer engaged with
the issue of whether Mr Plibersek’s decision as to the scope of the costs
was a decision of the Commission (as constituted by Member Plibersek) or whether
it was a decision of Merit Reviewer Plibersek. The
submissions are limited to an
interpretation of Mr Plibersek’s reasons and what work he was including in
his assessment of
costs and whether they are reasonable or not.
25. The awarding of costs and the assessment of those costs are two separate
issues. In a court setting, the judge will award costs
and determine the basis
of those costs (for example on the ordinary basis or on an indemnity basis). The
quantification of those
costs is then a matter for the parties to agree on or,
for the costs assessment process to determine. This bifurcation of costs issues,
between the awarding of costs and the assessment of costs is replicated in the
MAI Act, as the Panel’s jurisdiction decision
determined. The awarding or
permitting of costs is a matter for the Commission (constituted by a Member)
under section 8.10, and
the assessment of costs is a matter for a Merit Reviewer
under Schedule 2(1)(aa).
26. The Panel is of the view that when considering the nature of a statutory
benefits claim, legal work is done, and costs could be
(a) throughout the whole of a statutory benefits claim from the date it was made
to some other date;
(b) in order to resolve one or more disputes involved in the statutory benefits
claim (merit review, medical assessment or miscellaneous
claims assessment
matter) at first instance, or
(c) associated with an application for review of a merit review or medical
assessment matter connected with the statutory benefits
27. Section 8.10(1) allows for the recovery of costs incurred “in
connection with” a statutory benefits claim. The phrase
connection with the claim” is quite wide and would appear to cover the
whole of the statutory benefits claim, that
is point (a) above. The Regulation
provides for costs in relation to some matters in (b) and (c) but not (a).
28. Section 8.10(3) provides an entitlement to recover costs depends about
costs being “permitted by ... the Commission”.
There is nothing in
section 8.10 that would appear to limit or restrict the power of the Commission
and therefore the Panel is of
the view that the Commission can award or permit
of costs on any of the three bases identified in 26 (a) – (c) above.
29. Costs are usually a matter for the exercise of a discretion and whether
costs are allowed on the exceptional basis for all of
the statutory benefits
claim, part of the statutory benefits claim or one dispute in the statutory
claim is a matter for the exercise
of a discretion. The exercise of that
discretion requires the consideration of the circumstances of the claim, the
circumstances
of the claimant, the disputes involved in the claim, the work done
and other matters arising in connection with the claim.
30. The Panel is of the view that it is a matter for the Commission (and
Member Plibersek) to permit the basis upon which costs are to be
awarded (exceptional or regulated) and in doing so to determine the
scope of the
costs covered by the permission (whether all of the costs in connection with the
claim are allowed on the exceptional
basis or some lesser portion of those
31. The Panel is of the view that the specific wording of Schedule 2(1)(aa)
restricts a Merit Reviewer and this Panel to a consideration
“the costs and expenses incurred by the claimant [as permitted by the
Commission] are reasonable and necessary”
only. The permission decision is
a matter for the Commission and not amenable to review by the Panel.
The decision under review
32. Mr Plibersek’s reasons at [1] note the
insurer was of the view the claimant was entitled to the sum of $1,826 for costs
and the claimant was seeking $69,548.60 for his solicitor’s costs.
33. Mr Plibersek identified at [2] the issues for determination were:
(a) whether the costs and expenses incurred by the claimant were reasonable and
necessary, and
(b) whether the claimant is entitled to be paid or recover legal costs beyond
the maximum amounts provided for in the Regulation.
34. In [3] – [15] Mr Plibersek documented the factual background and
procedural history including the requests for the concession
as to minor injury
and the surgical treatment and the internal review applications. He
(a) the application for medical assessment included “detailed written
submissions and numerous medical reports” [11],
the claimant was assessed
[12] and the decision of Assessor Bodel was that the claimant had non-minor
injuries and the surgery was
related to the accident and was reasonable and
necessary [13];
(b) in replying to the insurer’s application for review “the
solicitor for the Claimant made detailed written submissions”
(c) between February and August 2020, the claimant’s solicitors were
required to comply with requests from the medical review
“numerous documents, scans and submissions” [16];
(d) the claimant wrote to the insurer putting them on notice that legal costs
would be claimed due to the “unusual degree of
factual and legal
complexity of the medical review” [17];
(e) the medical review panel had “set out in considerable detail”
all the documents, the claimant’s “extensive
history”, the
further evidence requested and provided [19], and
(f) the claimant’s x-rays, CT scans and MRIs were sent, by the panel, to
radiologist Dr John Korber for his views before the
Panel determined the
claimant’s injuries were non-minor and the treatment should be allowed
[20] – [21].
35. Mr Plibersek summarised the submissions by both parties and notes at [25]
the claimant’s argument that he was not restricted
under section
8.10(4)(b) to an award for costs of the dispute only but that what was being
claimed has been so limited by the claimant.
He also notes at [32] that the
insurer argues the claimant was not entitled to legal costs between 1 July and
16 October 2019 because
this was before the application for review had been
filed, that the insurer has already paid costs in respect to the first instance
medical assessments and that the requirement to obtain additional medical
evidence concerning causation is not unusual.
36. Mr Plibersek identified at [47] – [48] the fundamental dispute
between the parties was whether “exceptional circumstances
justify the higher payment of costs beyond the Regulation.
37. In determining that issue Mr Plibersek referred at [49] – [54] to
the decision of his Honour Justice Wright in
AAI Limited t/as GIO v Moon
[2020] NSWSC 714.
He noted that decision referred to a category of cases that
would be exceptional because there was an ‘unusual degree of factual
legal complexity’ justifying more substantial costs.
38. Other cases referred to relate to the previous
and include
[2007] NSWCA 259
where Campbell JA said that exemptional
circumstances can include a single exceptional matter, a combination of
exceptional factors,
or a combination of ordinary factors which, although of no
particular significance, when taken together are seen as
‘exceptional’.
An “exceptional case” does not have to be
“unique, unprecedented or very rare” and that each case has to
approached on an individual basis.
39. Mr Plibersek considered Mr Rymer incurred greater legal costs because of
the complexity of the medical evidence and the need for
a review by a Review
Panel. He noted the insurer had refused to fund the claimant’s spinal
surgery requiring the claimant to
pay for it himself and that the claimant was
the respondent to the MRP matter.
40. Under the heading “Determination”, Mr Plibersek provided the
following reasons:
“[55] Applying the concepts and discussions above about the meaning of
‘exceptional circumstances’, I find that
exceptional circumstances
exist in this case.
[56] The exceptional circumstances in this matter are that the
Claimant’s solicitor’s preparation and presentation of
the dispute
involved special skill by the solicitors given the complexity of the medical
issues and materials and the volume of material.
The solicitors were required to
undertake extra work because the matter had unusually complex medical issues
involved. They also
had a large volume of material they had to collate and
present to the Review Panel. The solicitors had to contend with an additional
difficulty of a client who, although not under a legal disability, was diagnosed
with depression. The solicitors say this made it
difficult to get instructions
and took longer to deal with the Claimant’s questions and need to explain
the dispute process
to him. Taken individually these factors may appear ordinary
and not amount to exceptional circumstances, but when combined together
be seen as exceptional.
Moon’s case
, the Court referred to a category of cases
considered exceptional, because they involved an unusual degree of factual or
legal complexity
or for some other reason which required the incurring of more
substantial legal costs by a claimant.
Moon’s case
stated it would
be consistent with the objects and other provisions of the MAI Act, including
the express terms of sub-sections 8.10(3)
and (4), to permit the amount of legal
costs recoverable under sub-section 8.10 in such exceptional cases to exceed the
maximum fixed
by regulation where that was reasonably required to prevent
injustice, hardship or some other relevant adverse consequence.
[58] In the present case the Claimant incurred greater legal costs because of
the complexity of the medical evidence and the need
for a review by a medical
assessment Review Panel. I also note that the Insurer initially refused to fund
the spinal operation and
the Claimant had to fund the operation himself. The
Claimant was also the respondent to the Insurer’s review application to
the Review Panel. His success at the Review Panel prevented hardship to the
Claimant who had suffered debilitating neck and back
pain which was only
relieved by necessary spinal surgery.
[59] Having found that exceptional circumstances exist in this case, I now
have to determine the amount of reasonable and necessary
legal costs.
[60] The solicitors for the Claimant submit that if I find that exceptional
circumstances exist the full amount of legal costs claimed
should be awarded.
The reasons they give are as referred to above: the volume and complexity of the
medical material and the difficulty
they had in getting instructions and
explaining the dispute process to a Claimant with a diagnosed depression.
[61] On the other hand the solicitors for the Insurers submit that not all
the legal costs claimed should be awarded. They submit
that the Claimant resides
in Australia, is English speaking and is well-educated. He is not under a legal
disability. The Insurer’s
solicitors argue that although the matter was
complex it was not unusually complex for a Medical Review Panel matter. They
that much of the work done by the Claimant’s solicitors was
clerical or administrative in character and did not need to be
done by qualified
solicitors. The Insurer’s solicitors also noted that the Insurer has
already made payment for legal costs
in connection with the “minor
injury” and cervical fusion surgery disputes. Finally, the Insurer’s
solicitors submit
some of the legal costs claimed by the Claimant’s
solicitors was for work done prior to the application to the Review Panel
is not allowable
[62] In addition to the matters raised in the Insurer’s
solicitor’s submissions,
I also note the comment by the Review Panel
The Review Panel noted that some of this documentation was “... not
requested by the Panel but was considered relevant by the
solicitor”,
(AD-1, page 23). In my view this demonstrates that some of the work done by the
Claimant’s solicitors for
the Review Panel was unnecessary.
[63] I also note that in a claim for damages the hourly rate recoverable for
a legal service is three monetary units, which is about
$312 plus GST. This is
clearly not a market rate, but it is a rate that the MAI Act prescribes for
provision of legal services in
connection with a claim for damages. The lower
than market rate reflects the intention of the legislation to reduce legal
In this case the Claimant’s solicitors have charged per unit fees
ranging from $30 to $60 or $66 for senior experienced solicitors,
[64] When exercising my discretion to determine the amount of legal costs to
be paid in exceptional circumstances there is little
guidance available in
assessing those costs. There is no scale of legal costs nor any schedule of fees
in the Commission’s
Rules or legislation unlike the maximum costs for
legal services set out for regulated matters in Schedule 1 of the Regulations.
Nor is there a process for a taxation where a taxing officer goes through in
detail checking every item claimed against a scale of
permitted fees. The
discretion to award legal costs in exceptional circumstances must be used
consistently with the objects of the
MAI Act. These objects include the early
resolution of claims and the quick, cost effective and just resolution of
disputes. The
objects are also to keep premiums affordable and the scheme
sustainable. When exercising a discretion, it must be exercised in the
would best promote the objects of the MAI Act. Accordingly, dealing with
disputes quickly and limiting legal costs would
be consistent with the objects
of the MAI Act and is a relevant consideration when determining legal costs.
[65] In my view it is not appropriate that I deal with the assessment of
Claimant’s legal costs on an item-by-item basis. The
discretion I have is
one which requires me to assess those reasonable and necessary costs for the
disposition of the Review Panel
dispute having regard to the objects and
framework of the legislation.
[66] Taking into consideration the above submissions from the parties, the
comment from the Review Panel and the objects of the MAI
Act, I find that not
all of the legal work claimed by the Claimant’s solicitors for the Review
Panel dispute was reasonable
and necessary. I award the amounts of $30,800
including GST for the solicitor’s professional legal costs and $4,455
GST for barrister’s fees.
[67] I have allowed Counsel’s fees because of the essential role
Counsel played in drafting written submissions for the Claimant
in the dispute.
[68] There is also a claim for the clinical records invoice from Dr Davor
Saravanja of $60 plus GST of $6 totalling $66. I will make
no formal order for
the $60 fee claimed by Dr Saravanja because the Insurer in its written
submissions stated it does not dispute
the invoice and would pay it on receipt
of verification of payment, (R-1, paragraph 3).”
What was determined?
The insurer’s submissions
41. Allianz’s
submissions suggest at [2] - [4] that Member Plibersek was, at [58] of his
submissions considering the work done
from 1 July 2019 to 8 October 2020 when
considering whether exceptional circumstances existed and do not establish the
scope of the
costs permitted.
42. Allianz also says at [1], [14] and [25] that the determination of and
payment by it of the claimant’s costs for the original
medical assessments
finalised the issue of costs for that part of the medical dispute and limits the
scope of the costs to be reviewed
by the Panel to the medical review matter.
The claimant’s submissions
43. Mr Rymer’s
submissions
at [6] – [10]
note that in Mr Plibersek’s decision from
[56] - [58] he considered
all of the circumstances of the claim and the claimant and the whole of the
medical dispute in determining
whether exceptional circumstances existed.
44. The submissions then argue at [11] - [13] that the scope of the costs to
be assessed must include all of those factors which determined
the existence of
the exceptional circumstances and says:
(a) the complex medical evidence and other matters did not begin with the
service of the application for medical review;
(b) the complexities arose once the dispute with the insurer arose and became
“more complex and protracted” with the
application for medical
(c) because of the broad reasons for the granting of exceptional circumstances,
all of the costs from 1 July 2019 to 8 October 2020
should be considered, and
(d) to limit the costs to those only in connection with the medical review would
not be giving effect to Member Plibersek’s
decision about exceptional
circumstances.
45. The claimant confirms at [14] – [15] that the insurer paid the sum
of $3,652.35 in accordance with the Regulation for the
costs associated with
Assessor Bodel’s initial assessments but says these should not affect the
scope of costs. The claimant
says at [16] that it has removed from its schedule
of costs, any items relating to costs already paid by the insurer.
The Panel’s decision on the scope of costs issue
46. Mr Plibersek’s certificate determined that
“the Insurer is to pay the Claimant’s reasonable and necessary legal
costs assessed at ...”.
47. The words on the certificate do not help the Panel determine whether the
Commission, as constituted by Member Plibersek was allowing
costs for the whole
of the claim, the whole or the two medical disputes or the medical review
48. The reasons for the decision indicate that Mr Plibersek was aware of the
whole versus limited, “scope of costs” issue
because in [25] and
[32] of his decision, he summarised the parties’ submissions. He also
summarised the position of the parties
in [60] and [61] although less
49. In [65] Mr Plibersek says, “The discretion I have is one which
requires me to assess those reasonable and necessary costs
disposition of the Review Panel dispute
” and in [66] he says, “I
find that not all of the legal work claimed by the Claimant’s solicitors
for the Review
Panel dispute was reasonable and necessary”. He then goes
on to award the amount he has assessed as reasonable and necessary.
50. The Panel has not been provided with any correspondence between the
parties as to the payment of the sum of over $3,500 from the
insurer to the
claimant. Allianz can certainly make an offer to the claimant to settle the
question of costs by the payment of a
certain sum, but the Panel does not agree
that Allianz can unilaterally determine a costs dispute by the payment of the
sum. The Panel is also of the view that the claimant’s
acceptance of the regulated sum does not, in the absence of any relevant
correspondence, constitute a concession that those are the only costs to which
the claimant can be entitled.
51. The Panel agrees with the claimant that Member Plibersek considered the
claim, an allegedly difficult claimant, and the complexity
of the whole of the
medical dispute process in coming to the decision about whether costs should be
awarded on the exceptional basis.
52. However, when the whole of the decision is read and in particular the
concluding paragraphs of [65] and [66], the Panel is of
the view that the
decision of the Commission as constituted by Member Plibersek’s award of
costs was limited to the disposition
of the matter before the MRP.
53. In the light of the Panel’s earlier jurisdiction decision, it
follows that that the decision to award or permit costs on
the exceptional basis
in respect of the MRP is not one amenable to review by the Panel.
54. The Panel will therefore proceed on the basis that it is considering what
costs associated with the MRP matter are reasonable
and necessary. It is the
Panel’s decision that costs are therefore to be allowed from when the
application for review was first
received by the claimant’s
solicitors.
APPROACH TO THE COSTS ASSESSMENT
Method of assessment
55. In [65] of his
decision, Mr Plibersek said that: “In my view it is not appropriate that
I deal with the assessment of Claimant’s legal costs on an
item-by-item basis”.
Mr Plibersek then went on, in [66], to consider
the sums claimed and awarded the sums of $30,800 (including GST) for the work of
Rymer’s solicitor and $4,455 (including GST) for the work of Mr
Rymer’s barrister.
56. In its submissions placed before the President’s
the insurer said that
while Mr Plibersek may have given some reasons for why he did not award the
whole of the sum claimed for legal
costs, he gave no reasons at all to explain
why the sum that he did award. The insurer also submitted that the only
explanation for
allowing the sum of $4,455 for barrister’s fees was that
counsel played an essential role in drafting the submissions in response
application for review. Allianz says it is unable to understand the process by
which Mr Plibersek determined costs.
57. The claimant says at [11] – [19] of his original
submissions
(a) not all of the costs claimed were awarded;
(b) the Assessor gave reasons for why he did not allow all of the costs
(c) it was open to Mr Plibersek to quantify costs the way he did so as to
provide a “quick, cheap and effective dispute resolution
and to avoid the parties having to proceed to the Supreme Court for an
assessment of costs, and
(d) the sum he allowed was fair and reasonable.
58. The Panel noted, in its jurisdiction decision that there is a bifurcation
of costs decisions in the context of court-based litigation.
The judicial
officer awards costs and then costs are agreed or if not agreed, assessed by
someone else (but not the judicial officer).
So too in the context of the costs
of an MAI Act statutory benefits claim. The Member of the Commission determines
whether costs
are to be allowed and if so the basis for those costs (regulated
or exceptional) and then, if necessary, the Merit Reviewer assesses
quantifies those costs. On that basis, Member Plibersek awarded exceptional
costs and Merit Reviewer Plibersek assessed those
costs at $30,800 and $4,550
inclusive of GST.
59. The Panel notes that Allianz and all insurers in the compulsory third
party scheme are “receivers of public money that is
compulsorily
levied”. The Panel also notes that Merit Reviewers when assessing costs
are determining the quantum of costs to
be paid out of those public monies which
have been compulsorily levied. The Panel is of the firm view that costs should
be assessed
with a degree of scrutiny particularly in a matter where the amount
awarded was over $35,000 and the regulated sum is less than one
60. The Panel is therefore of the view that it is required to undertake an
item-by-item assessment of the costs claimed in order to
ensure both full effect
is given to the exceptional costs permitted by the Commission and to ensure only
those reasonable and necessary
costs within the scope of costs are allowed.
The claimant’s itemised costs
61. The claimant’s solicitor provided a
spreadsheet of the itemised costs claimed and forwarded this to the
solicitor so the insurer’s objections could be
. There were 308 items
claimed in that spreadsheet totalling the sum of $30,800. In addition, the
claimant seeks the sum of $4,455
payable to Mr Todd Alexis SC in respect of his
legal work drafting submissions in response to the application for review as set
in his invoice dated 25 January
62. The itemised list includes the date work was done, a description of work
done, the initials of the person who has done the work,
the number of six minute
units involved in the work and then the value of the work done.
63. The work is broken up into tasks. There may be several tasks undertaken
on one day. Those multiple tasks on one day do not appear
to be arranged in a
chronological top-down order but a chronological top-up order. For example, on 2
December 2019 there were five
tasks recorded. Item 51 is the review of
correspondence confirming DRS has received the reply and the matter will be
allocated to
a proper officer. Item 50 is the drafting of correspondence to Mr
Rymer advising him of that DRS correspondence and item 49 concerns
claimant’s response to that correspondence. Clearly item 51 was the first
task in that set of three. This arrangement of
tasks has not greatly assisted
64. The description of the work is brief, and the source documents have not
been provided (for example the correspondence to and from
the client or the
insurer). The Panel obtained access to the Commission’s electronic medical
assessment review file in order
to better understand many of the entries
involving the parties and the tasks undertaken to resolve the medical
65. The Panel notes that the insurer was represented by Ms Ramrahka, an
officer of Allianz at least until March 2021 but that at some
stage after that,
Ms Allen of Moray & Agnew was retained, and she had provided the final
submissions for the Panel and undertaken
other work in relation to the matter
before the Panel. The final submissions with respect, do not engage fully with
the steps undertaken
in the medical dispute and do not appear to have
appreciated all of the work done. For example, the insurer has included all the
work undertaken in relation to ‘submissions’ on the assumption that
these were the submission lodged with the reply to
the insurer’s medical
review application when in fact there were submissions lodged with the reply and
then requests for information
and documentation made by the Panel which had to
be answered and which appear to have been coded in the list as
‘submissions’.
66. The Panel understands from its reading of the file and the
claimant’s itemised bill of costs that the following tranches
of work were
undertaken:
(a) replying to the application (26 November 2019) and waiting for the proper
officer’s decision;
(b) reviewing the proper officer’s decision (10 February 2020) and
awaiting the convening of the panel;
(c) responding to the MRP’s first request (February 2020) –
information, documents and imaging studies were requested
by the panel and work
was done to obtain them;
(d) responding to the MRP’s second request (May 2020) – after the
first documents were provided, the MRP requested further
information and
documents including transcription of handwritten notes;
(e) dealing with the MRP’s decision to obtain an expert opinion from a
radiologist (June 2020). This was, in the Panel’s
view a critical feature
of this case and, having read the MRP’s decision pivotal to the change in
the overall matter outcome,
(f) pursuing and reviewing the MRP’s decision which was a 32 page detailed
document (October 2020).
67. The Panel also notes the itemised account of costs refers to drafting
correspondence. Many of these appear to be emails rather
than formal letters.
For example, on 11 November 2019 is an item (26) drafting submissions seeking
instructions to brief counsel
and the next item (27) is the perusal of the
reply. The assumption in cases like this is that the first item was an email as
the second. Emails, being less formal, do not require administrative
assistance and generally take less time to write.
The insurer’s response
68. The insurer has marked up that schedule of costs
and provided submissions dated 10 March 2022. The submissions include both
arguments (dealt with below) and more specific arguments (dealt with
individually):
(a) the claimant’s lawyers cannot recover more than they are paid, and the
insurer has not seen the retainer agreement. The
Panel notes that section 8.3(4)
appears to provide that Mr Rymer’s solicitor cannot be paid or recover
costs for any legal
services in relation to a statutory benefits matter unless
the Commission or the regulation permits it. In other words, this suggests
the claimant’s solicitor cannot be paid by Mr Rymer for anything beyond
that which he can recover from the insurer under
section 8.10. Therefore, it is
not clear to the Panel what the value of seeing the retainer would be and the
Panel does not intend
to request it;
(b) the intention of the Act was to reduce costs and claimants should not be
awarded costs “for work that is common-place within
medical disputes and
in no way exceptional”. Compiling medical evidence to put before the MRP
is not exceptional. The Panel
disagrees with this submission. This is straying
into the area of the Commission’s decision and not the decision under
The test of whether costs should be allowed is whether the work was
reasonable and necessary as set out in section 8.10(3). The Panel
notes the MRP
requested documentation be obtained and scans be provided;
(c) costs associated with correspondence to the client, requesting records,
correspondence with medical practitioners or the insurer
and administrative
tasks should not be included. The Panel agrees that solicitor – client
costs should not be included and
only those party – party costs reasonable
and necessary in respect of the MRP matter should be considered, and
(d) costs should be confined to the costs of the medical review application. The
Panel has dealt with that submission in its determination
of the scope of costs
General observations regarding “reasonable and
necessary” costs
69. Section 8.10(1) of the MAI Act provides that a
claimant is entitled to recover from an insurer the “reasonable and
legal costs and schedule 2(1)(aa) of the Act provides
legal costs.
70. Section 172(1) of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW)
Uniform Law) provides that:
“A law practice must, in charging legal costs, charge costs that are no
more than fair and reasonable in all the circumstances
and that in particular
(a) proportionately and reasonably incurred; and
(b) proportionate and reasonable in amount.”
71. The tests are understandably different because section 8.10(1) is focused
on essentially party / party costs in a highly regulated
and limited statutory
benefits environment whereas the Uniform Law is concerned with solicitor /
client as well as party / party
72. The Panel considers that section 172 of the Uniform Law provides guidance
in the exercise of its discretion in assessing what
is reasonable and what is
necessary and that the concept of fairness is relevant to both.
73. Section 172(2) requires consideration of the level of skill and expertise
of the lawyers doing the work, the level of complexity,
novelty or difficulty of
the work, the labour and responsibility involved in the work, the circumstances
of the matter, the quality
of the work done, and the retainer and instructions
74. The Panel also notes that section 172(3) provides that when considering
whether costs are fair and reasonable consideration must
be given to, amongst
other things, “any fixed costs legislative provisions”.
75. The issue of proportionality is important. Mr Rymer’s entitlement
to accident-related treatment and care expenses for life
under Part 3 of the MAI
Act was dependant on the outcome of the minor injury dispute. So too was his
entitlement to recover damages
under Part 4. For him, the consequences of an
adverse minor injury decision would mean he had no entitlement to any benefits
or compensation
beyond 9 June 2019. It was also necessary (if not essential) for
Mr Rymer’s legal representatives to respond to the requests
from the MRP.
It was also reasonable for his solicitors to expend considerable time ensuring
all relevant documentation was before
the MRP and that all relevant scans and
imaging were made available to Dr Korber.
76. Mr Rymer was very much involved in his matter. He requested that he be
copied in on all dispute related correspondence. There
are days when it appears
he contacted his solicitor several times. He appears to have been in possession
of his scans and imaging
and was involved in the arrangement for their
production. These are also matters relevant to the Panel’s decisions in
of individual tasks and items.
WHAT COSTS ARE REASONABLE AND NECESSARY?
What is an appropriate hourly rate?
77. The Panel notes that
there are three persons who have undertaken work on
Mr Rymer’s matter
as follows:
(a) ABT – Mr Andrew Tudhope the partner in charge whose hourly rate is
$660 per hour (see item 20);
(b) MM – Ms Maria Mak the solicitor who has undertaken most of the work
and whose hourly rate is $600 per hour (see item 8),
(c) GMM – Ms Gabriela Montalvo – whose email sign off indicates she
was a law graduate in May 2020 before becoming a
solicitor by July 2020 and
whose hourly rate is $300 per hour (see item 87 for example).
78. The claimant’s
submissions
note that Mr Tudhope
is a partner with 32 years’ experience as a solicitor and he is an
accredited specialist and that Ms Mak
is a solicitor with 16 years’ post
admission experience which is the equivalent of an accredited specialist. The
submissions
refer the Panel to the Costs Assessment Rules Committee Guidelines
but no copy of these guidelines were provided with the submissions.
The document
has now been provided
essentially guidance material, dated March 2016 which is not binding on costs
assessors but is written to encourage consistency
and predictability in costs
assessments. It provides a range for partners and specialists ($450 - $700 per
hour), senior associates
($300 - $500 per hour) and junior solicitor ($200 -
$400 per hour).
79. The insurer says that the rate charged by the claimant’s solicitor
at $600 per hour is outside the hourly rate recoverable
for conferences or an
assessment conference in connection with the assessment of a claim for damages
($321) as set out in the Regulation.
80. The hourly rate is prescribed in the Regulation for conferences (with
clients, witnesses and so on) associated with the assessment
of a claim for
damages or for costs beyond the first two hours of an assessment conference. The
Panel notes that in a claim for damages
the claimant’s solicitor is
allowed to “contract out”’ and charge more than the Regulated
81. The Panel also notes that in this matter, Member Plibersek has determined
that exceptional circumstances exist to justify the
payment of costs
the fees (including any hourly rate) prescribed in the Regulation.
The Panel is therefore of the view that the hourly rate provided
Regulation is not determinative of the hourly rate that could be applied in Mr
Rymer’s matter but is a guide only. This
aligns with section 172(3) of the
Uniform Law.
82. In the Panel’s view a reasonable and proportionate hourly rate is
$450 per hour for
Mr Tudhope and Ms Mak and $300 per hour for Ms
Should counsel have been briefed?
83. The insurer says that retaining counsel was not
justified, “counsel, let alone Senior Counsel, was not necessary and
disproportionate
to the issues in dispute”. Mr Todd Alexis SC was briefed
to “settle” the submissions filed with the reply to the
insurer’s application for the medical review.
84. The insurer also argued that the amounts claimed for drafting the
submissions were excessive and that the five pages of submissions
would not have
required more than one day’s work one day (7.5 units) for which the
claimant should be allowed the sum of $2,405.
The insurer says that the claim
for 21 hours ($12,600) from a senior associate and 13 hours ($3,900) from a
junior solicitor and
the assistance of counsel in drafting the submissions was
not reasonable and that the claimant should be entitled to recover costs
or the other but not both.
85. The Panel agrees with this submission. The issue in dispute in the review
was causation, that is the nature and extent of the
injuries resulting from the
accident. The claimant had pre-existing conditions which were relevant to
causation. Causation is, in
the Panel’s experience an issue that arises in
many motor accident matters and one in which personal injury accredited
and equivalent solicitors are well versed. A medical review is
essentially a paper-based dispute resolution process and therefore
the skills of
a barrister-advocate are not reasonable or necessary particularly in the light
of the significant experience of Mr
Tudhope and Ms Mak.
86. The Panel will not therefore allow counsel’s fees or any of the
work associated with briefing counsel.
Costs incurred before application for review received
87. Costs incurred before the service of the
application for review (items 1 – 19) are not reasonable and necessary in
the panel’s
view in the light of the “scope of costs” decision
at [46] - [54] above.
Administrative tasks
88. The costs guidelines referred to by the
claimant’s solicitor provide an hourly rate of $75 – $150 for clerks
and secretaries
and suggests that if the hourly rate includes secretarial and
administrative services, additional hours should not be added.
89. The Panel is not of the view that administrative work cannot be charged
at all, or that administrative work undertaken by the
partner, senior solicitor
or junior solicitor should in all cases be charged at a lesser rate. The Panel
has given consideration
to individual items and adjusted the units claimed in
some instances to balance the reasonable time taken for a legal practitioner
do the administrative work with the lower rate for administrative and support
90. The Panel notes the claimant’s submissions at [64] indicate that
the claimant was very much involved in his proceedings
before the MRP. The
claimant’s solicitors undertook much of the work obtaining the medical
records and scans (from
Mr Rymer’s chiropractor, physiotherapist and
pre-accident GP) to ensure the treatment providers remained co-operative.
91. The Panel notes that in particular there was a significant amount of work
done obtaining notes and transcriptions of notes from:
(a) Ashley Hall – chiropractor;
(b) Stephen Hill – physiotherapist, and
(c) Vale Medical practice.
92. There were many entries concerning the cost of obtaining these records
and transcriptions. While these tasks were generally administrative,
times when intervention from a solicitor appeared necessary. The Panel
considered this work should be allowed and considered
that a global amount of
two hours should be allowed for
93. The Panel has provided its detailed reasons in
the column of the attached document for each item of costs claimed.
94. The total sum which the Panel assessed as reasonable and necessary is
$16,425 to which should be added the sum of $1,642.50 in
95. The parties agreed that in accordance with the Motor Accident Injuries
Regulation - Schedule 1 Part 1 (1) Merit Review (3) the
claimant is entitled to
recover the sum of $1,710 for the regulated costs associated with the review of
Merit Reviewer Plibersek’s
decision to which should be added the sum of
$171 for GST.
Itemised assessment of costs
1. “DRS” means Dispute Resolution Service
2. “MRP” means the Medical Review Panel.
3. “DRO” means a Dispute Resolution Officer who is a member of
staff of the DRS or Commission. They have been distinguished
as DRO 1 and DRO 2
as the Panel considers it is not necessary to include their names.
4. Words in square brackets are words that have been inserted by the Panel
to clarify or explain the description provided.
Description
Consider Dr Saravanja's letter regarding causation of injury
Scope of costs [54]
Telephone attendance with you regarding Operation report and outstanding
matters for DRS
Scope of costs [54]
Review correspondence from you enclosing letter of Dr Saravanja providing
Scope of costs [54]
Draft correspondence to you requesting recent scan to be submitted so I can
attach them as additional documents to the DRS applications
Scope of costs [54]
Review correspondence from you enclosing scan of neck
Scope of costs [54]
Draft correspondence to you regarding outstanding operation report
Scope of costs [54]
Review correspondence from you regarding physiotherapy treatment to your
Scope of costs [54]
Draft correspondence to barrister regarding advice about appointment of
medical officer
Scope of costs [54]
Review correspondence from you regarding submissions regarding the
Scope of costs [54]
Perusal of correspondence from you together with your MRI report
Scope of costs [54]
Draft correspondence to DRS regarding additional documents
Scope of costs [54]
Review correspondence from you regarding Assessment and additional
Scope of costs [54]
Review correspondence from you regarding Assessor Bodel's assessment and
matters to discuss requiring action
Scope of costs [54]
Review correspondence from you regarding Dr Bodel assessment and next
Scope of costs [54]
Review correspondence from DRS regarding Certificate of Medical Assessor
Scope of costs [54]
Review Certificate of Medical Assessor Bodel
Scope of costs [54]
Draft correspondence to you regarding Certificate of Assessor Bodel
Scope of costs [54]
Review correspondence from you regarding conference and expenses
Scope of costs [54]
Draft correspondence you in reply regarding interest concerns and expenses
paid to date and how to calculate total expenses
Scope of costs [54]
Consider guidelines and legislation regarding review process
Not R & N - research - solicitor has considerable personal injury
Telephone attendance with DRO-1 regarding interpretation of the guidelines
regarding a review
Not R & N - research - solicitor has considerable personal injury
Review [insurer's] application [for review of] of Minor Injury
Allow 30 minutes. 48 minutes unreasonable
Consider submissions of application in reply to review application
Not R & N - duplication - thinking not doing
Draft correspondence to DRO-1 seeking an extension of time to lodge
Not R & N - application just received, no need for extension at this
Telephone attendance with you regarding submissions, next steps, briefing
barrister and treatment
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Draft correspondence to you Todd Alexis, regarding submission and reply due
Reasonable and allowed at $45 for one unit (letter to client) but not
letter to counsel
Telephone attendance with DRO-1 regarding date submissions due
Not R & N – no need for extension at this time
Review correspondence from you regarding briefing barrister and next
Reasonable to obtain written instructions and allowed at $45 per unit -
Draft correspondence to Insurer requesting extension to lodge reply
Not R & N - application just received, no need for extension at this
Review correspondence in reply from Insurer regarding timing for
Not R & N - application just received, no need for extension at this
Draft submissions in reply with reference to supporting documents
Conceded by the insurer and allowed as reasonable and necessary at $45 per
Review further correspondence from Insurer regarding reply
Not R & N - application just received, no need for extension at this
Review correspondence from DRO-1 regarding reply to application and due
Not R & N - application just received, no need for extension at this
Draft correspondence to Todd Alexis re: due date
Counsel not allowed [78]
Review correspondence from you regrading appointment with Dr
Not R & N - appears to be claim related no evidence dispute
Further drafting of submission in reply
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit (note 35 units claimed but presumed
15 units only as corresponding value of $900 equates to
15 units @$60)
Draft brief to Counsel enclosing Application and Reply
Counsel not allowed [78]
Draft correspondence to Todd Alexis regarding submissions
Counsel not allowed [78]
Draft correspondence to Todd Alexis regarding application forms
Counsel not allowed [78]
Draft correspondence to barrister regarding submissions
Counsel not allowed [78]
Telephone attendance with Todd Alexis regarding submissions
Counsel not allowed [78]
Review correspondence from you regarding Dr Saravanja's report
Not R & N - no evidence there was a need to obtain this report at this
Review Submissions finalised by Todd Alexis and draft changes
Counsel not allowed [78]
Draft Application for Reply of Review of Medical Dispute
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit - drafting of reply form not
Telephone attendance with you to confirm lodgement of submissions
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Draft correspondence to DRS, DRO-1 enclosing Submissions
Not R & N - admin and part of 44
Telephone attendance with DRO-1 to confirm receipt of reply [to]
application
Not R & N duplication - purely admin
Review correspondence from you regarding reply [to] application and failure
of DRS to provide acknowledgment of Application
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Review correspondence from you regarding deadline for Proper Officer to
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Draft correspondence to you advising of reply application being receipt and
next steps regarding allocation to Proper Officer
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Review correspondence from DRS acknowledging receipt of Reply and
application and advising of allocation to Proper Officer
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Review correspondence from you regarding next steps at SIRA
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Draft correspondence to you regarding SIRA and timetable of decision
Not R & N - solicitor / client and duplication
Review correspondence from you regarding Proper officer failure to make
decision by due date
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Telephone attendance with DRO-1 to discuss delays
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Review correspondence from DRO-1, DRS regarding delays and reallocation of
Proper Officer
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Draft correspondence to you regarding progress of claim and the
frustrations regarding delays
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Draft correspondence to DRO-1 requesting all correspondence be forwarded to
client as well
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Telephone attendance with Tiffany to further discuss correspondence from
Not R & N - duplication and purely administration
Review correspondence from you regarding Dr Saravanja's letter
Not R & N - no evidence there was a need to obtain this report at this
Draft correspondence to you regarding update
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Telephone attendance with DRO-1 to request an update regarding the referral
to the proper officer
Not R & N - duplication of 63
Draft correspondence to DRO-1 regarding update of proceedings
1 unit reasonable and allowed at $45
Review correspondence from you following up DRA on a response
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Telephone attendance with DRO - 1
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Telephone attendance with Dispute Resolution Service
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Review correspondence from you to follow up DRS
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Draft correspondence to you advising of updates
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Telephone attendance with DRO-1 - attempted call and then to general line
DRS regarding failure to respond
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Telephone attendance Keegan from DRS to delay with my complaint
Not R & N - solicitor / client and complaint, not this dispute
Draft correspondence to you regarding DRS decision and steps to take
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Review Proper Officer's decision and reasons to refer to Panel
One hour – 10 units reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit for both
Telephone attendance with you regarding Proper Officer's decision
Draft correspondence to you regarding 2015 scan and imaging notes and what
was presented to Dr Bodel
Reasonable and allowed at $45 (not allowed in 35, 42 and 60 – report
now necessary)
Review your correspondence, reply and estimate of time frames to finalise
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Consider guidelines regarding binding decision of medical review
Not R & N - research - solicitor has considerable personal injury
Telephone attendance with you regarding collection of invoice and
submission of expenses and statutory declaration of wages
Not R & N – claim related - no evidence this is relevant to
matter in dispute
Draft correspondence to DRS regarding further documents to be
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit – panel request
Review correspondence from you regarding scans and next steps
Not R & N – claim related - no evidence this is relevant to
matter in dispute
Review your correspondence regarding CT scan
Not R & N – claim related - no evidence this is relevant to
matter in dispute
Telephone attendance with DRS regarding the delay in allocating a reviewer
for the dispute and requesting the issue be escalated
Not R & N - solicitor / client
Review correspondence from DRS regarding additional scans and CD and
putting additional material before the panel
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Draft correspondence to you regarding SIRA agenda and expediting the
Not R & N – solicitor / client
Draft correspondence to [you] arrange further material to be produced to
Reasonable and allowed at $45 - 1 unit
General received CD with CT scans to send to DRS but was unable to open and
view images. I tried opening each image in different applications
unsuccessful
Not R & N – IT / administrative task
Preparation of letter to DRS enclosing burned CD of CT
Not R & N – same work as 94
Telephone attendance with DRS to confirm whether USB or CD was most
suitable to send CT scans
Not R & N – administrative task not necessary for solicitor
Preparation letter to Allianz enclosing USB with CT scan
Reasonable and allowed in part but 6 units excessive similar letter to
Review correspondence from you regarding the conduct of your claim and next
Not R & N – solicitor / client and repetitive
Review correspondence to you regarding outcome of Bodel's Assessment
Not R & N – solicitor / client and repetitive
Telephone attendance with you to discuss outstanding matters
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Draft correspondence to you regarding CT scans
Not R & N - solicitor / client and repetitive
Review correspondence from DRS regarding delivery of CT scan and copies for
the Review Panel
Reasonable and allowed at $45 - 1 unit
Preparation letter to DRS with copies of two USBs with CT Scans.
Reasonable in part and 5 units allowed at $45 per unit – burning of
CDs and USB preparation IT / administrative task
Review previous correspondence from you and Allianz regarding outstanding
matters requiring your further instructions
Not R & N – repetitive and duplication
Telephone attendance with DRS re the CT scans sent to them for the
Not R & N – no evidence why this was necessary and why 2
Draft correspondence to DRS to determine medical dispute
Not R & N to remind a statutory authority of its duty
Correspondence with Allianz regarding the documentation necessary in
submitting for your claim.
Not R & N – claim related - no evidence this is relevant to
matter in dispute
Telephone attendance with DRS regarding outstanding matters for Review
Not R & N – a week since last follow up
Telephone attendance with DRO-1 regarding the appointment of the panel and
further steps
Reasonable and allowed in part – 1 month since documents filed follow
up reasonable but 24 minutes excessive
Review correspondence from you regarding determination of [matter]
Not R & N - solicitor / client and repetitive
Review correspondence regarding outstanding surgery costs
Not R & N – claim related - no evidence this is relevant to
matter in dispute
Draft to you regarding outstanding payments
Not R & N – claim related - no evidence this is relevant to
matter in dispute
Review correspondence from DRS regarding allocation of panel
Reasonable and allowed at $45 – 1 unit
Review correspondence from Allianz regarding past out of pockets
Not R & N – claim related - no evidence this is relevant to
matter in dispute
Draft correspondence to Allianz regarding outstanding out of pocket
expenses and outstanding treatment
Not R & N – claim related - no evidence this is relevant to
matter in dispute
Telephone attendance with you regarding DRS [request] for further
information and discuss steps to obtain outstanding information
Reasonable and allowed in part – allow 8 units at $45 per unit for
107 – 110 remainder excessive and duplication
Review correspondence from DRS regarding outstanding information
Review correspondence from you requesting Dr Roberts’ file
Review correspondence from you regarding outstanding matters from DRS
Review correspondence from you regarding matters outstanding for DRS
Not R & N – duplication of 110
Review correspondence from you regarding next steps
Not R & N – duplication of 111
Review correspondence from you enclosing physiotherapy notes, scans and
chiropractor notes
Not R & N – date possibly wrong and duplication of 117 which is
allowed in full
Review correspondence from DRS regarding further documents [MRP]
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit to check what you have and
responding to Panel request
Draft replies to you regarding additional information requested [by the
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit as documents still not to hand
Review Medicare History Statement to answer [MRP] requests for additional
information
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Review physiotherapy notes and consider whether a further request for note
from the chiropractor is appropriate
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Draft correspondence to you regarding [MRP] request for additional
[material] and steps requires to obtain it
Not R & N – duplication of work involved in 113 - 117
Review correspondence from you regarding authorities for Medicare
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit (see letter 21 May)
Draft correspondence in reply to Allianz indicating a Medicare request has
already been made
Not R & N - duplication or matter concerning whole of claim not
Review clinical notes provided by your physiotherapist - Hill
Not R & N - duplicate 113
Review Dr Ashley Hall [chiropractor] Medical Notes
Not R & N - duplicate 113
Review correspondence from Allianz regarding request for authorities and
Not R & N – appears to be claim related - no evidence this is
relevant to matter in dispute
Review correspondence from you requesting [assistance] to collect the
information requested by DRS
Not R & N – solicitor / client
Consider and review outstanding tasks to complete
Reasonable and allowed in part – 2 units at $30 per unit
Review correspondence from you regarding DRS outstanding matters and
treatment update
Not R & N – re outstanding matters – duplication. Re
treatment update claim related - no evidence this is relevant
to matter in
dispute or solicitor / client
Review correspondence from you regarding notes collected for DRS
Not R & N – solicitor / client and duplication of 124
Review clinical notes and drafting a response to the DRS
Not R & N – duplication of 131 (131 allowed)
Telephone attendance with you in regards to missing information for DRS
Reasonable and allowed at $30 per unit – MRP request for
Correspondence with Dr Saravanja and Dr Roberts requesting missing
information
Reasonable and allowed in part at $30 per unit – documents requested
Review documents required to provide to DRS
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Review correspondence from you regarding cortisone injection
Not R & N – claim related - no evidence this is relevant to
matter in dispute
Telephone attendance Dr Robert's office requesting the clinical notes
Reasonable to follow up request from MRP and allowed at $30 per unit
Correspondence with you regarding the notes by Dr Saravanja and the notes
requested of Dr Roberts
Reasonable to follow up request from MRP and allowed at $30 per unit
Consider and review the notes provided by Dr Saravanja
Not R & N - duplicate of 136
Review of documents and preparation of response to DRS
Reasonable but excessive and allowed in part. Documents requested by MRP to
be provided. Allow 20 units at $30 per unit
Chronology not requested and
duplication and or solicitor / client
Preparation Chronology of the material previously provided to Dr Bodel and
Preparation response to DRS
Not R & N – duplication of 136 either on basis of 39 units
claimed or $90 value claimed
E-mail to DRS regarding the delivery of the scans and films.
Not R & N – administrative task regarding address to send scans
Draft correspondence to you requesting clarification of hip injury
Reasonable in light of disputes and allowed at $45 for 1 unit
Review scans and settle letter to DRS regarding service
Reasonable and proportionate for senior solicitor and allowed at $45 per
Review clinical notes of Dr Roberts and consider further deterioration of
Reasonable and allowed in part - 7 units duplication of 140 re hip
Correspondence to DRS providing notice of delivery of scans
Not R & N – unnecessary administrative task
Correspondence with you regarding details of where to deliver scans
Not R & N – simple administrative task
Correspondence with the DRS [explaining] the delay in responding to their
Reasonable and allowed at $30 per unit
Review for privileged correspondence in attachments to DRS
No R & N – duplication of work done in 136 – should have
been done at the time
Draft and settle letter to DRS with submissions
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit. While some duplication may exist
with 136 and 137 the Panel notes the letter of 21 May to
DRS was lengthy and
provided 122 pages of material requested by the MRP not previously provided. In
addition, answers were given
to questions raised by the Panel
Review and clinical notes being attached to letter to DRS and settle
Review imaging notes for hip MRI scan and consider whether to provide to
Draft submissions in reply to the Panel
Review with Gabriela all clinical notes provided by client and remove
double up of attachments and discuss renaming documents
Not R & N – duplication of work
Further review with Gabriela the attachments for DRS dispute
Not R & N – duplication of work
Draft and further update reply to [MRP request]
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit for editing lengthy letter
Draft correspondence to you regarding class action
Not R & N – not relevant to this dispute
Further review reply to [MRP] (admin)
Not R & N – duplicate and excess to 153
Preparation of the response to the [MRP requests]
Not R & N – duplicate of 147 – 150 and others
Correspondence to DRS enclosing our response and supporting material
Not R & N - duplicate of work done by MM
Correspondence with you regarding the tax invoice for Dr Saravanja
Not R & N – admin and solicitor / client
Review matter and consider outstanding matters
Reasonable to check all documents submitted and allowed at $45 per
Consider and preparing invoices for reimbursement by insurer of medical
notes paid by you
Not R & N – administrative task
Review correspondence regarding disbursements and application for
Not R & N – premature request for costs.
Telephone attendance with DRS confirming receipt of scans sent on 19 and 20
Not R & N – unnecessary to follow up – administrative task
in any event
Review clinical notes on file to prepare response to DRS
Reasonable to respond to request from DRS and allowed at $30 per unit
Correspondence with Pittwater Physiotherapy requesting clear [copy of]
Reasonable to respond to request from MRP and allowed at $30 per unit
Preparation [of] the additional documents requested by DRS [MRP]
Not R & N – administrative task and duplication of 168 and 163
both allowed
Telephone attendance with you regarding the DRS Response
Reasonable and allowed at $30 per unit
Correspondence with you regarding the DRS [MRP] response requesting
additional documents
Not R & N - duplicate of 166
Review correspondence from DRS regarding [2nd request] for additional
documents [for MRP] and liaise with Gabriela regarding next
Reasonable to consider 2nd request from MRP and allowed at $45 per
Draft correspondence to you regarding next steps for DRS and
information
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Review correspondence from you in reply regarding the collection of
information as requested by DRS
Not R & N – solicitor / client, duplication of 166 and 167
Preparation of additional documents requested by SIRA
Not R & N – covered by 165 - 168
Correspondence with Vale Medical Practice requesting clinical notes from 9
Jan 2019 to date
Reasonable and allowed in part – almost one hour considered excessive
– allow 3 units (note 2 units for below similar
telephone enquiry)
Telephone attendance with Pittwater Physiotherapy
Reasonable and allowed at $30 per unit
Settle letter to Vale Medical Practice for requesting clinical notes
Not R & N - duplicate 172
Consider with ABT and GM how to best ask physiotherapist for clearer
Not R & N - internal conference not necessary
Telephone attendance with you to discuss the purpose of the request for
further information
Not R & N – solicitor / client and duplication
Review correspondence from you regarding cost of obtaining notes
Not R & N – solicitor / client
Telephone attendance with Vale Medical Practice
Reasonable and allowed at $30 per unit
Consider the remaining tasks in preparation to respond to DRS request
Reasonable noting multiple requests from DRS / MRP and allowed at $30 per
Correspondence with insurer requesting they reimburse you for the clinical
notes by Vale Medical Practice
Reasonable and allowed – 1 unit
Correspondence with the DRS regarding the clinical notes provided by Mr
Not R & N - duplication
Telephone attendance with you regarding the insurer requesting the
transcribed notes
Not R & N – solicitor / client
Correspondence with insurer regarding whether they will reimburse you for
the costs associated with [MRP] request for further clinical
Reasonable noting multiple requests from DRS / MRP and allowed at $30 per
Telephone attendance with DRS regarding clarification as to whether they
require notes by Mr Ashley Hall [chiro] or Mr Steven Hill
Reasonable and allowed at $30 per unit
Correspondence with Pittwater Physiotherapy requesting that the request for
transcribed documents be put on hold
Not R & N – solicitor / client noting 180 and 183
Review correspondence from Allianz regarding physiotherapy notes
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Review correspondence from you regarding further information required from
Not R & N – solicitor / client and duplication and excessive
units or excessive cost per unit
Correspondence with the insurer requesting them to pay the invoice by Vale
Reasonable in part and allowed at $30 for 1 unit
Correspondence with you providing you an update regarding the request to
Mosman Chiropractic Centre for transcribed clinical notes
by Ashley Hall
Not R & N – these tasks are generally administrative in nature
Correspondence to Mosman Chiropractic Centre to request a quote for
transcribed notes by Ashley Hall
Telephone attendance with to Mosman Chiropractic Centre to request a quote
for transcribed notes by Ashley Hall. I was directed to
E-mail to the insurer requesting confirmation as to whether the Pittwater
Physiotherapy clinical notes have been transcribed and received
Not R & N - follow up unreasonable
Correspondence with you regarding the need to purchase the Pittwater
Physiotherapy clinical notes. I confirmed that the insurer will
cover the cost
and will provide us with a copy of the notes
Not R & N – solicitor / client
E-mail to DRS requesting confirmation as to whether notes by Ashley Hall
need to be transcribed
Reasonable due to DRS confusion in names Hall / Hill and allowed
E-mail to Insurer following up on Invoice for Vale Medical Notes
Not R & N – these tasks are generally administrative in nature
Telephone attendance with Pittwater Physiotherapy regarding the request for
transcribed notes. Confirmed they have not received a
Telephone attendance with insurer confirming payment for Vale Medical notes
made. Remittance being sent. They also confirmed that
they paid for an
independent transcription service for the Pittwater physiotherapy notes. They
also confirmed that we can provide
them with a quote for Ashley Hall's notes and
they'll pay for it.
Telephone attendance with Ashley Hall's admin confirming the price for to
have the notes transcribed
Telephone attendance with Vale Medical practice confirming payment has been
made for the clinical notes. They confirmed that they
will send the notes on
Correspondence with Vale Medical practice providing a copy of the
remittance confirming payment has been made for the clinical notes
Consider and discuss the remaining documents requested and what we need to
provide the DRS
Reasonable noting multiple requests from DRS / MRP and allowed at $30 per
Telephone attendance with you, returning your call to speak about the
recent progress
Not R & N – solicitor / client
Telephone attendance with DRS confirming the need to have the notes by
Ashley Hall transcribed and the status of the remaining documents
Reasonable in part and allowed at 1 unit
Telephone attendance and a follow up email to Pittwater Physiotherapy
confirming that they need to provide the tax invoice for the
transcribed
Not R & N – these tasks are generally administrative in nature
Telephone attendance with the insurer confirming that an invoice will be
provided for the Pittwater Physiotherapy notes to be transcribed
Telephone attendance with Ashley Hall's admin confirming details on the
invoice to then forward it to the insurer to pay
E-mail to the insurer providing a copy of the invoice to transcribe Ashley
Halls notes
Telephone attendance with Pittwater Physiotherapy requesting that they send
the invoice for transcribing the notes
Not R & N – these tasks are generally administrative in nature
E-mail to insurer requesting they pay the invoice provided by Pittwater
Physiotherapy for the transcription of notes
Telephone attendance with Vale Medical Centre requesting they send the
clinical notes. They confirmed they would send them tomorrow
Consider cost to transcribe clinical notes
Not R & N – nothing produced merely considered
Review [Medicare] claims history statement since 2016 and draft email in
Not R & N - duplicate of 116 and no evidence necessary at this time or
related to dispute
Telephone attendance with Vale Medical confirming they had posted the
clinical notes by express post due to the size
Not R & N – administrative task see 241
E-mail to you enclosing the agreement and confirmation that you will need
to pay the chiropractor’s invoice
Not R & N – solicitor / client
Draft of the agreement that you will be refunded the $275.00 from the
chiropractor if the insurer pays
Not R & N – solicitor / client
Correspondence with the insurer requesting confirmation that the invoices
will be paid
Reasonable and allowed in part – 2 units at $30 per unit
Telephone attendance with Pittwater Physiotherapy requesting they start
transcribing the notes. They requested an email to confirm
conversation
Not R & N – these tasks are generally administrative in nature
Correspondence with Pittwater Physiotherapy requesting they start
transcribing the notes
Correspondence with Mosman Chiropractic Centre requesting they start
transcribing the notes
Correspondence with the insurer requesting they pay the invoices
Correspondence with Ashley Hall requesting confirmation that the notes will
be provided prior to the 25 June 2020 and that a refund
will be issued if the
insurer pays the invoice
E-mail to you providing confirmation that Ashley Hall will provide notes
prior to the 25 June 2020 and that a refund will be issued
if the insurer pays
the invoice
Not R & N – solicitor / client
E-mail to Pittwater Physiotherapy confirming insurer will pay invoice
Not R & N – these tasks are generally administrative in nature
E-mail to Ashley Hall confirming insurer will pay invoice
E-mail to you confirming the insurer will pay invoice
Not R & N – solicitor / client
E-mail to insurer requesting prompt payment and a remittance advice
Not R & N – these tasks are administrative in nature see
Telephone attendance with Pittwater Physiotherapy confirming that they
require payment before transcribing the notes
Telephone attendance with you requesting that you pay the invoice provided
by Pittwater Physiotherapy and they will reimburse you
when they receive the
payment from the insurer
Not R & N – solicitor / client
E-mail to Pittwater Physiotherapy confirming that they require payment of
the tax invoice will be paid asap
Not R & N – this task is administrative in nature see 241
Telephone attendance with you confirming that you would pay Pittwater
Physiotherapy for the transcription
Not R & N – solicitor / client
Review and consider Vale Medical Practice clinical notes
Not R & N - duplicate of 237
Review and consider Pittwater Physiotherapy transcribed notes
Not R & N - duplicate of 237
Review and consider Mosman Chiropractic Centre transcribed clinical
Not R & N - duplicate of 237
Draft correspondence to you in reply to C7/C8 comments in 2015
Not R & N – solicitor / client
Draft correspondence and advise to you regarding symptoms
Not R & N – solicitor / client
Review correspondence from you regarding comments from physiotherapist and
chiropractor
Reasonable to obtain instructions before responding to MRP’s
Review Vale Clinical Notes, Chiropractor notes and physiotherapy
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Preparation of supporting documents to send to DRS
Conceded by insurer and allowed as reasonable and necessary at $30 per
E-mail to Pittwater Physiotherapy confirming receiving transcribed
Not R & N – these tasks are administrative in nature see
E-mail to Mosman Chiropractor confirming receiving transcribed notes
No specific claim for these units but note various items from 186 to
See paragraphs [91] – [92] of the decision allowance for
administrative work needed to be done by junior solicitor
Review correspondence from you regarding symptoms of injuries following
2015 scan and compare with new injury post-accident
Not R & N – duplication of 234-236 and the Panel notes, the MRP
requested additional material which required gathering documents
and forwarding
them to DRS - no submission were requested, no submissions were provided, the
documents were sent by email
Draft submissions to DRS regarding clinical notes and observations
Conceded by insurer and allowed as reasonable and necessary at $45 per
Draft correspondence to you regarding DRS reply
Not R & N – solicitor / client
Preparation response to DRS.
Not R & N duplicate of 242
Review and settle correspondence to DRS
Not R & N – excessive 244, 247 and 248 allowed
Telephone attendance with you to consider submissions to DRS regarding
Not R & N – excessive see 243 – allow 5 units at $45
Draft submissions to DRS
Conceded by insurer and allowed as reasonable and necessary at $45 per
Draft submission with supporting documents to DRS
Conceded by insurer and allowed as reasonable and necessary at $30 per
Draft response to the DRS with supporting material.
Not R & N duplicate of work done by MM
Correspondence with the DRS, providing the additional documents.
Not R & N duplicate of work done by MM
E-mail to DRO-2 with an updated link to access the documents
Not R & N duplicate of work done by MM and administrative
E-mail to you regarding the DRS decision to seek a diagnostic radiology
opinion and our submission regarding your disc extrusion
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit for 2 units
Draft and settle submissions
Conceded by insurer and allowed as reasonable and necessary at $45 per
Review and settle correspondence to you regarding radiology request from
Not R & N - duplicate of work done by GMM and allowed at 252
Review correspondence from DRS regarding further radiological opinion
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Telephone attendance with DRS regarding radiology and request for a copy
[of letter to Korber]
Reasonable in light of critical importance of Korber’s opinion and
allowed at $45 per unit
Draft correspondence to you regarding next steps regarding
radiologist
Not R & N - duplicate of work done by GMM and allowed at 253
Draft correspondence to Dr Saravanja requesting further details of
Not R & N – no request from MRP for this and no evidence it is
related to this dispute. Solicitor / client but see 270
Review correspondence from you regarding concerns of radiologist opinion
and further evidence
Review correspondence form you regarding concerns of questions to Dr
Draft correspondence to you with revised approach to Dr Saravanja
Telephone attendance with you to consider next steps and radiologist
Reasonable in part and allowed at $45 per unit for 2 units note 252, 254
Review correspondence from you regarding concerns with information provided
to radiologist
Not R & N – solicitor / client but see 269
Review correspondence from you regarding Dr Saravanja's clinical
Not R & N – solicitor / client but see 269
Draft correspondence to you regarding scans to radiologist
Not R & N – solicitor / client but see 269
Review post-operative scans and images ordered by Dr Saravanja
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Consider what scans the [MRP] radiologist should have
Not R & N – duplication of 272 but see 269
Draft correspondence to you regarding [scans]
Not R & N solicitor /client but see 269
Telephone attendance with you to consider whether radiologist has been
properly briefed
See 258 – 261, 263 – 265, 267 – 268. While a large part
of these appear to be solicitor / client type costs they
relate to what is the
critical evidence for the panel – the claimant’s imaging studies
that were provided to Korber.
It was essential that the DRS/MRP had the correct
imaging studies and therefore this work is reasonable and necessary and the
tasks are allowed at one hour of the senior solicitor’s time.
Draft correspondence to DRO-2 DRS requesting letter of instructions
Not R & N – duplicate of 256 admin task to follow up
Consider response to DRS regarding the scans that need to be hand
Not R & N – administrative task
Telephone attendance with [DRS], following up on the email sent on 1 July
2020 requesting a copy of the letter of instruction
Reasonable follow up one week after first enquiry and allowed
Review further email from you regarding concerns that the radiologist does
not have the full history
Not R & N – duplicate of 276
Draft correspondence to you to provide update and arrange further
collection of scans
Reasonable to put in writing and allowed at $45 per unit – compliance
with request from MRP
Draft correspondence to DRS following up on request for letter of
instruction of radiologist
Not R & N – duplicate of 272
Review further correspondence from you regarding instructions to
radiologist and relevant documents he should have available with
consideration
It is not clear in what order the work on this day was done – it
appears to be related to following up the letter from the MRP
to Dr Korber and
then the receipt and review of that letter. The report from Dr Korber was
critical and it was essential for the
correct documents to go to him. As it
transpired two reports were obtained from Dr Korber, The Panel considers 1 hour
and necessary for the senior solicitor to do this work.
Telephone attendance with you to discuss letter of instructions to
radiologist and further information required
Draft correspondence to DRS regarding further documents to be present to
the Insurer
Draft correspondence to you regarding correspondence to DRS
Review correspondence from DRS enclosing Review Panel letter of instruction
[to Korber]
Review CT of the injection [procedure] of C7/T1 for panel
Review correspondence from you regarding consistencies with letter
instruction to radiologist and draft reply
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit – the scans which were before
Dr Korber and the Panel were critical to the outcome of
the medical assessment.
It was essential for the senior solicitor to have a complete understanding of
the scans and undertake these
Telephone attendance with you to discuss concerns regarding radiologist
Draft and settle correspondence to DRS regarding scan upload
Downloading and preparing the contents from the CDs provided with your
CT/EOS scans for the DRS Panel to access, download and review
online with
correct programming
Reasonable and allowed at $30 per unit. As per 282 – 284 and others
– this was a critical part of the proceedings and
reasonable for solicitor
to ensure scans correct
Downloading and uploading contents from CD with CT of the Paravertebral
Injection Cervical Spine on 21 March 2019 to send to DRS
Not R & N – task for IT and / or admin or included as part of
E-mail to DRS providing a link with access to a copy of the contents on the
CD with CT of the Paravertebral Injection Cervical Spine
on 21 March 2019
Reasonable and allowed at $30 per unit
Review and consider whether to submit additional documents to assist your
claim with the DRS
Not R & N – all work with additional documents done. No further
request from Panel.
Email to DRS requesting date for Review Panel teleconference
Reasonable and allowed at $30 but excessive claim – email is one
Review correspondence from DRS regarding the next teleconference
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit
Draft correspondence to you regarding Review Panel's decision
Not R & N – solicitor /client
Telephone attendance with DRS requesting confirmation of when Dr Korber is
anticipated to provide a copy of his report
Not R & N – duplicate of 289
Correspondence with you regarding deadline for report by Dr Korber
Reasonable and allowed at $30 - 1 unit
Email to you notifying date report by Dr Korber is due
Not R & N – solicitor /client and duplicate of 292
Draft correspondence to DRS regarding update
Not R & N – less than 2 weeks since last enquiry 291
Review the DRS legal portal for a response from DRS regarding your
Reasonable and allowed at $30 – 1 unit
Correspondence with DRS requesting an update on the report by Dr
Not R & N – updates requested too frequently –
administrative task to check.
Correspondence with DRS regarding report by Dr Korber
E-mail to DRS requesting a copy of Report by Dr Korber.
19/08/20 assume
Review report of Dr Korber, radiologist (report dated 19/08/20 but not
provided by DRS until 21/08/20)
Reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit. Note Panel assumes wrong date of
entry, but this task was necessary
E-mail to DRS requesting copies of the two reports by Dr Korber and update
on date of teleconference.
Not R & N – only 3 days since last enquiry 298
E-mail to you confirming we have requested from DRS copies of the two
reports by Dr Korber and update on date of teleconference.
Not R & N - solicitor / client
E-mail to you enclosing the reports by Dr Korber, explaining the
Reasonable and allowed at $30 per unit
Correspondence with DRS regarding the report by Dr Korber and the
teleconference
Not R & N – only one day since last enquiry 301
Telephone attendance with DRS requesting an update on the decision by the
Reasonable (one month elapsed since last enquiry) and allowed at $30 per
Telephone attendance with DRO-2 from SIRA
Reasonable and allowed at $45 – one unit
Review DRS decision and certificate
One hour – 10 units reasonable and allowed at $45 per unit for both
Consider DRS decision and certificate with you
$16425.00 + GST $1,642.50 = $18,067.50
Because of his dual roles and
the issues concerning jurisdiction of each of those roles, the Panel will refer
to General Member and
Merit Review Plibersek as Mr Plibersek in this
v Allianz Insurance
[2021] NSWPICMR 45
(7 October 2021).
Insurance v Rymer
[2021] NSWPIC 534
(14 December 2021).
Because the issue of costs in
dispute between the parties includes a dispute about the costs of a medical
review, to avoid any confusion,
any reference in this decision to “the
Panel” or “the Review” is a reference to this Merit Review
the Merit Review it is undertaking. The review of the medical
assessment and its panel will be referred will be referred to as “the
medical assessment review” and “the Medical Review Panel” or
The application is
document R1 in the insurer’s reply to the original medical assessment
application.
The liability
notice is document R14 in the insurer’s reply to the original medical
assessment application.
Allianz’s Certificate of Determination is document R19 in the
insurer’s reply to the original medical assessment
application.
The determination
of the insurer in respect of that application is not before the
Allianz Australia
Insurance Limited v Rymer (jurisdiction
) 23 February 2022 (not yet
Both those lodged
with the original submissions at page 31 of the claimant’s bundle and
those lodged with the final
submissions.
Accident Compensation Act
of costs” submissions are dated 3 March 2022 and are document AD 18 in the
Commission’s electronic
Document A1 in the
Commission’s electronic file in particular paragraphs 41 and 42. These
submissions are dated 26 October
Document R1 in the
Commission’s electronic file. These submissions are dated 16 November
Document AD19 attached
to the claimant’s final submissions dated 3 March 2022 document AD
Document AD 11 in the
Commission’s electronic
Document AD7 in the
Commission’s file dated 27 January 2021, paragraph
Document AD23 in the
Commission’s electronic
This entry has no
number but appears between 240 and 241 in the attached table.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.32 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter