URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/48.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sikka v Roads and Maritime Services (No. 2) (GD) [2013] NSWADTAP 48 (25 October 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Sikka v Roads and Maritime Services (No. 2) (GD)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 48
Hearing Date(s):
10 October 2013
Decision Date:
25 October 2013
Appeal Panel - Internal
Judge K P O'Connor, President
A Scahill, Judicial Member
Non-judicial Member
1. Appeal dismissed.
2. Decision of respondent affirmed.
Catchwords:
OCCUPATIONAL REGULATION - Appeal - Extended to Merits - Fitness -
Consideration of Driver's Explanation for Alleged Misconduct - Explanation
accepted - Decision affirmed
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Passenger Transport Act
Cases Cited:
Sikka v Roads and Maritime Services (GD)
[2013] NSWADTAP 28
Principal judgment
Amit Sikka (Appellant)
Roads and Maritime Services (Respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
M Jools (agent by leave, Appellant)
A Wozniak, Smythe Wozniak Legal
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
General Division
- Date of Decision:
11 March 2013
- Citation:
Sikka v Roads and Maritime Services (unreported, 11 March 2013)
- Court File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
is the second decision in an appeal brought by Mr Sikka. Mr Sikka has applied to
the Tribunal for review of a decision by Roads
and Maritime Services (RMS) as
administrator of the
Passenger Transport Act 1990
to cancel his taxi
driver authority issued under that Act. The Tribunal affirmed the cancellation.
Mr Sikka appealed to the Appeal
Panel. In our earlier decision, we accepted Mr
Sikka's objection that the Tribunal's reasons were inadequate, set aside the
decision and extended the appeal to the merits:
Sikka v Roads and
Maritime Services
[2013] NSWADTAP 28
(28 June 2013). The RMS decision
remained unaffected.
permitted by
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Appeal Panel has been reconstituted with Judicial Member Scahill replacing Ms
Huntsman, who became unavailable following her
resignation as Judicial Member to
take up an appointment as a Magistrate. The parties consented to this
replacement.)
30 July 2013 the Panel issued directions allowing the parties to file additional
material. On 7 August 2013 the Panel (constituted
by the President sitting alone
for this purpose) refused an application by Mr Sikka for a stay of the RMS
decision, so that he might
be permitted to resume work as a taxi driver pending
resolution of the appeal. He had the benefit of a stay during the period the
case was before the Tribunal below (31 May 2012 to 11 March 2013) and for a
further period after lodgment of the appeal (25 March
2013 to 23 April
filed a supplementary statement from Ms Minerva Mikhael, customer services
manager, GM Cabs. At the Appeal Panel hearing on 10
October 2013, Mr Sikka's
agent, Mr Jools, handed up a short document containing some queries in relation
to Ms Mikhael's statement.
Ms Mikhael attended, and was cross-examined. Mr Sikka
gave evidence supplementary to that previously given by him to the Tribunal,
cross-examined and answered questions from the Panel.
concern that led the Appeal Panel to the view that the Tribunal's reasons had
been inadequate related to its non-response to the
defence of machine error that
Mr Sikka has pressed in answer to the key concerns that led RMS to decide to
cancel his authority.
RMS Concerns
key concerns were (1) an in-cab payment transaction involving a credit card,
where the customer's credit card was charged twice
in different amounts for the
one fare (21 June 2011, complaint lodged with RMS 1 August 2011); and (2) the
discovery, as a result
of the RMS investigation of that complaint, that Mr Sikka
had been questioned on 21 July 2011 by Ms Mikhael whose company, GM Cabs,
supplied the in-card credit card terminal used by Mr Sikka, over numerous
double-charges. He had agreed to refund $3406. In all instances
transaction had occurred a very short time after the first transaction, usually
around 50-60 seconds later.
the instance of the item (1) transaction, the two merchant slips were in
evidence. The first slip was accepted as authentic (in
the amount of $25.25,
time imprint - 17:02). RMS and the Tribunal on review accepted that the second
slip (for $58.83, time imprint
- 17:03) was not signed by the passenger and that
the signature that appeared there was forged.
all the item (2) matters, the slips themselves were not in evidence. Instead RMS
relied upon GM Cabs' computer records of the slips
presented to it for
processing by the driver at the end of the shift against which immediate cash
payments had been made to the driver.
her evidence to the Appeal Panel, Ms Mikhael explained that when repeat
complaints are received from passengers over apparent double-charging,
bank makes contact with a customer query, the relevant records are examined, and
the driver who has the terminal shown
is questioned. Mr Sikka had been with GM
Cabs for about two years without incident when 'chargeback' complaints commenced
to be received
both direct from customers and from banks around June-July 2011.
called Mr Sikka into her office after hours on 21 July 2011, and she opened the
computer records on-screen. Prior to the meeting,
he had on 19 July 2011
returned the terminal involved in the disputed transactions and was issued with
a new terminal. He had used
that terminal since 4 May 2010.
Cabs' accountant, Mr Diab, was also present at the meeting. Ms Mikhael and Mr
Sikka agreed that there were numerous instances of
second charges against a
credit card and they were very close in time. After discussion he agreed to
refund the second of the charges,
and accepted her calculation of the total
amount, i.e. $3406. She explained that she was keen to resolve the matter
quickly to avoid
having her company billed by the bank at the rate of $30 per
dispute transaction if it was left to effect the refunds. He made the
the complaint in respect of the 21 June
2011 transaction.
Driver's Explanation
Sikka has contended throughout these proceedings that a terminal fault must be
the explanation for what occurred. He said all he
did at the end of his shift
was present all slips for cash payment unaware that there were second slips
affecting some of the fares
done during the shift. He said he repaid the amount
of the second charges identified at the meeting because he was worried he might
lose his job, not because he had done anything wrong.
Sikka also relies in his defence on a statement made by Ms Mikhael at the
interview that terminals were sometimes faulty and sometimes
wrongly issued a
second slip. He also referred to a letter written by Ms Mikhael some time later,
14 July 2012, 'to whom it may concern'
stating that: 'Mr Sikka had our eftpos
terminal which was changed over to a new terminal due to incorrect programming.
has a working eftpos terminal with no errors.' Ms Mikhael stated in
her record of interview with RMS compliance officers dated 31
January 2013 that
she had agreed to give him such a letter if he paid back the second charges.
Tribunal below regarded Mr Sikka's explanation as implausible, but did not spell
out why. In the circumstances, given the attention
the defective-machine defence
had received in the course of the proceedings, we considered that
unsatisfactory.
Mikhael explained to the Appeal Panel, as she had to the RMS inspectors and to
the Tribunal below, that she had dealt with Mr Sikka
on the basis that if he
reimbursed to GM Cabs the $3406 she would take no further action in the matter,
and treat it as closed. She
stated that it was not her company's practice to
report drivers to RMS or the police over matters of this kind.
Importantly,
in her additional statement presented to the Appeal Panel, she attached a
complete transaction history where credit cards
had been used in relation to the
terminal issued to Mr Sikka covering the period 1 June 2011-28 July 2011. She
marked 57 transactions
as involving a second charge to the same card usually
within a minute of the first charge, the first suspect transaction occurring
9 June 2011 and the last on 21 July 2011. The transactions were spread across 28
driving days. This provision of a complete list
met one of the criticisms made
by Mr Jools for Mr Sikka both before the Tribunal below and at the appeal
hearing, i.e. that the transaction
history presented to that time had been
selective and only a sample.
suspect second charges were usually in an amount different from the first
charge, and all but three involved a higher amount.
There were several instances
where a second charge was in the same amount across different transactions
involving different cards
(Mr Wozniak referred for example to transactions 1, 4,
11, 16, 43 where the second charge was $61.05).
to the reliability of the terminals, we accept Ms Mikhael's evidence, and in
that regard also refer to Mr Diab's evidence (recorded
in the Tribunal's
reasons), that the kind of terminal issued to Mr Sikka at the time of the
transactions was capable of issuing a
second transaction slip quickly after a
first transaction slip in respect of the same card. In the case of the kind of
terminal supplied
to Mr Sikka in 2010 the card could be swiped a second time
unless it had an internal security feature (say a ten minute bar) that
that. In her experience, some cards used by customers did have that feature. She
said that none of the 60 or so passengers
had travelled twice or authorised the
second payments.
Ms Mikhael's opinion, for a second transaction to be recorded against the same
card, it would be necessary for a second swipe action
to occur. That would
ordinarily be undertaken by the driver. We accept her evidence as to this
reject Mr Sikka's assertion that this history could be explained by a machine
fault, an assertion for which he produced no independent
evidence in
is regrettable that Ms Mikhael said what she did to Mr Sikka at the beginning,
and issued the letter to that effect. She has been
candid with the inspectors
and the Tribunal over why she said what she said to Mr Sikka at the time.
our view, it involved no more than a manager saying something comforting to a
driver who was faced with a situation that threatened
his livelihood, and might
well have led to police charges. We do not accept Mr Sikka's assertion that the
words of threat were used
by Ms Mikhael and he felt compelled to make the
refund. We note in that regard that the actual payment of the refund did not
on the day itself of the interview, but four weeks later not long after he
got notice that the RMS inspectors were investigating
the complaint the subject
of item (1).
our view the Tribunal below rightly drew an inference, contrary to Mr Sikka's
assertions, that his actions were consistent with
him having done wrong.
in our view the following inferences can comfortably be drawn from the evidence
as it relates to the item (2) transactions:
Mr Sikka swiped the passenger's card
the second time; and Mr Sikka, as he would have done when performing the first
transaction,
inputted the amount to be charged and consistently inputted an
amount different from the first amount and usually inputted an amount
to the item (1) transaction, there is no doubt that the passenger signature that
appears on the second docket is a forgery. In
our view, the inference is
inescapable that Mr Sikka was the author of the second signature. There is no
dispute that Mr Sikka was
the driver who dealt with that passenger, and the
docket was one of those presented for encashment by Mr Sikka at the end of the
Mr Wozniak has submitted, Mr Sikka's conduct in respect of item (1) would be
sufficient to justify RMS forming the view that he
had displayed a lack of the
honesty and integrity required of a taxi driver. To that must be added our
findings in respect of the
item (2) transactions.
Sikka had a relatively unblemished history in his first two years as a driver.
He has pressed the view that in the several months
he continued to drive while
the case was before the Tribunal below, he has not offended in any way. We
accept, in principle, that
he should be accorded some recognition for his good
history over the stay period.
we are not satisfied that we should ameliorate RMS's decision in the way sought
by Mr Sikka. He put to us that he should
be granted a conditional licence, say
for six months.
our view, Mr Sikka has not come to terms with his misconduct. He does not
acknowledge that he did anything wrong. He has a misplaced
belief that RMS and
GM Cabs are in league to stop him working as a driver. His belief that the
machine is to blame is far-fetched.
Until he accepts responsibility for his
misconduct, and can show that he has taken steps that might suggest he could be
again trusted
to conduct himself with honesty and integrity, he must be regarded
as not fit to be granted a driver authority.
1. Appeal dismissed.
2. Decision of respondent affirmed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (139 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter