URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2021/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Craddock v GH Varley Pty Ltd [2021] NSWWCCPD 10 (11 February 2021)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
Craddock v G.H. Varley Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWWCCPD 10
Christopher Craddock
RESPONDENT:
G.H. Varley Pty Ltd
AAI Limited trading as GIO
FILE NUMBER:
ARBITRATOR:
Ms J Toohey
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
8 September 2020, amended 17 September 2020
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
11 February 2021
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Factual error: application of
Whiteley Muir & Zwanenberg Ltd v Kerr
(1966) 39 ALJR 505
; clinical notes of treating doctors –
v Council of the City of Wagga Wagga
[2004] NSWCA 34
; application of
weight of expert evidence in the Commission: application of
Paric v John
Holland Constructions Pty Ltd
[1984] 2 NSWLR 505,
Hancock v East Coast
Timber Products Pty Limited
[2011] NSWCA 11
and associated
authorities; admission of fresh evidence on appeal: application of
Australia Ltd v Strickland
[2013] NSWCA 351
12 DDCR 501
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Michael Snell
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr R Stanton, counsel
Brydens Lawyers
Respondent:
Mr D A Baker, counsel
Gillis Delaney Lawyers
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
appellant’s application for leave to rely on fresh or additional evidence
pursuant to
section 352(6)
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
is refused.
Arbitrator’s decision dated 8 September 2020 (amended 17 September 2020)
is revoked. The matter is remitted for re-determination
by a different
Arbitrator.
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Christopher
Craddock (the appellant) was employed full-time by G.H. Varley Pty Ltd (the
respondent) as a production worker, from 27
February 2017 to 24 May
There was an incident on 29
March 2017 when the appellant was using an air rivet gun which was connected to
compressed air. The air
hose blew off the machine and struck the appellant in
the vicinity of his abdomen (to employ an intentionally vague
The occurrence of the
incident was not in serious dispute. There was an issue regarding precisely
where on his body the appellant
was struck and the nature of any injury
sustained. The incident was reported, but the appellant did not claim
compensation at the
time. He saw a general practitioner, Dr Chin, on the date of
the incident and was given a medical certificate for two days off
The appellant resumed his
normal duties on 3 April 2017 and worked on until 24 May 2017 when he was
terminated whilst still on probation,
due to concern about his attendance and
health issues.
The appellant states
that he had difficulty carrying out his duties after the
appellant obtained sedentary work with another employer which he performed from
22 October 2017 to 18 August
The appellant lodged a claim
form dated 11 December 2017.
respondent’s insurer denied liability in a dispute notice dated 19 March
2018. The insurer contended the incident had not
caused any incapacity for work,
that any treatment was not reasonably necessary, and that the effects of the
injury had resolved.
The decision
was confirmed in a
notice dated 31 July
The claim as ultimately
pursued was for weekly compensation from 24 May 2017 to 22 October 2017 and from
19 August 2019 to date and
continuing, together with medical and related
expenses pursuant to s 60 of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
current proceedings were commenced by way of the ARD which was dated 3 June
2020. The matter was listed for an arbitration hearing
on 18 August 2020. Mr R
Stanton appeared for the appellant and Mr D A Baker appeared for the respondent.
In accordance with the Commission’s
current practice, due to the COVID-19
pandemic, the hearing was conducted remotely, by telephone. The Arbitrator dealt
late documents that were relied on. Particulars of the weekly claim
were discussed, counsel addressed and the Arbitrator reserved
her decision.
There were no applications to adduce oral evidence or to cross-examine.
Commission issued a Certificate of Determination dated 8 September 2020 (amended
on 17 September 2020), accompanied by the Arbitrator’s
reasons. There was
an award in favour of the respondent. References in this decision to the reasons
are to the amended document.
THE ARBITRATOR’S REASONS
Arbitrator described the claim that was brought and the basis of the
respondent’s denial. She described the issues as whether
there was an
injury within the meaning of s 4 of the 1987 Act, whether the effects of any
injury were continuing, whether there was
incapacity as a result of injury and
whether there was an entitlement to reasonably necessary medical
She summarised the lay
and medical evidence that was before
Arbitrator summarised the appellant’s submissions. Mr Stanton submitted
there was no dispute that the appellant was struck
by an air hose. It was
submitted there was some force involved, the air hose tore through the
appellant’s clothes, he felt
immediate pain, vomited and had trouble
standing. Mr Stanton referred to the medical evidence. Dr Draganic (a treating
surgeon) diagnosed abdominal wall neuralgia. Dr Mendelsohn (a surgeon
qualified in the appellant’s case) had previously had
difficulty with the
diagnosis. He then agreed with Dr Draganic’s diagnosis. He agreed that the
appellant had chronic iliac
fossa pain. He described the appellant’s prior
abdominal problems as unrelated to the injury.
Stanton referred to the reports of Dr Garvey (a surgeon qualified in the
respondent’s case). Dr Garvey took a comprehensive
history consistent with
the appellant’s statement. He had access to the reports of Drs Draganic
and Mendelsohn. He found no
inconsistency or exaggeration. He diagnosed anterior
cutaneous nerve entrapment. Dr Garvey maintained this diagnosis on the basis
his clinical findings, after seeing an MRI scan report that failed to confirm
the diagnosis. Mr Stanton submitted all of these
doctors came to the same
conclusion, the appellant suffered from anterior cutaneous nerve entrapment
syndrome and was unfit for his
The Arbitrator also
summarised Mr Stanton’s submissions on the appellant’s entitlements,
which it is unnecessary to repeat
having regard to the issues in this
Arbitrator summarised Mr Baker’s submissions. Dr Chin certified the
appellant as fit to resume work on the day after the
incident. There was nothing
apparent, when the appellant resumed work, that suggested serious injury. The
appellant did not lodge
a claim until 11 December 2017. Dr Chin’s
notes on the day of the incident described a visible mark above the umbilicus.
his claim form in December 2017, the appellant said that he was “hit on
the tummy”. The mark observed by Dr Chin was
not on the left iliac fossa
anterior flank, the injury location later recorded by Dr Mendelsohn, and then by
the appellant in his
statement. It was submitted a medical dictionary will show
the iliac fossa region is below the
Baker submitted that, following 29 March 2017, the appellant did not see Dr Chin
for nine months, save for one occasion which was
unrelated to the incident. When
the appellant returned to her in December 2017, Dr Chin declined to give him a
WorkCover certificate
and told him to see Dr Plummer. The appellant, in his
statement, said that he had no bowel problems before the workplace injury.
was inconsistent with notes from the Nelson Bay Medical Centre which showed a
long history of abdominal pain and gastrointestinal
problems apparently related
to anxiety. Mr Baker submitted that during 2017, after the incident, the
appellant saw Dr Plummer on
five occasions regarding matters such as abdominal
discomfort, without mentioning the workplace injury. Dr Plummer’s first
record of the incident was on 20 October 2017, after he had seen lawyers. The
Arbitrator noted a submission that the appellant went
to Dr Plummer on his
lawyers’ advice and subsequently provided a “statement of evidence
that does not reflect what actually
Baker referred to the fact that the appellant, in his statement, referred to
injuring his “left anterior flank region”,
a term Mr Baker submitted
came from Dr Mendelsohn’s report. He submitted that the appellant stated
Dr Chin gave him a WorkCover
certificate when she did not. The appellant said he
was terminated because he had difficulty carrying out his work, but this was
borne out by the statements of Mr English and Mr Alexander. The appellant said
he was in and out of hospital four or five times
between the injury and around
June 2017. The only medical evidence was that he attended the Mater Hospital on
one occasion and was
discharged.
Baker submitted the history on which Dr Draganic based his opinion was
incorrect, the doctor understood the appellant had chronic
left iliac fossa pain
for two years corresponding with where he was struck. He was not struck in the
left iliac fossa area. Dr Draganic
understood there was a history of no previous
gastrointestinal symptoms, contrary to the true history. Mr Baker submitted Dr
found localised pain in the left iliac fossa below the umbilicus;
this was contrary to Dr Chin’s record of the site of the
injury. Other
discrepancies were also referred to. Mr Baker submitted that all three doctors
had the wrong histories, there was not
a fair climate for the expression of
their opinion.
Arbitrator noted a submission in reply from Mr Stanton, that Dr Garvey had a
full history that included the factual investigation
arranged by the
Arbitrator referred to
Nguyen v Cosmopolitan Homes (NSW) Pty
and the need for a
tribunal of fact to feel an actual persuasion of the existence of a proved fact.
She referred to
Kooragang Cement Pty Ltd v
and the need, when
dealing with causation issues, for a commonsense evaluation of the causal
She referred to the need
for caution in dealing with clinical notes from treating
referring to a line of
authority that included
Davis v Council of the City of Wagga
Arbitrator said there was no dispute that the appellant was struck by an air
hose. Dr Chin, on the day of the incident, noted
a “visible mark from
in the original). There was no reason to think that Dr Chin “did not
record the site of the visible mark accurately”.
There was no submission
that the note was inaccurate.
The Arbitrator said that Dr Chin’s was “the only contemporaneous
record”. She referred to “the value of contemporaneous
Onassis and Calogeropoulos v
Arbitrator referred to the history recorded by Dr Mendelsohn in November 2018.
Dr Mendelsohn recorded the hose “tore through
his clothes and hit his
left anterior flank region”. She noted that Dr Mendelsohn identified the
site of pain as
below the level of the umbilicus
in the left iliac fossa,
which is where Dr Mendelsohn found “localised tenderness” and an
“irregularity in the
soft tissues” (emphasis in the original). Dr
Draganic also recorded two years of “chronic left iliac fossa pain from
where the air hose ‘struck him in that area’”. It did not
appear that Dr Draganic had Dr Mendelsohn’s report.
Both doctors recorded
a history of injury at a spot different to that recorded by Dr Chin. The
Arbitrator said it did not appear
that either of these doctors had Dr
Chin’s records.
Arbitrator said that the site of where the appellant was struck was of greater
significance because of his long history of abdominal
and gastrointestinal
problems. This was shown in the clinical records, notwithstanding the
appellant’s denial of bowel problems
prior to the incident. She said it
did not appear the cause of these problems “was ever identified with any
certainty”.
She said the clinical records did not show any particular
change in the appellant’s symptoms after the
The appellant
consulted Dr Plummer about his abdominal problems during May 2017. The
appellant’s symptoms were sufficiently
severe that he attended a hospital
emergency department on 17 May 2017 and was sent for a CT scan to investigate
his abdominal problems.
There was no mention to Dr Plummer or the hospital of
his work incident. The Arbitrator said it was:
“... difficult
to think of a reason why he would see a doctor several times over several months
for abdominal pain, including
having a CT scan, and attend at a hospital in
severe pain, without once mentioning the injury at work, if it had the effects
It is reasonable to infer it had no noticeable effect different from
his previous abdominal
Arbitrator said that Dr Chin certified the appellant as fit to resume work on
the day following the incident, and he resumed full
duties on the following
Monday. The evidence suggested any effects of the incident quickly resolved. She
accepted the appellant “continued
to suffer abdominal pain as he had for
many years”. She did not accept that there was any significant change
following the
incident. She said that the appellant’s statement that Dr
Chin gave him a WorkCover certificate was “not correct”.
she accepted the respondent’s submission that the appellant’s
statement contained “other statements that
are not correct including that
he was in and out of hospital four or five times in the months following the
incident”. She
accepted a submission from the respondent that the
consultation with Dr Plummer on 20 October 2017, when the incident was first
to that doctor, was prompted by the appellant’s attendance on
his lawyers.
Arbitrator said she did not “think [the appellant’s] responses on
the later employment questionnaires should be held
against him”. She said
the appellant’s “evidence is unreliable in significant respects, in
particular some of what
he told the specialists of the incident itself and his
medical history”. Dr Draganic and Dr Mendelsohn both proceeded on the
basis that the air hose struck the appellant in the left iliac fossa. Dr Garvey
“apparently proceeded on the basis of [the
appellant’s] written
statement that he was struck in the left anterior flank region”. She said
she accepted the respondent’s
submission that “the three specialists
reached their conclusions based on a description of the incident that did not
with the contemporaneous record”. This was “against a
background of longstanding complaints of abdominal pain, vomiting,
diarrhoea”.
Arbitrator said that Dr Mendelsohn, in his second report, described the previous
history of longstanding abdominal problems as
irrelevant to the abdominal wall
problems that followed the incident. She said it was “not clear”
why. The Arbitrator
referred to
Paric v John Holland Constructions Pty
and associated
authorities regarding the need for “a fair climate” upon which a
doctor can base an opinion. She accepted
the respondent’s submission that
there was not a fair climate for the specialists’ reports. She said the
appellant had
not discharged his onus of establishing ‘injury’ on 29
March 2017. To the extent that there was any incapacity after
29 March 2017, she
was not satisfied that it resulted from his employment. There was an award for
the respondent.
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) provides:
“(6) If the Commission is
satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with
proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
parties submit the matter can be determined on the papers. Having regard to
Practice Directions Nos 1 and 6, the documents that
are before me and the
submissions by the parties, I am satisfied that I have sufficient information to
proceed on the papers without
holding any conference or formal hearing and that
this is the appropriate course in the circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant raises the following grounds:
(a) The Arbitrator erred in
fact finding in that she effectively concluded the air hose struck the appellant
above the umbilicus rather
than on the left side of the abdomen because there
was ‘no reason’ to think that Dr Chin’s record was not
(Ground No. 1)
(b) The Arbitrator erred in fact finding in that she concluded Dr
Chin’s record was ‘the only contemporaneous record’.
(c) The Arbitrator erred in fact finding in that she concluded the opinions
of the three specialists were not given in a ‘fair
climate’. (Ground
(d) Fresh evidence (on which the appellant seeks leave to rely) assists in
concluding that the other probabilities so outweigh that
chosen by the
Arbitrator as to conclude the Arbitrator was wrong. (Ground No. 4)
THE NATURE OF AN APPEAL PURSUANT TO SECTION 352(5) OF THE 1998
352(5) of the 1998 Act, pursuant to which this appeal is brought,
“An appeal under this section is limited to a
determination of whether the decision appealed against was or was not affected
by any error of fact, law or discretion, and to the correction of any such
error. The appeal is not a review or new hearing.”
Raulston v Toll Pty Ltd
Roche DP applied
Whiteley Muir & Zwanenberg Ltd v
(cited with
approval by Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ in
v Cosmarnan Concrete Pty
) to the nature of the
appeal process pursuant to s 352 of the 1998 Act:
Arbitrator, though not basing his or her findings on credit, may have preferred
one view of the primary facts to another
as being more probable. Such a finding
may only be disturbed by a Presidential member if ‘other probabilities so
outweigh that
chosen by the [Arbitrator] that it can be said that his [or her]
conclusion was wrong’.
(b) Having found the primary facts, the Arbitrator may draw a particular
inference from them. Even here the ‘fact of the [Arbitrator’s]
decision must be displaced’. It is not enough that the Presidential
member would have drawn a different inference. It must
be shown that the
Arbitrator was wrong.
(c) It may be shown that an Arbitrator was wrong ‘by showing that
material facts have been overlooked, or given undue or too
little weight in
deciding the inference to be drawn: or the available inference in the opposite
sense to that chosen by the [Arbitrator]
is so preponderant in the opinion of
the appellate court that the [Arbitrator’s] decision is
Davis v Ryco Hydraulics Pty Ltd
, Keating P observed that these principles
“have been consistently applied in the
Commission”.
President in
also cited the following passage from
Ltd v Owston Nominees (No 2) Pty
in that process of considering the facts for itself and giving weight to the
views of, and advantages held by, the trial
judge, if a choice arises between
conclusions equally open and finely balanced and where there is, or can be, no
preponderance of
view, the conclusion of error is not necessarily arrived at
merely because of a preference of view of the appeal court for some fact
facts contrary to the view reached by the trial
Northern NSW Local Health Network v
Sackville AJA
, if a statutory right of appeal
requires a demonstration that the decision appealed against was affected by
error, the appellate
tribunal is not entitled to interfere with the decision on
the ground that it thinks that a different outcome is preferable: see
[1986] HCA 17
161 CLR 513
principles applicable to appeals pursuant to s 352(5) of the 1998 Act were
considered by the Court of Appeal in
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer v
Their Honours
said there was no error in a Presidential member, dealing with an appeal
pursuant to s 352(5), applying the description
of a judge’s function on
appeal as explained by Barwick CJ in
Whiteley Muir.
“With respect to errors of fact finding, the line
between preferring a different result and identifying error is by no means
to draw, but that is clearly what the Deputy President sought to do by adopting
the language complained of. It was also what
Barwick CJ sought to do in
Whiteley Muir
in using such language to identify the difference between
an appeal based on a finding of error and a hearing de novo (and, one must
add, a rehearing). If, on an appeal by way of rehearing, the court asked whether
the findings of fact were ‘open’
to the trial judge, that might
demonstrate an unduly limited understanding of the court’s function;
however, that language
is not out of place in determining an appeal from factual
findings under
THE APPELLANT’S APPLICATION TO ADMIT FRESH
appellant seeks leave to admit fresh evidence pursuant to s 352(6) of the 1998
Act. It consists of two photographs and a short
statement identifying the
photographs. It is described in a schedule attached to the Application to
(a) statement of the appellant dated 1 October 2020, which
describes the photographs referred to in (b) and (c) below as having been
on the date of the incident at 7.07 am and 9.33 am respectively;
(b) a photograph of the appellant’s abdomen, annexure ‘A’
to the statement, and
(c) a photograph of the appellant’s shirt, annexure ‘B’ to
the statement.
Appellant’s submissions
appellant’s submissions on this topic are to be found in a section of its
submissions dealing with ‘Background matters’,
together with its
submissions dealing with Ground No. 4. The appellant submits there was no
dispute that, in the course of his employment
on 29 March 2017, the
appellant was using a rivet gun when the air hose detached and struck him. The
appellant refers to the dispute
notices issued by the respondent’s
insurer. The s 74 notice dated 19 March
included reference to a
factual investigation which stated that a “red mark was observed on one
side of your abdomen”.
It included “your alleged injury of 29 March
2017 ... has resolved”. The appellant submits the impression is that the
insurer “was generally accepting that an injurious incident occurred, that
it had left a red mark on the side of the abdomen
but that the effects of that
injury had resolved”.
s 287A notice
referred to Dr
Chin’s reference to “a visible mark above your umbilicus”. It
referred to Dr Mendelsohn’s
report which identified “localised
tenderness over the left side of the abdomen below the level of the umbilicus
was an irregularity in the soft tissues at this
appellant describes “the combined effect of these notices when read
together [as] somewhat obscure”. The appellant
submits that neither notice
developed an argument that tenderness on the left side below the umbilicus was
inconsistent with an event
that produced a red mark above the umbilicus. Neither
notice attached any medical opinion to that
appellant notes that Dr Garvey’s report dated 10 August 2020 was attached
by the respondent to its Reply. Dr Garvey diagnosed
an injury being
“[a]nterior cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome” and said
“[t]he [w]orker’s presentation
is consistent with the history and
examination obtained”.
appellant’s submissions note that Dr Garvey’s report indicates he
was sent statements of Wayne Moy, Brett English,
Chad Page and James Alexander.
The statements of Mr Page indicated that shortly after the incident he saw the
appellant “holding
his stomach to one side”, and that there was
“a faint red mark on the side of his stomach”. The Accident/Incident
Report Form described the nature of the injury as “Red mark” and the
part of the body affected as
appellant submits that neither the appellant or Mr Page described “the
mark as being central or as being above the umbilicus”.
The appellant
submits there was nothing to alert the appellant or his legal advisers that the
respondent would base a defence on
Dr Chin’s note regarding “a red
mark above the umbilicus, as opposed to a red mark on the side of the
abdomen/stomach”.
appellant’s submissions state that in the context of the hearing, which
was being conducted by telephone, “it is more
difficult and confronting
for a worker to interrupt the submissions of counsel to inform his solicitor or
counsel of additional evidence
he or she may be aware of”. It is submitted
the appellant was “aware of such evidence” but felt
“uncomfortable
and intimidated” and did not mention it to his legal
representatives.
appellant submits that the fresh evidence, the “relatively contemporaneous
photos”, are highly persuasive. They assist
in concluding that trauma was
caused by a blow to the side of the abdomen. The red mark is on the left side
and not above the umbilicus.
The torn clothing is consistent with trauma to the
left side of the stomach. The appellant submits that, with the addition of this
evidence, “it is likely the Arbitrator’s decision was erroneous and
that the Arbitrator was wrong as to the location
of the trauma”.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent’s submissions on the fresh evidence are contained in its
submissions in the “Preamble” in its Notice
of Opposition, and its
submissions dealing with Ground No. 4. It submits the matters raised in its
dispute notices were addressed
by its counsel at the arbitration
It submits the
appellant’s counsel understood the issues in the matter and dealt with
them at the arbitration hearing.
respondent submits the material does not support the notion that the appellant
was unaware of the issues determined by the Arbitrator.
The dispute notices
specifically referred to the site of the appellant’s injury as noted by Dr
Chin. The respondent notes the
appellant does not submit the fresh evidence was
unavailable or could not with reasonable diligence have been available for use
the arbitration hearing. It submits the appellant knew of the issues but did
not seek an adjournment or seek an adjournment to obtain
further instructions to
meet the submissions. Mr Baker (who appeared for the respondent at the
arbitration hearing and is the author
of its submissions on this appeal) submits
he can recall the Arbitrator informing the appellant that the appellant was able
with his representatives in private conference at any time he felt the
respondent submits on the photographs. It submits that, from a lay point of
view, Annexure B shows a red mark above the umbilicus
and not at the site of the
left iliac fossa, consistent with Dr Chin’s note. The respondent submits
that Annexure C shows a
tear in the appellant’s jacket immediately below
the left breast pocket. It submits this would accord with the site nominated
Consideration
352(6) of the 1998 Act provides:
“(6) Evidence that is
fresh evidence or evidence in addition to or in substitution for the evidence
received in relation to
the decision appealed against may not be given on an
appeal to the Commission except with the leave of the Commission. The Commission
is not to grant leave unless satisfied that the evidence concerned was not
available to the party, and could not reasonably have
been obtained by the
party, before the proceedings concerned or that failure to grant leave would
cause substantial injustice in
CHEP Australia Ltd v
(Macfarlan JA agreeing) dealt with the application of s 352(6) of the 1998 Act.
His Honour at [27] and [30]–[31]
“27. In the s
352(6) context, there are two threshold questions. They arise as alternatives
and are set out in the second sentence
of the provision. The first goes to the
issue of availability in advance of the proceedings. The second entails an
assessment of
whether continued unavailability of the evidence ‘would
cause substantial injustice in the case’. The discretion to admit
available to be exercised only if the Commission is satisfied as to one of the
threshold matters.”
“30. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the Commission
misdirected itself in law in construing the ‘substantial
criterion in s 352(6). It was submitted that that criterion may be satisfied in
circumstances where it is not possible
to say that availability of new evidence
would have produced a different result; and that the criterion will be satisfied
evidence is compelling and might have influenced the outcome even though
it cannot be said that it would certainly have done so.
The part of s 352(6) concerning ‘substantial injustice’ does not
direct attention to possibilities or potential outcomes.
The task is to decide
whether absence of the evidence ‘would cause’ substantial injustice
in the case. There must therefore
be a decision as to the result that
‘would’ emerge if the evidence were taken into account and the
result that ‘would’
emerge if it were not. If the result would be
the same on each hypothesis, the ends of justice cannot be said to have been
by exclusion.”
appellant’s statement dated 1 October
is the first item in the
appellant’s schedule of fresh evidence. It is a largely formal document.
It identifies the two photographs
(Annexures A and B) as having been taken on
the morning of 29 March 2017, at 7.07 am and 9.33 am respectively. The appellant
that Annexure A “shows the impact area where I was struck”;
Annexure B shows “the severity of the impact which
ripped my shirt”.
The appellant states that he had not shown these photographs to his solicitors
as he did not realise they
would be relevant. He states he did not mention them
during the arbitration hearing as he felt “uncomfortable and intimidated
by the whole process”. It is common ground that the photographs could have
been available to be used at the arbitration hearing.
It follows that the
documents do not satisfy the first of the threshold questions identified in
and cannot be admitted on that basis.
question then becomes whether the fresh evidence satisfies the second of the
threshold tests. This involves a consideration of
the result that would emerge
depending on whether or not the evidence is taken into account. It is necessary
to deal with the various
grounds of appeal, to consider whether or not the
result that emerges is different depending on whether the fresh evidence is
into account.
the circumstances it is convenient to consider Grounds Nos. 1, 2 and 3
GROUNDS NOS. 1, 2 AND 3
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits there was evidence “which introduced reasons to consider
that Dr Chin’s record was not
He submits Mr
Page’s statement describes him, shortly after the accident, “holding
his stomach on one side”.
Mr Page describes seeing “a faint red mark on the side of his
The appellant
states that he was struck “over the left side of my abdomen”. He
submits this “very much takes issue
with the accuracy of the
doctor’s note”.
is submitted the Arbitrator ignored this evidence and simply proceeded on the
basis that Dr Chin’s record was accurate.
It is submitted to be error that
she failed to give any weight to “this persuasive
appellant refers to the Accident/Incident Report Form signed by the appellant
dated 29 March 2017. It stated “air line fitting
blew off and hit
It is submitted
this should be considered in conjunction with Mr Page’s statement. It was
error to describe Dr Chin’s
note as “the only contemporaneous
record”. In his supplementary submissions, lodged following receipt of the
of the arbitration hearing, the appellant’s counsel submits
that in reply, at the arbitration, he referred to the material
sent by the
respondent’s solicitors to Dr Garvey. This included the statement of
Mr Page, which was in evidence before the
Arbitrator. It was error not to refer
It was error to describe Dr Chin’s clinical note as
“the only contemporaneous record”.
appellant refers to the Arbitrator’s reference to the absence of a
“fair climate” for the expression of an expert
opinion, which he
said came from the decision in
. Drs Draganic, Mendelsohn and
Garvey all proceeded on a history that the air hose struck the left side of the
appellant’s abdomen.
The appellant submits that the Arbitrator’s
conclusion that there was not a fair climate flowed from her
“unquestioning
acceptance” of Dr Chin’s record. The appellant
submits the decision was affected in this regard by the errors in fact
identified in Grounds No. 1 and
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits Dr Chin’s clinical note was the only contemporaneous
medical note made by the general practitioner on
the date of the incident. The
respondent submits the reasons should be read as a whole, and this discrete
piece of evidence was considered
in the reasons at [89] to [92]. The respondent
submits the Arbitrator’s conclusion on the point was reasonably open to
respondent refers to the appellant’s submission that the statements of the
appellant and Mr Page were persuasive evidence
against the acceptance of Dr
Chin’s clinical note. The Arbitrator had reservations about the accuracy
of the appellant’s
evidence, reference is made to the reasons at [102]
(sic, [101]). The respondent refers to inconsistencies in the medical and
records over a number of years, and inconsistencies between the
appellant’s statement and statements attached to the factual
investigation
report. The respondent refers to Mr Page’s statement as being consistent
with Dr Chin’s note, Mr Page refers
to the site of injury being on the
side of the appellant’s stomach. Dr Draganic refers to the site of injury
as the left iliac
fossa, on examination on 8 May 2019. That does not accord with
injury to the side of the stomach. Dr Chin’s report to the insurer
20 December 2017 also refers to the appellant being “hit on his
Accident/Incident Report Form was completed by Mr Page, a qualified first aid
officer. It refers to a blow to the appellant’s
stomach, and to the
“part of body injured” as the “trunk”. The respondent
submits these responses are internally
consistent with Mr Page’s statement
and do not demonstrate any error in fact finding.
respondent submits that the Arbitrator accepted the site of injury was that
recorded by Dr Chin, rather than the site identified
in histories recorded by
Drs Draganic, Mendelsohn and Garvey. It submits this was consistent with other
contemporaneous evidence.
The facts as determined by the Arbitrator were not
demonstrated to be wrong. She was entitled to draw the inference that the
had not suffered injury at the site relied upon by the three
specialists. The Arbitrator’s conclusion that those reports were
on a “fair climate” for expression of the doctors’ opinions
was not erroneous. There was not appealable
error of the kind referred to in
Consideration
The principles in Paric and associated authorities
is helpful to note the principles in
. The reference to
in the Arbitrator’s reasons, and in the parties’ submissions on this
appeal, are to the decision of the High Court, in
which it was
“It is trite law that for an expert medical opinion to
be of any value the facts upon which it is based must be proved by admissible
Ramsay v. Watson
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642).
that does not mean that the facts so proved must correspond with complete
precision to the proposition on which the opinion is
based. The passages from
Wigmore on Evidence cited by Samuels J.A. in the Court of Appeal (Wigmore on
Evidence, (1940) 3rd ed., vol.II,
680, p.800; 2 Wigmore, Evidence 680 (Chadbourn
rev. 1979), p.942) to the effect that it is a question of fact whether the case
is sufficiently like the one under consideration to render the opinion
of the expert of any value are in accordance with both principle
, in the Arbitrator’s reasons and in the parties’
submissions, are to whether a ‘fair climate’ existed for
expression of an expert opinion by a doctor. This phrase is taken from the
decision in the case of
in the Court of Appeal, in which Samuels JA
“It is a question of whether the hypothetical material
put to the expert witnesses represents a fair climate for the opinions
expressed. I do not think there is any requirement that the matter put is
precisely consonant with the material provided; and
certainly it cannot be
contended that there was no evidence upon which the opinions could be based.
Discrepancies may be fatal; in some cases even slight discrepancies may be
fatal; in other cases even broad departures are not likely
to affect the force
of the expert opinion. Moreover, it is for the tribunal of fact to assess this
factual basis.”
above is to some extent modified in the context of the statutory scheme in the
Commission, in which the rules of evidence do not
apply: s 354(2) of the 1998
Onesteel Reinforcing Pty Ltd v Sutton
Workers Compensation
Commission Rules 2010
, provides that evidence should be logical and
probative, be relevant to the facts in issue and the issues in dispute, not be
on speculation or unsubstantiated assumptions, nor should it be in the
form of unqualified opinions. The relationship between these
requirements and
lawful discharge of power at general law based on relevant material need not be
explored. It suffices to say that
represents a sound approach for the
reliable disposition of important cases for individuals. It is not a
reintroduction of the rules
of evidence. Were the rule to be such a
reintroduction, it would confront the inconsistency of the statute (in s 354).
one is considering the probative value of an expert report, for
instance, the question is not whether it is admissible, but whether
it provides
material upon which the Commission was entitled to act.
recognition of the difference will be important in a jurisdiction where the
Commission will often conduct an appeal without an
oral hearing in a statutory
regime, the aims of which include expedition and low cost. Thus, if a person has
given a history to a
doctor which is incorporated as an assumption for the
doctor's opinion, that recorded history may be hearsay for the
but it may be material able to be acted on by the Commission
in accepting the doctor's opinion. Much will depend on the context and
issues tendered for consideration as to how the Commission evaluates material
before it. In most cases, as here, that evaluation
will be a factual question,
although the question whether material could or can support a factual conclusion
is ultimately a question
(excluding references)
the context of the Commission it is also necessary to have regard to the
following in
Hancock v East Coast Timber Products Pty
“In the case of a non-evidence-based jurisdiction
such as here, the question of the acceptability of expert evidence will not
one of admissibility but of weight. This was made apparent in
Industries Limited v Bell
[2010] NSWCA 162
Hodgson JA.”
The specialist medical opinions
was a matter in which each of the three relevant specialist medical opinions,
dealing with the causal relationship between the
incident relied on and the
appellant’s diagnosed condition, supported the appellant’s case. The
Arbitrator concluded
that none of those three opinions had any probative weight,
on the basis of the principles in
. Grounds Nos. 1 to 2 challenge
the Arbitrator’s fact finding regarding the location of the blow suffered
by the appellant in
the incident, both in accepting the note made by Dr Chin and
in whether she dealt satisfactorily with other evidence which arguably
the contrary. Ground No. 3 challenges the availability of the Arbitrator’s
conclusion that each of those three opinions
was deprived of any probative force
in the circumstances. It is necessary to examine the assumptions on which the
three opinions
were based, and the extent to which the assumptions were borne
out by the evidence.
Dr Mendelsohn
specialists provided reports in the matter dealing with the injury suffered by
the appellant. The earliest of these was Dr Mendelsohn,
a general surgeon
qualified by the appellant’s solicitors, who reported on 26 November
His history was that the
appellant had no previous abdominal wall problems. The history referred to
“anxiety and depression
which he has had since school”. It stated
there were no bowel problems prior to the incident save for occasional bouts of
related to certain foods. The history said that in the past the
appellant “had suffered from nausea which may have been related
and he tended to have vomiting every few weeks. He did not, however, suffer from
constipation prior to the incident under
discussion”.
recorded a history of injury:
“... he was positioned awkwardly
between two shelves and as he went to put in a rivet, an air hose blew off the
machine and
struck him over the left side of the abdomen. It tore through his
clothes and hit his left anterior flank region but did not cause
a laceration or
penetrate the skin.
He had immediate severe pain and vomited because of the
Mendelsohn recorded the appellant “returned to work after about a
week”, there was pain, trouble lifting and he worked
more slowly than
before. There were intermittent days off over the next month. Because of
continued symptoms he saw his usual general
practitioner. There was a history
that when he returned to work he “suddenly dropped down with pain and
again went home”.
The history states that at this stage he went to the
Mater Hospital. It is recorded that the appellant had further time off work
was “eventually dismissed a couple of months after the incident because of
difficulty in carrying out the work and frequent
Dr Mendelsohn
recorded a history of multiple investigations including a CT scan, gastroscopy
and colonoscopy.
examination Dr Mendelsohn found “localised tenderness over
side of the abdomen below the level of the umbilicus. This was basically in the
left iliac fossa
and there was an irregularity in the soft tissues at this
point. The area was exquisitely tender ...” (emphasis added).
Mendelsohn described the condition as “currently undiagnosed as to his
exact problem”. He suggested as possible diagnoses
“intra-muscular hernia ... or neuroma of one of the superficial nerves
damaged by the incident with the air hose”.
The doctor thought the bowel
symptoms were “unlikely to be directly, however, as a result of the blow
to his abdomen”.
They could be related to stress. Dr Mendelsohn stated the
“condition is consistent with the mechanism of injury
described”.
Mendelsohn reported again on 11 December
The appellant’s
solicitors furnished Dr Mendelsohn with a copy of Dr Draganic’s report
dated 8 May 2019 (summarised below)
and asked whether he agreed with the
diagnosis. Dr Mendelsohn said he believed the appellant had chronic iliac fossa
pain. He considered
the condition involved “abdominal wall pain rather
than reflecting an intra-abdominal condition such as diverticulitis or irritable
bowel syndrome”. He referred to Dr Draganic’s suggestion of
abdominal wall neuralgia and agreed “this is almost
certainly the
case”. Dr Mendelsohn said neuralgic pain “would be due to either the
development of a neuroma or chronic
inflammation or damage to a superficial
nerve as a result of the trauma. In either situation, it is almost certain that
the ongoing
problems have been caused by the injury by the air hose”. Dr
Mendelsohn said there was no prior evidence of abdominal wall
problems. He said
the other problems, vomiting, diarrhoea and intermittent pain, were
“unrelated to the injury that [the appellant]
received in the workplace
incident”. The doctor said he believed “unequivocally that he has a
work related injury to
the abdominal wall, with ongoing symptoms of pain due to
either neuralgia and less probably a hernia”.
Dr Draganic
Draganic, a colorectal surgeon, reported on 8 May 2019 after seeing the
appellant on referral from a doctor in the Nelson Plaza
Clinic (from which Dr
Chin also practices). Dr Draganic recorded chronic left iliac fossa pain
which the appellant felt “coincides
with an injury he sustained where a
hydraulic hose came loose and struck him in that area of the abdomen”. He
recorded very
well localised pain in that area, no gastrointestinal symptoms and
pain caused by movement. The appellant was “quite tender
in that very well
localised area in the mid left iliac fossa”. Two ultrasounds and a CT scan
showed “no evidence of hernia
or any intra-abdominal abnormality”.
The doctor said that he thought “the symptoms are very suggestive of
abdominal wall
neuralgia”.
Garvey, a surgeon, examined the appellant at the request of the
respondent’s solicitors and reported on 30 April
He was appropriately and
thoroughly briefed with material that included Dr Mendelsohn’s reports, Dr
Draganic’s report
dated 8 May 2019, records from Nelson Bay Plaza Clinic
(from which Dr Chin practices), the claim form dated 11 December 2017, Dr
Chin’s handwritten report dated 20 December 2017, the appellant’s
statement dated 9 October 2019, and statements from
Messrs Moy, English, Page
and Alexander from the factual investigation arranged by the insurer.
Garvey took a history that the appellant was injured while building shelves in a
deployable shipping container destined for Army
use overseas. The doctor
recorded the mechanics of the injury as “[h]e was using an air rivet gun
and the air hose came off
and hit the left side of his abdomen. He fell to the
ground”. The doctor recorded the appellant walked to a bin and vomited,
then walked to a bathroom as he was feeling ill. He then reported the incident
to the medical officer. He saw a female doctor that
afternoon, she inspected the
injury, “treated him with RICE and he returned to work normally on Monday.
He continued with his
usual work but had pain on the left side of his abdomen so
was sent home and spent a couple of weeks home and was let go from his
May 24, 2020.” He recorded the appellant spent days in bed in pain, had a
gastroscopy and a colonoscopy which were
“non-contributory”, but
showed “a stress and inflamed reaction in his colon”. An ultrasound
and CT scan showed
he was “blocked up inside” so he took laxative
Garvey recorded a thorough physical examination. It included reference to
“hypersensitivity to punctate sensation in the
distribution of the
anterior ventral ramus I of T10–T12 cutaneous nerve distribution”.
The doctor noted the results of
investigations involving an upper abdominal
ultrasound on 5 May 2017, a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis on 23 May 2017,
endoscopy and colonoscopy performed on 21 June
Dr Garvey’s
“Summary of injuries and diagnoses” read “Anterior cutaneous
nerve entrapment syndrome”.
Under the heading “Consistency of
presentation” the doctor stated “The Worker’s presentation is
with the history and examination obtained.” Dr Garvey
assessed six per cent whole person impairment. He stated: “This
objective clinical evidence of hyperaesthesia in the distribution of the left
T10, T11 and T12 anterior cutaneous nerves
of the abdomen”.
Garvey summarised Dr Mendelsohn’s reports, including the supplementary
report in which Dr Mendelsohn diagnosed “abdominal
wall neuralgia is
almost certainly the case”, beneath which Dr Garvey wrote “I
summarised Dr Draganic’s report dated 8 May 2019 in which Dr Draganic
diagnosed “abdominal wall neuralgia”,
beneath which Dr Garvey wrote
response to a specific question Dr Garvey wrote “There was no
inconsistency or exaggeration in the Worker’s presentation”.
Garvey recommended further investigation in the form of an abdominal wall MRI
scan. Dr Garvey reported again on 10 August 2020,
to comment on an MRI scan
report of Dr Long dated 12 June 2020. This scan dealt with the anterior
abdominal wall. Dr Garvey said
the scan “failed to detect any anterior
cutaneous nerve entrapment or irritation”. Dr Garvey commented that the
did not identify any anterior abdominal wall cutaneous nerves at all. He
wondered whether the resolution of the scan technique was
adequate for the
purpose of diagnosing the cause of the peripheral neuralgia. He made suggestions
for further investigation if the
respondent wished “to take this
further”. There is no indication that further investigations were
arranged. Dr Garvey
said that he maintained his diagnosis of anterior cutaneous
nerve entrapment syndrome, which rested mainly on clinical examination
of hypersensitivity in the three peripheral nerves T10, T11 and T12 on the left
The lay evidence
reliability of the appellant’s account of both the incident and the
subsequent events became an issue, particularly in the
context of the issue
appropriate to consider this aspect of the history.
earliest evidence going to the reliability of the above account is from others
in the workplace.
is an “accident/incident report form” dated 29 March 2017 at 7.20.
It is signed by Mr Page and Mr English. “What
happened” is
described as “air line fitting blew off & hit stomach”. The part
of body injured is “trunk”
and the nature of the injury is
“red mark”.
is a handwritten note in what appears to be a desk diary, for the date 29 March
2017, that states the appellant “reported
incident with air lead blowing
off and hitting him in the stomach. He went home as he wasn’t feeling
is a statement of Chad Page dated 17 January 2018. Mr Page was a leading hand
and also the “qualified first aid officer”.
He stated that
“quite early” on the day of the incident he saw the appellant
“walking down the factory and he was
holding his stomach on one side ...
He was making wincing faces”. Mr Page said “[h]e told me that the
air hose had ‘blown
off’ and hit him in the stomach.”
Mr Page stated “I recall he had a faint red mark on the side of his
stomach.” He said the appellant “did not initially
want to report
the matter, as he allegedly thought he would ‘get into
trouble’”. Mr Page said that when the appellant
subsequently resumed
work he “continued to go home early and display the same work
statement of Mr English, the production supervisor, is dated 12 January 2018.
The date 29 March 2017 was a Wednesday. Mr English
stated that the appellant
resumed work on the following Monday (3 April 2017) when he “returned on
full duties”. Mr English
said the appellant has “an unusually high
amount of time off work” from quite early in his employment, usually just
single day. He discussed the appellant’s absences with him on 4 May
2017. Mr English stated that the appellant “felt
that his work
absences were due to stomach pains and he felt it may have been due to the
incident on 29 March 2017”. Mr English
stated that the appellant indicated
he also felt unwell, light headed and faint so he was directed he could not
continue work and
should see a doctor. There was talk of “a bacterial
infection and some type of pre-existing stomach condition, so it was all
confusing”. Mr English stated the appellant had off “a number of
days on leave without pay”, and there was
a further meeting where the
appellant “basically agreed that he could not continue”. It
“was not clearly identified
as a workers compensation matter at that
is a statement of Wayne Moy, the production manager, dated 12 January 2018.
Mr Moy stated the appellant resumed work on 3 April
2017, on full hours and
duties. He stated that Mr English requested his involvement when Mr English had
a discussion with the appellant.
He said the appellant “looked
unwell”, and it was “due to possibly three causes, including the
incident on 29.3,
a bacterial infection and a pre-existing illness”. Mr
Moy stated the appellant “was terminated on 24 May 2017, basically
his attendance continued to be a concern, due to his alleged health
issues”. He said he met with the appellant briefly
prior to his
termination and the appellant “basically agreed to resign because he
‘did not want to stuff us
Arbitrator referred to the appellant’s consultation with Dr Chin on 29
March 2017 and the doctor’s note of the mark
on the appellant’s body
(see [14] above). It should be noted that the clinical note also indicated that
Dr Chin gave the appellant
a medical certificate to cover the period from 29 to
30 March 2017,
consistent with the statements of Messrs English and Moy that the appellant was
absent from the day of the incident on a
Wednesday until the following Monday.
In a handwritten document dated 20 December 2017, directed to the insurer, Dr
Chin described
the diagnosis as “abdominal injury by airhose” and
the mechanism as “patient stated he was hit on the tummy by
should be noted that, when the appellant attended the Mater Hospital on 18 May
2017, he presented with “sharp central 8/10
abdo pain radiating into back
onset 0600 hrs whilst at work. Nausea and diahhrea [sic]”. It referred to
“Hx Recent work
place accident 1 month ago – had ultrasound last
week for same shows ?enlarged
appellant’s claim form was dated 11 December 2017. It stated
“working on assembly line using an air-riveter when the
air hose and metal
clamps blew off and hit my abdomen on the left
appellant, in his statement dated 9 October 2019, described the mechanics of
“On 29 March 2017 I was positioned awkwardly between
two shelves and as I went to put in a rivet, an air hose blew off the machine
and struck me over the left side of my abdomen. It tore through my clothes and
hit my left anterior flank region but did not cause
a laceration or penetrate
To what extent were there significant
inconsistencies?
lay evidence in the witness statements and associated documents is generally
consistent with the appellant’s history to
Drs Mendelsohn, Draganic and
Garvey. The Arbitrator correctly observed that “there is no dispute that
[the appellant] was struck
by an air hose on 29 March
Mr Page, the first
aid officer, observed the appellant on that morning holding his stomach on one
side and making wincing faces.
The initial report of injury was consistent, that
the air hose hit the appellant in the stomach. Mr Page stated there was a faint
red mark on the side of the appellant’s stomach. This is consistent with
the accident/incident report form, apparently filled
out at 7.20 am on 29 March
2017, which referred to the appellant being hit in the stomach and commented on
a red mark. The history
recorded by Dr Chin (leaving to one side for current
purposes her reference to where a red mark was located) was generally
consistent.
The appellant was off work from 29 March 2017 to 3 April 2017. He
had a certificate from Dr Chin covering those days of this period
that were not
on a weekend, although the certificate was not in a WorkCover
It is clear from the
clinical note that Dr Chin had a history that the event occurred at
All of this evidence
was contemporaneous.
appellant raised with Messrs English and Moy, in discussions in May 2017, that
the appellant thought his problems may be a result
of the incident on 29 March
2017 (see [72] to [73] above). When the appellant attended the Mater Hospital on
18 May 2017 he gave
a history of a “recent work place accident 1 month
ago” (contrary to the reasons at
The Arbitrator
inferred, from the absence of a recorded history of the incident in Dr
Plummer’s notes and the hospital records,
that there was no noticeable
effect on the appellant’s pre-existing abdominal
This does not take
account of the entry in the records of the Mater Hospital, and is at least to an
extent inconsistent with the
appellant suggesting to his employer that he
thought the symptoms, prior to his termination, may be a result of the incident.
is some criticism of the appellant on the basis that he did not furnish Drs
Mendelsohn, Draganic and Garvey with an accurate
history of his prior complaints
of abdominal pain, vomiting, nausea and
Dr Mendelsohn, in
his first report, recorded a history of occasional bouts of diarrhoea related to
certain foods. Dr Mendelsohn,
in that report, also recorded a history that, in
the past, the appellant suffered from nausea that may have been related to
and that he “tended to have vomiting every few
Dr Mendelsohn
expanded on this in his second report, referring to “longstanding
abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhoea”.
He thought the likely diagnosis
of these difficulties was irritable bowel syndrome, although he regarded these
complaints as irrelevant
to the abdominal wall problems. Dr Garvey was furnished
with both of Dr Mendelsohn’s reports at the time he examined the appellant
and would have been aware of the recorded history. The Arbitrator, in
considering the weight to be afforded to the medical evidence,
said it did not
appear that Dr Mendelsohn or Dr Draganic had Dr Chin’s
Dr Garvey did have
Dr Chin’s records and he agreed with Dr Mendelsohn’s ultimate
diagnosis and opinion. Dr Garvey’s
opinion was also consistent with that
of Dr Draganic. The appellant’s counsel, in his submissions in reply
before the Arbitrator,
specifically referred to the fact that Dr Garvey had
before him the same material (clinical notes and lay statements) as that on
which the respondent
relevance of the prior abdominal complaints was, in any event, doubtful. The
prior complaints were essentially of a gastric nature,
diarrhoea and vomiting.
The condition diagnosed by Dr Mendelsohn, Dr Draganic and Dr Garvey as resulting
from the incident involved
a nerve injury to the abdominal wall. Dr Mendelsohn
agreed with Dr Draganic that it was “abdominal wall neuralgia”. Dr
Mendelsohn drew a clear distinction between the conditions, saying the chronic
left iliac fossa pain was “abdominal wall pain
rather than reflecting an
intra-abdominal condition such as diverticulitis or irritable bowel
Mendelsohn considered the intra-abdominal problems were “unrelated to the
injury that he received in the workplace
There is no
medical opinion to the contrary.
the extent that significant inconsistency was alleged at the arbitration, it
related to a single matter, whether a mark that Dr
Chin noted on 29 March 2017
was at a location consistent with the incident causing the diagnosed condition.
Dr Mendelsohn’s
history described a relatively violent incident, in which
the air hose blew off, struck the appellant over the left side of his stomach
and tore through his clothes.
This is generally consistent with the evidence overall. There is no reason to
conclude that the capacity of this incident to cause
injury to the soft tissues
of the appellant’s abdomen, in the region of his stomach, was limited to
the location of the mark
observed by Dr Chin. There is no medical opinion to
that effect.
Was there appealable error?
take the case run by the respondent at its highest, in the absence of the fresh
evidence, one can assume the accuracy of Dr Chin’s
description in her
clinical note on 29 March 2017, that there was a “visible mark from
airhose above umbilicus”. The
history she recorded of the incident was
simply “hit on abdo by airhose this morning – at work”. It did
not suggest
a history that the location of the mark was the only point at which
the airhose struck or injured the appellant’s abdomen.
The lay and medical
evidence is consistent with the proposition that the appellant was struck on the
stomach region. It does not
restrict the impact to the place where Dr Chin said
she saw a mark. This would accord with common sense given that, on the history
in the appellant’s statement and as recorded by Dr Mendelsohn, the impact
was sufficiently violent that the device “tore
through his clothes”
(see [56] and [77] above).
was, in my view, error in the fact finding, in that the analysis proceeded on
the basis that any injury was confined to a location
at or close to the red mark
identified by Dr Chin. The Arbitrator approached the matter on the basis that
the site of the red mark
represented the “site of where [the appellant]
was actually struck”.
The appellant’s statement, the statements of the lay witnesses, and the
histories on which Drs Mendelsohn, Draganic and Garvey
relied, were not confined
in this way. They referred to trauma to the abdomen or stomach in a more general
sense. I accept the appellant’s
submission that the Arbitrator erred in
how she dealt with the evidence regarding the mechanics and location of the
trauma to the
appellant’s abdomen. She focussed on Dr Chin’s
description of the location of a mark and failed to engage with the other
evidence on the topic.
was also necessary that that the Arbitrator deal with the evidence in Dr
Chin’s note having regard to the principles in
and associated
authorities. The Arbitrator referred appropriately to that line of authority.
She did not, in my view, exercise the
caution that those authorities require. In
it was said:
“Experience teaches that busy
doctors sometimes misunderstand or misrecord histories of accidents,
particularly in circumstances
where their concern is with the treatment or
impact of an indisputable, frank injury. It is possible, and not merely
speculatively
so, that Dr Middleton misunderstood the precise mechanics of the
immediate antecedent of the
clinical note from Dr Chin’s consultation on 29 March 2017 referred to the
mechanics of the incident very briefly: “hit
on abdo by airhose this
morning – at work”. There was nothing specific about the nature of
the way in which the appellant
was struck, where or with what force. The
findings on examination also were brief: “abdo soft, nontender, visible
airhose above umbilicus”. The note, understandably, did not seek
to identify the length of the mark, its dimensions, its shape
or the direction
in which it ran. The recorded clinical note did not identify whether, on the
history, the blow suffered by the appellant
was confined to the area of the
abdomen where the mark was located or was more extensive. The brief history did
not suggest the blow
was confined to the place where the mark was seen. The note
was entitled to some weight, but the use made of it exceeded what was
appropriate in light of
and associated authorities. The Arbitrator
approached the matter on the basis that the appellant was struck only at or
close to the
place where Dr Chin described a mark.
Additionally,
the identification of a precise point of impact, and consideration of its
importance, proceeded on the basis that the
significance of these matters was
increased by the history of prior intra-abdominal problems such as pain,
vomiting, nausea and
Why that was so
was not explained. It was contrary to the only medical opinion on the topic,
from Dr Mendelsohn, who considered the
intra-abdominal symptoms were irrelevant
to the abdominal wall neuralgia which was diagnosed as resulting from the
incident. The
appellant has succeeded in demonstrating appealable error of the
kind described in
Whiteley Muir
(see [25] above). Grounds Nos. 1 and 2
my view there was also error in the approach taken by the Arbitrator in the
application of the principles in
and associated authorities. There
were three expert reports that supported the causal relationship between the
incident and the relevant
abdominal nerve damage, including the report
commissioned by the respondent’s solicitors. If there was a lack of
correlation
between the facts as proved and the assumed facts relied on by the
experts in reaching their views, this did not mean that the expert
opinion was
deprived of all weight. The passage of
quoted at [54] above makes
it clear that, even if there are deficiencies in this regard, it is necessary to
assess what weight should
be afforded to the expert opinion in the circumstances
of the particular case. As was said in the Court of Appeal in
“in some cases even slight discrepancies may be fatal; in other cases even
broad departures are not likely to affect the force
of the expert
Arbitrator, dealing with the history and its adequacy, referred to two essential
factors. The first was that the opinion of the
three specialists was
“based on a description of the incident that did not accord with the
contemporaneous
The reasons
are to be read as a whole.
The Arbitrator referred to Dr Chin’s clinical record, specifically
referring to “the visible mark”, as the “only
contemporaneous
In context,
the “contemporaneous record” was Dr Chin’s description of that
second factor was the history relating to “longstanding complaints of
abdominal pain, vomiting, nausea and diarrhoea”.
It was said that Dr
Draganic took a history that there were no such previous problems, which was
“not correct”. The Arbitrator
said that Dr Mendelsohn corrected his
first report in his second report, to say that there was a longstanding history
of such matters,
but said that history was irrelevant to the abdominal wall
condition, “[i]t is not clear
reasons discussed above, the history of prior intra-abdominal symptoms was, on
the only available medical evidence, probably of
little or no relevance. The
opinion of Dr Mendelsohn on this point did not rely on those aspects of the
history that the Arbitrator
regarded as deficient. It was simply a statement of
medical opinion that prior intra-abdominal symptoms were probably irrelevant,
a condition diagnosed as involving nerve damage to the abdominal wall (that is,
not intra-abdominal). To the extent that there
was any deficiency in the history
regarding prior intra-abdominal symptoms, its impact on the weight of the
medical opinions was
not self-evident.
the force of Dr Chin’s note regarding the location of the mark (which was
entitled to some weight) had to be dealt
with in the context of the issues and
evidence overall, in considering the weight to be given to the opinions of Drs
Mendelsohn,
Draganic and Garvey. There was much other evidence, discussed above,
which needed to be considered before concluding these opinions
were deprived of
any probative force. The approach that was taken involved concluding, on the
basis of these two identified deficiencies
in the history, that there was not a
‘fair climate’ for the opinions of these three specialists. The
opinions of these
doctors (there was no other expert opinion to the contrary)
was then ignored, in concluding that the appellant had failed to discharge
onus of proof.
This approach
was inconsistent with the authorities discussed at [51] to [54] above.
follows that Ground No. 3 also succeeds. The appellant’s appeal is
entitled to succeed.
THE FRESH EVIDENCE APPLICATION AND GROUND NO. 4
appeal succeeds in the absence of the fresh evidence. In those circumstances it
cannot be concluded that absence of the fresh
evidence would cause
‘substantial injustice’ (see [39] to [42] above). The result that
emerges is the same in the absence
of the fresh evidence. It follows that the
application to admit fresh evidence is refused. In the absence of the fresh
Ground No. 4 does not arise.
DISPOSITION OF THE APPEAL
appellant submits the appropriate order, if the appeal succeeds, is that the
matter should be remitted to a different Arbitrator
re-determination.
respondent’s submissions do not deal with the orders that should be made
in the event that the appeal succeeds. It is appropriate
to remit the matter for
de-determination by a different Arbitrator.
appellant’s application for leave to rely on fresh or additional evidence
pursuant to s 352(6) of the 1998 Act is refused.
Arbitrator’s decision dated 8 September 2020 (amended 17 September 2020)
is revoked. The matter is remitted for re-determination
by a different
Arbitrator.
Michael Snell
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
11 February 2021
Mr Craddock’s
statement dated 9 October 2019, Application to Resolve a Dispute (ARD), p
G.H. Varley Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWWCC 328 (reasons),
[2008] NSWCA
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
NSWCCR 796.
[2004] NSWCA 34
[1968] 2 Lloyd’s
[98]–[100].
[101]–[103].
59 ALJR 844
[105]–[108].
NSWWCCPD 25
10 DDCR 156
Whiteley Muir
[1996] HCA 140
[2017] NSWWCCPD
[2001] FCA 1833
[2013] NSWCA
Appellant’s submissions,
[1.4]–[1.7].
appellant’s submissions,
Appellant’s
submissions,
[1.8]–[1.9].
290, quoted in appellant’s submissions,
[1.12]–[1.13].
Appellant’s submissions,
[1.14]–[1.18].
Appellant’s submissions,
Appellant’s
submissions,
[1.23]–[1.24].
Respondent’s submissions, p
Transcript of arbitration
hearing on 18/8/20 (T), T
43.25–49.19.
22.30–23.02.
Respondent’s submissions, Ground Four,
Respondent’s submissions, Ground Four,
[2013] NSWCA
12 DDCR 501
of Appeal, p 33.
Appellant’s submissions,
Appellant’s
submissions, [1.28].
Appellant’s submissions,
[3.2]–[3.3].
Appellant’s
supplementary submissions,
[1.4]–[1.5].
Appellant’s submissions,
[5.1]–[5.2].
Respondent’s submissions, [Preamble], [Ground 1
Respondent’s
submissions, Ground One
Paric v John
Holland Constructions Pty Ltd
[1984] 2 NSWLR 505 (per Samuels JA, Hutley and
Priestley JJA agreeing),
13 DDCR 351
[2011] NSWCA
Statement of Chad Page
17/1/18, [12], [18], [20], [28], Reply, pp
Brett English
Statement 12/1/18, [48], [49], [54]–[58], Reply, pp
statement 12/1/18, [30], [36], [38], [41], Reply, pp
Appellant’s statement
9 October 2019, [19], ARD, p
ARD, pp 37 and
Government Insurance Office (NSW)
(1997) 48 NSWLR
[103]–[105].
[106]–[107].
Appellant’s submissions, [8.3].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.84 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter