URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2021/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer (incorrectly named as Concut (NSW) Pty Limited, Deregistered) v Dures [2021] NSWWCCPD 9 (10 February 2021)
DETERMINATION OF AN APPLICATION TO STRIKE OUT
A PRE-FILING STATEMENT
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer (incorrectly named as Concut (NSW)
Pty Limited, Deregistered) v Dures
[2021] NSWWCCPD 9
APPLICANT DEFENDANT:
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer (incorrectly named as Concut (NSW) Pty
Limited, Deregistered)
RESPONDENT CLAIMANT:
Aaron Dures
FILE NUMBER:
DATE OF DECISION:
10 February 2021
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Application to Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement;
Workers Compensation Act 1987
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
President Judge Phillips
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant Defendant:
Ms E Blackman, solicitor
Rankin Ellison Lawyers
Respondent Claimant:
Mr S Meigan, solicitor
Taylor & Scott Lawyers
ORDERS MADE ON APPLICATION:
application to Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement is
order as to costs.
INTRODUCTION
matter concerns an application filed by the applicant defendant employer seeking
an order pursuant to s 151DA of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
1987 Act) that the respondent claimant worker’s pre-filing statement be
struck out. For the following reasons, the application
unsuccessful.
Aaron Dures (the respondent claimant) was employed by Concut (NSW) Pty Ltd as a
concrete cutter.
Dures alleges that on 7 June 2002, while working on a construction site at a
crane depot, he was drilling holes into counter weights
which required him to
continuously jump up and down off the counter weights throughout the day. He
says that over the course of the
day, he noticed pain in his back which
increased by the end of the day.
claimed injury to his back and also for sleep apnoea.
Dures relied upon a report of Professor Iven Young dated 28 November 2017 and
complying agreement entered into on 3 April
in support of his claim for
work injury damages dated 14 May
complying agreement certified Mr Dures as having a total of 21% whole person
impairment (WPI), which was comprised of 16% WPI
with respect to injury to the
lumbar spine and 6% WPI “with respect to sleep apnoea condition”.
The particulars of the
agreement provided for the payment of $30,000 lump sum
compensation pursuant to s 66 of the 1987 Act, less previous payment of
for 14% WPI with respect to injury for the lumbar
25 September 2019, Mr Dures served on the applicant defendant a Pre-Filing
Statement dated 25 September
5 November 2019, the applicant defendant served a Pre-Filing Defence.
9 December 2019,
the parties
attended a mediation hearing. On 10 December 2019, Mediator Callaway issued a
Certificate of Mediation Outcome, certifying
that the parties failed to resolve
the dispute and reach a settlement.
1 June 2020, the applicant defendant’s solicitors wrote to Mr Dures’
solicitors noting that since the mediation, they
had not heard from his legal
representatives. The letter provided that if the applicant defendant’s
solicitors did not hear
from the respondent claimant within 14 days, the
applicant defendant’s solicitors were instructed to file an Application to
Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement in accordance with s 151DA(3) of the 1987
31 August 2020, the applicant defendant lodged an Application to Strike Out a
Pre-Filing Statement. This was rejected due to procedural
non-compliance. A
subsequent complying Application to Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement (the
Application) was lodged on 3 September
3 September 2020, the Registrar issued a Direction setting down a timetable for
the filing and service of the Application, Notice
of Opposition and any
submissions in reply. Amongst other Directions made, the respondent claimant was
directed to lodge with the
Commission a Notice of Opposition (Form 11F) (the
Notice of Opposition) by 15 October 2020.
23 September 2020, the applicant defendant lodged a Certificate of Service,
certifying the Application was served on the respondent
solicitor, Mr Simon Meigan by email on 3 September 2020.
note that in mediation proceedings before the Commission in 2019 (matter number
5797/19) the respondent claimant was represented
by Mr Simon Meigan of Taylor
& Scott Lawyers.
respondent claimant did not comply with the Direction of 3 September 2020 and
did not lodge a Notice of Opposition by 15 October
the Commission had not received the Notice of Opposition, on 16 October 2020,
the Commission emailed Mr Meigan, both to his direct
email and carbon copied to
Taylor & Scott Lawyers’ general email address, requesting Mr Meigan to
urgently advise whether
he continued to represent the respondent claimant and
whether he intended to file a Notice of Opposition. It was noted that the
claimant would need to make an application for an extension of time.
No response was received.
20 October 2020, the Registrar issued a Direction, directing Taylor & Scott
Lawyers to advise the Commission by 27 October
2020 whether they continued to
represent the respondent claimant and whether the respondent claimant intended
to file a Notice of
Opposition.
Direction of 20 October 2020 was not complied with and no response was received.
As such, on 29 October 2020, the Commission called
Taylor & Scott Lawyers
and left a telephone message for Mr Meigan’s secretary, Lauren, to return
the Commission’s
call. This phone call was not returned.
3 November 2020, Ms Taylor from the Commission again called Taylor & Scott
Lawyers, speaking to Lauren, Mr Meigan’s secretary.
The Commission’s
file indicates that Lauren advised Ms Taylor that the respondent claimant was
still their client and advised
that Mr Meigan was on leave, returning on 6
November 2020, and she would ask Mr Meigan to return the Commission’s
Commission’s call was not returned.
9 November 2020, Ms Taylor from the Commission again called Taylor & Scott
Lawyers. Taylor & Scott Lawyers advised that
Mr Meigan was currently in a
hearing before the Commission in another matter. Accordingly, a message was left
for Mr Meigan to return
the Commission’s call.
10 November 2020, Mr Meigan returned the Commission’s call. He advised
orally he had a teleconference scheduled with his
client for Monday 16 November
and would be in a position to respond after that. By way of confirmatory email
(to the Commission and
the applicant defendant’s solicitors) sent shortly
after the telephone call, Mr Meigan advised:
“I refer to my
telephone discussion with just now [sic].
I confirm I am conferring with Mr Dures on Monday 16 November, I will then be
in a position to respond.”
19 November 2020, as there had been no further correspondence from the
respondent claimant’s solicitor, the Registrar issued
a further Direction
directing the respondent claimant to advise the Commission by 26 November 2020,
whether he intended to file a
Notice of Opposition.
24 November 2020, Mr Dures’ solicitor, Mr Meigan, sent a letter to the
Commission, in which he advised that he continues
to act for Mr Dures and also
advised that on 24 November 2020, he filed a Statement of Claim in the
District Court in relation to
these proceedings.
Meigan undertook to shortly file a Notice of Opposition to the Application to
Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement. On 1 December
2020, the Commission sent an
email to Mr Dures’ solicitors following up the Notice of Opposition, as it
had not been lodged.
was no response to the Commission’s inquiry sent on 1 December 2020. On
4 December 2020, the Registrar issued a further
Direction noting Mr
Meigan’s undertaking to lodge a Notice of Opposition and the email sent
from the Commission on 1 December
2020. The respondent claimant was directed to
make any application for an extension of time to file its proposed Notice of
Opposition,
and lodge with the Commission and serve on the applicant defendant
any proposed Notice of Opposition by 4.30 pm on 8 December 2020.
The Direction
also provided for the applicant defendant to lodge submissions in response to
any application for an extension of time,
as well as to lodge submissions in
response to any proposed Notice of Opposition by 18 December 2020.
Dures did not lodge a Notice of Opposition by 8 December 2020.
9 December 2020, Mr Dures sought to lodge a Notice of Opposition. Mr Dures did
not make an application for an extension of time
to lodge the Notice of
Opposition.
Dures submits a Statement of Claim has been lodged in the District Court and
submits he has acted to continue with his work injury
damages claim. The author
of the document also submits that the respondent claimant is not in possession
of the applicant defendant’s
submissions made in the Application to Strike
Out a Pre-Filing Statement. The author also complains that not all of the
were served on him. It is of assistance to set out his submission in
relation to seeking to lodge further submissions:
claimant is at a slight disadvantage in relation to formulating his submissions
as we are not in possession of the insurer's
submissions. At the time of
drafting these submissions, the claimant has now reviewed the email from the
insurer’s representatives
wherein the application was served upon our
office on 3 September 2020. An index to the insurer’s application to
the Pre-filing Statement was included however, the covering email
serving the application advises ‘We have not enclosed a copy
annexures as they are already in your possession. Please advise us if you
require a further copy.’ It is correct that
the claimant is in possession
of all of the documents attached to the insurer's application, except for the
insurer’s submissions.
We are writing to the insurer seeking a further
copy of their submissions and would seek an opportunity to further respond to
submissions if necessary within 7 days of receipt of the insurer’s
submissions.”
note this was the first occasion, despite being served three months prior, that
Mr Dures or his legal representatives raised this
10 December 2020, the Registrar issued a further
revoking the Direction of
4 December 2020 and directed the respondent claimant make any application
for leave to lodge a Notice of
Opposition out of time, and to also lodge any
such proposed Notice of Opposition by 17 December 2020. The Commission provided
of the applicant defendant’s submissions with the Direction to Mr
Meigan and the applicant defendant’s solicitor.
applicant defendant was given leave to lodge submissions in response to the
respondent claimant’s application for an extension
of time and to lodge
any submissions in reply to the proposed Notice of Opposition by 28 January
note that the respondent claimant did not respond to this Direction and has not
lodged anything in reply since. I also observe the
applicant defendant has not
lodged anything further and neither party has contacted the Commission
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) provides:
“(6) If the Commission is
satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with
proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
regard to Practice Direction Number 1, the documents that are before me, and the
submissions by the parties that the matter
can proceed to be determined on the
basis of these documents, I am satisfied that I have sufficient information to
proceed ‘on
the papers’, without holding any conference or formal
hearing, and that this is the appropriate course in the circumstances.
LEGISLATION
151A of the 1987 Act provides:
151A Effect of recovery
of damages on compensation
(1) If a person recovers damages in respect of an injury from the employer
liable to pay compensation under this Act then (except
to the extent that
subsection (2), (3), (4) or (5) covers the case)—
(a) the person ceases to be entitled to any further compensation under this
Act in respect of the injury concerned (including compensation
claimed but not
yet paid), and
(b) the amount of any weekly payments of compensation already paid in respect
of the injury concerned is to be deducted from the damages
(awarded or otherwise
paid as a lump sum) and is to be paid to the person who paid the compensation,
(c) the person ceases to be entitled to participate in any injury management
program provided for under this Act or the 1998 Act.
(2) If damages in respect of an injury are recovered from the employer liable
to pay compensation under this Act, pursuant to a cause
of action that survives
for the benefit of the estate of a deceased worker under the
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1944
, the following amounts of compensation
are to be repaid out of the estate of the deceased worker to the person who paid
the compensation—
(a) the amount of any weekly payments of compensation already paid in respect
of the injury concerned,
(b) the amount of any permanent impairment compensation and pain and
suffering compensation already paid in respect of the injury
(3) If damages are recovered in an action under the
Compensation to
Relatives Act 1897
in respect of the death of a worker from the employer
liable to pay compensation under this Act in respect of the death—
(a) the amount of any compensation under Division 1 of Part 3 paid in respect
of the death is to be deducted from the damages (awarded
or otherwise paid as a
lump sum) and is to be paid to the person who paid the compensation, and
(b) a person recovering those damages ceases to be entitled to any further
compensation under this Act in respect of the death of
the worker.
(4) If a person recovers motor accident damages (other than damages to which
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
applies) from the employer
liable to pay compensation under this Act—
(a) the person ceases to be entitled to any further compensation under this
Act in respect of the injury concerned (including compensation
claimed but not
yet paid), and
(b) the amount of any compensation already paid in respect of the injury
concerned is to be deducted from the damages (awarded or
otherwise paid as a
lump sum) and is to be paid to the person who paid the compensation.
(5) If a person recovers damages to which
Motor Accident
Injuries Act 2017
applies from the employer liable to pay compensation under
(a) the person ceases to be entitled to any further compensation under this
Act in respect of the injury concerned (including compensation
claimed but not
yet paid), and
(b) the amount of any of the following compensation already paid in respect
of the injury concerned is to be deducted from the damages
(awarded or otherwise
paid as a lump sum) and is to be paid to the person who paid the
compensation—
(i) weekly payments of compensation,
(ii) permanent impairment compensation and pain and suffering compensation,
but limited to the amount of any damages recovered for
non-economic
151DA of the 1987 Act provides:
151DA Time not to run for
commencement of proceedings in certain cases
(1) Time does not run for the purposes of section 151D:
(a1) while the determination of the claim concerned is delayed as permitted
by section 281 of the 1998 Act, but not including delay
beyond 2 months
after the claimant has provided all relevant particulars about the claim as
required by section 281(2)(b) of that
Delay in determining a claim beyond 2 months is only permitted on the basis
that degree of permanent impairment is not fully ascertainable
and the insurer
has notified the claimant of this. In such a case, paragraph (a) of this
subsection can apply (if a dispute about
whether degree of permanent impairment
is fully ascertainable is the subject of medical assessment) to further prevent
time running
for the purposes of section 151D.
(a) while a medical dispute as to whether the degree of permanent impairment
of the injured worker is at least 15%, or whether the
degree of permanent
impairment of the injured worker is fully ascertainable, is the subject of a
referral for determination by the
Commission or a referral for assessment under
Part 7 of Chapter 7 of the 1998 Act (including any further assessment
under section
329 of that Act), or
(a2) during the period of 1 month after an offer of settlement is made to the
claimant pursuant to the determination of the claim
as and when required
by the 1998 Act, or
(a3) while an assessment under Part 7 of Chapter 7 of the 1998
Act in respect of a medical dispute referred to in paragraph (a) is
subject of a pending appeal under section 327 of the 1998 Act, or
(b) while a pre-filing statement served in accordance with section 315
of the 1998 Act in respect of the claim concerned remains
(2) A pre-filing statement remains current from the time it is served until
it is struck out under this section on the application
of the person (
) on whom it was served or it is withdrawn by the person who
served it, whichever happens first.
(3) The defendant may apply to the President to have the pre-filing statement
struck out by order of the President. Such an application
may not be made until
at least 6 months have elapsed after the defendant served on the claimant a
defence to the claim in accordance
with section 316 of the 1998 Act.
(4) The President may order that a pre-filing statement be struck out but
must not do so if satisfied that the degree of permanent
impairment of the
injured worker is not yet fully ascertainable and the matter is the subject of a
referral under Part 7 of Chapter
7 of the 1998 Act for assessment of
the degree of permanent impairment of the injured worker.
(5) A medical dispute is considered to be the subject of a referral for
assessment under Part 7 of Chapter 7 of the 1998 Act even
approved medical specialist has declined to make an assessment of the degree of
permanent impairment of the injured worker
until satisfied that the degree of
permanent impairment is fully ascertainable.
(6) The President may delegate to a Deputy President any function of the
President under this section (except this power of delegation),
but only if the
President is satisfied that the delegation is necessary to avoid a conflict of
interest or the appearance of bias.”
SUBMISSIONS
Applicant defendant’s submissions
applicant defendant refers to Mr Dures’ allegation of injury on 7 June
2002. It records Mr Dures served a claim for work
injury damages on 14 May
2018, which was disputed by the applicant defendant in a s 74 Notice dated 13
July 2018. The applicant defendant
notes the Pre-Filing Statement was served on
25 September 2019, and a Pre-Filing Defence was served on 5 November 2019.
matter proceeded to mediation before Mediator Callaway on 9 December 2019. The
matter did not settle at mediation and a Certificate
of Mediation was issued on
10 December 2019.
applicant defendant says its solicitors, Rankin Ellison Lawyers, wrote to Mr
Dures’ solicitors, Taylor & Scott Lawyers,
on 1 June 2020, requesting
a response and if nothing further was received within 14 days, the applicant
defendant would proceed with
the present application. The applicant defendant
submits that no response was received.
applicant defendant seeks the Pre-Filing Statement be struck out pursuant to
s 151DA(3) of the 1987 Act. It submits that approximately
8 months have
elapsed since it served its Pre-Filing Defence in accordance with s 316 of the
1998 Act. It submits that the requirements
in s 151DA(3) have been met.
applicant defendant argues that there is no evidence that Mr Dures has taken any
steps to progress his claim since the mediation
on 9 December 2019.
applicant defendant quotes the following passage from
Pasminco Cockle Creek
Smelter Pty Ltd v
is clearly not the intention of the legislature that the time limit within which
a claimant may bring work injury damages
proceedings should be extended
indefinitely by the operation of these provisions. Claimants must actively
pursue the required steps
throughout this pre-litigation process. The pre-filing
statement should remain current for the purpose of completing those required
applicant defendant submits Mr Dures has had ample time to complete the
pre-litigation phase of the proceedings and file a Statement
of Claim. The
applicant defendant adds “see also
Luke v Frank William McCarthy and
Barbara Annette McCarthy t/as FW & BA McCarthy
It does not
expand on this or refer to a particular part of the decision.
applicant defendant contends that it has been prejudiced by Mr Dures’
substantial delay in making this claim and continues
to be prejudiced by the
operation of s 151DA(1)(b) which stops time for the purposes of s 151D while the
Pre-Filing Statement is
current, relying upon
Workers Compensation Nominal
Insurer v England
Respondent claimant’s submissions
noted above, the respondent claimant has not included an application for leave
to rely on the Notice of Opposition lodged, despite
being directed to do so and
having had several chances. In view of the protracted history of these
proceedings and to determine this
application in a timely fashion, in the
interests of justice, I grant leave of my own motion to the respondent claimant
to rely upon
his Notice of Opposition lodged on 9 December 2020 pursuant to r
Workers Compensation Commission Rules 2011
the Notice of Opposition, Mr Dures notes he was injured in the course of his
employment on 7 June 2002. He says he reached the
relevant threshold to pursue a
work injury damages claim on 20 December 2017. Mr Dures says he served his
Pre-Filing Statement on
25 September 2019; he filed an application for
mediation on 7 November 2019, and the mediation proceeded on 7 December
Dures submits he has now filed a Statement of Claim in the District Court on
24 November 2020. He argues that he has therefore
now acted to continue
with his work injury damages proceedings in the Court system.
balance of Mr Dures’ submissions following this are quoted above at [27]
concerning the applicant defendant’s submissions.
Relief sought
applicant defendant seeks that the Pre-Filing Statement be struck out pursuant
to s 151DA(3) of the 1987 Act and no order as to
costs. Mr Dures’
submissions do not specify the relief he seeks. It is inferred from the Notice
of Opposition that he seeks
that the Application be dismissed.
claim for work injury damages must be brought within three years after the date
of injury, except with leave of the
However, time may be
suspended for one of the reasons set out in s 151DA of the 1987 Act. Section
151DA(1)(b) of the 1987 Act suspends
time for the purposes of s 151D while a
pre-filing statement in respect of the claim remains current. That is, until the
Statement is struck out on the application of the applicant defendant
or withdrawn by Mr Dures.
employer may apply to have the pre-filing statement struck out by order, once
six months have elapsed after it served the pre-filing
defence (s 151DA(3) of
the 1987 Act). A pre-filing statement may be struck out by order if the degree
of permanent impairment is
fully ascertainable (s 151DA(4) of the 1987
are no impediments presented by s 151DA(3) of the 1987 Act to the Application
being determined at this time. More than six months
have elapsed after the
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer served the pre-filing defence.
are sound policy reasons for the inclusion of s 151DA(3) in the 1987 Act. The
provision ensures that the parties have sufficient
time to finalise the
pre-litigation phase of the
proceedings.
It also ensures
that there is a degree of certainty to the process and enables the parties to
explore resolution and/or mediation
of the claim before embarking on
litigation.
applicant defendant unhelpfully has not made submissions specifically addressing
s 151DA(4) of the 1987 Act. The respondent’s
submissions do not refer
to s 151DA(4) and do not provide assistance. I note that in the Application to
Strike Out a Pre-Filing
there is a complying
agreement dated 3 April 2018 in respect of 21% whole person impairment. This is
suggestive that there is no
impediment in respect of s 151DA(4). Further, I note
that the respondent claimant has had the opportunity to raise this as an issue
and has not done so. Given this has not been put into contention, I am of the
view that there are no impediments presented by s 151DA(4)
of the 1987 Act.
the Notice of Opposition, Mr Dures submits that on 24 November 2020, he
filed a Statement of Claim in the District Court in relation
proceedings. As noted at [31] above, the applicant defendant has not lodged any
submissions in reply, and consequently,
has not advanced submissions contesting
whether or not a Statement of Claim has been lodged.
is apparent from this that Mr Dures, since the lodgment of the Application to
Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement, has taken further
steps to advance his claim,
notably the commencement of work injury damages proceedings in the District
Court. In view of the steps
taken by Mr Dures and the lodgment of a Statement of
Claim in the District Court, I am not persuaded to exercise my discretion
Strike Out the Pre-Filing Statement. I do not think it is appropriate to do
so in view of the Statement of Claim having been filed
in the District Court.
ANOTHER MATTER
not part of my reasons in coming to this decision, there is one observation that
I wish to make in relation to the history
of these proceedings. The chronology
listed above demonstrates the respondent claimant, and particularly his
solicitors, have failed
to comply with numerous directions issued by the
Registrar’s delegate throughout the course of these proceedings. Further,
the respondent claimant’s solicitors have failed to respond to many
enquiries from the Commission in this matter, made both
by telephone and email.
The Commission expects parties and their legal representatives to comply with
Directions issued, and to promptly
respond to enquiries made by the
Commission.
application to Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement is dismissed.
order as to costs.
Judge Phillips
10 February 2021
Notice of Claim dated 14 May
2018, Application to Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement (the Application), p
The Application, p
The Application, p
Complying Agreement, the
Application, p 35.
Application, p 6.
Certificate of Mediation Outcome lists the mediation as occurring on 6 November
2019 which appears to be
I note this document
inadvertently was dated 4 December 2020 but was sent by email on 10 December
[2006] NSWWCCPD 108
NSWWCCPD 123.
NSWWCCPD 41.
Section 151D of
the 1987 Act.
Application, pp 34–36.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.66 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter