URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDT/2009/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v RUTNER [2009] NSWDT 2 (11 December 2009)
DENTAL PRACTICE ACT 2001
DENTAL TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
SECTION 130
REGISTRATION NUMBER: DE 0056299
DAVID JOHN RUTNER
(David Jonothan Rutner)
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDER APPLIES
CITATION: HCCC v Rutner [2009] NSWDT 2
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints
(Complainant) represented by Ms Patricia McDonald (of Counsel)
instructed by Mr Stephen Cox, Solicitor, Health Care Complaints
Commission.
Dr David Rutner
(Respondent) represented by Mr Gary Gregg (of
Counsel) instructed by Ms Kate Hickey, Solicitor, Guild Legal
FILE NUMBER: 002/2008
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne Muller (Chairperson) Dr Penny Burns (Dentist
Dr William O’Reilly (Dentist Member) Dr Noel Greenaway (Lay
DATES OF HEARING: 10, 12, 13 March, 8 May, 19 & 20 August
DATE OF DECISION: 11 December 2009
DATE OF ORDERS: 11 December 2009
ORDERS (in summary): The name of the Respondent is suspended from
the Register for a period of two months commencing
from seven days
after the date hereof. The Respondent is to provide the Board with written
evidence of satisfactory completion of
an ethics course within one year of the
date hereof. The Respondent to pay the costs of the HCCC, less the costs of the
with respect to the Directions Hearing held on 10 June
CATCHWORDS: Dentistry – claims through HICAPS system
– work not performed – unsatisfactory professional
– professional misconduct.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Dental Practice Act 2001
, schedule 5 – clause 6,
Evidence Act 1995
CASES CITED:
Allinson v General Council of Medical
Education and Registration
(1894) 1 QB 755
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Clyne v New South Wales Bar
Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
HCCC v Margiotta
Palmer v Dolman; Dolman v Palmer
[2005] NSWCA 361
[1963] HCA 44
(1963) 110 CLR 234
Bradshaw v McEwans Pty Ltd
(1951) 217 ALR 1
Richard Evans & Co Ltd v
[1911] AC 674
Holloway v McFeeters
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Girlock (Sales) Pty Ltd v Hurrell
(1982) 149 CLR
Chamberlain v R (No 2)
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521
[1990] HCA 51
(1990) 171 CLR 207
Transport Industries Insurance Co Ltd v
Belhaven & Stenton Peerage
(1875) 1 App Cas 278
Ross v Ross
(1930) AC 1
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan
Holdings Pty Ltd
(1992) 67 ALJR
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Dental Tribunal of New South Wales (the Tribunal) convened at the Pharmacy Board
Room in Sydney on 10 March 2009 to conduct an
Inquiry into a complaint made by
Ms Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings, Health Care Complaints Commission
(HCCC), dated 10
October 2008 in relation to a registered dentist,
David Rutner (the
Respondent). The Inquiry continued on 12 and 13 March, 8 May and
19 August 2009.
Respondent has been a registered dentist since 1986. The Complaint (set
out in full below) is limited in scope to one
patient over approximately four
months and relates to payments received by the Respondent through the HICAPS
system from the health
insurer, The Hospitals Contribution Fund of Australia
Limited (HCF) for four full veneer crowns which it is alleged were not in fact
the patient attended the practice of another dentist (Other Dentist),
her claim was denied by HICAPS on the basis that
an earlier claim had been
processed in that year.
The Complaint
Complaint alleges that the Respondent, being a person registered
as a dentist under the Act:
COMPLAINT ONE
Is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
of the Act, in that he:
(i) engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the dentist in the practice
of dentistry was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a dentist of an
equivalent level of training or experience,
(ii) engaged in other improper and unethical conduct in the course of
the practice or purported practice of dentistry.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
At all relevant times the dentist was a registered dentist in private
practice and Patient A was a patient of the dentist.
15 December 2005 and about 17 December 2005 the dentist received payment from
HICAPS on behalf of HCF for the service of two
full veneer crowns claimed to
have been provided to Patient A on 15 December 2005 when in fact no such service
had been provided.
28 February 2006 and about 2 March 2006 the dentist received payment
from HICAPS on behalf of HCF for the service
of one full veneer crown claimed to
have been provided to Patient A on 28 February 2006 when in fact no such service
had been provided.
13 March 2006 and about 15 March 2006 the dentist received payment from HICAPS
on behalf of HCF for the service of one
full veneer crown claimed to
provided to Patient A on 13 March 2006 when in fact no
such service had been provided.
COMPLAINT TWO
Is guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of
Act, in that he:
(i) engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the dentist in the practice
of dentistry was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a dentist of an
equivalent level of training or experience,
(ii) engaged in other improper and unethical conduct in the course of
the practice or purported practice of dentistry.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
As per Complaint One.
The Law – preliminary matters
Meaning of ‘Professional Misconduct’ and
‘Unsatisfactory Professional
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is found when the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied
that the conduct made out demonstrates
one of the deficiencies or inadequacies
that are set out in
section 41(1)
of the Act. The Complaint currently before the
Tribunal alleges that the conduct particularised amounts to unsatisfactory
professional
conduct within the meaning of this section – specifically
sub-sections (a) and (f).
Tribunal considers, first, whether the conduct alleged in the
particulars of complaint are made out in point of fact.
The next matter the
Tribunal must evaluate is whether, if established, the conduct amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of the
Professional
misconduct is defined in
of the Act as meaning (noting that
a dentist falls within the definition of dental care provider stated in
of the Act):
unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the dental care provider's
registration
common law, the classic definition of professional misconduct is found in the
judgment of
Lopes L J in Allinson v General Council of Medical Education and
Registration
(1894) 1 QB 755
[Conduct] which could
be reasonably regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable by his professional
brethren of good repute and competency.
satisfied that the particulars of complaint that are made out amount to
unsatisfactory professional conduct, the Tribunal
must then consider
whether the unsatisfactory professional conduct established is of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension
or cancellation of the Respondent’s
registration. If so satisfied, that a suspension or cancellation of registration
is justified,
then a finding of professional misconduct is indicated. To
make a finding of professional misconduct, the Tribunal,
having taken
into account any relevant mitigating circumstances, would need to be comfortably
satisfied (see below) that the conduct
made out was of such a serious nature
that it warrants suspension or removal from the Register.
the Tribunal has followed these steps, if the conduct has been characterised as
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct, the Tribunal
will then need to consider the appropriate order(s) to be made.
Standard of proof required
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
the civil standard, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
satisfied’ that the particulars
of the complaint have been established. In
these matters, the HCCC bears the onus of
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J, as he then
was, said at 362–363:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not be
produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences ...
This does not mean that some standard of persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt required upon a criminal
inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in a
civil issue may,
not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It means
that the nature of the issue
necessarily affects the process by which
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
HCCC made submissions as to the standards to be applied where an
inference of fraud is made from circumstantial evidence
in a civil matter and
referred the Tribunal to the decision in
Palmer v Dolman; Dolman v Palmer
[2005] NSWCA 361
(details below under the heading of HCCC
submissions).
matter to note is that the jurisdiction exercised by this Tribunal is
protective, not punitive. There are dual reasons
for this. In
Clyne v New
South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
case involving a barrister, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasized that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the
public point of view, for the protection
of those who require
protection, and from the professional point of view, in order that abuse of
privilege may not lead to loss
of privilege.
the primary role of the Tribunal is protective, it also has a role in
maintaining public confidence in the profession
and maintaining the
reputation of the profession. Orders of the Tribunal may operate to have a
general deterrent effect for other
members of the profession.
Appearances
16. The parties were represented as per the headnotes.
Suppression Order
Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in relation to the name of
Patient A. In accordance with Schedule 5 Clause
6 of the Act, the name of
Patient A as indicated in the schedule annexed hereto and marked ‘E’
and any information that
may identify her is not to be
documents received into evidence in this matter are set out in Annexure
‘A’ hereto. The oral submissions made by Counsel
for each party were
supplemented by further written submissions. The HCCC’s written submission
was limited to providing the
references to support one area of the submissions
disputed by the Respondent.
Grahame Maher (HCF Inspector), Patient A, Mr Brett Butler (by telephone), Dr Ian
Burns, Mr Luke Givney, Dr Brendan Quill, Dr Sonika
Sharma (by telephone), Mr
Alan Westwood and the Respondent all gave evidence before the
Background information
Background of the Respondent
20. The Respondent was born in 1963. The Respondent graduated in
1985, was first registered in 1986 and after working as an associate for two
years has been the principal of his own business since
that time. Until some
time in 2008 he worked in partnership with another dentist. The Respondent
indicated he had kept up to date
by attending courses in all disciplines of
dentistry with the exception of orthodontics. He is currently registered until
31 December
21. The Respondent agreed to be bound by the HICAPS Provider
Agreement on 16 February 2001 (exhibit 5).
Background of the Complaint
A first became a patient of the Respondent in 1993. She attended upon
the Respondent for various treatments over
time, including to have work done on
a troublesome ‘upper right hand side tooth, second from the
back’ (tooth 17)
on 8 December 2005, 15
December 2005,
20 February 2006, 28 February 2006 and 13 March
A was still concerned about tooth 17 on which she understood the Respondent had
undertaken work on those specified dates set
out above and sought a second
opinion from another dentist (Other Dentist) on 21 March
Other Dentist undertook an examination of Patient A and referred her for an OPG
radiographic scan.
12 September 2006 Patient A complained to HCF about the Respondent and
shortly thereafter signed an authority to allow
HCF to have access to the notes
held in her file by the Respondent. The HCF obtained these notes on 27 October
30 October 2006 HCF wrote to the Respondent advising that he had been
suspended from using the HICAPS system for HCF members
27. HCF wrote to the HCCC on 17 November 2006 requesting a
‘complaint’ regarding the Respondent be ‘assessed’
and provided a number of documents setting out details
‘complaint’. The documents so provided were in the nature of a
‘brief’ of evidence, 37 pages long,
being the substantial part of
the evidence before the Tribunal, save for a formal statement from Patient A,
documents regarding HICAPS
and extracts from the records of HCF.
28. Ultimately, a Complaint dated 10 October 2008 was referred to the
Tribunal by the HCCC.
Evidence before the Tribunal
Patient A’s evidence
A’s evidence is found in exhibits 3.2, 3.3 and 11. Patient A also gave
oral evidence before the Tribunal in a forthright
30. Patient A had four veneer crowns fitted to her four upper front teeth
1974 (following the loss of those teeth in an accident). In 2001, the
Respondent replaced one of these crowns.
A sought treatment from the Respondent regarding tooth 17 commencing in December
2005 and ending in March 2006.
first appointment during this period of time was made by Patient A by way of
a telephone call to the Oxford Street
surgery. The following appointment
was made at the time of her departure after the first appointment. The next
appointment, being
in 2006, was once again made by Patient A telephoning the
Oxford Street surgery and thereafter the appointments were made by the
Respondent prior to her departure from the Oxford Street surgery. Patient A
could not recall the identity of the person she spoke
to when she telephoned for
these appointments. General cleaning was also undertaken by the Respondent while
addressing the significant
problems with tooth 17.
A claims that on each occasion she visited the Respondent during this period,
December 2005 until February 2006,
the Respondent was responsible for
processing the HICAPS claim. In December 2005 she saw the Respondent personally
swipe her HCF
membership card through the EFTPOS machine. She observed him
swiping the card through several times and heard him comment that a
new machine
was required and that they would obtain one when the practice moved to the
other surgery. These abovementioned
appointments were all in the Oxford
Street rooms.
this period in the later part of 2005 and the first part of 2006, the
Respondent and his business partner, Dr Quill,
were in the process of
moving into a new surgery located in Waverley Street. Dr Quill made the initial
move to the new surgery
and the Respondent followed, working progressively more
and more from the new surgery over these months. Both the Oxford Street and
Waverley Street surgeries were located at Bondi Junction and are in close
proximity to each other.
appointments in 2006 were at the Waverley Street surgery and Patient A could not
actually see the EFTPOS machine being used by
the Respondent. She stated that
the Respondent took her card, she saw him making a movement that was
consistent with a
swiping motion and completed the transaction. Patient A
stated that the actual machine and card were blocked from view by the high
reception counter.
36. In her oral evidence, Patient A stated that at the first appointment
December 2005) she complained to the Respondent of a minor tooth ache with a
‘right upper tooth’. She stated that she
did not want to have any
problems with the tooth over the holiday period and thought she should have it
attended to. The Respondent
took x-rays and informed her that she would require
a filling in the tooth. He then cleaned some of her teeth and an appointment
made to attend to the filling the following week. On this occasion she
noted that ‘a blonde lady, very tall,
very elegant lady’ (T5,
10.3.09) was present at the surgery. Patient A gave evidence that she could not
be certain that there
was not a dental assistant present at any of the
appointments.
A stated that the Respondent accompanied her to the reception area and
took her HCF card. He swiped the card through
the HICAPS machine
‘repeatedly’ and she observed him ‘punching in numbers’.
They had a conversation regarding
the HICAPS machine. Patient A gave evidence of
what she understood to be a ‘gap’, being the difference between the
refunded by the health fund and the amount charged by the practitioner.
She stated that it was her practise to pay the gap by credit
card. Patient A
stated that the Respondent did not ask her to pay any gap for the appointments
between December 2005 and March
2006. She had recently reviewed her
credit card statements for this period of time and she could not identify any of
merchants as being referable to the Respondent. Patient A confirmed that she
never left her HCF card at the surgery.
15 December 2005, Patient A gave evidence that the Respondent filled tooth 17
(noting at this point that Patient A referred to
the tooth as an upper right
back molar rather than tooth 17). At the end of the consultation, the Respondent
took Patient A back
to the reception area, took her card and swiped it through
the HICAPS machine.
A gave the following account of the first consultation in 2006 with the
Respondent (T18, 10.3.09):
We talked about the tooth and the
problems that I was still having with it. I think Dr Rutner took an x-ray and
informed me that
tooth, the tooth itself, had cracked and that we
were going to remedy it. We were going to have to actually create a lab filling
in the tooth, like a different type of filling that he had done
A returned to have the ‘lab filling’ installed in March 2006. The
filling did not fit and the Respondent
strongly expressed his
dissatisfaction. The Respondent then took another impression and asked Patient A
to return about two
weeks later. Patient A gave evidence that the Respondent
informed her she would not need to pay for this replacement
the third visit in 2006, Patient A recalls the new inlay filling being fitted
and the Respondent ‘polishing’ her
A confirmed in her oral evidence that she was not asked to read or sign any
documentation after any of the consultations
over the December 2005 to March
2006 period nor was she given any documentation to take away.
A stated that she had reviewed her diaries within the week or so preceding the
commencement of the Inquiry. Patient A gave
the following evidence regarding the
time of day the appointments occurred (T22, 10.3.09):
For the diaries that I have got, all of my appointments were late in the
afternoon. There was one that I had which was an a.m. appointment,
which was at
8 o'clock and it was either for 28
February or the 13th when they were doing the filling that had been
created, one of them were.
in her evidence Patient A explained that she had consulted her electronic diary
(she did not keep any other type of diary) and
had found entries for
appointments with the Respondent for 2005 but none for 2006. Paper print
outs of these entries were
produced to the Tribunal on the second day of the
in March 2006, Patient A went to see another dentist (Other Dentist) for a
second opinion. He referred her
for an Orthopantomogram (OPG)
which was performed on 22 March 2006. It was when she presented her paid account
from the Other
Dentist to HCF that Patient A was informed that she had reached
her limit for dental treatment for the year. When she queried this
HCF directed her to a website where she was able to view her claim
record. Initially, Patient A unsuccessfully
attempted to contact the Respondent
by telephone to discuss the issue. She left voice mail
messages just asking for the Respondent to return her call but her call was
not returned. Patient A downloaded from the HCF web site
the claims recorded as
having been made by Dr Rutner and included this information in a table format in
a letter to Dr Rutner. Patient
A gave evidence that she posted the letter to the
Oxford Street address of the surgery by Registered Mail. The article was never
collected and the letter was ultimately returned to her.
A then wrote a note onto the letter she had originally addressed to
the Respondent and forwarded it to the HCF.
obtaining information from HCF regarding the claims made on HCF by the
Respondent, Patient A states she attempted to telephone
the Respondent and when
Registered Mail. The letter dated
20 June 2006 (part of exhibit
3.2) was never collected by the
Respondent according to Australia Post records.
the Respondent had been contacted by the HCF investigator, Patient A’s
statement records she received a telephone call
from the Respondent wherein he
apologised and explained that he had had difficulties with his staff at the
time she received
the treatment. Patient A claims that the Respondent
became hostile when she started to explain that she did not consider
issues with his staff to be her problem but that his treatment had not met her
expectations and that claims lodged with HCF had
not reflected the treatment
provided. Patient A stated that the Respondent became cross with her for not
allowing him to fully explain
the circumstances regarding the problem with the
receptionist.
HCF investigation file
noted above a significant amount of the material before the Tribunal is
constituted by information gathered during an
investigation undertaken on behalf
Mr Maher, the HCF investigator, collected Patient A’s file from the
Respondent the investigator said to the Respondent
doesn’t appear to be any crowns mentioned on these records?’ to
which the Respondent is recorded as replying
‘No there isn’t, I
don’t want to say anything for legal reasons.’ And further, ‘I
have had to have
all the locks changed in the office and my tax returns
haven’t been submitted.’ Under cross-examination Mr Maher
denied that there was any other content in this conversation and produced a
handwritten note he said he made before leaving the
car park after attending the
Respondent’s surgery on that day (exhibit 19).
obtained an expert opinion from Dr Ian Burns, an experienced dentist. HCF
provided Dr Burns with Patient A’s notes
practice of the Respondent and the OPG initiated by the
3.4 is a print-out of HCF benefits paid to the Respondent with respect to
Patient A from 8 December 2005 to 13 March 2006.
The print out records a claim
for two full veneer crowns was made on 15
December 2005 at a cost of
$2,000 for which a benefit of $800 was paid to the Respondent. Another full
veneer crown is claimed for
28 February 2006 at a cost of $1000 for which a payment of $450 to the
Respondent is recorded. A fourth full veneer crown is claimed
13 March 2006 at a cost of $1000 for which a payment of $350 to the
Respondent is recorded.
A’s clinical notes from the Respondent’s practice were
obtained by HCF (with the permission of Patient
A) and they form exhibit
Maher gave evidence that the Respondent was co-operative with his
investigation.
Report of Dr Ian Burns
3.10 is a report from Dr Burns written to the HCF regarding his assessment of
Patient A’s clinical notes and her OPG.
Exhibit 3.11 is Dr Burns’
interpretation of the clinical notes kept by the Respondent from 8 December 2005
to 13 March 2006.
Report contains a transcript of the Respondent’s treatment notes provided.
Dr Burns expresses the opinion that the notes
accurately reflect the claims made
by the Respondent through HICAPS with the exception of the addition of four
being ‘full crown veneered indirect’ . Dr
Burns’ interpretation of the treatment notes for the period in question
could find no evidence of any crowns being either prepared or fitted. There is a
small inaccuracy in the report of Dr Burns as he
refers to one ‘item
024’ rather than two ‘item 022’, this having been the correct
description under the
previous edition of the Schedule. Dr Burns also
commented that he was of the opinion that the item 533 would have been more
accurately referred to as an item 531.
Records from HICAPS
9 consists of a bundle of documents from HICAPS regarding the transactions
recorded with respect to the Respondent’s
practice for Patient A on 15
December 2005, 28 February 2006 and 13 March
records indicate that the sums of $450 and $350 were paid into the account
nominated by the Respondent on 15 December 2005 in
response to a
claim made for two items described as ‘D615’, $450 was paid for an
item ‘D615’ on 28 February
2006 and $350 paid for another item
‘D615’ on 13 March 2006.
Statement of Dr Brendan Quill
Quill graduated from Sydney University in 1985 and has worked as a general
dentist since that time. He first met the Respondent
Dr Quill practised in partnership with the Respondent from 1992 to March 2008.
Since March 2008 they have conducted their practices
from the same rooms, but
not in a partnership arrangement.
Quill provided a statement to the Tribunal dated 26 February 2009 (exhibit R1).
The statement indicates that the partnership practice
moved location during
2005. Dr Quill moved across to the new rooms mid-way through 2005 and the
Respondent sometime later. Dr Quill
was not practising in the ‘old
rooms’ as at December 2005.
background recounted by Dr Quill in his statement indicates that there were a
number of unsatisfactory performance issues regarding
the receptionist employed
by the partnership from 2002. During 2005, the receptionist mainly worked from
the ‘old rooms’.
Dr Quill believes that the receptionist ceased her
employment with the partnership in early 2006. A bookkeeper was employed
‘to sort out the mess’.
to the usual manner in which accounts are dealt with, Dr Quill states that after
the treatment was completed, it was his practise
and that of the
Respondent’s to walk the patient out to the receptionist with their
clinical records and the receptionist would
then process the account through the
HICAPS machine.
respect to the ‘Transaction Search Results’ (exhibit 9) Dr Quill
states that given the time the transactions are
recorded as occurring ‘I
would find it most unusual that [the receptionist] was not there on any of those
occasions’.
He further noted that it was the usual practice for the
receptionist to attend to the HICAPS processing.
64. Dr Quill then makes the following statement (paragraph 15):
....I have known David Rutner for approximately 27 years and during that
time I have never had any reason to question his integrity
or honesty and have
always found him to be trustworthy. I find it very difficult to believe that
David would intentionally defraud
the health fund.
Statement of Dr Sonika Sharma
Sharma graduated with BDS (India) in 2003. She ‘re-located’ to
Australia in 2003 and worked as a chair-side assistant
in the practice of Drs
Rutner and Quill from May 2004 to April 2006.
Sharma provided a statement dated 26 February 2009. She states that the office
of the surgery was managed by a person
named ****. **** performed
reception duties, handled payments from patients (including payments through the
HICAPS system), payments
to suppliers and general office management tasks at the
surgery. In general she observed that Dr Rutner signed cheques but ‘a
great deal of the responsibility for the running of the surgery‘ was
placed on ****.
Sharma states **** interviewed her for the position of chair- side assistant and
that during the interview **** claimed to be a
psychologist. Dr Sharma states
that a short time later she became aware that she was not in fact a
psychologist.
Sharma states that she noticed the following ‘issues emerging’ or
problems while working with ****:
On occasions
when she asked **** to order dental supplies they did not arrive. When enquiries
were made with the suppliers they advised
that the accounts were
outstanding.
A technician
named ‘Ian’ informed her on one occasion that he had not been paid
for work performed over a period of 2
Sharma had taken study leave to complete her examinations, she
telephoned to enquire about when she should
that Dr Quill had employed a replacement and did not want her to return to work
at the surgery.
Dr Sharma states that subsequently she spoke to Dr Quill and he
told her that **** had lied about him having a problem with her and
expected her to return to work. Dr Sharma then commenced working with the
Respondent. In her oral evidence, Dr Sharma clarified
that the conversation
between herself and Dr Quill whereby this matter was clarified occurred a few
months after her return to work
at the surgery and that she had recently
revisited the topic in conversation with Dr Quill.
• Dr Sharma
found **** ‘generally untrustworthy’.
occasions **** would blame others for her own mistakes e.g. when appointments
were made incorrectly.
Dr Sharma states
that at Christmas time in 2004 **** was responsible for cashing a cheque to pay
all the employees their holiday
pay entitlements and that she did not
receive the full amount of holiday pay owed to her.
Dr Sharma was of
the view that **** had an inappropriate manner with the patients e.g. she
showed favouritism towards some
patients and discussed her private life with
On one occasion
she found a ‘couple of patient health cards’ on ****’s desk.
When Dr Sharma enquired as to why they
were there, **** told her that she had
been so busy running the surgery that she would process them ‘later when
69. With respect to the short payment of holiday pay at Christmas time in
2004, Dr Sharma gave oral evidence that the matter was raised with Dr Quill
at the time. She understood that Dr Quill spoke to ****,
but she was not privy
to the conversation between them. She states that she did not receive the
correct pay despite discussing the
situation with Dr Quill.
70. Dr Sharma states at paragraph 8:
From my observations and to the best of my knowledge, no one else in the
office processed payments (including payments by patients
for their treatment
accounts and payment of the accounts) and **** seemed to not want to train
anyone else to do so. On many occasions
other staff would make
mistakes with the processing of payments in her absence and when they were
asked about the mistakes
they would say that **** had told them how to do the
ordering, accounts, cheques or payments to the suppliers.
her oral evidence, Dr Sharma stated that she had been ‘taught’ how
to use the HICAPS machine at the Darlinghurst branch
of the practice, but not at
the Bondi Junction offices. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent and Dr Quill
had also operated a surgery
in Darlinghurst at some earlier point in
Sharma recalled in her oral evidence that from early 2006, Dr Rutner
worked on Wednesdays at the Waverley Street rooms
and then two or three weeks
later they commenced working there on Fridays as well. Dr Sharma confirmed there
were some other days
as well but was unable to be specific about the
dates/days.
cross-examination Dr Sharma’s ultimate recollection was that the height of
the reception desk at the Oxford Street rooms
was higher than that of the
Waverley Street rooms. The answers given by Dr Sharma leading up to this
evidence and the fact that the
evidence was being taken by telephone deprived
the Tribunal of the possibility of using visual prompts. These factors resulted
the Tribunal being uncertain of the reliability of this
Evidence of Mr Alan Westwood
Westwood is a bookkeeper with over 20 years experience in various
accounts work. Mr Westwood made a statement
2009 (exhibit R3).
February 2006 and September 2006, Mr Westwood worked for two or three hours per
week, primarily for the purpose of setting
up an MYOB system for handling the
practice accounts. He also attended to the payment of staff and invoices.
He had previously
had professional contact with Dr Rutner, assisting the
accountant retained by the practice to ensure compliance with ASIC
requirements.
76. At paragraph 6 of his statement, Mr Westwood records:
My impression of David Rutner is that he is a trustworthy man, but
slightly disorganised. I have been handling various aspects of
his business
accounts for many years and have never seen anything that would lead me to
believe he would deliberately do anything
Westwood believes that ‘an office manager called ****’ had left the
practice in about April 2006. About a week after
she left he attempted to
reconcile the practice accounts and found at least 60 cheques ‘were
unaccounted for’.
The cheques were for superannuation,
credit cards and ‘there may have been some cheques to the ATO’. When
he spoke to the Respondent about these cheques, the Respondent told him that he
recalled signing the cheques and then said ‘I’ll
come and have a
look’. They undertook a search of the office and located them in a drawer
of ****’s desk. He observed
that the cheques had been
Westwood states that he took about six weeks to organise the practice accounts
as they were so disorganised. Not only were there
missing cheques and invoices
that had not been paid there were also no records ‘of the actual
invoices’. These invoices
had to be ‘tracked down’ so they
could be reconciled.
oral evidence, Mr Westwood confirmed that after working for the practice for a
number of weeks in the second half of 2005, he ascertained
that a number of
cheques that appeared to have been written from the practice account had not
been presented to the bank. Mr Westwood
stated that there were about 40 or 50
cheques ‘missing’ and after a search the ‘vast majority’
of the cheques
were located in a drawer ‘out the back’ of the Oxford
Street surgery. Mr Westwood recalled that he was assisted in the
cheques in the surgery by the Respondent and as best as he could recall they
located in the drawer of a wooden filing cabinet. Along with
the cheques, Mr Westwood found some of the invoices and delivery notes
had been ‘chasing up’ while attempting to put the practice accounts
in order. The cheques were payable to various
suppliers, the ATO and the
superannuation fund and, as best as Mr Westwood could recall, they had been
signed by the Respondent.
The Respondent’s Evidence
80. The Respondent provided a response to a letter from the HCCC dated
5 January 2007 by his letter dated 3 March 2007 (exhibit 14). By this time he
was represented by Guild Legal.
Respondent states in this letter that ‘In 20 years of practice’ he
had ‘never been in this position’ being
a reference to facing this
Complaint, and that he felt ‘completely devastated’ by it. He
explained that the HCF inspector
had misinterpreted the comments he made on the
day he attended his practice and denied that he said he had a tax problem. The
went on to say:
What I said was that there was an internal problem being investigated and
part of this problem was that upward of 15 or more cheques
have gone missing
including 4 of my own cheques to the taxation department.
Respondent describes his practice at the time as not being as efficient as it
should have been because he had to spend a considerable
amount of time sorting
out the ‘staff fraud, moving the location of the practice and coping with
the rotation in staff’.
The Respondent states in his letter that apart
from the telephone call he made to ‘apologise for any inconvenience’
he had not received any telephone ‘correspondence’ from Patient
A regarding the subject matter of the Complaint
nor had he received any mail
from her. He further states, ‘I would never deliberately attempt to
alienate or hurt a patient’.
respect to the HICAPS claims made in December 2005, the Respondent
states that he has ‘no idea how or why this
error has occurred only to
conclude that an error was made at the time’. He went on to explain that
staff turnover was high
and ‘reliability was not
Respondent states that he normally leaves accounts to the receptionist
but accepts that as the ‘owner of the business’
he is responsible
for ensuring accounts are correct. He reiterates that he had problems with staff
the possibility of
‘fraud within
the staff’. With respect to the claim made by Patient A that
he swiped her card on all occasions, the Respondent stated this ‘is not
85. The Respondent states:
I certainly did not try to take advantage of this patient. Granted
mistakes were made but not deliberately and I had not been involved
serious problem within the surgery I dare say I would have probably picked up
the mistake.
his oral evidence the Respondent clarified that his middle name is in fact
Jonothan, although he is registered with the middle
Respondent gave evidence that he did not completely move out of the Oxford
Street rooms until May 2006. Dr Rutner said that he
was not responsible for the
writing of the words ‘new surgery’ at the top of a column for
particular days in his diary
for the times after May 2006. He states he was at
the Waverley Street rooms full time from May 2006.
being given an opportunity to peruse his 2006 appointment diary for his dental
practice, the Respondent agreed he was working
full time in the practice. He
also gave evidence that he was spending considerable periods of time at an
indoor activity centre that
he and Dr Quill owned. The Respondent stated he
could not say with any clarity that he was working full time in the other years
he did not have access to the relevant diaries. The best recollection of the
Respondent was that the indoor sports centre business
was sold over the period
Respondent stated that both he and Dr Quill employed a personal assistant and a
dental nurse. The receptionist/practice manager,
**** was employed by both of
them together with another dentist, Dr Duncan. In the period when Dr Quill moved
across to the Waverley
Street rooms, **** remained at the Oxford Street rooms as
she was also working for Dr Duncan.
Respondent stated in his oral evidence that the partnership practice had
been the subject of fraudulent activity in the
mid 1990’s by a staff
member whereby over $80,000 was lost. After this incident he had put in place an
arrangement with the
bank and both he and Dr Quill watched the cheques more
91. The Respondent gave the following evidence (T181, 13.03.09)
regarding the HICAPS:
Q. The period December 2005 to 13 March 2006, during that period did you
have a practice of undertaking daily reconciliations
of the HICAPS transactions? A. I believe we did.
Q. Who did that? A. Not me.
Q. Who did it?
A. I would assume the receptionist.
Q. But you don't know?
A. I'd say the receptionist.
Q. You are using words "I assume" and "I'd say". Was there a practice in
place that the receptionist did that?
Q. Did you check it?
A. Sometimes I checked it and sometimes Brendan checked it.
Q. The HICAPS at the old surgery, that would have been your
responsibility to check it, wouldn't it?
A. Yes, it would have been.
Q. And did you check it on a daily basis? A. No.
Q. When did you check it, if you did check it?
A. It might have been - there was no regularity to it, so I can't say
every day, once a day. There was no regularity to it.
Respondent stated that soon after Mr Westwood took over the bookkeeping for the
practice (after **** left), Mr Westwood informed
him of difficulty he
experienced trying to reconcile the cheque account. Mr Westwood indicated that
it appeared there were a number
of cheques not presented. A search of the
practice located the ‘missing’ cheques in a drawer at the Oxford
premises. Some of these cheques had been addressed to the Australian Tax
Office (ATO) for payment of the Respondent’s quarterly
instalment. The Respondent was unsure as to what quarter these ATO
cheques related to, but thought it was likely
to be some time in 2005.
Ultimately, some time after the end of 2005, the ATO contacted Dr Rutner’s
accountant and alerted
him to the fact that the BAS tax instalments had not been
paid. Arrangements were made for the payment of the outstanding tax and
circumstances the ATO waived the penalty.
carrying out a further reconciliation of the cheque account, Mr Westwood
indicated that there were still some cheques outstanding.
Enquiries were made
with the bank to ensure the cheques had not been presented.
Respondent confirmed there was tension between him and Dr Quill regarding his
billing practices and the subsequent differential
in their incomes. Dr Quill had
encouraged the Respondent to charge at a rate higher than the health fund
benefit for some services.
clinical records kept by the Respondent in evidence do not have item numbers
recorded for work undertaken. When asked how the
receptionist decided how to
charge the patient, the Respondent stated (T185, 13/3/09):
There was a glossary at the front of the desk which listed scaling equals
that, this equals that. ****, by that stage, could read
most of my writing and
if she didn't understand anything or I wanted to specifically point out
something, I would tell her. That's
how it worked.
96. The Respondent agreed he had signed the HICAPS Provider
Agreement, but could not recall reading either this agreement or the
‘Terms and Conditions’ document that accompanied the
cross-examination, after being taken in detail to the relevant provisions of the
Agreement, the Respondent agreed that the
copy of the HICAPS print-out he
produced under summons that related to the consultation of Client A on 15
December 2005 (exhibit
20) did not comply with the HICAPS requirements. The
print-out had not been signed as required by paragraph 4.2(e) of the contract
(exhibit 6).
asked if the print-outs for the consultations from 28 February and 15 March
could be produced as required by the Agreement
(copies of the print-outs
should be kept for a period of 24 months), the Respondent stated (T 189,
No. We were in the process of moving and as I am about to say, there were
certain things that were inadvertently lost. I can't explain
why. There was a
lot of activity going on in the surgery at the time. I searched high and low
for this and could not find it.
Respondent was asked questions about his billing practices and the manner by
which items were recorded for billing purposes and
how outstanding amounts were
followed up. Patients were not always billed on the day of the treatment. The
Respondent also gave
evidence that he would sometimes bill for major work at
some stage during the work, sometimes this would be noted in the patient’s
clinical notes and at other times it would not be.
T 192-3 the Respondent gave the following evidence under cross-
examination:
CHAIRPERSON: Q. So from time to time was it that you would not charge a
patient on the same day for their treatment?
A. It may have been.
MS McDONALD: Q. And you indicated that by writing in your clinical notes a
reference such as (to bill)?
A. Not all the time, but on that date I did. I can't say.
...........
Q. And it was the case on 8 December that you attempted to put through
the HICAPS transactions for the work done on
patient A on that day?
A. No, I don't agree with that. You are saying that I did it and
I'm saying I can't remember. I may. But I'm not saying I
T 197-8 the Respondent gave the following evidence under cross- examination
regarding the manner in which the fees transaction
occurred with Patient
Q. Have you still got tab 9, the transaction search result for that day
in front of you?
A. For the 15 th [
referring to 15 December]
A. Yes I do.
Q. Would you look at the last entry on the claims item table? That's the
entry for the 533
[being a reference to an item number]
, the D533, that's
A. That is correct.
Q. And that sets out that the requested amount was 120
and a benefit amount of 83
was paid, doesn't it?
A. It appears so.
Q. This was treatment work, not preventative work that you were
performing on Patient A, wasn't it?
A. That is correct.
Q. And in those circumstances
(was it your intention)
only would she pay the benefit amount - I withdraw that - your intention was
that she would also pay the gap amount for
A. It may have been.
Q. It is consistent, isn't it, with the practice you have set out in your
A. In my statement there was some patients who were fund only and some
not. I can't remember on the day if I decided
Q. You gave evidence, Dr Rutner, didn't you, that your practice
was that preventative treatment would be fund paid? A. That
is correct.
Q. And that, if I could call it treatment, such as fillings, the gap
would be paid?
Q. It was your intention on 15 December that Patient A, for the
composite resin and the GIC, would pay the gap? A. I'm
not sure. I
don't - yes.
Respondent gave evidence that he had not realised that he had received money to
which he was not entitled with respect to the
615’ claims until the HCF investigator drew them to his attention
Respondent was asked about part of a letter he wrote to the HCCC dated 3
March 2007 during cross-examination as follows
You have got "in 20 years of practice I have never been in this position and
feel completely devastated that this has
occurred. During the period 1999 and 2006 I was not working full-time due
to building and then selling another business".
Do you see that? A. Yes, I do.
Q. Now, that statement is not correct because in 2006 you were working
full-time in the practice, weren't you? A. Yes
T203-204 the Respondent would not concede that he had ‘a tax
problem’ after giving the following evidence:
Q. You gave evidence this morning about the cheques going missing to the
tax office. Do you remember that?
Q. Is it your recollection that there were four cheques that went
A. No. To the Taxation Department?
Q. Yes, just the Taxation Department?
A. The number four, from what Mr Woodward told me, that would be about
right. That's what I recall.
Q. They were payments for business activity statements? A.
Q. And you gave evidence this morning that the tax office hadn't received
those cheques?
Q. And that hence there was a debt that you owed to the taxation
A. There was.
Q. And that you had to enter into an instalment payment plan? A. I
T 209-211 the Respondent gave the following evidence regarding the additional
benefits paid for the four ‘item 615’
Q. To pick up an additional $800 isn't that something that you should
have realised or picked up in your review of the accounts of
A. I will answer the question first. If everything was normal,
Q. What wasn't normal?
A. I have stated in my statement that things weren't normal.
There was incidents of cheques, okay. We were moving. There was a lot
going on. The assumption or the insinuation
is that I processed this and this is what I disagree with. I have no
recollection of doing that.
Q. Dr Rutner, you could have done a daily reconciliation of the HICAPS,
couldn't you?
A. I don't do them.
Q. You could have done? A. I could have.
Q. And that would have enabled you to pick up the discrepancy with an
additional $800, wouldn't it?
A. Yes, but that wasn't my duty.
Q. Again in February and March 2006 you received about
$800, to which you were not entitled?
............
Q. And again that was an amount that you would have picked
up if you reviewed the daily HICAPS transactions? A. There was - I don't
have one so I couldn't have.
Q. Sorry, you don't have what?
A. I don't have the ones in January, sorry, in February and
March. Otherwise I would have given them to you, this is what
I am saying.
Q. They would have been produced back in February and March, wouldn't
they? The machine spits out a printout? A. Yes, sorry.
Q. And I'm asking you at that time you could have checked those daily
reconciliations and realised that you had received the additional
A. My answer to that is exactly the same as the other one.
Q. And it was the case that on 28 February you were the person who put
through the HICAPS transactions for patient A, weren't you?
Q. And the same on 15 March?
A. No. I don't agree definitely that I did it.
Q. The crowns in December, for which you received $800, you have agreed
that was an error and you weren't entitled to it?
Q. You haven't paid it back? A. Correct.
Q. Though as early as March 2007 you were informing the
Health Care Complaints Commission that was an error?
A. That's right. No-one has asked me to pay it back. They informed me
that there was going to be a series of
investigations and of course I would have paid it back. I state that in
my statement but no-one asked me to.
Q. And you never volunteered it? You never thought it was appropriate: I
have $800 that I wasn't entitled to; I will contact HCF
and say how do I get it
A. I was taking instructions from the legal team and also instructions
from HCCC and I never saw any piece of paper to ask me to
pay back. Of course I
would have.
Q. What I am asking you is you never volunteered to pay it back, did
A. I was never asked.
extensive evidence given by the Respondent (substantially found from T226
onwards) regarding the record keeping of his
practice in the period 2005 and
2006 painted an extremely disorganised and haphazard picture. While the exact
details are not recounted
herein, the Respondent described a manual method of
recording in a ‘day book’ payments made by patients, no systematic
manner of recording attendances, payments or item numbers for example. It did
not appear that there was any means of reconciling
the accounts of the practice
during this period. As a number of documents had been lost during the move of
the practice from Oxford
St to Waverley St, the Respondent reported that the BAS
statements (for taxation purposes) were done on the basis of deducting lab
expenses from the takings and then 40% going to the Respondent and 40% to Dr
Respondent gave evidence regarding the type of information that was recorded in
the day book and produced an example of a ‘day
book’ that was used.
The ‘day book’ produced was from the Waverley Street practice for
the year 2006.
the last occasion the Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal,
being 19 August 2009, he produced to the Tribunal a
cheque butt in the sum of
$1,600 drawn to the HCCC. The cheque butt produced was dated 26 March 2009. The
Respondent gave evidence
that he had forwarded the cheque under cover of a
letter which he could not produce to the Tribunal due to his computer having
three weeks ago’ (T339). At T 333 - 334 the Respondent gave
the following evidence:
MR GREGG: Q. Could I show you a photocopy of a document? Could you
identify what the document is?
A. The document is a photocopy of my cheque butts from Dr David
Rutner Dental Practice account.
Q. And the date on the cheque butt? A. 26/3/09.
Q. And the amount?
A. The amount is $1,600.
Q. And the notation on the cheque butt is? A. HCF
reimbursement.
Q. Did you cause a cheque in that sum to be sent to HCF on or about that
A. I felt I had to reimburse monies that I wasn't entitled to as a result
of a mistake that I believe has happened and I did that
so that that matter
would be cleared up.
MR GREGG: I tender the photocopied page. The original is available if
there is some issue about it being a copy.
cross-examination the Respondent agreed that he had written to the HCCC on 3
March 2007 indicating that the charging of item
615 to Patient A was an error
and that he ‘had no idea’ how or why the error had occurred and that
he realised by this
time that he was not entitled to those
13 March 2009, the Respondent gave evidence to the Tribunal that he had not paid
the money back to HCF as he ‘was never asked’
(T211). Under
cross-examination on 19 August 2009 the Respondent agreed that no one had
‘asked’ him to repay the money
March 2009 and
19 August 2009.
re-examined, the Respondent confirmed that he had not acted earlier to refund
the monies as he had understood from
his conversation with an
investigator from the HCCC that there was a
for the investigation and that at some stage he expected that he would be asked
to refund the monies.
the Respondent completed his evidence, the HCCC tendered a handwritten letter
from the Respondent to HCF dated 23 March 2009.
This letter was obtained by the
HCCC from HCF. The letter recorded that a cheque for the sum of $1600 was
enclosed by the Respondent
to HCF in relation to Patient A.
Submissions made by the HCCC
HCCC provided a written outline of submissions which is reproduced at
annexure C hereto.
HCCC written outline of submissions was supplemented by oral submissions and by
a written submission dated 12 October 2009. The
HCCC emphasised the following
evidence that the Complainant relies upon is the direct evidence by Patient A,
which has not been contradicted, that is
that the person when she attended the
dental surgery on the dates in December, February and then March, the person who
the HCF transaction, HICAPS transaction, was Dr
Other matters
in the nature of ‘circumstantial evidence’ would allow the
Tribunal ‘to draw the inference
that Dr Rutner undertook those
transactions and undertook those knowing that he had no entitlement to those
payments’. The
HCCC notes the denial of the Respondent in paragraph 25 of
exhibit R4 and the evidence given by the Respondent under cross- examination
(particularly T199.5-8 and 209.8-211.7).
The HCCC relied upon the principle in Palmer v
[2005] NSWCA 361.
inference that you will find proven to the standard as set out by the High
Court, is that Dr Rutner not only conducted
the HICAPS transactions but knew
that he was undertaking the transactions and that he was claiming refund of
monies that he wasn't
entitled to’.
gave evidence that the Respondent conducted the relevant transactions this is
not contradicted and is not inconsistent with
any other evidence. The
Respondent’s evidence was that he could not recall whether or not he had
undertaken the transactions
and none of the witnesses called by the Respondent
gave evidence directly on this matter.
There is no
reason or motive for Patient A to give the evidence that it was the Respondent
who processed her claim. It was never
put to Patient A in
cross-examination that another person had undertaken the HICAPS transactions.
Patient A’s evidence
was corroborated by some objective facts e.g.
Patient A stated that no gap was charged for the dental work conducted over
relevant period and that the usual way of paying a gap would be by credit card.
Patient A had checked her credit card payments
and there was no entry
at the relevant times for any gap payment paid to the Respondent. Patient A
also consistently gave
evidence that when the HICAPS transactions were
undertaken she was not given any documentation and in particular was not given
documentation to sign. That is supported by the one document relevant to
these transactions which was produced by the Respondent
(exhibit 20), being the
original HICAPS machine generated receipt for 5 December 2005 which does not
bear the signature of Patient
A as required by the HICAPS
made some concessions in her evidence with respect to matters such as the
time of day the appointments
occurred which the HCCC
submitted was indicative that she was not reconstructing, rather giving an
accurate account based on her current
memory of the events and that she did not
refuse to countenance that she might have been mistaken on some matters. Rather,
A made appropriate concessions that her recollection may not have been
100% correct or conceding that she could not now recollect
A’s evidence about who undertook the HCF transactions has been
consistent from when she raised the matter
initially with HCF and sought to
raise it personally with the Respondent and throughout her
complaints, her statements
and the evidence before the
A’s evidence that the reception area at the Oxford Street practice being
larger than that at the Waverley Street rooms
was supported by the evidence of
Dr Quill and Dr Sharma.
Patient A stated that the consultations in
2006 (being in
February and March) were in the Waverley Street rooms.
Respondent gave evidence that during February and March 2006 he only
worked out of the new rooms in Waverley Street on
Wednesdays, the inference
being that there would be no need for any notations to be written in the
appointment book as to where he
was working on any other day of the week if this
pattern was adhered to:
The only honest explanation I can give is that I know where I worked on what
days. In the early stages of moving there was some discussion
how many days I
was and how many days I wasn't going to. It was decided for the ease and
regularity of patients we would pick one
day. I cannot account for staff
putting old surgery on some and old surgery on another date. I don't have an
answer for that.
All I know is that a decision was made for me to work only on
a Wednesday. It would make it easier for everyone to understand that
appointment was made on Wednesday it would be at the new surgery. When I say the
new surgery, that's Waverley Street and the
old surgery would be Oxford Street.
That's all I can honestly say. I can't say any more.
Q. What I want to suggest to you, and do you agree with this, Dr Rutner, is
that it indicates that you did work at the old surgery
and the new surgery on
different days during
February and March and not restricted to the new surgery only on
Wednesdays?
A. I can't agree with that because I know what I did. I
worked on Wednesdays in the Waverley Street surgery to the best of my
gave evidence at the top of T 158 that the HICAPS terminal was portable and
could be taken between surgeries. Dr Rutner
denied that the terminal was taken
in between those surgeries. ‘The fact that it was conducted on the one
terminal and that
it was portable, in my submission is consistent with the
evidence of Patient A that she attended both
surgeries’.
clarified the evidence given in her statement under cross-examination,
‘her evidence was that though her visibility
was impeded at the new
surgery, she saw a hand action of swiping and that was sufficient to make or
allow her to draw the inference
in those circumstances that the machine was
being activated by Dr Rutner’.
The concern
raised by the Respondent regarding the inability of Patient A to recall details
of the work undertaken by the Other Dentist
as well as the dates on which the
work occurred is not of significance to the Tribunal. The HCCC submitted that it
was understandable
as Patient A was focussed on the difficulty she was
confronted with when HCF informed her that she had reached the limit of her
because of certain treatment by the Respondent. Patient A gave statements
and came to give evidence about the Particulars of Complaint.
Patient A was not
charged by the Other Dentist for work not done. She was not telephoning the
Other Dentist or contacting
him about four crowns that allegedly were placed
in her mouth and claimed against her health benefits. ‘In those
circumstances
not to have a clear recollection of "this was the sequence
treatment I received on these dates" et cetera in my submission is completely
understandable and that the Tribunal would not form any adverse finding as to
her credibility as a witness’.
‘Ultimately
my submission in respect of her evidence is that her evidence is uncontradicted
and that the Tribunal would accept
it, that it was the Respondent who undertook
those HICAPS transactions’.
115. The relevant section of
Palmer v Dolman
is set out in paragraphs
47 under the heading of ‘The standard of proof, in a civil case, where
fraud is sought to be inferred from circumstantial evidence’
33 It was common ground between Mr Grieve and Mr Harrison that the
standard of proof to be applied was that expressed by Menzies J
[1963] HCA 44
(1963) 110 CLR 234
at 252, namely:
“[Whether] there was sufficient evidence upon which the jury,
fulfilling their duty not to convict unless the inference
of guilt was
the only inference which they considered that they could rationally draw from
the circumstances, could have convicted
the applicant.
...The customary direction where circumstantial evidence is relied upon
to prove guilt, [is] that to enable a jury to bring in
a verdict of guilty it is
necessary not only that it should be a rational inference but the only rational
inference that the circumstances
would enable them to draw...”
34 Despite the agreement of counsel, however,
was a criminal
case and what was there said does not apply to this case.
35 The relevant principle in regard to civil cases was expressed by the
High Court in the case of
Bradshaw v McEwans Pty Ltd
(1951) 217 ALR 1
5, in a passage that has been repeated many times. The passage is:
Of course as far as logical consistency goes many hypotheses may be put which
the evidence does not exclude positively. But this is
a civil and not a criminal
case. We are concerned with probabilities, not with possibilities. The
difference between the criminal
standard of proof in its application to
circumstantial evidence and the civil is that in the former the facts must be
to exclude reasonable hypotheses consistent with innocence, while
the latter you need only circumstances raising a more probable
inference in
favour of what is alleged. In questions of this sort, where direct proof is not
available, it is enough if the circumstances
appearing in the evidence give rise
to a reasonable and definite inference: they must do more than give rise to
conflicting inferences
of equal degrees of probability so that the choice
between them is mere matter of conjecture: (see per Lord Robson,
Evans & Co Ltd v Astley
[1911] AC 674
, at 687). But if circumstances are
proved in which it is reasonable to find a balance of probabilities in favour of
the conclusion
sought then, though the conclusion may fall short of certainty, it is not to
be regarded as mere conjecture or surmise ...
36 This statement in
was adopted in
[1952] HCA 19
(1952) 85 CLR 352
Holloway v McFeeters
CLR 470 at 480 to 481;
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Girlock (Sales) Pty Ltd v Hurrell
(1982) 149 CLR
155 at 161 and 168.
Chamberlain v R (No 2)
[1984] HCA 7
(1984) 153 CLR 521
Mason J said at 536:
“When the evidence is circumstantial, the jury, whether in a civil or
in a criminal case, are required to draw an inference
from the circumstances of
the case; in a civil case the circumstances must raise a more probable inference
in favour of what is alleged
[1990] HCA 51
(1990) 171 CLR 207
Deane, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron
and McHugh JJ said at 211 that when a lesser standard of proof than beyond
reasonable doubt will suffice,
“the existence of other reasonable
hypotheses is simply a matter to be taken into account in determining whether
fact in issue should be inferred from the facts proved”.
39 On these authorities, it is sufficient in a civil case that the
circumstances raise a more probable inference in favour of what
is alleged. (See
Transport Industries Insurance Co Ltd v Longmuir
[1997] 1 VR
40 The standard of proof to be applied, together with a non- exhaustive
list of “matters” to be taken into account, are
now to be found in
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) which provides:
Civil proceedings: standard of proof
(1) In a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if
it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the
probabilities.
(2) Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in
deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:
(a) the nature of the cause of action or defence; and
(b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceedings; and
(c) the gravity of the matters alleged.”
Section 140(1)
is reflective of the law as stated in
Section 140(2)
provides for no new principle.
The approach, in a civil case, in determining whether circumstantial
evidence leads to an inference of fraud
principles have become well-established in determining, in a civil
case, whether circumstantial evidence leads
to an inference of fraud. The
following are presently pertinent:
(a) The jury must consider
“the weight which is to be given to the united force of all the
circumstances put together”
(per Lord Cairns in
Belhaven & Stenton
(1875) 1 App Cas 278
at 279 - quoted with approval by Gibbs CJ and
Chamberlain v R (No 2)
(b) The onus of proof is only to be applied at the final stage of the
reasoning process: “[i]t is erroneous to divide
the process into
stages and, at each stage, apply some particular standard of proof. To do so
destroys the integrity of [a] circumstantial
case” (per Winneke P in
Transport Industries Insurance Co Ltd v Longmuir
(c) The inference drawn from the proved facts must be weighed against
realistic possibilities as distinct from possibilities that
might be regarded as
(d) Where the competing possibilities are of equal likelihood, or the
choice between them can only be resolved by conjecture, the
allegation is not
42 Mr Harrison placed considerable reliance on the approach expressed in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
been quoted so many times, it is helpful to repeat Sir Owen Dixon‘s
statement at 361 to 362:
“Except upon criminal issues to be proved by the prosecution, it is
enough that the affirmative of an allegation is made out
to the reasonable
satisfaction of the tribunal. But reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind
that is attained or established
independently of the nature and consequence
of the fact or facts to be proved. The seriousness of an allegation made,
inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the
gravity of the consequences flowing
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to
the question whether the issue has been proved to
the reasonable
satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences.”
43 The question arises as to the authoritative weight that, today,
attaches to the observation that, where a serious allegation is
“reasonable satisfaction” should not be produced by “inexact
proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences”.
Dixon J at 365 to 367 expressly recognised that
adultery (the “serious allegation” in that case) might be proved by
“circumstantial
evidentiary facts” (see at 366). His Honour approved
Lord Buckmaster’s reference in
Ross v Ross
(1930) AC 1
proof of adultery as being “a matter of inference and circumstance”,
and accepted that the test for corroboration
of confessional material
depends on the “surrounding circumstances” (at 366). Later, in
, Dixon J observed at
242 (in a passage quoted in
Chamberlain v R (No 2)
CJ and Mason J at 536):
“I cannot think, however, that in a case where the prosecution is based
on circumstantial evidence any part of the circumstances
can be put on one side
as relating to motive only and therefore not to be weighed as part of the proofs
of what was done.”
45 It is worth repeating, I think, that in
Chamberlain v R (No 2)
536 Gibbs CJ and Mason J said that in a civil case “the
circumstances must raise a more probable inference in favour of what
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
67 ALJR 170
Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane and Gaudron JJ said at
“[T]he strength of the evidence necessary to establish a fact or facts
on the balance of probabilities may vary according to
the nature of what it is
sought to prove. Thus, authoritative statements have often been made to
the effect that clear
or cogent or strict proof is necessary
‘where so serious a matter as fraud is to be found’. Statements
to that effect should not, however, be understood as directed
to the standard of
proof. Rather,
they should be understood as merely reflecting a conventional perception that
members of our society do not ordinarily engage in fraudulent
or criminal
conduct and a judicial approach that a Court should not lightly make a finding
that, on the balance of probabilities,
a party to civil litigation has been
guilty of such conduct.”
47 The more recent authorities to which I have referred, and
Evidence Act
(1995) (NSW) make it plain that there are no hard and fast rules by
which serious allegations might be proved from circumstantial
evidence. The
inquiry is simply, taking due account of what was said in
Neat Holdings Pty
Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
, has the allegation been proved on a balance
of probabilities.
HCCC made written submissions at paragraph 22 to support the Tribunal making a
finding of professional misconduct against the
Respondent, that the Respondent
knowingly made claims for services not provided. Further submissions were made
orally as follows:
It is my submission that the Tribunal would not find that it was some
mistake. He had a motive for claiming the services not provided.
charged by the Respondent for the work. His use of the HICAPS transaction was
grossly negligent and, in addition, his
use of the HICAPS system was in
contradiction and in violation of his obligations under the HICAPS agreement
which he signed.
He gave a prior inconsistent explanation for the claims in February and
March. He didn't undertake any repayment for the overpayment
until after his
cross-examination on 13 March
and as one can see from the
handwritten explanation given in exhibit 26, his explanation now becomes on
page two of that document,
"I had previously neglected to refund this money
which was simply an oversight on my part", not his previous evidence of "well, I
was never asked to provide it or I had legal advice not to provide it "et
cetera. Now in the letter of 23 March
it suddenly
becomes it was simply an oversight on my behalf.
Those various factors, which in my submission are consistent with the
authorities the Tribunal will take into account globally, in
my submission the
inference that you would draw would be primarily that he knew he wasn't entitled
to the money or, as a secondary
submission, that his use and participation in
the HICAPS system was so grossly negligent that it is sufficient to satisfy a
requirement
or a definition of professional misconduct.
The issue of whether it was the Respondent who undertook the HICAPS
transaction, I have referred you to the evidence of patient A.
It is quite
clear from Dr Rutner's evidence that he was trained in
the use of the HICAPS machine and that he was able to use it himself and
that on occasions he did use the machine. According to his
evidence there were
only two people who could have performed the HICAPS transactions in question,
that is the Respondent and also
his receptionist practice manager,
It was quite clear from the evidence of dental nurse Ms Sharma that she
was not trained in the - she was not shown at Bondi Junction
how to do the
HICAPS transactions and this is transcript 214 at about point 4.
“Q. While you were employed at the practice were you shown how to do
HICAPS transactions?
A. Not in Bondi Junction. I was shown to do that in the
Darlinghurst practice but I never, like, I never used to do that
in Bondi Junction because I didn't know how to do that over there because
the machine is different. It all related to
computers and because I'm not very good with computers I
wasn't told how to do it at Bondi Junction.
Q. When you say Bondi Junction are you talking about Oxford
Street and Waverley Street? A. That's right, yes".
So we are looking at the Respondent or ****. The uncontradicted evidence
of Patient A was that it was the Respondent.
Now, turning to ****, the important first thing to remember about **** is
that the Tribunal has not heard from her. She has not been
called by the
Respondent to give evidence. In my submission that would allow the Tribunal to
make a Jones v Dunkel conclusion about
the evidence **** would have given if
called, that is that that evidence would not assist the Respondent in defending
the complaint
against him.
**** was not raised by name in the correspondence sent by the Respondent
to the Commission on about 3 March, that is exhibit
14, that I took the
Respondent to this morning. There are references in this letter to an internal
problem with cheques going missing.
"The significance of this is during the early nineties the practice
was the victim of staff fraud on a large scale. The
similarities of that
situation and the present are overwhelming. I was working long hours and after
hours with the accountant to
resolve the issue. With all of this going on a
continual rotation in staff and moving into the new surgery. I did not move in
until March 2007. The practice was not as it should have been in terms of
efficiency".
There is no reference in this letter to ****. There is really no
allegation that she was the one that supposedly undertook these
transactions.
The important thing to note about some of these comments in this letter is that
there has never been any allegation
by Dr Quill or anybody that **** indulged in
any form of fraud at the practice.
The allegations against her appear never to have been put to her. She was
a person or a witness who was in the camp of the Respondent.
She only emerged
once statements were served by Dr Quill and Ms Sharma. If she was the
particular person that it is the Respondent's
submission was the person who
conducted the transaction, she is the witness in their camp and they should have
called her. They
have not done so. Again there is no evidence that she
performed the particular HICAPS transactions on the particular day. It was
never put to Patient A that it was her or somebody else who did the transactions
on that particular day.
HCCC also submitted that part of exhibit 23, being a
‘Lewis’ accounting system pay slip for **** records
that it was
likely she was on holidays on at least one of the relevant occasions. The HCCC
submitted that the ‘Lewis’
system usually records wages being paid
in arrears and reflects a pay period of Friday to Friday. The HCCC submitted
that the inference
that could be drawn from the records was that **** was on
holidays for the week of 20 to 24 February 2006 and for two days during
following week (given the record of holiday pay). The HCCC invited the Tribunal
to infer that the two days **** was likely
to have as holidays were 27
and 28 February, returning to work on 1 March as the Respondent was
unable to produce
any records that would more accurately identify the actual
dates of the leave and that it was the usual practice to take holidays
block of time. If the Tribunal accepted that inference then it would flow that
**** was on holidays on 28 February and therefore
was not available to process
HCCC also noted in its submission that there was no actual allegation
regarding any fraudulent behaviour on the part
of ****. Rather, it was by way of
innuendoes made in the evidence of Dr Quill and Dr Sharma and when probed it
appears it was an
‘inadvertent mistake, innocently done and dealt with
appropriately’.
HCCC also made submissions regarding another explanation put forward by the
Respondent that the HICAPS machine was
malfunctioning. Oral
submissions continued as follows:
My submission as to that is that there is no evidence that the machine was
malfunctioning in such a way that it would claim on 15
December, 28 February and then 13 March for work that was not conducted
and in particular work in the way of crowns.
HCCC made detailed submissions about the nature of the claims made on the three
occasions. It is not a matter of an item 615 being
substituted for another item
of service that had in fact been performed (on that occasion or being billed for
on that occasion) and
entered into the machine and the machine malfunctioning
and transforming the claim into a claim for item 615. Leaving to one
issue regarding precisely what was the appropriate code for one service (531 or
533) all items of service performed were
entered into the HICAPS system
accurately apart from the four additional claims for items 615.
121. Mr Butler gave evidence at T157 as follows:
If there is a swipe of the card and the card can't be read, the machine
can't go any further. You actually don't get to key in any
information. If it
was a keying like a faulty number on the key pad it would usually affect one
HCCC did not accept the Respondent’s submission that the
Complainant in some way had a responsibility or an onus
to discount this
hypothesis The HCCC submission in this regard was as follows:
It is translating these proceedings to a criminal proceedings where a
prosecutor may have that role. That's not the case here. As
I referred the
Tribunal to, in civil matters it's a matter of looking at the various inferences
that can be drawn from the facts
and then the Tribunal determining whether on
the balance of probabilities the particular inference that the Complainant has
put forward
has been proved to the requisite standard.
HCCC submitted that the ‘
mistake wasn't an aberration that
occurred on one occasion, it occurred on three occasions’
‘The other fact which supports that it was not a
mistake is the actual money and reimbursement gained by Dr Rutner. Overall
was a benefit of $1,600’.
In the circumstances detailed by the HCCC,
i.e. relatively small amounts of benefits received for work actually performed
by the Respondent
and the financial pressures the Respondent agreed he was under
to increase his contribution to the practice partnership the HCCC
submitted that
the Tribunal would find that the Respondent had a motive in participating in
this conduct.
respect to Patient A not being asked to pay a gap on each occasion, the HCCC
made the following submission:
The other factor that I would ask you to take into account is that
gap was paid by patient A. The evidence in the Respondent's statement was
that there were occasions when he would not gap, primarily
where it was
preventive type work and with some health funds they would only charge the gap
or charge the client the gap, and that
he made that a practice across all his
The difficulty is some work was preventative that patient A received but
there was other work that definitely was not preventative.
Her expectation was
that a gap would be charged because in the past a gap had been charged, and she
gave evidence of checking her
credit card statements to determine whether any
gap was charged and it was the case that it wasn't. The evidence dealing with
non-payment of the gap is at page 197 of the transcript.
I had taken the Respondent to the HCF transaction search result at tab 9,
which looks at an entry for 15 December, which dealt with
the item 533. He
admits that that was not preventative work and then further down:
"Q. Was it your intention for her to pay the gap for the work? A. It may have
Then I asked:
"Q. It is consistent, isn't it, with the practice you have set out in your
A. In my statement there were some patients who were fund
only and some were not. I can't remember on the day if I just signed it yes
Q. You gave evidence, Dr Rutner, didn't you that your practice was
that preventative treatment would be fund paid?
A. That is correct.
Q. And that, if I could call it treatment such as fillings, the gap would be
respect to the issue of gross negligence, the HCCC submissions included the
The next matter is that I would submit that the Tribunal would find the
Respondent's use of the HICAPS system to be grossly
negligent. That
submission relies on several aspects of the evidence. The first part is his
evidence on how the person, if we
assume that the HICAPS transaction is being
done by another party, by the receptionist, how he communicated with that
the item numbers. Dr Quill's evidence is that his observations when they
worked at the same surgery was that it was a
verbal instruction.
The Respondent's evidence was different. His
evidence was that primarily the communication occurred by handing
the patient the patient record and that the receptionist
could then have a
glossary on the desk and it would be up to her discretion, her reading of the
patient records, comparing them with
the glossary and then making a decision of
which item numbers to use. At times there might have been a verbal instruction
specific item numbers.
Evidence of what would be a proper system was given by Dr Burns and Dr
Burns was quite adamant that the decision as to what item numbers
entered into the HICAPS terminal was his decision and his decision
He spoke about the computer system that he had in his surgery which
allowed him to relay that information to the person who may actually
HICAPS transaction, but it was not the case here where another person, a
non-dentist, the person who didn't conduct the work,
in a sense had a discretion
to read notes, look at glossaries and make a determination of item
numbers to be entered.
Combined with that, is the lack of any - I was going to use the term
rigorous system - but I submit that there was really no system
of appropriate
checking of what item numbers were used and what item numbers were
appropriate.
At paragraph 58 of my submissions I have an extract from the transcript.
That appears at page 181. It is important, in my submission,
that that is read
as a whole to indicate the lack of system.
"Q. The period December 2005 to 13 March 2006, during that period did you
have a practice of undertaking daily reconciliations of
HICAPS transactions?
A. I believe we did.
Q. Who did that? A. Not me.
Q. Who did it?
A. I would assume the receptionist.
Q. But you don't know?
A. I'd say the receptionist.
Q. You are using words "I assume" and "I'd say". Was there a practice in a
place that the receptionist did that?
Q. Did you check it?
A. Sometimes I checked it and sometimes Brendan checked it.
Q. The HICAPS at the old surgery, that would have been your responsibility
to check it, wouldn't it?
A. Yes, it would have been.
Q. Did you check it on a daily basis? A. No.
Q. When did you check it if you did check it?
A. It might have been - there was no regularity to it, so I can't say every
day once a day. There was no regularity to it".
HCCC submitted that the evidence of Mr Butler and Dr Burns would satisfy the
Tribunal that the HICAPS system allowed for the checking
of records via the
internet and that regular HICAPS statements were mailed out to
practitioners. These provided the means
and opportunity for appropriate
checking to occur. When consideration is made of the combination of the
discretion placed on the
receptionist and the lack of checking the Tribunal
would make a finding of gross negligence in the use of the
HCCC supported this submission by the evidence of non-compliance
by the Respondent of his obligations under the
HICAPS agreements. The
Respondent could not answer a question during cross-examination as to
whether he complied with
his obligations under the HICAPS agreement that
he signed (exhibit 20). Specifically the Respondent admitted that he had not
the invoices signed by the patient or kept appropriate
HCCC noted that the evidence revealed that a couple of months after the
February and March 2006 transactions no
HICAPS documents for the
transactions that occurred during that period could be located. The HCCC
submissions in this regard pointed
particularly to the cross-examination of the
Respondent commencing at T295.6:
Q. After being notified in October 2006 of this issue that had
Q. --did you search for any of the HICAPS receipts for 28
A. We searched for everything.
Q. No, when did you search for it?
A. Within days of finding out from Mr Maher what was going on.
Q. So that would have been around October-November
A. Yeah, I suppose so, yes. I don't know.
Q. At that stage you couldn't find any of the HICAPS
transaction receipts? A. No.
Q. Except for exhibit 20? A. That's correct.
Q. You were under an obligation, weren't you, to keep those
HICAPS receipts for a period of time?
Q. What period of time were you required to keep them for? A. I don't -
I don't know. I don't know.
Q. If I say to you on your HICAPS agreement that you entered into you
would keep them for 24 months?
A. If that's what it says, that's what it says.
Q. So the records from 28 February 2006 in
October-November 2006 you haven't kept them per your obligations
A. I have explained that we couldn't find it and that's what I'm
129. The HCCC submission continued:
My friend has foreshadowed that he will take the Tribunal to a judgment of
the Court of the Appeal that I referred to in my submissions,
Pillai v Messiter
15 NSWLR 197
, the section that I relied on appears at page 200 of the
judgment of his Honour, the President, Justice Kirby, where his Honour refers
misconduct meaning more than mere negligence and the passage reads:
"The words used in the statutory test of misconduct in a professional respect
plainly go beyond that negligence which would found
a claim against a medical
practitioner for damages. On the other hand gross negligence might amount
to relative misconduct particularly
if accompanied by indifference to
or a lack of concern for the welfare of the patient, departures from elementary
and generally
accepted standards of which a medical practitioner could scarcely
be heard to say that he or she was ignorant, could amount to such
professional
misconduct, but the statutory test is not met by mere professional incompetence
or deficiencies in the practice of the
profession. Something more is required.
It includes a deliberate departure from accepted standards or
such serious negligence as although not deliberate to portray indifference
and abuse of the privilege which accompany registration
as a medical
practitioner”.
Although a case dealing with obviously a medical practitioner, in my
submission those observations are applicable here and that when
one looks at the
participation in the HICAPS scheme is one in which the practitioner has to sign
an agreement, undertakes to comply
with obligations and responsibilities under
that scheme, has repercussions for the scheme overall and also for the
HCCC drew the Tribunal’s attention to the section of exhibit 14 (being a
letter from the Respondent to the HCCC, at page
2) dealing with the two uses of
item 615 in February 2006 wherein no reference to **** is made and he stated
I can only suggest that due to a need for a new restoration to be made
it was used twice. This was not deliberate but rather an unfortunate
. The HCCC submitted that:
....the Tribunal would read that as the respondent saying one use of 615
was okay. What the difficulty was, was the second use of
615 and that's not the case. The work being performed on that occasion
was not a 615. I think it was either a 533 or Dr Burns'
evidence was that it
was a 533. In my submission that is an inconsistent statement and explanation
that he has given subsequently
to this Tribunal, though I should note that I put
that proposition to the Respondent in his evidence at page 206 at about point 3
of the transcript and he did not agree with the proposition I put to
Even though there was no concession by the Respondent, my submission is
that the Tribunal can still look at that section of the letter
and adopt the
submission that I have made.
131. The HCCC also made submissions relating to the repayment of the
$1,600 by the Respondent to the HCF part way through the hearing. It is
quite clear that it is October 2006 when the Respondent is
informed that Patient
A has raised the issue with HCF. No attempt is made at that stage to offer or
make a repayment. The Commission
became involved in 2006. Again, no
effort or offer to make a repayment followed although there is a clear
acknowledgement,
especially in that letter of March 2007, of
entitled to those payments’.
cross-examined on 13 March 2009 as to why the repayment had not been made
earlier, the Respondent relied on either instructions
he received from his legal
advisers or "I wasn't invited to make the repayment". However on 19 August
2009 the Respondent
gave evidence that he had made repayment shortly after he
gave evidence
in March 2009 and that he was unable to provide a copy
of the letter that accompanied the cheque to the HCF as his computer
‘crashed’ some weeks earlier. Later that day the HCCC obtained a
copy of a handwritten letter from the Respondent addressed
to the HCF enclosing
a cheque where a ‘new explanation’ for the late repayment was
provided. The HCCC submission continued:
In my submission the rushed payment after the cross-examination on 13
March was the proposition I put to the Respondent this morning
that he disagreed
with, that is, it was a realisation that it was inconsistent with his
defence that he was putting to
the Tribunal and he had better put it right
and that is the submission that I would ask the Tribunal to accept, that
fact of the non-repayment of the money until this last stage reveals the
complicity and the knowledge that the Respondent participated
transactions that are before the Tribunal.
133. By way of a summary, the HCCC made the following submission:
My overall submission is the Tribunal will find deliberate conduct with
knowledge. If the Tribunal finds that, it is professional
misconduct. If
the Tribunal is against me on that, the circumstances and in
particular the gross negligence,
in my submission, is sufficient for it to come
within the concept of professional misconduct as described by the President in
judgment that I have just referred you to
Pillai v Messiter
finding with respect to
‘deliberate conduct with knowledge’
being based on circumstantial evidence in accordance with the principles in
Palmer v Dolman
there being no direct evidence of a mental element. The
gross negligence submission made by the HCCC relies on
‘the lack of
system, checking et cetera, and the breach of the obligations under the
HICAPS agreement by the
Respondent’
circumstances of ‘gross negligence’ to the point of professional
misconduct (
Pillai v Messiter
The Respondent’s Submissions
Respondent provided a written outline of submissions which is annexed hereto and
marked with the letter D and the Tribunal has
considered the entirety thereof.
As mentioned above, the Respondent made a written submission on 13 October 2009
in response to the
HCCC’s submission of 12 October 2009.
Respondent’s oral submissions significantly supplemented the
written submissions and commenced with extensive
comments regarding
the standard of proof required (commencing at T 375). The
adopted the statement made in the Physiotherapists Tribunal decision in the
HCCC v Margiotta
[2007] NSWPYT 1
(at [19]) regarding the
standard to be applied in protective jurisdictions:
The standard of proof required to establish this Complaint is the civil
standard, however it is well settled that
seriousness of the allegations and the gravity of their consequences, the
Tribunal is required to be comfortably satisfied
that the Complaints have been
established.
extensive quote from
is set out in the Respondent’s
written submissions. The Respondent emphasised the following passage of the
decision of Dixon
It means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process by
which reasonable satisfaction is attained.
particular the Respondent submitted that the evidence relied upon by the HCCC
fell into the categories described by Dixon J as
In such matters reasonable satisfactions should not be reduced by inexact
proofs, indefinite testimony or indirect inferences.
the Respondent made written submissions with respect to the evidential burden,
the submission elaborated as follows:
The evidential burden is relevant because the evidential burden remains
with the Complainant throughout. It is not for the Respondent.
The Respondent
bears no evidential burden in that sense. For instance, there is a Jones v
Dunkel submission been made about ****
not being called. The same submission
could be made that the HCCC didn't call her. There is a submission
the Respondent has not demonstrated that the machine was
malfunctioning. It is not the Respondent's burden to lead affirmative evidence
that the machine was malfunctioning.
In my submission a burden rests throughout with the Complainant that if
there is evidence which gives rise to inferences that the
machine may have
malfunctioned and then in the absence of the Complainant disproving that, then
that's something you are entitled
to take into account, along with everything
else, along with what are the probabilities that this dentist committed dental
for $1600. You weigh that up with all these other factors, such as well
where is a possibility that this machine malfunctioned.
respect to the statutory test of unsatisfactory professional conduct, the
Respondent submitted that several of the subsections
the Act did
not apply to the factual circumstances. With respect to subsections (a) and (h)
the Respondent made the following submissions:
41(a) Any conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment
possessed or care exercised by a dentist in the practice
of dentistry is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected
of a dentist of an equivalent level of training or experience, so
that’s care exercised in the practice of dentistry.
That's not defined I don't believe. Is operating the HICAPS
machine either personally or by an employee, the practice of
dentistry and is it
below the standard reasonably expected of a dentist of an equivalent level of
training or experience? Not a
lot of assistance there.
(h) Any other improper or unethical conduct by a dentist in the course of
the practice or purported practice of dentistry.
What one apprehends there is not mere carelessness. That must be
requiring, by the use of the words improper or unethical conduct,
a conscious
wrongdoing on the behalf of the dentist. Improper or unethical conduct would
cover deliberate financial impropriety,
perhaps sexual misconduct with a
patient, various other matters ....
Respondent made further submissions that there may be a third category of
matters where the conduct falls short of professional
misconduct and
unsatisfactory professional conduct by virtue of the provisions of
Respondent pointed to the conjunctive wording of the complaint, emphasising that
the Complaint i.e. (i) and (ii) of the Complaint
must be established as
illustrated below:
(i) engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge or judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the dentist in the practice
of dentistry was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a dentist of an
equivalent level of training or experience,
(ii) engaged in other improper and unethical conduct in the course of the
practice or purported practice of dentistry.
Tribunal notes as an aside at this point that the usual practice in this
Respondent submitted, contrary to the submissions made by the
HCCC, that:
The same acts and circumstances can't be dental fraud with a mental
element of conscious wrongdoing and also be grossly negligent
such as to amount
to professional misconduct.
the Respondent submitted that dental fraud, improper and unethical conduct
cannot be committed by inadvertence or mistake.
There is a mental element in the ordinary English usage of the words
‘improper and unethical conduct’. Similarly, a machine
malfunction can't amount to improper or unethical conduct
Respondent referred to the headnote in
Pillai v Messiter
which reads as
follows (emphasis added by Counsel for the Respondent):
"The statutory test of misconduct in a professional respect was not met by
mere professional incompetence, nor by deficiencies in
the practice of the
profession, that more is required and that such misconduct included a
departure from accepted standards or such serious
negligence as although not deliberate would portray indifference and an abuse
the privileges which accompany registration as a medical
practitioner.
Respondent then made the following submission to clarify how the circumstances
that would fall into the ‘serious negligence’
category by virtue of
‘indifference’ and submitted that ‘indifference’ and
‘reckless indifference’
were ‘really the same thing’ as
One might use the concept of reckless indifference perhaps to the
consequences of one's gross negligence so that in a clinical context
might use the inappropriate amount of a local anaesthetic, just to take an
example off the top of my head, that was clearly
either inadequate or grossly
too much. The dentist in question didn't deliberately do it, but it
amounted to gross negligence
because the dentist was so reckless about what
he was doing that he actually didn't direct his mind to it and didn't direct his
to the possible consequences for the patient. That's the sort of thing
that I would submit would be required for gross negligence
to amount to
misconduct.
There is a mental element in it and it is a different kind of mental
element. It is almost a reckless indifference. That concept
of reckless
indifference isn't used by the Court of Appeal in this case.
148. The Respondent referred to a further passage in
Pillai v Messiter
which quotes from an entry in
Corpus Juris Secundum
(1948) at 818:
Both in law and in ordinary speech the term misconduct usually implies an
act willfully and with the wrong intention and conveys the
idea of intentional
wrongdoing. It implies fault beyond error of judgment, a wrongful intention and
not a mere error of judgment,
but it does not necessarily imply corruption or
criminal intention....
Respondent submitted that the principles in the American case of
Mills Inc v Board of Review, Division of Employment Security, Department of
Labor and Industry
128 A 2d 20
(1956) referred to by Kirby P later in the
decision in
Pillai v Messiter
were applicable to the interpretation of
misconduct before this Tribunal. The part of the decision referred to by Kirby P
In that case, the New Jersey Superior Court held that "misconduct" does
not mean mere mistakes, errors in judgment or the exercise
of discretion or
minor but casual or unintentional carelessness or negligence. It did not mean
mere inefficiency, unsatisfactory
conduct, failure of performance as a result of
inability or incapacity, inadvertent in isolated instances, or errors of
which were not made in bad faith, or some other ingredient. Numerous
other recent cases are cited to support this proposition but
in the United
States “misconduct” generally means wrongful, improper
or unlawful conduct motivated by premeditated
or intentional purpose or by
obstinate indifference to the consequences of one's acts. Similar approaches to
the meaning of the word
“misconduct” have been taken in Australia
outside the context of professional discipline: see, eg
Palmer (No 1)
(1959) 1 FLR 397.
The primary dictionary meaning confirmed that
this is also the way misconduct is used in every day speech.
Respondent’s submissions continued by setting out further extracts
Pillai v Messiter
and making references to the current matter as
Then under the heading ‘The purpose of discipline is protection of
the public’ this really is the guiding principle.
Kirby says:
In giving meaning to the phrase misconduct in a professional respect, in
the context in which it appears it must be kept in mind that
the consequence of
an affirmative finding is drastic for the practitioner and the purpose of
providing such a drastic consequence
is not punishment of the practitioner as
such but protection of the public.
He doesn't say so but that sort of notion, "the drastic for
practitioner" harks back and echoes back to Briginshaw
Briginshaw which was adopted in Margiotta and then at about 8 or
10 lines from the bottom his Honour says:
They do not warrant the conclusion that the act provides such a drastic
consequence for carelessness on the part of the practitioner,
as here in failing
to notice the mistake made in the prescription of Dilantin which lead to the
death of his patient Ms McLeod.
Just pausing there,
was a much more
serious case than this case before the Tribunal involving $1600. In that case
the doctor misprescribed the drug
which led to the death of the patient and the
judge goes on:
The error of transcription by the appellant is accepted. It must be put to
one side as being a terribly unfortunate mistake but nonetheless
an accidental
one which could occur in a busy professional practice without misconduct, but
then all that remains is the complaint
that the appellant did not notice his
error before it was too late.
The judge goes on to say:
Yet that cannot amount to misconduct in a professional respect to
sustain the order made by the Tribunal.
This was an appeal from a Medical Tribunal. If you then turn to page 202
under the heading "conclusion”, the facts do not
support misconduct", in
my submission these principles will also be of assistance to you in grappling
with this case. Kirby J says:
No purpose would be served to achieve the objective of the statute of
protecting the public to remove the appellant from the register
to prevent an
error of transcription of medical dosage. Clearly that was an isolated error.
How it happened was convincingly explained
in the circumstances. It was such as
might happen even to a careful practitioner. Nor is any point served in the
protection of
the public to discipline the appellant by removing his name from
the register for failing to notice that which so many others likewise
...........
It is simply to acknowledge that mistakes can happen to the most
conscientious professional person. In evaluating whether
mistakes amount to "’misconduct in a professional respect" it is
necessary to demonstrate something more than mere
negligence by the civil
standard. It is that additional component which was missing in this case.
was further submitted by the Respondent that the remarks made by Samuels J in
the same matter (at page 210) provide guidance as
to how professional misconduct
is to be characterised:
However I do not think the Tribunal made any such
endeavour. Indeed its judgment is remarkable. The omission of
reference to the principles which regulate the translation of
professional negligence in a professional misconduct
or misconduct in a
professional respect, it seems as if the Tribunal treated the matter as if it
were an action for professional
negligence rather than a charge of misconduct.
The Tribunal found that the appellant's conduct demonstrated a gross departure
the standard and care and competence of a medical practitioner.
However it is not every departure, even if gross, from
standards which amounts to misconduct. In the absence of the necessary
evidence no such inference can be made.
Respondent submitted on 13 October 2009 that the complaint must be understood to
involve allegations of deliberate overcharging
and that ‘misconduct’
must be something more than mere negligence.
Respondent agreed with the HCCC submission that the central principle in
Palmer v Dolman
which is applicable is found in paragraph
thereof. The Respondent further submitted that regard should also be made to the
comments in paragraph 35 (emphasis added by counsel)
as there is no direct proof
that the Respondent deliberately made false claims:
The relevant principle in regard to civil cases was expressed by the High
. Of course as far as logical consistency goes many
hypotheses may be put which the evidence doesn't exclude positively but this
a civil and not a criminal case. We are concerned with probabilities not with
possibilities. The difference between the criminal
standard of proof and its
application is circumstantial evidence and the civil is the form of the facts
must be such as to exclude
reasonable hypotheses consistent with innocence,
while the latter in any circumstances raising a more probable inference in
of what is alleged.
In questions of this sort where
proof is not available
, it is enough if the circumstances appearing in the
evidence give rise to a reasonable and definite inference. They must
more than give rise to conflicting inferences of equal degrees of probability so
that the choice between them is a mere matter
of conjecture
154. The Respondent submitted that
Palmer v Dolman
would guide the
Tribunal to accept that the evidence must be such that there is an
actual persuasion of the mind of the Tribunal that misconduct had occurred
before such a finding could be made. In a civil matter,
the jury (i.e. the
Tribunal) in determining whether circumstantial evidence leads to the inference
of fraud, the Respondent referred
the Tribunal to the following passage of
Palmer v Dolman
a) The jury must consider the weight which is to be given for
the united faults of all the circumstances put together.
(b) Where the competing possibilities are of equal likelihood or the
choice between them can only resile by conjecture the allegation
(c) The inference drawn from the proved facts must be weighed against
realistic possibilities as regard from distinct possibilities
which might be
regarded as fanciful.
addition to paragraphs 10 to 12 inclusive of the Respondent’s written
submission the Respondent said in oral submissions
that there had clearly been
‘a misunderstanding, innocent or deliberate’ on the part of Mr Maher
with respect to his
recounting of the conversation he had with the Respondent on
27 October 2006 as recorded in his statement. The Respondent gave evidence
Mr Westwood had started working for the practice in 2005. The Respondent also
gave evidence that **** was employed by the Practice
until some time in 2006. At
this point the Tribunal notes Mr Westwood’s evidence was that the
discovery of the ‘missing
cheques’ in the Oxford Street practice had
occurred in the second half of 2005 although his earlier evidence was that he
worked for the practice during 2006. There was evidence from both the
Respondent and Dr Quill that the Oxford Street practice was
vacated by some time
around the second quarter of 2006.
Respondent noted in submissions that a letter had been forwarded to HCF on 3
March 2007 indicating that Mr Maher had misunderstood
him. The Respondent
concluded the written submission by indicating that Mr Maher’s evidence
in this regard is not relevant
to the substantive issues before the
Tribunal and his oral submission by stating:
Mr Maher would no doubt like to influence the minds of the Tribunal by
insinuating that Dr Rutner had told him that he had a tax problem
and presumably
that would give rise to some inference that he had financial difficulties that
would provide the missing motive the
Complainant is scratching around to find as
to why he would make false claims upon HCF for
$1600. You would put those matters out of your mind because
they are unable to be sustained.
Respondent submitted that the Tribunal should exercise considerable
caution when relying upon the evidence of Patient
A. The Respondent continued
submissions as follows:
One got the feeling that [Patient A] was revelling in the
attention of being in the limelight of giving evidence in these
proceedings and
was very much enjoying herself. She was not an impressive witness in a number
of respects and in a number of respects
the Tribunal would not feel confident in
acting upon her uncorroborated evidence.
sub-paragraphs 13 (i) – (iv), paragraphs 14 and 15 of the
Respondent’s written submissions, the Respondent
took the Tribunal to
areas where the evidence of Patient A was unreliable and provided further
details in oral submissions. The Respondent
noted that the Waverley Street
Appointment Book (exhibit R8 - which had been produced to the Tribunal after
written submissions had
been prepared) contained no record of Patient A having
attended the Waverley Street surgery during the period 7 November 2005 to
March 2006. However, Patient A had given evidence that she had attended the
Waverley Street surgery for her February 2006 appointment.
159. The Respondent submitted that the evidence of Mr Butler
‘demonstrated that all transactions were made on the same
, meaning HICAPS terminal and that this was
‘inconsistent with
[Patient A’s]
evidence that she was
treated by Dr Rutner and charged at both practices’,
meaning the
Oxford Street surgery and the Waverley Street surgery. Dr Quill gave evidence
that each of the surgeries (i.e. the Oxford
Street surgery and the Waverley
Street surgery) had its own HICAPS terminal. The Respondent submitted:
There was clearly two terminals, different numbers, different codes and
the notion which has been floated today that it was a portable
terminal and
you should somehow infer that Dr Rutner treated [Patient A] down at Oxford
Street and then tucked the terminal
under his arm and trotted up to Waverley
Street and treated her up there and used the HICAPS terminal up at Waverley
Street, that
he brought up from Oxford Street. Presumably that is what is
intended that you consider. It is just not tenable and indeed the
documents and the like all make it clear that all the billing was done from the
one terminal.
Respondent submitted that Patient A was wrong when she gave evidence that the
hood of the desk at the Waverley Street Practice
location was higher that at the
Oxford Street surgery. Patient A had offered this observation as an explanation
as to why she was
to have a clear view of the actual
swiping of her HCF card through the HICAPS machine at the Waverley Street
practice. The Respondent
submitted that the evidence of Dr Quill established
that the hood of the Oxford Street practice was in fact larger than the Waverley
Street practice. The Respondent further noted that this was a matter on which
Patient A did not make any concession; rather she adhered
to the version given
in her statutory declaration.
161. The Respondent then referred to the following evidence given
Q. Do you recall what time the appointment was on the 15th?
A. It would have been at 1500 or 1600. I would have assumed it
would have been 1600.
Q. But you don't have an actual recollection of that, do you? A. I'm 99
percent sure it was 1600.
Respondent then submitted that as this evidence was demonstrated
to be ‘wrong’ this indicates
that little weight can be
placed on her evidence. The submission continued:
This was not a witness who was happy to say: Look, I really don't
remember that. [Patient A] wanted to be certain about everything.
She was very
reluctant to make concessions. She did make some concessions after I had to
spend a long time cross-examining her but
by and large she wanted to convey to
this Tribunal that you should accept everything she said at face value.
respect, you can't. This is yet another example.
A careful witness in whom a Tribunal or judge can repose some confidence
would have said at this point well, I think it was about
4 o'clock but I
wouldn't swear to it. I'm not 100 percent sure, but she puts forward she is 99
percent sure.
submission then recounts that Patient A was asked by the Chairperson if
she had accessed her electronic diary. Patient
A stated she had done so in the
week prior to the hearing with respect to December 2005 and she confirmed her
evidence with respect
to the time of the 15 December 2005
appointment.
submission omits to mention that Patient A was asked to produce a copy of her
electronic diary (exhibit R7) for December 2005
and that it indicated that the
appointment was recorded as occurring at 7.00am. The Respondent
The importance of that passage of evidence is a week before this witness
had looked at exhibit R7, just one week before and seen or
not seen, because she didn't want to see, that the appointment on
15 December was at 7 a.m. This is her document, her diary. A
week later she tells you at page 44 she is 99 percent sure the
appointment was at 1600 hours. It is not only incorrect, it indicates she
is either careless or reckless in the manner in which she
her testimony generally to this Tribunal because if she was a
careful prudent witness she would have been a careful prudent
witness about all matters. If she was a reckless witness who was
indifferent as to whether she was conveying an accurate testimony
to you or not, she would have been careful throughout. She was reckless
throughout. She demonstrated her unreliability for you to
repose any confidence in her by that passage alone.
It is not as though she was relying upon her recollection from December
2005. She was relying upon her recollection from the week
before in March 2009
and she still got it wrong. Now, it is quite bizarre that she got in wrong in
one sense. How could she have
looked at it and sworn that it was 4 o'clock in
the afternoon when her own diary said it was 7 a.m. Whatever the answer is - I
suggest she was deliberately lying but I suggest you can have no
confidence in her testimony.
165. The Respondent submitted that Patient A gave evidence (T
...... with reckless indifference as to whether the actual matters set out
in it were true or not true, didn't even bother to check
her own diary and it
was only through laborious cross-examination of her that the issue of the
diaries arose and the Chairperson
asked her to bring the diaries and we were in
fact able to demonstrate that both her oral testimony and her written testimony
incorrect. It could have all been clarified but wasn't. Again this is
not a witness you can place any store in. This is not a
witness of credit.
This is not a witness whom you can prefer to Dr Rutner.
page 394 and 395 of the Transcript, the Respondent made submissions
regarding the ‘discrepancy’ between the
evidence of Patient A in the
statutory declaration (exhibit 3.3) and her statement (exhibit 3.11) with
respect to the issue of whether
Patient A actually saw the Respondent physically
swiping the health fund card and her description of the machine as an EFTPOS
rather than a HICAPS machine. The Respondent referred to the following
passage of evidence as supporting the submission that the
Tribunal ‘must
exercise great caution at the very least’ with respect to Patient
A’s evidence:
Q. Do you not concede the two are fundamentally inconsistent?
A. The stat dec is wrong because it was not an EFTPOS
Q. The stat dec is wrong because you didn't see the EFTPOS
machine. You now know it to be a HICAPS machine. That is wrong because
you didn't see the machine, did you?
Q. It is wrong because you didn't see him swipe anything, did you? You
have made an inference?
A. Yes I have.
Q. Why did you not correct the stat dec that Mr Maher drafted and
presented to you before you signed it was true and correct?
A. Because my idea of it being swiped is different to what you
Respondent submitted that Patient A’s inability to recall details as to
sequencing of the dental work performed by the Other
Dentist indicated she was
not a credible witness. The following exchange that occurred during
cross-examination was referred to as
illustrating that although she claimed to
have prepared herself to give evidence she was incorrect about a number of
matters and
was unable to substantiate others:
Q. You say in paragraph 11,
[Patient A]
, you visited
some days later and the tooth that we are dealing with there is the
upper right molar or upper right 7."
That's the context. Go to the bottom of the page.
"Q. When do you say that the crown was done by
[Other Dentist]
on that tooth?
A. The date, I can't tell you the date, but I have definitely got
crown sitting there.
Q. Was it in the early part of 2006? In other words after you--
A. I can't tell you the date that he did it. I only prepared myself
what was right here. I didn't go into the next lot of dental
appointments that I had".
168. The Respondent made the following submission at T 398-399:
That's quite extraordinary when that is put in context. She comes here
and purports to give strident dogmatic evidence about what
Dr Rutner did and
didn't do, matters that are in issue. Matters that were longer ago, further in
the past than when she was giving
her testimony then of the more recent
treatment by
[Other Dentist]
and even of the most simple of questions,
did he do the crown first or the treatment to your R7 first, she couldn't tell
couldn't answer. She could not say what, if any, treatments she got
for the tooth she was complaining was giving her pain. Why
couldn't she,
because she hadn't prepared herself. She had not worded herself
up to what she might say when she came here. That throws her evidence
into a particular light and along with all the matters suggests
that you can
have little confidence in her and again her credit is severely
T 400, it was conceded on behalf of the Respondent during submissions
.... was at least endeavouring to process the HICAPS transaction on the
[December 2005]
. We know as a fact there was no HICAPS
transaction effected on the 8
[December 2005].
mean if her
[Patient A]
evidence is accepted in that respect, that the
machine in question was not functioning properly or at all on 8 December 2005.
must mean that or, as I point out, that Dr Rutner did not know how to operate
the machine properly. It is one or the other.
Respondent further submitted that if the machine malfunctioned on 8 December
2005, then it could have malfunctioned on the subsequent
occasions with respect
to the item 615 being charged (T
171. By way of a summary, the Respondent submitted (T 401):
Cutting to the chase, he concedes that some mistake somehow happened. He
said from the outset in his testimony that it was never
his intention to charge
the 615 items to
[Patient A]
. He says it may have been him that did the
processing. He doesn't recollect. His normal practice was that it was the
office staff
and that the hours of consultation would suggest there were office
staff on duty and we know at least on 15 December the HICAPS transactions
done some time after 9 a.m. I think about 9.15 when you would expect office
staff to be there and carrying that out.
He is unable to offer you a precise explanation of how it happened but he
says it was not his intention - he had no intention to deliberately
charges. There was a mistake. He is not sure of the precise mechanism of that
mistake, whether it was by him or by someone
else and so these submissions I am
making to you should be understood in that context, that the mistake may have
come about without
his knowledge because the machine malfunctioned. It may have
come about because he was clearly having problems with the machine
according to
[Patient A]
, needing to swipe it many times, pushing buttons many times,
and it may have been that buttons were pushed in error.
172. The Respondent submitted that it was possible (T 408):
.... that the incorrect billings were the result of an error by him in
whole or in part, that is he inadvertently punched in wrong
numbers and failed
to notice the wrong numbers had been punched in.
Respondent noted that Patient A gave evidence that the Respondent said
to her on 8 December 2005 ‘
at the new practice we will have a new
machine. We won't be using this one
’. The Respondent added
the following submission:
The machine was obviously thrown away.
The Complainant was unable to offer any evidence that the machine
either functioned or didn't function and the Respondent
is unable to offer any
evidence that the machine did or didn't function, so you need to look at all the
evidence and see what reasonable
inferences can be drawn from that.
Respondent submitted that when the evidence of Patient A regarding the
malfunction of the machine on 8 December 2005 is
combined with the evidence of
Mr Butler there is (T 410):
...... a real possibility that the errors in the item numbers entered into
the HICAPS machine were entered by error of the machine
‘deliberate, improper and unethical conduct’ on the part of the
Respondent noted that it was never put to the Respondent that he knowingly made
false claims on HCF. The Respondent submitted
that denying the Respondent an
opportunity to deny fraud was ‘
more than a mere Browne v Dunn
procedural fairness point’.
The Tribunal therefore had before it
‘indefinite testimony, because it was never put to Dr
and applying the Briginshaw test, the Tribunal could not
‘reasonably’ satisfied.
Respondent submitted that the HCCC bears the onus to exclude malfunction of the
machine. Further, there was no evidence that
the machine had been tested around
the time of the transactions and no evidence that would rebut the possibility
that the four item
615 claims were a result of a machine malfunction of the
177. The significant part of the evidence of Mr Butler relied upon by the
Respondent commences at about T 165.5 as follows:
Q. From time to time machines, for whatever reason, may not read
adequately the information data encoded on the number card, is that
A. That can happen.
Q. For example, if the magnetic strip is worn that can cause
problems in reading it when it is swiped in the machine?
A. Definitely. Definitely, also if it is kept near mobile phones and
things like that.
Q. It can be interfered with by the magnetic field from the mobile phone
and other sources of contamination, is that what you mean?
Q. I suggest a third reason it might malfunction is that there is a
problem at the terminal, the HICAPS machine kept at the provider's
A. Yes, there can be issues where the terminal had to be
Q. If it was an old machine, or faulty, that could cause difficulty first
of all in reading the data on the card when it was swiped?
A. It could.
Q. It could also cause problems when entering the data by pushing the
various buttons, could it not?
A. Yes it could".
That's an important piece of evidence.
"Q. If that were the case, a health care provider wishing to process
would have to repeat the attempts until it was successful, or
give it up if it
was not successful, would you agree?
A. It would depend on the error that's occurring. If it were a swipe of
the card and the card can't be read, the machine can't go
further. You actually don't get to key in any information. If it was
keying, like a faulty number on the key pad, it would affect usually just
that one number.
Q. Unless there was more than one faulty key on the key pad? A. Unless
there was more than one faulty key on the key pad.
178. In conclusion the Respondent submitted:
I am inviting the Tribunal to look at the allegations in the context and
say is this really likely, that this dentist for $1600 charged
on three separate
occasions for crowns, deliberately charged I should say, with knowing and
intent, to obtain a benefit of $1600,
the same patient for three crowns? You
would have to say it's inherently stupid. It's inherently improbable because if
intention to defraud, which is what has been put to you strongly by
Ms McDonald, and that he had motive, the only motive she can
offer is the $1600
and that, in my submission, is a trifling and insignificant sum, that would not
bring a person otherwise of good
character - you have got Dr Quill's
evidence as to his honesty and good
character - to commit fraud for $1600.
An honest person wouldn't do that and a dishonest person would be a lot
smarter about it. A dishonest person would not charge
[Patient A]
three separate occasions for four crowns that were going to use up her
entitlement under the HCF benefits that she had and would
trigger at HCF and
would trigger to
[Patient A]
you have used up all your benefits for this
item, and she is going to say, hang on, I didn't have that done, et cetera, et
A dishonest person, if they needed $1600 that badly, would have been a bit
smarter about it and would have involved perhaps three
or four different
patients, three or four different false charges that were not going to push that
particular patient's entitlement
to benefits under their scheme to the limit and
therefore set in motion the chain of events that have happened in this case, and
that dishonest person would have got away with it. That's not this case. You
are not presented with a dishonest person, you are
presented with an honest
dentist who has been candid with the Tribunal.
He may have made a mistake. He concedes that. He has never intended to
profit by it and it is clear that the repayment reimbursement
of $1600 - it is
clear he was in some confusion as to when he believed it was an appropriate time
to do it, but he said the documents
demonstrate that.
In my submission you would not be satisfied that the Complainant
has discharged its onus in making out to your comfortable satisfaction
that Dr Rutner engaged in unsatisfactory professional
conduct, professional misconduct and other improper and unethical
Respondent clarified for the Tribunal that the amount of $1,600 would be
considered a
‘comparatively small sum’
$16,000 or $160,000’
consideration of the matter was:
.... part of the process of you weighing up whether the evidence is
capable of discharging the allegation of dental fraud and I have
exhorted you to
use common sense. It was in that context that I was putting the $1,600 as a
small sum, but not to suggest that it
was a trivial matter, or not a serious
allegation. It is a very serious allegation.
HCCC submissions in Reply
HCCC noted that Mr Maher’s evidence was that he made a record of the
conversation immediately after he left the Respondent’s
surgery and
returned to his car in the nearby car park, and that as such
19 should be considered as a contemporaneous document.
that the Respondent made a submission that Patient A appeared to be
‘revelling’ in giving evidence
(as set out in detail above),
the HCCC noted that counsel for the Respondent did not comment to this effect
while the witness
was giving her evidence before the Tribunal, nor did the
Respondent point to any particular answer to support this claim. The
submitted that there was no evidence that Patient A was ‘revelling’
or enjoying herself while she gave her evidence
and that she had attended the
Tribunal to give evidence in good faith, making concessions with respect to some
parts of her evidence,
commenting that that was her recollection or that she
could be wrong or not ‘100% correct’.
HCCC responded to the criticism made by the Respondent regarding Patient
A’s inability to recall details regarding
the work undertaken by the Other
Dentist as follows:
In my submission that is perfectly understandable. You have got a witness
being called to give evidence of events that occurred at
the end of 2005, early
2006. She has prepared a statement beforehand. She reads that statement. She
realises that it is a Tribunal
hearing which is investigating or looking into
the conduct of the Respondent. Then to be asked questions about treatment
a number of years ago by a different dentist that doesn't appear to be
the focus of what the Tribunal would be looking at, and not
to have a crystal
clear recollection of when crowns were put in at what date, in my submission is
understandable and in no way would
undermine the evidence that she
As I said, at the end of the day you have her evidence that it was Dr
Rutner who undertook the HCF transactions and Dr Rutner has
respect to the question of the onus of proof regarding the possibility
of a malfunctioning HICAPS machine, the HCCC
made the following
submission:
Turning to the question of the malfunctioning machine, my friend has made,
in my submission, an incorrect submission in law, that
is it has not been
excluded. This is not a criminal case. The Complainant does not have an
obligation to exclude.
If I may take the Tribunal to the judgment of the Court of Appeal
handed up yesterday, Palmer v Dolman and in particular paragraph
41(d) where they are looking at competing possibilities
hypotheses, it is a matter of looking at the hypothesis and then
determining whether the hypothesis put forward is one that has
been proven to the requisite standard and it is conceded by the
Complainant that is the Briginshaw standard.
Subsection (d) says where competing possibilities, and I emphasis this,
are of equal likelihood or the choice between them can only
be resolved by
conjecture, the allegation is not proved.
It is not a criminal case where the prosecutor has to positively discount
competing reasonable hypotheses. That's not the case here.
Here the first step
is to say well, what are the hypotheses? Are they reasonable hypotheses? What
are their intentions? To use
a ridiculous example, it might be a hypothesis
that Elvis is alive and he did the transactions. You would sit back and say
hypothesis is not reasonable. What's the evidence? You wouldn't accept
Let's look at the evidence of the malfunctioning machine. At first my
friend has taken you to Mr Butler's evidence, but there was
some important
evidence that he neglected to continue with and that was the evidence at page
158 of the transcript. These are some
questions by Dr O'Reilly and at 158,
commencing at about point 3:
Q. If the card is swiped and the transaction is commenced and for
whatever reason it is aborted, I guess what I am saying
is that okay
button is not pushed, is HICAPS able to record any activity on that
A. Unfortunately no. We can only record information that hits our host,
so the okay button has to be pressed. It is like a telephone
connection. Until
you actually start talking to the person on the other end he doesn't actually
know you have called.
Q. Is it possible to see if there had been any - I'm not sure what the
term is, but line outages on particular days?
A. On particular days.
Q. Of the year, at particular areas, particular terminals, so for example
if we found out on a particular date and are you able to
see if there were
problems in relation to the connectivity between the terminal and
A. Unfortunately it would be whoever the service provider is for the
telephone line that would be able to tell you that Information.
Now, the summary of the evidence about the supposed malfunctioning is step
number 1. Yes it is correct patient A gave evidence,
not on each occasion,
but on 8 December and 15
December that she saw Dr Rutner swipe the machine on many occasions and
punch in some numbers. There is no evidence of
transactions going through on the 8th. There are transactions
went through on the 15th, including treatment that was given on
8th. My recollection is that she did not give any evidence of a similar
issue or a similar observation for the transactions that
occurred in February
You then have Mr Butler hypothetically being asked about problems with the
machine and there is a problem if you swipe it and it doesn't
connect. It could
be there is a problem with the card. The mechanical part has gone down, there
might be a problem with the terminal
or there might be a problem, as Dr
O'Reilly's questions elicited. There might be a problem with the telephone
line. You are just
not going to connect with Connex on that particular day.
The problem with that type of malfunction is you don't get to step one.
don't get a 615 item being transacted and money going into a practice's bank
account for those items where work wasn't conducted.
That leaves us with the other hypothetical mistake. There was a problem
with the keys on the pad number, so that assumes swiping
fine, terminal rings
up, connects with Connex. Now, the difficulty with that hypothetical fault is
what I addressed you on yesterday,
which has not been addressed by my friend.
He could see the sense in it, if there was work done and that work then you can
with look, it was an x-ray, it should have been a 022 but it has
somehow been translated to a 615. That's not the case. I took
you through the
evidence matrix yesterday. It is quite clear the work that was done, which Dr
Rutner said yes, I did that work,
it has been claimed for. Item numbers were
He was specifically asked about this. It commences transcript
200. I'm taking him through 13 March and it commences at about point 5 or
Q. Then you identify an error on 13 March that a 615 was charged and nothing
should have been charged?
He agrees and he says:
"Correct. I am sorry, when you say nothing, I did do work.
Q. I'm sorry I should - yes, on 13 March the D533 was charged?
Q. That was for the lower 6?
A. Well, I called it the lower left 6. There was some dispute
whether in fact it was the lower left 7 and I believe Dr Burns was happy to
accept my numbering on it as the lower left 6.
Q. So the D533 related to work done on the lower left 6? A. Yes.
Q. And the D115, that again was preventative treatment, some scaling or
something like that?
Q. Putting those entries to one side, nothing should have been charged for -
that was all that should have been charged for 13 March?
But on that date 615 it appears, was entered and charged for and money
came back. There is no evidence of a malfunctioning of the
machine by the
miraculous creation of new item numbers in some fashion. Also when you look at
the pad numbers that were used,
615, a number of the items that had been used on the other transactions on
all those days included number 1 and number 5.
The question of the malfunctioning machine in my submission isn't a
hypothesis that the Tribunal would consider. It just hasn't been
proved. It is
in the area of conjecture and speculation.
Now in respect of Mr Butler's evidence my friend put some
submissions that the application, which I should note was opposed
Respondent, of seeking to call evidence in reply by Dr Butler, was
opposed and he has now submitted the inference
you would draw is some
fear of exposing Mr Butler to cross-examination on this issue. There is
another reason,
quite plainly, assessment of the evidence that was before the
Tribunal on that issue, assessment that it was extremely weak, speculative,
conjecture. Why do we need to call this witness to give evidence when in my
submission the Tribunal wouldn't even go to first
base with those submissions,
based on the evidence before you. That is another competing reason and a
reason in my submission that
the Tribunal would accept.
Respondent’s submission that Patient A had been reckless about her
evidence that all of the appointments with the Respondent
were in the
afternoons. The Respondent pointed to the fact that Patient A had accessed her
diary the week before the hearing and
the diary recorded one appointment
occurring at 7.00am. The HCCC submitted that the same comment could be made with
respect to the
Respondent. The Respondent had answered a cross-examination
question about the days of the week that he worked at the Waverley Street
surgery during January, February and March 2006. to which the Respondent
I only worked there Wednesdays. That was the day I worked
The HCCC submission continued:
We then have evidence when the day book of Waverley is produced
and we suddenly see evidence of people, of patients of the
Respondent who appear
in his appointment book paying at Waverley. It's put to him that must mean that
he was working at Waverley
and he says "no, no, no". The explanation is put
that because they were moving to the new surgery he invited those patients to
around the corner and see where the new surgery was. It is only
subsequently when my friend re-examines that evidence is adduced
that well, it
is his handwriting actually on these pages, which reveals that actually he was
working at Waverley on days other than
Wednesday in February and March
HCCC submitted that the evidence of the Respondent indicated that he had not
even looked at the Waverley Street Day Book in preparation
for giving evidence.
This would be of concern to the Tribunal given the evidence of the
Respondent that most of the relevant
documentation could not be produced as
it had been lost during the process of moving out of the Oxford Street surgery.
also noted that the Waverley Street Day Book was only produced by the
Respondent on the last day he gave evidence. The HCCC also
noted that there had
been requests for documents from the Respondent by way of summons prior to the
commencement of the hearing.
HCCC pointed to inconsistencies in the Respondent’s evidence regarding his
practice of charging the ‘gap’ for
work that was not of a preventive
nature. Noting that the Respondent was unable to comment on whether he had
intended to charge Patient
A the relevant ‘gap’ fees on the relevant
occasion together with the evidence of Patient A that her credit card records
and her recollection was that no ‘gap’ payments were made, the
Tribunal will not repeat this entire submission.
respect to the Respondent’s submission that the HICAPS transaction
on 15 December 2005 was likely to have been
undertaken by the Receptionist,
****, because it is recorded as having been processed at 9.07am (see
paragraph 22 (ii) of
the Respondent’s written submissions –
annexure D hereto), the HCCC submitted that this should be considered in the
context that the Tribunal did not have records (or at least complete and
accurate records) regarding the sick leave or annual leave
taken by **** and the
evidence of Dr Quill that **** was spending time at the Waverley Street
responding to the submission made by the Respondent that it would have been
‘stupid’ for a person in the Respondent’s
position to attempt
to commit fraud for the amount of $1,600, the HCCC point to the fact that two
claims were made in one calendar
year and the other two in the following
calendar year. The HCCC asked the Tribunal to take
notice’ that claims on health funds frequently had limits for certain
a calendar year basis. Further, the HCCC
submitted that regard should also be had to the fact that the Respondent was
Patient A’s
usual dentist, the inference being that he would be well
placed to know what claims she had likely made on her health fund for that
calendar year with respect to dental work. The Respondent would not have
expected Patient A to attend another dentist for major work
as she did later in
2006. The HCCC further submitted:
Speculation of whether it is stupid and whether anybody would defraud for
"an insubstantial amount of $1,600" - whether $1,600 is
an insubstantial amount
is probably depending on your perspective in life, but at the end of the day
that is the allegation before
the Tribunal. There is no evidence as to whether
that would be an insignificant sum for this particular dentist or not.
The Tribunal has to make its decision on the evidence before it and not
enter into conjecture or speculation about whether $1,600
whether somebody in a
dentist's position would be dishonest for that amount of money.
Tribunal notes at this point that the Respondent made
submissions in reply to the HCCC submission regarding this
The submission made by Ms McDonald, the limit by the HCF, I make the
point if Dr Rutner had deliberately charged for four
crowns with the
expectation that
[Patient A]
would continue to be his patient, and if he
was asked to do further crown work in the following 12 months, she would have
the limit then and his alleged fraud would have been exposed then in
just the same way as she was alerted by HCF that she had reached
the limit, so
it is really no answer to say that she went off and had work done with someone
way of clarification, the HCCC added that even if Patient A had required crown
work to be undertaken in the 2006 calendar year,
as the Respondent had been
Patient A’s regular dentist:
.... the control over billing was in the hands of the Respondent. He
could have billed it as something else. He may not have billed
her for that.
The control of detection of the fraud was in his camp. My point was the unknown
factor that occurred was after many,
many years of the Respondent being her
treating dentist she went elsewhere
to the Respondent’s submission that the allegation of fraud had not been
put directly to the Respondent, the HCCC submitted
that it was clear from the
Complaint, the evidence filed by the parties, the cross- examination of the
Respondent and the denial
in submissions of dental fraud that this was a live
issue in this matter.
HCCC reinforced the submission that there can be improper and unethical conduct
with gross negligence, there being no requirement
for any type of ‘mens
rea’. The Respondent’s evidence clearly demonstrated a total lack
of any system to keep
track of the HICAPS payments and a failure to undertake
any form of checking. The Respondent did not consider these tasks to be his
‘duty’ despite the terms of the HICAP Agreement which the Respondent
entered into.
Findings in relation to the Particulars of Complaints
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that Patient A did not receive four full
veneer crowns to her teeth during the relevant period.
This is a matter not
disputed by the Respondent and is patently obvious on the face of the clinical
records of Patient A (exhibit
Tribunal is also comfortably satisfied that the Respondent received payment from
HICAPS on behalf of HCF for four full veneer
crowns. This is a matter that was
also not in dispute.
195. The Particulars of Complaint are established.
Findings in relation to the Complaints
196. The Respondent is an appropriately trained and experienced dentist.
No allowance needs to be made by the Tribunal for these aspects of the
statutory test of unsatisfactory professional conduct
(section 41(i)).
Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s submission regarding the standard
of proof to be applied in protective jurisdictions
HCCC V Margiotta
paragraph 19,
statutory definitions of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
professional misconduct applied by this Tribunal are
found in the
current legislation. The current legislation sets out a ‘two-tiered
approach’ to the characterisation
of conduct as indicated above. Whilst
the jurisprudence regarding the defining of the term ‘misconduct in a
professional respect’
considered in cases such a
Pillai v Messiter
is of interest it is of limited assistance given the fundamental differences in
the statutory test.
Tribunal notes that a quote from an American legal reference,
Corpus Juris
(vil 58, (1948) at 818, extracted by Kirby P in
... the legal idea of misconduct, an evil intention is not a necessary
ingredient. The word is sufficiently comprehensive to include
misfeasance as
well as malfeasance, and as applied to professional people it includes
unprofessional acts even though such
acts are not inherently wrongful. Whether a
particular course of conduct will be regarded as misconduct is to be determined
the nature of the conduct and not from its consequences.
200. After reference to the above quote, the American decision in Beaunit
(Op. cit) and an article written by Huxley JA ((1982)
20 Law Soc J 13
17), Kirby P concludes that it was still necessary ‘
misconduct that goes beyond mere carelessness’
Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s submission that the Tribunal requires an
actual persuasion of the mind, not a mere tipping
of the scale a little bit one
way or the other. It is not a result of a
‘mere mechanical comparison
of probabilities independent of any belief in its reality’
Tribunal has carefully considered
‘...the seriousness of an allegation
made, the inherent unlikelihood of the occurrence of a given description’,
‘the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular
when considering whether the issues have been proved to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Tribunal
Tribunal has carefully considered the principle in
. The Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s submission that there
has been a serious allegation made regarding the conduct of the
Respondent from
which serious consequences can flow and therefore
‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be reached by consideration of
‘inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences’
Significant
concerns would be apparent from the above account of the inability of the
Respondent to produce appropriate financial
records for the transactions in
question. However, as this does not form part of the Complaint it has not been
considered by the
Tribunal in determining the appropriate characterisation of
the conduct Particularised. The Tribunal notes that some aspects of the
Respondent’s evidence regarding his attitude towards record keeping are of
significant concern to the Tribunal.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent agreed that as a result of claims made by his
practice he received monies to which he was not
entitled (see transcript
commencing about T 199). The Respondent’s
evidence was that he
did not recall whether or not he had conducted the HICAPS transactions and could
not explain how the four claims
for item 615 occurred.
its simplest form, the evidence before the Tribunal comes to a contest
between the Respondent stating that he cannot
recall making the three relevant
transactions and Patient A stating that the Respondent undertook the
transactions. There are
however many more layers that the Tribunal has
considered to satisfy the rigorous requirements needed to be reasonably
satisfied as to the characterisation of the conduct.
Tribunal does not accept the submission made by the Respondent that Patient A
was revelling in the attention of being the limelight of giving
evidence in these proceedings’
or that she gave evidence
‘with reckless indifference as to whether the actual matters set out in
it were true or not true’.
There was nothing in the demeanour of
Patient A that would allow this conclusion to be reached. There were a number of
inconsistencies
and difficulties in the evidence given by Patient A concerning
issues peripheral to the substance of the Particulars; inconsistencies
most part being explained by the effluxion of time. The Tribunal notes that on
at least one matter, being the alleged inconsistency
between the statutory
declaration of Patient A and her statement with respect to the description of
the machine, the Respondent has
mistakenly submitted that an EFTPOS machine was
different to a HICAPS machine. However, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of
A that the Respondent processed the claims on each occasion, being the
central issue in this matter. This evidence withstood significant
under cross-examination.
this point the Tribunal notes that counsel for the Respondent conceded
that the Respondent ‘
was at least endeavouring to process the HICAPS
transaction on the 8
’ although the Tribunal has not
relied on this admission in making a finding that the Respondent made the claims
on the other
occasions (T 400). The Tribunal further notes that the Respondent
submitted that there was a possibility that the incorrect billings
were a result
of inadvertently punching in the wrong numbers and failing to notice
8 of Dr Sharma’s statement is consistent with the evidence of the
Respondent that generally, **** would process payments
by patients. Dr Sharma
gave evidence to the effect that **** was reluctant to train other members of
staff. Dr Sharma was clear that
she had been trained to use the HICAPS system at
some of the practice locations and that
‘other staff made.....mistakes
with the processing of payments’
in the absence of ****. There
was nothing in the
evidence before the Tribunal to indicate that
there were other people who were at the surgery at the relevant times who were
to carry out the transactions and Patient A’s evidence was that there
were no other staff members present.
was not called to give evidence by either party. The HCCC did not need to call
**** to prove the Particulars of the Complaint.
If the Respondent wanted to
place evidence before the Tribunal about her role in the making of the HICAPS
claims then it was for
the Respondent to call her to give evidence. The Tribunal
notes the Respondent gave evidence that he had access to her contact
Tribunal notes that the possible explanations put forward by the Respondent were
inconsistent with there being a fraudulent intent
on his part but that he
acknowledged receiving money to which he was not entitled (which of course does
not of and in itself result
in there having been a fraud).
Tribunal notes that when Patient A was shown exhibit 20 (being the only HICAPS
record for any of the relevant transactions produced
by the Respondent) and was
asked to reconcile her evidence that the Respondent had processed her card on 8
and 15 December 2005 but
exhibit 20 recorded that all services performed on 8
and 15 December were claimed on 15 December, Patient A replied (T
So the first time I went to Dr Rutner and he processed my HCF card
multiple times, he told me that the machine was playing up. So,
I would assume
that he couldn't process it and he processed it the next time I came round. So
when I look at treatments I had on
the 8th, and I looked at the treatments I had
on the 15th, he processed them on the 15th, the multiple days.
in the evidence dispels the Tribunal’s view that the Waverley Street
‘Day Book’ or Appointment Book is an
unreliable document. It is not
a document that the Respondent had regard to until the final day of the hearing;
it contained alterations,
overwriting and had a generally disorganised
appearance and content.
Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s submission that the evidence of Mr
Butler establishes all of the transactions originated
from the same HICAPS
terminal. The Tribunal however does not see this evidence as necessarily
undermining the evidence of Patient
A to the effect that it was the Respondent
who processed the claims on each occasion. It may be, as submitted by the
Respondent,
that Patient A was mistaken as to the location at which the
transactions occurred. Even if the actual location of the transactions
matter crucial to the proper consideration of the evidence of Patient A, the
possibility
remains that the HICAPS terminal had been relocated.
Further, the Respondent gave evidence that during the transition period, where
he was working out of both locations, he would sometimes treat patients at the
Oxford Street practice and then ask them to walk around
to the Waverley Street
practice to pay their account and also thereby become acquainted with the
‘new location’. This
could have led to some confusion on the part of
Patient A. Fundamentally, it is not a matter for a patient to know the
identification
number of a HICAPS terminal.
Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s submissions to the effect that
the four item 615 claims could be explained by
a malfunctioning of the HICAPS
machine. In this regard, the Tribunal considers the content of the only HICAPS
record produced by
the Respondent to the Tribunal (exhibit 20) as well
as the records produced by HICAPS/HCF. These documents demonstrate
from the four item 615 claims, the claims accorded with the clinical notes made
by the Respondent. Further, the Respondent’s
statement to Patient A that
the HICAPS machine was malfunctioning and that he would have to obtain a new one
when he moved to the
new location does not sit with the evidence of Dr Quill
that both he and the Respondent shared a HICAPS terminal and that a new terminal
was obtained for the Waverley Street practice in which he had commenced working
by the time the relevant claims were being processed.
There would have been no
need for a new machine to be obtained at the
Tribunal has considered whether there is another reasonable explanation
and whether the circumstances raise a more probable
inference than what is
alleged. The conclusion the Tribunal considers as the most reasonable
explanation and the most probable explanation
was that the Respondent
knowingly processed the four item 615 claims.
Tribunal accepts the submission that ‘
the same acts and
circumstances can't be dental fraud with a mental element of conscious
wrongdoing and also be grossly
negligent such as to amount to
professional misconduct’.
However, in this matter the Tribunal has no
knowledge of the Respondent’s conscious thoughts at the time he processed
transactions. After considering the myriad of possibilities put
before the Tribunal by the Respondent, the Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that
the machine did not malfunction and result in four claims for item 615 being
processed with respect to Patient A.
Such a proposition is far from being a
possibility, let alone a probability.
having accepted the evidence of Patient A
was the Respondent
who processed the claims, the Tribunal is of the view that he did so knowing
that it was improper. However, if
the Tribunal was wrong in accepting the
evidence of Patient A on this point, the only other explanation for the four
claims is the
grossly negligent accounting system adopted by the Respondent. The
accounting system of the Respondent portrayed reckless indifference
and an abuse
of the privileges which accompany registration as a dentist (in particular, the
trust reposed in the Respondent under
the HICAPS contract and the trust reposed
by patients in their treating dentists). This is not a case of mere inadvertence
or mistake.
One claim for item 615 could be characterised as a mistake,
but four cannot. The Tribunal is of the view that these
are the only
‘reasonable and definite inference
arise from the evidence
Palmer v Dolman
Tribunal accepts the submission that where there is no direct evidence as to
whether the Respondent deliberately made
false claims, i.e. direct proof is
not available, that ‘
it is enough if the circumstances appearing in the
evidence give rise to a reasonable and definitive inference’
Dolman at paragraph 35).
Respondent made a submission that the allegation that the Respondent had
knowingly made the claims was not put directly
to the Respondent during
cross-examination. The Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC to the
effect that it was clear
from the Complaint, the evidence filed by the parties,
the scope of the cross- examination and the Respondent’s denial of fraud
that this was a live issue in the matter. As foreshadowed during the HCCC
submissions in reply, the HCCC located the material upon
which it relied in this
regard and forwarded same to the Tribunal under cover of a letter dated
October 2009. The HCCC noted that in paragraph 24 of his
statement (exhibit R4) the Respondent had denied that he had knowingly made
claims and relies upon the evidence given by the Respondent at T
199.5-8 and T 209.8 – 211.7.
Tribunal finds the conduct of the Respondent demonstrates a lack of judgment and
care in the practice of dentistry which was significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a dentist of an equivalent level of training or
experience and that he engaged in improper
and unethical
a significant breach of accepted standards is considered by the Tribunal to
constitute unsatisfactory professional conduct (therefore
Complaint One is
established) of a sufficiently serious nature to justify the removal of the
dentists name from the Register.
Tribunal finds Complaint Two established. The Tribunal has an actual persuasion
of the mind that the Respondent committed dental
if the Tribunal was wrong with respect to the Respondent’s
knowledge of the falsity of the claims that he made,
having had the benefit of
hearing evidence regarding the accounting methods of the Respondent’s
practice, the Tribunal is of
the view that it could only be characterised as
totally reckless and utterly disorganised. In no way does it resemble the
that are expected of a health care practitioner. These are also the
standards required legally for the operator of a small business,
respect to the taxation system and in this instance as required by virtue of a
contract having been entered into with HICAPS.
There was no system of
reconciliation, no system to ensure patients were appropriately charged for
services and no checking of the
payments received through the HICAPS system.
This is not merely a mistake made on one occasion in extenuating
circumstances such
as can been seen in
Pillai v Messiter
Recklessness of this nature, in the Tribunal’s view, amounts to
professional misconduct as it is so grossly negligent.
Considerations relevant to
deterring other members of the profession from
engaging in similar conduct, of
maintaining the confidence of the public in the profession and maintaining the
reputation of the
profession. Any orders
made by the Tribunal are
not intended to be punitive.
Tribunal has considered the submission made by the Respondent regarding the
of the Act. Although it may well be the case that the Tribunal is
able to exercise the powers accorded to the Board in circumstances
subject matter of the Complaint is proven but not found to constitute
unsatisfactory professional conduct (and therefore
professional misconduct would
not be considered) the Tribunal does not have to make a determination on this
issue as a finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct (and
professional misconduct) is made.
Tribunal is of the view that it is unlikely that the Respondent will repeat
conduct of this nature. This is mainly as a result
of the financial and
emotional burden the investigation and inquiry have placed upon him. However,
all dental practices must be conducted
in a professional and accountable manner.
Both the public and organisations such as health funds are entitled to expect
that financial
transactions will be conducted accurately. In this regard, the
Respondent has significantly failed.
the Tribunal accepts that the quantum of money involved in this matter is
comparatively modest, it is the underlying factor
of the charging of Patient A
on three occasions (one occasion involving two claims) for services not provided
that offends professional
Tribunal considers it appropriate for the Respondent to be suspended
from practising for a period of two months to allow
him time to reflect on his
conduct. The Tribunal suggests that this time may be used by the Respondent to
ensure his accounting practices
and financial affairs are all in order. This
period will also allow the Respondent to make preparation for undertaking a
229. The HCCC made an application for costs. In accordance with clause
13 of schedule 5, the Tribunal is a ‘costs follows the event
amount of the Respondent’s costs of the Directions Hearing held on 10
2009 as agreed or determined by the Tribunal. If any aspect of the costs
order cannot be agreed between the parties the matter can
be re-listed for the
Tribunal to determine.
230. The Tribunal orders that the Respondent:
1. Is Reprimanded in the terms annexed hereto and marked E.
suspended from the Register for a period of two months commencing from 14 days
of the date hereof.
a period of one year from the date hereof the Respondent is to provide
the Board with written confirmation of successful
completion of an ethics course
approved by the Dental Board of New South Wales.
Respondent is to pay the Health Care Complaints Commission’s costs
of these proceedings, adjusted to allow for the
Health Care Complaints
Commission’s payment of the Respondent’s costs of the Directions
Hearing on 10 June
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded
Registry to:
1) The Dental Board of NSW;
2) The Respondent and his legal advisers;
3) The HCCC; and
4) as the Board sees fit.
Dated: 11 December 2009
Joanne Muller
Penny Burns
William O’Reilly
Noel Greenaway
Annexure A – Schedule of documents in evidence Annexure B –
Evidence Matrix prepared by HCCC Annexure C –HCCC –
Submissions Annexure D –Respondent – Outline of Submissions Annexure
E –Reprimand
Annexure F – Schedule of names suppressed
ANNEXURE A HCCC V RUTNER
INDEX OF DOCUMENTS IN EVIDENCE
a. Complaint dated 10 October 2008.
b. Amended complaint filed 10 March 2009.
Certificate of Registration dated 9 March 2002.
Letter from Julie Macey, Ancillary Benefits Manager, HCF to the Commission
dated 17 November 2006, enclosing complaint to the Commission
by Grahame J
Maher, Investigator for HCF dated 16 November 2006, including the following
attachments:
Attachment 1
: Two statutory declarations of Grahame
John Maher dated 16 November 2006.
: Letter from Patient A to Dr David J Rutner dated 20 June
Attachment 3
: Statutory Declaration of Patient A dated
19 October 2006.
Attachment 4
: List of HICAPS claims made by Dr David
Rutner for services provided to Patient A from 8
December 2005 to 13 March 2006.
Attachment 5
: Authorisation from Patient A to Dr David
Rutner re Grahame Maher dated 12 October 2006.
: Copy of Dr David Rutner’s clinical records for Patient
Attachment 7
: Authorisation from [Patient A] to Dr
David Rutner re Other Dentist dated 12 October 2006.
Attachment 8
: Report of Other Dentist re treatment of
Patient A dated 28 October 2006
Attachment 9
: Report from Dr Ahmed Mayat to Other
Dentist re OPG dental x-ray of Patient A
: Report (memo) to Dr Ian R Burns, Dental Advisor to HCF – Julie
Macey, Gail Newman
dated 9 November 2006.
: Interpretation of Dr David Rutner’s clinical notes for Patient A
for the period 8 December
2005 to 13 March 2006 by Dr Ian R
Letter from Julie Macey, Manager - Ancillary Benefits
Management, HCF to Dr David Rutner dated 30 October
HICAPS Provider Agreement Details dated 16 February
2001 and 2 March 2001.
HICAPS Provider Agreement Terms and Conditions.
Change of Provider Details Request dated 16 July 2004.
HICAPS Equipment Agreement Terms and Conditions.
Letter from Brett Butler, HICAPS to Luke Givney, HCF
undated, enclosing:
(a) Transaction details for XXXXXXXXXXXX0972 on 15
December 2005.
(b) Transaction details for XXXXXXXXXXXX3833 on 28
February 2006.
(c) Transactions details for XXXXXXXXXXXX2016 on 13
March 2006.
(d) HICAPS Terminal Operations Guide.
(a) Letter from Luke Givney, HCF to Stephen Cox at
HCCC dated 22 August 2008.
(b) Letter from Luke Givney, HCF to Stephen Cox, HCCC
dated 5 March 2009.
(c) Letter from Luke Giveny, HCF to Stephen Cox, HCCC
dated 10 March 2009 with appendices:
(i) Health Product History Enquiry dated 10 March
(ii) Product Definition (Product WAD Title WPC Multicover dated 10 March
(iii)Health Assessing Rules (Product WAD; Title WPC Multicover) dated 10
March 2009.
Statement of Patient A dated 7 February 2007.
Letter from the Commission to Dr David Rutner dated 5
January 2007.
Letter from Guild Legal to the Commission dated 29
January 2007.
Letter from Dr David Rutner to the Commission dated 3
March 2007 (received 14 March 2007).
Letter from the Commission to Guild Legal dated 5 March
Principles of Ethical Dental Practice
, Policy Statement 5.4 of the
Australian Dental Association Inc, as amended by Federal Council, April 7/8,
The Australian Schedule of Dental Services and Glossary
Statement 4.2 of the Australian Dental Association
Inc, as amended by Federal Council, November 11/12,
OPG dental x ray of Patient A on 22 March 2006 referred
to in statutory declaration of GJ Maher dated 16 November
2006 at Tab 3.1.
Grahame Maher’s handwritten notes of his conversation with Dr David
Rutner on 27 October 2006.
HICAPS terminal print out dated 15 December 2005.
Dr Brendan Quill’s appointment book 2006.
Photocopy extracts of Dr Rutner’s appointment book for 2
January 2006 - 15 March 2006.
Employment records Rutner Quill & Associates.
Extracts from the Australian Schedule of Dental Services
Glossary for items:
011 - 019, 022, 025, 031, 033, 035 - 039, 111, 113 - 119,
121 - 123, 213, 221 - 222, 225, 231 - 238, 241, 245, 281 -
282, 511 - 515, 521 - 525, 531 - 535, 541 - 545, 551 - 555,
611, 613, 615, 618, 625, 627, 629.
Daybook 2005 – March 2006.
Handwritten letter from Dr David Rutner, Dentist to Ms Macey (HCF) dated 23
March 2009, stamped “Ancillary Benefits Mall 02
April 2009 RECEIVED”
(two pages).
DOCUMENTS TENDERED BY THE RESPONDENT
Description
Statement of Dr Brendan Quill dated 26 February 2009
Statement of Dr Sonika Sharma dated 26 February 2009
Statement of Mr Alan Westwood dated 3 March 2009
Statement of Dr David Rutner
Transcript of Dr Rutner’s clinical records
HICAPS letter 26 February 2009
Patient A’s computer diary 8 and 15 December 2005
Dr Rutner’s original 2006 appointment book
Copy of a cheque butt dated 26 March 2009
ANNEXURE B HCCC V RUTNER
EVIDENCE MATRIX PREPARED BY HCCC
Patient A’s
recollection
explanatio n in letter Ex 11
claimed From HICAPS
evidence on items claimed
but not claime d until
Examination
x-ray removal of calculus foreshadowe d filling
complaint) UR molar region
2 Pas mes caries –
2 quads (lower) scaling
F – application of flouride
p- discussed options for UR7
options 1 –
2 – tunnel prep (more conservative
No explan’t why 114 used twice
012 (periodic
examination)
114 (removal of calculus
114 (removal of calculus
121 (topical application of remineralizin g amd/or cariostatic agents one
022 - intraoral periapical or bitewing radiograp h – per
114 - agrees
121 - agrees
2 x rays taken but not
These notes appear to treatment planning
2 painkilling injections
Tunnel prep
– remove caries
Place GIC (Glass ionomer cement) With shade A3
LA 2.2ml scandonet w/o adrenalin
(under local anaesthetic)
tunnel prep no tooth identified
This is for a 3 surface tooth coloured
restoration (T86.2). This work was
X rays itemized assume taken on
No evidence of crowns being prepared or completed
2006 claime
Experienced
further tooth pain
Rutner that crack had appeared which would require further treatment. He
would have to do another type of treatment by fitting a
lab created
Advised need to replace restoration with porcelain Imp, temp 1
PA shade taken (to Bill)
Deep scaling upper quads
planning and subgingival
curettage per
Notes indicate possible perio treatment
– agree with itemization
benefit of the doubt. Some indication that
cover that affected area as the tooth would not crumble if he tried to fill
LA given w/o adrenalin infiltration
planning and subgingival curettage per tooth)
222 - agrees
n and impression might have been
taken for ? porcelain restoration
Finalise the treatment –
Rutner said that the lab
up the filling and it needs to be done again.
(Rutner said that she would not be charged for the visit)
Porcelain restoration
didn’t fit –
need to fit new imp + new temp modify prep cap??
LA given 2.2 ml adrenalin infiltration
No notes indicating
No notes indicating a crown.
Treatment completed
and teeth polished
CR top-up of
Scale lower quads duraphat
Cement porcelain restoration
533 he used for building up an existing restoration on tooth
36 was incorrect and he
have used alternative code
Due to a need for a new
Disagrees with item
(T91) the item no claimed of
533 refers to s 3 surface
coloured restoration
. Burns believes that there
surface involved.
Scaling and fluoride
application to one tooth
adjust bite,
restoration
to be made it (615) was used
twice, a mistake
ANNEXURE C HCCC V RUTNER
HCCC OUTLINE OF SUBMISSIONS
The complaint.
amended complaint dated 10 March 2009 the Health Care Complaints Commission
alleges that David Rutner (the Respondent) has been
(i) unsatisfactory professional conduct; or
(ii) professional misconduct.
2. It is alleged that the Respondent has engaged in conduct that:
(i) demonstrates that the knowledge or judgment possessed or care exercised
by the dentist in the practice of dentistry was significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a dentist of an equivalent level of training or
experience; and
(ii) engaged in other improper and unethical conduct in the course of the
practice or purported practice of dentistry
3. Each of the two complaints relies upon the same particulars:
15 December 2005 and about 17 December 2005 the dentist received payment
from HICAPS on behalf of HCF for the service
of two full veneer crowns claimed
to have been provided to patient A on 15 December 2005 when in fact no such
service has been provided.
28 February 2006 and about 2 March 2006 the dentist received payment
from HICAPS on behalf of HCF for the service
of one full veneer crown claimed to
have been provided to patient A on
28 February 2006 when in fact no
such service has been provided.
13 March 2006 and about 15 March 2006 the dentist received payment from
HICAPS on behalf of HCF for the service of
one full veneer crown claimed to have
been provided to patient A on
13 March 2006 when in fact no such
service has been provided.
Respondent has admitted that the dentistry work as particularised was not
performed and that he received the payment to which
he was not entitled from HCF
for the purported work.
issue to be determined by the Tribunal is whether it is comfortably satisfied
that the conduct of the Respondent taken in its
entirety amounts to either
professional misconduct and/or unsatisfactory professional
Background.
complaints arose out of dental treatment received by Patient A from the
Respondent.
7. Patient A had been a patient of the Respondent since about 1993.
the period of the complaints the Respondent operated from two premises –
the old surgery at Oxford Street Bondi Junction
and the new surgery at Waverley
Street Bondi Junction. During the period of the complaint, Dr Quill operated
from the new surgery
at Waverley Street.
the period of the complaint the Respondent was usually assisted in his work by a
dental nurse Sonika Sharma, though on occasions
Ms Sharma also assisted Dr Quill
in his practice.
partnership also employed a receptionist/practice manager ****. During the
period of the complaints **** worked primarily at
the old surgery in Oxford
Street although at times she attended the new surgery.
11. The period of the complaint covers Patient A’s treatment
Respondent on 5 occasions.
A attended the surgery on 8 December 2005 because she was suffering from a
toothache at the back right top upper
jaw. The Respondent told her that
she needed to have a filling which he would perform next week and on that
occasion he performed
a hygiene calculus clean on her teeth.
15 December the Respondent performed a three surface tooth coloured
restoration on tooth UR7. At the end of the
consultation a HICAPS
transaction was put through which included a claim for item 533. This was the
correct claim for the restoration.
In addition there were two claims made and
payment received for item 615. Item 615 is for a porcelain fused to
crown. The work represented by item 615 was not performed.
February 2006 Patient A returned for another appointment with the Respondent as
she was still suffering pain from her tooth UR7.
She was told on that occasion
by the Respondent that the tooth was cracked and that to remedy it the
Respondent was going to use
a different type of filling. An impression was
28 February 2006 Patient A had a further consultation with the
Respondent. On this occasion there was a difficulty with
the inlay that had been
created and another impression of the relevant tooth was taken.
the end of this consultation there was a HICAPS transaction in which there was a
claim for an item 615. The work represented by
item 615 was not
13 March 2006 Patient A attended for her final consultation with the Respondent.
On that occasion a porcelain restoration was made
on her tooth UR7. At the end
of the consultation a HICAPS transaction was put through which included a claim
for item 615. The work
represented by item
615 was not
Professional Misconduct and Unsatisfactory Professional
Professional
Misconduct is defined under
Dental Practice Act
unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to justify
the suspension or cancellation of the dental
care provider’s
registration.
19. Unsatisfactory professional conduct is defined in
Practice Act
to mean, conduct which includes:
(a) any conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgement
possessed, or care exercised, by the dentist in the
practice of
dentistry is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a dentist
of an equivalent level of training or
(h) any other improper or unethical conduct by the dentist in the court of
the practice or purported practice of dentistry.
of the Dental Board dealing with “dental fraud” indicate that a
finding of professional misconduct has been
made in circumstances in which the
Respondent’s conduct was found to be intentional and motivated by
the knowledge
that the Respondent would obtain a financial
. In these cases the Board expressed the view that
In the Matter of Temnyk
Record of Decisions of Dental
Board of NSW 1988-1993 page 50;
In the matter of Wong
Record of Decisions
of Dental Board of NSW 1988-1993 page 52;
In the matter of Harte
of Decisions of Dental Board of NSW 1988-1993 page 66;
that are guilty of conduct which is associated with ‘dental
fraud’ should be dealt with by either removal or suspension
Registrar.”
negligence may also be grounds for a finding of professional misconduct
particularly if accompanied by indifference
or a lack or concern for the
welfare of the patient or exhibiting a departure from elementary and generally
accepted standards
. A statutory test of professional misconduct is
not generally satisfied by mere professional incompetence but it is submitted
conduct may be unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Tribunal will be comfortably satisfied that the complaint of
professional misconduct has been established for
the following
(i) It was the Respondent who undertook the relevant HICAPS
transactions;
(ii) The Respondent knowingly claimed for the services not provided;
it was not a mistake;
(iii) The Respondent had a motive for claiming the services not
(iv) No gap was charged by the Respondent for the substantive work;
(v) The Respondent’s use of the HICAPS system was grossly
(vi) The Respondent has given a prior inconsistent explanation for the claims
in February and March 2006.
Respondent undertook the HICAPS transactions.
was the Respondent who undertook the relevant HICAPS transactions on 15 December
2005, 28 February 2006 and 13 March 2006.
Respondent was trained in use of the HICAP machine and was able to use
to the Respondent there were only two people who could have performed the HICAPS
transactions in question – himself
and the receptionist/practice manager
In the matter of Patsellis
Record of Decisions of
Dental Board of NSW II 1994 - 2001 page 105.
Pillai v Messiter
(1989) 16 NSWLR 197
Transcript 186.5.
position was confirmed by the evidence of the dental nurse Ms Sharma.
His dental nurse Ms Sharma was not trained
in use of the HICAPS
system and did operate the machine
. Ms Sharma could not have
performed the HICAPS transaction on 13 March 2006 as her full time employment
ceased on 3 March 2006 although
she subsequently performed some paper work for
Dr Quill and his orthodontic practice
Evidence of Patient A.
27. Patient A gave evidence that it was the Respondent who undertook the
HICAPS transactions. This evidence should be accepted by the
A said that at the end of her consultation on 8 December, the Respondent took
her to the reception area and took her HCF membership
card and swiped the card
through the machine on a number of occasions and punched in some numbers. The
Respondent made the comment
that the machine was playing up.
was no HICAPS transaction of 8 December 2005. The dental work performed on that
day was charged on the next occasion when Patient
A attended for a visit –
evidence of Mr Butler from HICAPS was that if a transaction was commenced and
then aborted there would be no record of any activity
Respondent cannot recall whether he attempted on that day to process
the transaction
Patient A’s treatment on 15 December 2005 the Respondent took her HCF card
at reception and swiped the card through the
machine and pressed buttons.
Patient A was not given any documentation to sign and she did not pay any gap
evidence of Patient A is consistent with the HICAPS printout which is Exhibit 20
as this is the copy retained by the practitioner
and it does not contain her
Respondent has no independent recollection of whether or not he personally
processed [Patient A]’s account
Transcript 238.
Transcript 214.4 -.6.
Transcript 214.1.-.3.
Transcript 158.3 - .5.
Transcript 194.3.
Exhibit R4 para 14a.
35. In respect of the HICAPS transactions which occurred on 28 February
13 March 2006, Patient A’s evidence was that it was the Respondent who
undertook the transaction using the HICAPS machine.
36. The Respondent cannot recollect whether he personally
[Patient A’s] account on those occasions.
A’s evidence should be accepted for the following reasons. She
consistently maintained that it was the Respondent who
undertook the HICAPS
transactions. There is no reason for her to maintain that it was the Respondent
who undertook the transactions.
It is beyond dispute that that the work
conducted in December 2005, February and March 2006 did not include the
installation of crowns.
38. The only other person put forward as possibility is ****.
first important fact about **** is that the Tribunal has not heard from her. The
Respondent has not called her. It is open to
the Tribunal to find consistently
with the principle in
Jones v Dunkel
, that the evidence of
**** would not assist the Respondent.
fraud has been alleged against ****
. The allegations made against
her are irrelevant to the matter to be determined by Tribunal. They have never
been put to **** and
she has never has an opportunity to respond to
is no evidence that **** performed the particular HICAPS transactions
which are in issue in these proceedings. There is
no evidence that she received
any financial advantage or gain from claiming the 615 items in the HICAPS
transactions.
is not the case that **** has confused the work performed with an item 615 the
installation of a crown. The substantive work was
included in the HICAPS
transactions.
The conduct of the Respondent was not a mistake.
the Tribunal accepts that it was the Respondent who performed the HICAPS
transactions the Tribunal would not accept that it was
the result of a mistake
by the Respondent.
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298.
Transcript 128.5.
“mistake” was not an aberration which occurred on one instance; the
incorrect claims were made on 3 occasions.
incorrect claims involved claims for item 615 that is “a porcelain fused
to metal crown”
. The work performed on Tooth UR7 in
February/March
2006 was a porcelain restoration constructed
indirectly and cemented. There was a huge difference between an item 615 and an
. The Respondent acknowledged the difference between the work
that he performed and the work of fitting a crown
work performed by the Respondent on 15 December 2005 was claimed and
the relevant benefit paid by HCF. Putting to one
side any preventative work that
was performed, the substantive work performed on
15 December was the
three surface tooth coloured restoration which was claimed as item 533 in the
HICAPS transaction on that day
. It is difficult to see how the
Respondent could have mistakenly claimed the additional items for 2 crowns and
mistakenly generated
$800 to which he was not entitled.
47. For the substantive work performed on tooth 17 on 28 February and 13
March the Respondent agreed that the appropriate item was 553 which should
have been charged and claimed on the one occasion
. Instead there is
a charge for 2 item 615, again the fitting of a crown which was substantially
different to the work undertaken.
This resulted in the Respondent generating
$800 to which he was not entitled.
Respondent had a financial motive for the inclusion of the additional items in
the HICAPS transactions; he received considerable
difference in the amount that he has received and the amount of the legitimate
claim is demonstrated by the following
HCF benefit paid
Legitimate charge
Legitimate benefit
Transcript 86.5 per Burns.
Transcript 92.4 per Burns.
Transcript 203.2 - .4.
Transcript 86 per Burns.
Transcript 200.4.
Taken from Butler statement and annexures – Exhibit
50. Dr Quill gave evidence of the tension within the practice of because of
Respondent’s contribution to revenue of the partnership.
Respondent agreed that Dr Quill was putting pressure on him to increase his
contribution of revenue to the partnership
. By claiming the payment
for the item 615 on the three occasions, the Respondent was able to obtain
revenue in the amount of $1,600
to which he was not entitled.
No Gap payment requested.
gap was charged for the substantive (not preventative) work performed on Patient
A. Patient A confirmed that her practice was to
pay any gap amount by credit
card and that she had checked her credit card records and there were no records
of payments to the
Respondent.
53. This was inconsistent with the billing practice of the
The Respondent’s use of the HICAPS system was grossly
clinical notes prepared by the Respondent included no reference to item numbers
to be used in any HICAPS transaction. The Respondent’s
evidence was that
there was a glossary at the front desk where each treatment was allocated an
item number and it was up to the receptionist
to interpret his clinical notes
and to allocate the relevant item number. If the receptionist was in any doubt
she could refer the
question to the Respondent.
Respondent’s evidence of the system was different to the evidence of Dr
Quill who said that the Respondent gave verbal instructions
receptionist.
56. According to the Respondent he did not check the HICPAS transactions.
Given the experience of the Respondent of difficulties with members of staff
in the past and in particular a member of staff
Transcript 185.2
Transcript 184.
partnership by cashing of cheques
, one would have expected that
there would be a checking regime in place.
Respondent agreed that as a result of that experience he became more aware of
the importance of supervising staff
and he became more aware of
the importance of checking what employees did on behalf of the
58. When asked about a system of undertaking daily reconciliations
HICAPS transactions the Respondent initially responded:
“Q: The period December 2005 to 13 March 2006 during that period, did
you have a practice of undertaking daily reconciliations
of the HICAPS
transactions?
A: I believe so
Q: Who did that? A: Not me
Q: Who did it?
A: I assume the receptionist”
was the Respondent’s responsibility to check the HICAPS transactions at
the old surgery but he did not check it on a daily
basis; there was no
regularity to the checking
was no checking by an independent person, the checking was conducted by
the person who conducted the transaction
were systems available from HICAPS to facilitate the checking of transactions;
for example the option of checking transactions
online has been available online
for HCF transactions since April 2005
HICAPS system provides for a daily reconciliation summary, and to conduct weekly
or monthly checks the transaction information
is available from the
HICAPS’ web site.
Burns gave evidence of the importance of checking and auditing the HICAPS
transactions. In respect of the allocation of item numbers
for the claim, Dr
Burns gave evidence that he was the one and nobody else who allocated the item
numbers for the claim.
Transcript 179.
Transcript 180.4
Transcript 180.9
Transcript 181.
Transcript 242.1 -.3.
Transcript 150.4 per Butler.
Burns stated that the greater the margin for error in a system the more rigorous
the checking and auditing system.
is also evidence of abrogation by the Respondent of his
responsibilities under his agreement with HICAPS.
In respect of
20, the HICAPS receipt generated on 15 December 2005, the
Respondent agreed that as it was not signed by the patient as required by
4.2(e) of the HICAPS providers agreement, he had not complied with the
obligation imposed on him
Change in Explanation by the Respondent.
letter of 3 March 2007, the Respondent wrote to Mr Robinson of the Health Care
Complaints Commission, providing his side of the
story to the complaint by
[Patient A]; he realised the importance of the issues raised by the Commission
and in providing his answers
he was careful to be accurate to the best of his
error identified by the Respondent in evidence to the claim made in February and
March 2006 was the claim of 615 on the two occasions.
This accorded with his
evidence that the claim for item 615 was not appropriate as no work involving
the fitting of a Crown had been
in his letter the Respondent offers a different explanation: in that letter at
page 103 he says:
“ With respect to the two uses of 615 in February 2006 I
can only suggest that due to a need for a new restoration
to be made it was
used twice.”
Respondent does not describe the error as using item 615 but the error of using
it twice. This is different to his description
of the error given before the
Tribunal and implies that he did knowingly claim item 615 in February
Conclusion.
Dental Tribunal should be comfortably satisfied that the complaint of
professional misconduct has been proven.
the alternative the Dental Tribunal should be comfortably satisfied that the
complaint of unsatisfactory professional conduct has
Transcript 187 – 189.2.
ANNEXURE D HCCC V RUTNER
RESPONDENT OUTLINE OF SUBMISSIONS
The Complainant’s burden of proof
is uncontroversial that the Complainant bears the legal burden of proof. The
legal burden of proof has been defined as the obligation
of a party to meet the
requirement of a rule of law that a fact in issue be proved (or disproved) to
the requisite standard (Cross
on Evidence, 7
Australian edition
Standard of proof
is well established that the standard of proof applicable in these proceedings
is the civil standard. However, as was observed
by McColl JA (with whom Sheller
JA and Beazley JA agreed) in
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales v McCaffery
[2004] NSWCA 470
“It must be recalled
that the standard of proof which applies in disciplinary proceedings is that
referred to in Briginshaw
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
went on to refer to the well known passage in the judgment of Dixon J set out
below at [11].
3. Similarly in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Margiotta
the Physiotherapists Tribunal observed:
“19. The standard of proof required to establish this Complaint is
the civil standard, however it is well settled that due to
the seriousness of
the allegations and the gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal is required
to be comfortably satisfied that
the Complaints have been
established.”
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
op. cit. Dixon J said at
“The truth is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact, the
tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence
or existence before it
can be found.
It cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of
probabilities independently of any belief in its reality. No doubt
that a state of facts exists may be held according to indefinite gradations of
certainty; and this has led to attempts
to define exactly the certainty required
by the law for various purposes. Fortunately, however, at common law no third
persuasion was definitely developed. Except upon criminal issues to be
proved by the prosecution, it is enough that the affirmative
of an allegation is
made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the Tribunal. But reasonable
satisfaction is
not a state of mind that is attained or established independently of the
nature in consequence of the fact or facts to be proved.
The seriousness of
allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given
description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing from
a particular
finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the question whether
the issue has been proved to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Tribunal. In
such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences. ... This does not
mean that some standard of persuasion is fixed intermediate between the
satisfaction
beyond reasonable doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the
reasonable satisfaction which in a civil issue may, not must, be
preponderance of probability. It means that the nature of the issue necessarily
affects the process by which reasonable
satisfaction is
Evidential burden
evidential burden, in the sense of the burden of adducing evidence
edition, paragraph 4-02) has been described by
the High Court as the burden of proof in the sense of introducing evidence:
Purkess v Crittenden
[1965] HCA 34
(1965) 114 CLR 164.
The burden of introducing
evidence may shift constantly from one party to the other according as one scale
of evidence or the other
preponderates.
Amended Complaint
the first day of the hearing, 10 March 2009, the Complainant filed an Amended
Complaint without objection. The original Complaint
dated 10 October 2008
professional misconduct and/or unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of sections 40 and 41 of the Act
respectively
Amended Complaint dated 10 March 2009 splits the original complaint into two
parts, complaint 1 being an allegation of unsatisfactory
professional conduct
41) whilst complaint 2 comprises an allegation of
professional misconduct (section 40). The broad allegations and particulars
on in support of each of the two complaints are identical and in that
regard reproduce the allegations and particulars found in the
each case, it is alleged that the Respondent engaged in conduct that
demonstrates that the knowledge or judgment possessed, or
care exercised by the
dentist in the practice of dentistry was significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a dentist
of an equivalent level of training or
experience and, that the Respondent engaged in other improper and unethical
is observed that these allegations are not put in the alternative but are made
in conjunction. Accordingly, it appears that the
Complainant’s case must
be understood as involving allegations of deliberate overcharging with respect
to the four full veneer
crowns identified in the
particulars.
The Complainant’s case
Maher is an investigator apparently employed or engaged by HCF. His statement
appears at page 13 of the brief. It is submitted
that he misunderstood what he
was told by Dr Rutner on 27 October 2006. He did not make a note at the time of
the conversation but
did so later.
Rutner’s evidence is that he said to Mr Maher “
I am sorry about
the mess. We are undertaking an internal audit. We have a problem – tax
cheques have gone missing and there
may be a need to change the locks on the
any event, it is submitted that Mr Maher’s evidence in this regard is not
relevant to the substantive issues before the Tribunal.
respect to the evidence of [Patient A], it is submitted that the Tribunal should
exercise considerable caution in relying upon
her testimony. It is submitted
that the cross-examination of this witness demonstrated that she had no clear
independent recollection
of the events in question. She was clearly
reconstructing. Moreover, in a number of significant respects her evidence was
demonstrated
to be inaccurate and
unreliable. In such circumstances
it is submitted [Patient A]’s testimony should not be preferred to other
evidence or testimony
with which it conflicts. In support of the foregoing
submissions the following matters are of significance.
(i) As to her evidence that she was treated at both surgeries and that HICAPS
transactions were done at each surgery respectively,
this evidence cannot be
accepted in light of the following:
(a) the HICAPS transaction records and the evidence of Mr Butler demonstrate
that all transactions were made on the same terminal;
(b) Dr Quill’s evidence is that a separate HICAPS machine was installed
at the Waverley Street surgery. Mr Butler’s evidence
is to the effect
that such a machine must have a different number. See also Dr
O’Reilly’s question to Mr Butler on 12
March 2009 at T 157.6 and Mr
Butler’s evidence that: “
...If it was processed on a different
terminal the terminal has a different terminal ID. No two terminals can
actually function
under the same terminal ID
(c) [Patient A]’s evidence that she had treatments at Waverley Street
and that she could not see the HICAPS machine when Dr
Rutner was processing
transactions at Waverley Street because of the height of the desk hob should be
rejected in light of Dr Quill’s
evidence that in fact
the Oxford Street desk had a hob slightly higher to that at Waverley
Dr Quill is clearly in a better position to give accurate evidence as to
these matters. [Patient A]’s credit is also affected
by her refusal to
countenance that she might have been mistaken in this and other
(ii) [Patient A]’s evidence that all the appointments with Dr Rutner in
question were in the afternoons should be rejected for
the following
(a) such evidence is not compatible with the HICAPS transaction
(b) under cross-examination [Patient A] did eventually make a concession that
at least one appointment in 2006 was in the morning;
(c) her diary records a 7am appointment for 15 December 2005.
Accordingly, at least two of the appointments in question were morning
appointments. These matters severely damage [Patient A]’s
(iii) With respect to [Patient A]’s statutory
declaration and her later statement to
HCCC there are clear inconsistencies. In her statutory declaration
paragraph 8 she asserts that on each occasion she visited Dr Rutner there was
HCF processing done by Dr Rutner. This is clearly inconsistent
transaction records.
In addition, in paragraph 8 of the statutory declaration [Patient A] declares
that on each such occasion she saw Dr Rutner “
personally swipe my card
on the eftpos machine
”. However, in her statement at paragraphs 8 and
10 she states that on 20 February 2006 and 13 March 2006 she “
see this being done
”. [Patient A] maintained that her statutory
declaration was correct until pressed under cross-examination to make
concessions
which she ultimately did. It is submitted that she was careless in
signing the statutory declaration and/or the statement. Further,
her resistance
to making concessions or to even countenance that she may have made a mistake,
coupled with her evidence referred
to below with respect to her treatment by Dr
Bartolazo, significantly damages her credit.
(iv) With respect to her subsequent treatment by Dr Bartolazo the following
aspects of [Patient A]’s testimony are significant:
(a) [Patient A] was unable to give accurate evidence concerning the treatment
which she subsequently received from Dr Bartolazo. Although
that treatment is
more recent than the treatment given to her by Dr Rutner, about which she
stridently asserted she had a clear recollection,
she was unable to give even
the order of treatment by Dr Bartolazo;
(b) [Patient A] was unable to give any details of treatment by Dr Bartolazo
of tooth UR7 other than that it was capped. However,
it is to be recalled that
her evidence is that she went to Dr Bartolazo because the tooth continued to
trouble her, yet, she was
unable to state what if
anything he did to alleviate the symptoms before it was ultimately
(c) tellingly, apparently in justification or defence of her position with
regard to her failures of memory with respect to (a) and
(b) above, [Patient A]
“I hadn’t prepared for questions about
further aspect of [Patient A]’s evidence concerning the events of 8
December 2005 (see paragraph 3 of her statement page 93
of the brief) is as
“While he was processing my account, using the HCF electronic
payment system, I asked Dr Rutner if he was having problems with
my card as he
was repeatedly swiping it and pressing the keypad many times. He apologised and
commented that he needed to get a
new machine.”
15. The transaction records clearly indicate that there was no processing
affected on 8
December 2005 but it was in fact done on 15 December 2005. The effect of
A]’s evidence (if it in fact be correct) and the absence of recorded
transactions on 8
December 2005 is that it leads to the conclusion, that with respect to the
machine in question:
(i) it was not functioning, properly or at all on 8 December 2005,
(ii) that Dr Rutner did not know how to operate the machine
Burns, the Complainant’s expert, provided a note of his interpretation of
Dr Rutner’s handwritten notes (page 39).
Dr Rutner’s notes in part
are difficult to read and it is clear that Dr Burns made errors in transcribing
the notes which
Dr Burns readily
conceded. Dr Burns was not
required for cross-examination by the Respondent since it appeared that the
errors in transcription were
clearly made in good faith. Dr Burns was called in
any event by the Complainant. He gracefully made concessions as to these
under cross-examination.
in the same document Dr Burns offered certain comments about Dr Rutner’s
treatment notes. In this document Exhibit
3.11 Dr Burns has used a non-existent
number “Item 024” as the correct item number for
the treatment carried out by Dr
Dr Burns, as an expert witness for the Complainant, must have carefully
considered his evidence knowing that it would be
carefully scrutinised and that
he would be cross-examined, he made a significant mistake by putting forward
non-existent item number in Exhibit 3.11.
submission is not made to attack the credit of Dr Burns, rather, the submission
made on behalf of the Respondent is that mistakes
can be made by competent and
careful practitioners despite their best intentions. It is not suggested that
Dr Burns was attempting
to mislead by deliberately including an incorrect item
number in Exhibit 3.11. Rather, it must be seen as an inadvertent but obvious
mistake by the expert witness.
The Respondent’s case
is no evidence to support the complaints that Dr Rutner engaged in
improper and unethical conduct
”. There is no evidence that
he deliberately engaged in overcharging or charged for items which had not been
performed. The
Complainant’s case wholly relies upon drawing inferences
adverse to Dr Rutner from the
circumstantial evidence available to
the Tribunal. The Respondent’s submission (which will be developed more
fully below) is
that the Tribunal should exercise great caution in dealing with
allegations of improper and unethical conduct based only on inferences
from circumstantial evidence. This is particularly so when there are a number
of alternative hypotheses as to how the incorrect
items came to be
his statement Exhibit R4 Dr Rutner makes it plain that he has no knowledge or
recollection as to how the incorrect charges came
“It is my belief that the incorrect billings referred to above were
the result of human error, on the part of the receptionist
and/or on my part. I
wish to state that it was never my intention to bill for services which I did
not provide. I did not notice
the incorrect item numbers at the time they were
processed nor at any time thereafter. If I had I would certainly have drawn
to the attention of both HCF and [Patient A].”
transactions in question could have been performed by a member of Dr
Rutner’s staff. In this regard the following matters
(i) on 8 December 2005 no transactions were recorded;
(ii) on 15 December 2005 transactions were recorded at 9.07am, a time at
which it is highly likely a receptionist was on duty. It
can be assumed that
was present and on duty at this time. See the pay slips which indicate the
days off and the sick days. These documents indicate
that **** was not off
work that week;
(iii) in addition, see the statement of Dr Brendan Quill Exhibit R1 who
“10. With respect to the running of the practice and the use of the
HICAPS system the usual practice for both myself and, from
my observations
David, was that following the treatment we would walk the patient out to
reception with their clinical records and
the receptionist would then process
the account through the HICAPS machine by entering the item numbers with
reference to what was
recorded in the clinical records
have been provided with a copy of the documents that have been served on behalf
of the Health Care Complaints Commission. One of
those documents which is
headed “Transaction Search Results” records the transaction times
for processing of the patient’s
payments as being at 9.07am on
December 2005, 4.38pm on 28 February 2006 and 3.57pm
13 March 2006. These times were all during ****’s usual hours of
work and I would find it most unusual that she was not there
on any of those
occasions. The usual practice was for the receptionist to enter payments into
the HICAPS machine.”
23. Similarly, Dr Sharma states:
“5. At the time I was working with David Rutner and Brendan Quill,
the office was managed by a practice manager who also performed
reception duties
by the name of **** (****). From my observations and to the best of my
knowledge, **** handled all the practice
payments including patient payments for
the treatment received (which included processing payment through the HICAP
system, payments
to suppliers and general office management tasks.
is also possible as Dr Rutner concedes that the incorrect billings were the
result of error by him in whole or in part, ie. he
inadvertently punched in
wrong numbers and failed to notice that wrong numbers had been punched
25. A further alternative for which there is a good deal of support, is that
machine malfunctioned.
is Mr Butler’s evidence that in 2005/2006 one only needed to swipe a card
through the HICAPS machine once in order to enter
transactions.
is [Patient A]’s evidence that Dr Rutner swiped the card on multiple
occasions at each consultation when billed. She gave
evidence that she
discussed with Dr Rutner the
fact that the machine was not working
properly and that he would get a new one when he moved to the new practice
evidence strongly supports the finding that the machine used by Dr Rutner at all
relevant times was faulty. The faulty machine
could easily have affected the
correct registering of keypad numbers.
A]’s evidence is that on 8 December 2005 Dr Rutner swiped her card on
numerous occasions (c.f. Mr Butler) and was punching
in numbers, yet the
transaction records indicate that no claims were processed. This demonstrates
that the machine was not working
malfunction of the HICAPS machine has not been excluded by the Complainant.
There is no evidence of testing of the machine.
In this regard, the Complainant
bears the evidentiary onus as well as the onus of proof with respect
excluding this competing exculpatory hypothesis as to how
incorrect item numbers came to be processed.
noted, Dr Rutner has given sworn testimony that he did not intentionally enter
incorrect charges. There is no direct evidence
to rebut Dr Rutner’s sworn
testimony. The Complainant appears to rely upon circumstantial evidence seeking
to draw inferences
to try to overcome Dr Rutner’s sworn testimony. For
such an approach to succeed, the Tribunal would have to come to an actual
persuasion of the mind, such that the Tribunal was comfortably satisfied, taking
into account the seriousness of the allegations,
that Dr Rutner was not telling
the truth under oath and was seeking to mislead the
Complainant appears to rely heavily upon the fact that Dr Rutner did not charge
[Patient A] what is commonly referred to as “the
Complainant apparently submits that the Tribunal should put a sinister
connotation on Dr Rutner’s failure
to charge the gap to [Patient A]. Such
a submission depends upon the implied acceptance that all dentists are in the
to maximise their billings and therefore their profits. This theory
takes no account of the dentist who performs a valuable service
to his patients
and is not motivated primarily by the pursuit of maximum profit. Dr
Rutner’s evidence at paragraph 23 of his
statement, Exhibit R4, and in his
sworn testimony, gives a full explanation as to why he frequently did not charge
his patients the
addition, the Tribunal is assisted by the evidence of Dr Quill. It is Dr
Quill’s evidence that Dr Rutner historically very
often did not charge
patients the gap and that this was the subject of considerable tension between
them at the time they were in
partnership.
It is submitted that the
evidence of Dr Rutner and Dr Quill negates the inference sought to be drawn by
the Complainant from the fact
that Dr Rutner did not charge [Patient A]
is submitted that the Tribunal would be assisted by applying commonsense to the
allegations made by the Complainant. In this regard,
it might fairly be asked
‘why would someone who intended to dishonestly overcharge and derive
benefits from HCF
to which they were not entitled, charge the same
patient with four high value items (four crowns) within a three month
Surely such conduct increases the likelihood of detection since
it appears that the charging of the four crowns used up the patient’s
yearly allowances such that she was denied further benefits which in turn led
to the discovery of the incorrect charges.
person intending to be dishonest would surely have slipped one false transaction
such as a crown into the charges for four separate
patients and thereby
minimised the risk of detection.
it might also be thought also that a dishonest person would have mixed up the
false charges utilising different item numbers
rather than four crowns which are
so obviously incorrect.
Complainant is not able to discharge its burden of proof. The
Complainant’s case is built upon circumstantial evidence,
which in turn
rests on the drawing of adverse inferences which the evidence does not
inferences based on circumstantial evidence cannot be drawn in the face of
competing hypotheses entirely consistent with conduct
of the Respondent devoid
of any intention to wrongdoing.
serious allegations of dishonest and unethical conduct brought by the
Complainant against Dr Rutner have not been made out.
40. The Amended Complaint should be dismissed with costs.
Dated: April 2009
ANNEXURE E HCCC V RUTNER Reprimand
David Jonothan Rutner, as a registered dentist you are hereby reprimanded
this Dental Tribunal in relation to findings of unsatisfactory professional
conduct arising from your processing of HICAPS claims,
for treatment that was
not provided, in the period 15 December 2005 to about 15 March 2006.
The Tribunal has an actual persuasion of the mind that you knowingly claimed
benefits for treatment not provided.
In addition the Tribunal records its observation that the accounting and
reconciliation methods utilised in your practice were grossly
negligent. Your
compliance and oversight in maintaining a proper standard in your accounting and
contractual legal requirements,
was in the view of the Tribunal, totally
reckless and utterly disorganised.
The community is entitled to expect that the financial and contractual
transactions of a health care provider will be conducted accurately.
The Tribunal considers it appropriate that you be suspended from practicing
for a period of two months allowing you time to reflect
on your conduct and
would suggest that you also use this time to make preparation for a course in
ethics and to ensure that your
professional accounting and financial affairs are
all put in order.
The Tribunal is of the view that it is unlikely that this type of conduct
will be repeated by you in the future and recognises
the financial and
emotional burden that the investigation and inquiry has placed upon you.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (8.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter