URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPYT/2012/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v VU [2012] NSWPYT 1 (16 August 2012)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
PHYSIOTHERAPY TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 167
HUNG THANH VU
(AKA PETER VU, HUNG TAN
MATTER NUMBER: PY01/2011
REGISTRATION NUMBER:
PY125290(NSW)
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v VU
[2012] NSWPYT 1
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant)
represented by Mr W Hunt of Counsel instructed by Ms Faye Westwood,
Solicitor, Health Care Complaints Commission.
Hung Thanh Vu
(Respondent) self-represented.
FILE NUMBER: PY01/2011
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
Dr Elizabeth Ellis (Physiotherapist
Prof. Darren Rivett (Physiotherapist
Mr Christopher Gardiner (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 13 and 14 March 2012
DATE OF DECISION: 16 August 2012
FINDINGS (in summary): Professional misconduct – not a suitable
person – not entitled to apply for re-registration for
-Respondent to pay costs of HCCC.
CATCHWORDS: Physiotherapist – unsatisfactory professional conduct
– professional misconduct – not a suitable person
received through HICAPS for services not provided – falsifications of
records to reflect provision of services
not in fact provided – failure to
keep adequate clinical records.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(National Law – NSW) – ss139B, 139E, 139G, 144(e),
145A, 149C, clause 7 – schedule 5D;
Health Care Complaints Act
– 39(2), 90B(3).
CASES CITED:
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Physiotherapy Tribunal (the Tribunal) convened at the Health Professional
Councils Authority (HPCA) Tribunal Hearing Room in Sydney
on 13 and 14 March
2012 to conduct an Inquiry with respect to a complaint (Complaint) made in
accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act
and section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) No 86a
(National Law - NSW) by Ms Karen Mobbs, Director of
Proceedings, Health Care Complaints Commission (the HCCC), dated 30 August 2011
in relation to a registered physiotherapist, Hung Thanh Vu (the Respondent).
Complaint alleges the Respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct related to claiming
and receipt of benefits
through the HICAPS system for service not in fact provided and inappropriate
record keeping. The conduct
of the Respondent extended to many patients (or
alleged patients).
The Complaint
Amended Complaint alleges that the Respondent, being a physiotherapist under the
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
section 139B of the National Law in that he:
(i) has engaged in conduct that demonstrates the judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by him in the practice of physiotherapy is
significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience; and/or
(ii) has engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice of
physiotherapy.
Particulars
At all relevant times the physiotherapist practised as a physiotherapist at
Aches and Pains Treatment Centre at Shop 33/101-103 John
Street, Cabramatta;
approximately February 2007 to July 2008
the physiotherapist claimed and
received benefits from health insurance providers through the Health Industry
Claims and Payments
Service (“HICAPS System”) for the patients
listed in Schedule A for physiotherapy services which the physiotherapist
not provided to the listed patients;
approximately February 2007 to July 2008 the physiotherapist falsified patient
records to reflect the provision of physiotherapy
services to Patients A to Q of
Schedule A which the physiotherapist had not provided to the listed
approximately April or May 2007 to July 2008 the physiotherapist claimed and
received benefits from health insurance providers
through the HICAPS System for
the majority of his patients who had private health insurance cover for
physiotherapy services which
the physiotherapist had not provided;
approximately February 2007 to July 2007 the physiotherapist kept inadequate
clinical records in relation to the patients
as set out in Schedule B in that
to record an initial physiotherapy assessment or an adequate physiotherapy
assessment or diagnosis;
to record adequately the treatment that was provided;
to record any treatment notes for some sessions;
to record patients’ progress, treatment change or reason for
to record the signature or initials of the physiotherapist who provided
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of section 139E
of the National Law in that he:
(i) has engaged in conduct that demonstrates the judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by him in the practice of physiotherapy is
significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience; and/or
(ii) has engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice of
physiotherapy.
Particulars
At all relevant times, the physiotherapist practised as a physiotherapist at
Aches and Pains Treatment Centre at Shop 33/101-103 John
Street, Cabramatta:
approximately February 2007 to July 2008
the physiotherapist claimed and
received benefits from health insurance providers through the Health Industry
Claims and Payments
Service (“HICAPS System”) for the patients
listed in Schedule A for physiotherapy services which the physiotherapist
not provided to the listed patients;
approximately February 2007 to July 2008 the physiotherapist falsified patient
records to reflect the provision of physiotherapy
services to Patients A to Q of
Schedule A which the physiotherapist had not provided to the listed
approximately April or May 2007 to July 2008 the physiotherapist claimed and
received benefits from health insurance providers
through the HICAPS System for
the majority of his patients who had private health insurance cover for
physiotherapy services which
the physiotherapist had not provided;
approximately February 2007 to July 2007 the physiotherapist kept inadequate
clinical records in relation to the patients
as set out in Schedule B in that
to record an initial physiotherapy assessment or an adequate physiotherapy
assessment or diagnosis;
to record adequately the treatment that was provided;
to record any treatment notes for some sessions;
to record patients’ progress, treatment change or reason for
to record the signature or initials of the physiotherapist who provided
COMPLAINT THREE
Is not a suitable person to hold registration as a physiotherapist.
Particulars
At all relevant times, the physiotherapist practised as a physiotherapist at
Aches and Pains Treatment Centre at Shop 33/101-103 John
Street, Cabramatta:
approximately February 2007 to July 2008
the physiotherapist claimed
benefits from Health Insurance providers through the HICAPS System for the
patients listed in Schedule
A for physiotherapy treatment not provided for these
approximately February 2007 to July 2008 the physiotherapist falsified patient
records to reflect the provision of physiotherapy
services to Patients A to Q
of Schedule A which the physiotherapist had not provided to the listed patients;
approximately April or May 2007 to July 2008 the physiotherapist claimed and
received benefits from health insurance providers
through the HICAPS System for
the majority of his patients who had private health insurance cover for
physiotherapy services which
the physiotherapist had not provided.
The Law – preliminary matters
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
essentially the civil standard, because of
the seriousness of the allegations
and the gravity of their consequences, the Tribunal must be ‘comfortably
that the particulars of the Complaint have been established.
This qualifies the civil standard that is applied by the Tribunal.
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, Dixon J (as he then
was) at 362–363 said:
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent
unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the
consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must
affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved
reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect inferences ... This does not mean that some standard of
persuasion is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable
doubt required upon a criminal inquest and the reasonable satisfaction which in
issue may, not must, be based on a preponderance of probability. It
means that the nature of the issue necessarily affects the process
reasonable satisfaction is attained.
dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of
disbarment’ it must be emphasised that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made, from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
Appearances
per headnotes.
Suppression Orders
Chairperson of the Tribunal made a Suppression Order in relation to the name of
various patients in accordance with Schedule 5D
Clause 7 of the Act as indicated
in the schedule annexed hereto and marked ‘D’. Any information
beyond that contained
in this Reasons document which may identify them is also
not to be published. Annexure D will only be attached to the original Reasons
for Decision held by the Registry and must not be reproduced.
a Further Directions Hearing held on 22 February 2012 the Respondent admitted to
the Particulars of all three Complaints. He also
admitted that the Particulars
established Complaints One and Two. The Respondent did not admit Complaint
documents received into evidence in this matter are set out in Annexure
‘A’ hereto. The documents relied upon by the
HCCC became volume 1,
exhibits 1 – 21, volume 2 and volume 3. The latter two volumes consisted
of copies of the Respondent’s
patient records. The documents relied upon
by the Respondent became R1 and R2.
following people gave evidence before the Tribunal: Ms Helen Kindness, Mr Scott
Casey and the Respondent.
Background information
Background of the Respondent
Respondent was born in 1980 in Vietnam and came to Australia when he was ten
years of age. He completed a Bachelor of Physiotherapy
at the University of
South Australia in 2001. He moved to Sydney thereafter and in March 2002
commenced working as a physiotherapist
with JB Healthcare in Cabramatta. In
February 2003 he commenced working at Parramatta Physiotherapy Sports Rehab
Centre. The Confirmation
of Registration Status document provided by AHPRA
dated 12 March 2012 indicates he was first registered on 14 December 2002
the fact that the Respondent’s evidence is that he was working as
a physiotherapist by April 2002). His registration lapsed
on 31 December 2008.
The Respondent has never been registered under the National Law. The Respondent
currently resides in South Australia.
Background of the Complaint
Complaint arose from a complaint received by the then NSW Physiotherapists
Registration Board from a private health insurer (nib).
A letter dated 22 July
2008 from nib stated that the Respondent had breached the Provider Requirements
– Terms and Conditions
by using membership cards in a manner contrary to
their purpose and accessing the HICAPS system to obtain funds fraudulently. This
complaint was then forwarded to the HCCC which commenced an investigation.
Ultimately, when the Respondent provided his residential
address to the South
Australian Registration Board with an application for registration, the HCCC
were able to make contact with
the Respondent. The Respondent then attended an
interview with the HCCC on 29 June 2010.
Evidence before the Tribunal
Tribunal had the benefit of a large amount of documentary evidence as well as
the evidence of the witnesses relating to the health
fund investigation and
extensive evidence from the Respondent.
Evidence of Ms Kindness
13 is a review of the clinical notes of the Respondent prepared by Ms Helen
Kindness dated 23 July 2007. The report reveals
numerous deficits with the
Respondent’s clinical notes, including the total absence of notes on many
occasions where a claim
had been made on a health fund.
Oral evidence of Ms Kindness
Kindness gave evidence on the first day of the Inquiry by way of conference
telephone. Ms Kindness stated that she held a Bachelor
of Physiotherapy and a
Master of International Health (T23.9). She had provided the report in her
capacity as a physiotherapy consultant
to a private health fund. Ms Kindness
adopted the report dated 23 July 2007 as true and correct (exhibit 13).
much of Ms Kindness’ evidence explores the reasons for appropriate records
to be kept by a physiotherapist, some of
her evidence is of particular
assistance in relation to the importance of this issue (T26):
Q. What you're saying is that apart from obviously health fund
implications for who might be permitted to charge what fee for a treatment,
there are good therapeutic reasons why it needs to be trackable who treated a
patient such as
on any one occasion?
A. Yes. For the health fund they need to know that whoever provided the
treatment was actually a qualified and registered practitioner
within the terms
of their agreement. And additional to that I think it's important because I've
certainly audited practices where
there have been a number of health
professionals involved or engaged or contracted to the one practice so you need
to know who's
actually provided the service or the intervention.
Q. Am I right in suggesting that in a practice that has more than one
treating professional, in terms of providing proper ongoing
care to a patient,
that being able to identify who treated somebody on an occasion is important so
that there can be consultation
between the treating professionals about the
patient's condition?
A. That certainly makes the treatment much more comprehensive and
reasonably you'd expect to get a better outcome with that kind
of communication.
And in some cases if there has been an adverse event you actually need to know
who was responsible for the adverse
event, or whether they were responsible, so
that you can check that. So if there's been a manipulation and a fracture as a
of a manipulation or a subsequent stroke, or some catastrophic event,
then there needs to be an identifying made
to say who's actually
delivered that intervention.
Q. Well that's important for two reasons, isn't it, one in terms of
patient protection for who might have done whatever went wrong,
but also so that
a later treating professional such as an orthopaedic surgeon might need to
consult with the physiotherapist in question
the consultation to better the patient's outcome?
A. Well that's true, and if there has been an adverse event where it's a
surgical and a physiotherapist intervention you need to
have very clear
communication between the two. So it's just a normal practice to keep everybody
safe, to keep the lines of communication
open, and to hopefully facilitate a
good therapeutic outcome and monitor for adverse events.
Kindness also gave evidence regarding the importance of recording objective
measures and other observations made of the patient
in clinical notes.
general terms the review undertaken by Ms Kindness revealed some commonality of
concern across most of the records being that there
was no proper indication of
an initial physiotherapy assessment, no objective signs recorded and no
signature for any of the entries.
Ms Kindness provided a detailed analysis of
the clinical notes for a seven year old child with a presenting complaint of a
ankle which reveals substantial deficits in the Respondent’s
record keeping and treatment of this patient. Ms Kindness expressed
that if another physiotherapist had been required to take over the care of this
patient a whole assessment process would
have to be undertaken.
treatment of a four year old patient was also reviewed by Ms Kindness in answer
to questions from the Tribunal. Once again it
appeared that the records kept by
the Respondent indicated that the treatment provided by the Respondent was less
than optimal to
the point of likely being unsatisfactory.
clinical notes relating to a number of other patients were discussed with Ms
Kindness by members of the Tribunal and she provided
comments indicating that
the state of the clinical notes did cause her to have considerable concern
regarding the treatment that
had been provided to the particular patients,
including an elderly woman, by the Respondent.
Evidence of Mr Casey
Casey was acting in the role of an investigator for a health fund when he
attended the Respondent’s practice and later took
part in an interview
with the Respondent. The transcript of the interview is exhibit 9. He had also
prepared a Briefing Note dated
15 July 2008 (exhibit 7) covering the issues
relating to the concerns of the health fund regarding the Respondent’s use
the HICAPS system.
Oral evidence of Mr Casey
Casey gave evidence on the first day of the Inquiry. Mr Casey confirmed that the
contents of the Briefing Note were true and correct.
He also confirmed that the
transcript of the record of interview accorded with his recollection of the
Casey gave evidence that the various health funds cooperated on matters
involving the investigation of potentially fraudulent activity.
Casey provided the Tribunal with an overview of how the HICAPS system works (T42
Casey stated that due to the records kept by the Respondent it was not possible
to calculate the exact amount of money that had
been improperly claimed by the
Respondent.
Casey provided details of counselling that had been given to the Respondent
regarding the appropriate use of the HICAPS system
and record keeping (T47). The
Tribunal notes at this point that the Respondent acknowledged that Mr Casey had
spoken to him about
conduct that should not continue.
Other Evidence
transcript of a record of interview conducted on 29 June 2010 with investigators
from the HCCC formed exhibit 3. During this interview
the Respondent makes
various admissions and provides details of his conduct, the manner in which he
had practised, and the demise
of his practice.
exhibits also contained a transcript of an interview held with the Respondent by
representatives of the nib and the HCF Health
Funds. This interview occurred on
11 July 2008 (exhibit 9). The first question asked of the Respondent by one of
the investigators
‘Can I call you Hung or do you have an Anglicised
’ to which the Respondent replied
‘No. Hung.’
This contrasts with the evidence given to the Tribunal that he had been known by
the name of ‘Peter’ since his school
days. Further, he had used this
name to the extent of his degree being conferred in this name.
documents relating to the investigation undertaken by the health funds indicate
that a number of HICAPS cards belonging to
patients were located in the
Respondent’s practice together with numerous HICAPS print outs for claims
made using these cards.
There is correspondence from many of these patients
stating that they had lost the card, or in one instance they had left the card
with the Respondent because the HICAPS system was ‘down’ at the time
of the last consultation so it was left for the
purpose of being used when the
system was functioning.
Tribunal was also provided with copies of documents such as the HICAPS Provider
Agreement Terms and Conditions (exhibit 18) and
the HICAPS agreement signed by
the Respondent (exhibit 19). Although not officially published at the time of
some of the Respondent’s
conduct, assistance as to what was the accepted
standard within the profession of physiotherapy was given to the Tribunal by the
Policy for documentation in the physiotherapy clinical record published by the
NSW Physiotherapists Registration Board (as it then
was) issued in 2008 (exhibit
The Respondent’s evidence
Documentary evidence
Respondent responded to a letter from the HCCC dated 7 October 2010 (exhibit 4)
by way of a letter dated 16 October 2010 (exhibit
5). This letter provides
details of the emotional toll of the demise of his practice and his ultimate
bankruptcy.
Respondent also provided the ‘Submission’ (exhibit R1) reproduced in
Annexure B and a CV (exhibit R2).
Oral evidence – the Respondent
Respondent gave oral evidence before the Tribunal. He confirmed the admissions
he had made during the Directions Hearing held
just prior to the Inquiry (see
paragraph 9 above).
Respondent gave evidence that he found it hard to explain to patients that they
had to go away and work on exercises as part of
the treatment. He accepted that
part of the judgment and care of a registered physiotherapist is to address any
patient resistance
to ‘at home’ treatment.
Respondent also explained that some of the patients who asked not to pay a gap
for treatment he provided to them were people who
had been injured at work but,
as in his words, they were not paying tax they were not covered by
workers’ compensation. Others
had had their claim for compensation denied
or discontinued.
the Respondent’s evidence indicated that he wanted to maximise the amount
of time he spent providing treatment to his
patients his evidence made it clear
that this came at the price of minimal reassessment during consultations. The
Respondent accepted
that the manner in which he practised was not providing
maximum benefit to his patients.
Respondent stated that he had many regular patients and so therefore he had a
good understanding of their problems. He also had
a good memory of their
treatment. This was evidence put forward as mitigation for his failure to keep
appropriate records.
in his evidence, the Respondent stated that he was disgusted with the standard
of his own clinical notes and it had been a
‘gut wrenching’
experience to hear Ms Kindness talk about his notes and the standard of care
they reflected.
Respondent was asked to comment upon the treatment he had provided to an elderly
patient with mobility issues following a knee
replacement. The Respondent had
heard the comments of Ms Kindness regarding the records of the treatments
provided to this patient.
The Respondent stated that he could have developed a
care plan that was ‘sustainable’ and the care he did provide did
reflect his training.
Respondent agreed that when he set up a practice at Richmond he hired another
physiotherapist who may have treated the same patients
as he did. He also had a
physiotherapy assistant to do massage and to set-up the interferential machine.
in his evidence he stated that he felt his practice had suffered because the
local doctors in Cabramatta saw him as competition
and did not really refer
patients to him.
Respondent gave evidence that he felt his practice had been
. He also thought the manual work was too intense and this was
the reason why he took steps to move in to optical dispensing with
his sister.
He went in to this venture as he thought there was
‘money to be
. This venture was not successful and he
‘almost gave up
at that time’
Respondent gave evidence that he had found the whole issue of his failed
business ventures to be too shameful to talk to anyone
when it was all happening and since that time.
Respondent confirmed that he ceased treating patients in July 2008 when he
closed his practice and returned to his family home
interstate. He had
subsequently worked as a courier and in a chicken processing factory.
Respondent offered an explanation as to why he had not provided references to
the Tribunal. He stated that he accepted that the
situation he found himself in
‘all his fault’
and he did not want to make any more
excuses. Further, he was trying to be honest with himself.
stated that he thought he was ‘
good to others’
but was weak
in character and could not
‘make decisions’.
The result of
these character traits had been that the consequences of his actions were
greater than he expected.
Respondent stated that one of his close friends (who was also a physiotherapist)
had asked him to work with him since he had returned
awkward about the situation as his friend did not know he is not still a
registered physiotherapist. The Respondent
was not sure whether this friend
would have the time to mentor him should he be allowed to regain his
registration.
Respondent agreed that a psychologist would help him to be able to say
‘No’ to inappropriate patient requests and
expectations, with being
more assertive and dealing with the shame of his circumstances. The Respondent
stated that he feels better
talking to people about the feelings he has day
after day. The Respondent stated that he thinks that people do not care about
has happened to him.
Respondent stated that he wants
and to start the
‘healing process’
. He stated that he now had a clear
direction and recognised his mental stability issues and will seek counselling
for these. He accepted
that he had issues with avoidance and denial. The
Respondent also stated that his primary focus had been on his own feelings
than dealing appropriately with the situation. The Respondent recognised
that he did want to be appreciated and liked by everyone;
this ultimately being
to his detriment.
answer to a question from Counsel for the HCCC in which the Respondent was
informed that de-registration was not necessarily permanent
the Respondent
responded that if allowed back to work he would want to work in
‘limited private practice’
, that he would look for an APA or
University course in the area of musculo-skeletal physiotherapy. He had not yet
looked to see if
such a course exists as he was awaiting the outcome of the
Tribunal before doing so. He thought that he would work part time while
undertaking this course. The Respondent stated that he would
he was told’
‘he was open to feedback’
in his evidence he stated that he was not sure if he was ready to go back to
working in health, but he had been proud to work
as a physiotherapist and wanted
to feel some purpose again and build back the confidence he had before. Although
he was passionate
training. The Respondent stated that volunteering had been on his mind and
now wanted to help people without the financial motivation. The Respondent
stated that he also wanted to rebuild his family relationships.
response to a cross-examination question the Respondent stated that he would
like to return to work in private practice but accepted
this would be under
guidance and that he would need general practice managerial skills, as well as
patient interaction skills, and
he looked to the Tribunal to give him direction
in this regard.
detailed questioning as to his intentions regarding returning to the profession
and having time to consider a plan during the
overnight adjournment of the
Inquiry the Respondent stated that he thought he could revise his undergraduate
student notes, he could
have his clinical note keeping reviewed by peers, he
would liaise with colleagues, he could have a mentor and he expected that he
would have conditions on his registration.
Respondent had given evidence that he had returned to attending church. He was
asked about whether he had volunteered in any activities
as a result of this
involvement. The Respondent indicated he had not become involved in any
volunteering. The Respondent stated that
if it was a condition on his
registration he would be willing to undertake voluntary work.
Respondent estimated that his gross income for the financial years 2006, 2007
and 2008 was approximately 1 million dollars. He
has been bankrupted and this
will discharge on 6 October 2012. The Respondent stated that he was aware of his
own financial management
shortcomings. He stated that the financial side of his
practice had kept him going but now accepted that this was not the right motive
to continue to practise physiotherapy in the manner he was doing. Later in his
evidence the Respondent stated that he was no longer
paying off ATO and that his
total indebtedness had been $250,000.
Respondent stated that after his initial conversation with Mr Casey, who had
explained to him the problems he had with his practice,
he made an attempt to
relocate his practice and engaged in discussions with a CBD location. The
Respondent stated that there was
too much debt involved for this scheme to work
‘did not have the strength to walk away ..... didn’t know
who to talk to ..... just tried to hang on’.
Respondent was asked about the comment made to him by the local doctor who told
him that he thought the gift of a bottle of wine
was not legal. The Respondent
stated he had not realise it was not legal/acceptable.
Respondent stated that he had not opened any letters between 2008 and 2010
because still trying to
‘to defy bankruptcy’
. He now accepts
that he should have
‘done things’
earlier so that he could
have got things
‘off my chest’
Respondent stated that he had made a mistake, a string of poor decisions and
when asked if he would accept he had been dishonest
the Respondent replied
Respondent confirmed during oral evidence that he had been assisted during the
Direction Hearings held prior to the commencement
of the Inquiry with
understanding the relevant law, the process that was to be adopted as well as
the scope of the documents that
could be placed before the Tribunal as evidence.
The Respondent accepted that he had been advised that he could place reports,
example from treating general practitioners or psychologists, before the
Tribunal. The Respondent stated that he had not received
any treatment from
health professionals and his working hours hampered him from so doing. In answer
to questions the following day
the Respondent stated that his working hours
currently were either 5.30am-1.36pm or 2.30pm to 10.42pm. The Respondent gave no
reasons as to why these hours restricted him from receiving treatment or
consulting health practitioners.
Respondent agreed that parts of his statement (R1 – see Annexure B hereto)
were inconsistent and some of the sentiments
expressed therein were not
reflected in his clinical practice.
Respondent stated that he
‘would take his medicine and be punished for
. By way of a final submission the Respondent stated that he
considered the HCCC position was fair, that all cross-examination questions
been fair, that the HCCC submission had really helped clarify things for him and
that any decision the Tribunal made would be
acceptable to him and fair. He
stated that he had not given ‘much thought’ to the steps he would
need to take to re-enter
the profession. He stated that he appreciated
everyone’s time.
Submissions
Submission made by the HCCC
HCCC provided a written outline of submissions (see annexure B hereto) which
were supplemented by oral submissions. The transcript
reflects the oral
submissions made.
Respondent’s Submissions
Respondent provided a written outline of submissions (see annexure B hereto)
which were supplemented by oral submissions. Some
of the oral submissions are
detailed above under the heading ‘Oral evidence of the Respondent’
and in the findings below.
The transcript reflects the oral submissions made.
Findings re Particulars
Tribunal notes the admissions made by the Respondent with respect to all of the
Particulars of each Complaint. The Tribunal is
reasonably satisfied on the
evidence in this matter that each of the Particulars of each of the Complaints
is established.
Findings re Complaints
Tribunal notes the admission of the Respondent to Complaints One and Two. The
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the conduct
engaged in by the Respondent
demonstrates that the judgment possessed and the care exercised by him in the
practice of physiotherapy
is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training and experience.
the Tribunal is of the view that the conduct is of such a serious
nature that a finding of professional misconduct is established.
Considerations relevant to a Finding re Complaint
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent would not have been a suitable
person to hold registration at the time he committed
the conduct detailed in the
Particulars. The question for the Tribunal to determine is whether or not the
Respondent is, at the current
time, not a suitable person to hold registration.
this regard the Tribunal has considered a number of factors as determinative of
a finding that the Respondent remains a person
who is not suitable to hold
registration. A review of the transcript of the Respondent’s oral evidence
is highly informative
in this regard.
clearly the nature of the conduct at first instance plays a role. As noted
above, there also needs to be a contemporaneous assessment
of the Respondent
otherwise the possibility of remediation of deficits would not be able to be
considered. This would fall foul of
the well-established principle that the
punitive and
with the more general principle of law that the possibility of
rehabilitation should be considered.
Tribunal is of the view that professional integrity, personal integrity, insight
into the reason why the conduct attracted the
severe criticism of the Tribunal,
insight into the steps required to remediate any personal or professional
deficits identified by
the offensive conduct, steps taken towards such
remediation, the Respondent’s otherwise good character, the nature of the
Respondent’s
prior professional practise including any prior misconduct
are some of the matters to be explored and appropriately weighed by the
in determining suitability at the current time.
are a number of aspects of the evidence that go to the question of the
Respondent’s professional integrity and conduct.
The Respondent gave
evidence that he had answered a question on the application for registration he
made in South Australia in 2010
indicating that there was no current
investigation knowing that a matter had been referred to the HCCC in New South
Wales. He accepted
that lodging such an application may have resulted in a
rejection of the application and provoked the HCCC to take action with respect
to the matters currently before the Tribunal. He also stated that he considered
there was a chance that the application for registration
would be successful.
any event, what occurred was the application was rejected by the South
Australian Registration Board and the letter so advising
was accompanied by a
letter from the HCCC inviting the Respondent to make telephone contact with one
of the Investigators. The Respondent
was able to tell the Tribunal the name of
the Investigator in the letter and also stated that the Investigator had left
by the time he rang to talk to him. This contrasts with his earlier
evidence (see transcript and exhibits 3 (page 4) and 5) that
he had voluntarily
approached the HCCC to start to address the issues complained of and thereby
contributed to the process of his
rehabilitation. In his oral evidence the
Respondent accepted that although his answer to the question on the application
have been technically correct it was not in the spirit of the question
(T109, 14/3/12).
the Tribunal is also of the view that the nature of the CV provided by the
Respondent to the Tribunal, at the request of the
Tribunal, identifies some
professional deficits, it also demonstrates a lack of insight into what would
ordinarily be required in
a professional CV. By way of example the Tribunal
would not expect a CV to include the fact that the Respondent was born
prematurely,
where he had resided during his childhood, his parents reaction to
his progress through school, his mother’s insistence on
him drinking a
litre of milk a day so that he would grow taller, the comments made to him by
his university tutors, the response
of individual patients to his treatments and
the fact that he feels dizzy at the sight of blood in the chicken processing
in which he currently works.
Tribunal also notes that there were no referees named in the CV nor had the
Respondent provided the Tribunal with any references
although he was advised he
was able to do so. The Respondent explained to the Tribunal that he felt too
ashamed to talk to any previous
colleagues, any of his close friends or family
church (although he did not take part in any volunteer work) and also
was ‘really’ well-liked by the people in his current
(where he had worked for over two years). The Respondent has not provided any
independent comments regarding his good
character, although once he ultimately
made contact with the HCCC he has co-operated with the investigation process.
of the Particulars of Complaints One and Two relates to the keeping of
inadequate clinical records. The Tribunal notes that in
R2 the Respondent
erroneously recorded his early work in NSW. The Tribunal also notes at this
point that there is a discrepancy between
the time the Respondent stated he
first gained Registration in NSW and the date formally recorded in the AHPRA
records (volume 1
– exhibit 1B). The HCCC made further enquiries of AHPRA
and the commencement of Registration date of 14 December 2002. The
Tribunal was
unable to resolve this discrepancy by reliance on any other documentation and
therefore relies on the formal Confirmation
of Registration Status.
Respondent’s evidence that he did not consider that the need for
appropriate clinical notes was as great when he was practising
practitioner rather than in a practice with a number of practitioners is of
concern. This position does not accord with
the professional and legal
obligations placed on health practitioners, in all settings, with regard to
keeping records of matters
such as the treatment provided, the response to
treatment and the plan for further treatment.
giving of massage (or any other treatment) without appropriate clinical
indication in response to patient request and/or ‘social
is contrary to accepted standards of professional practice. Similarly the
provision of services, the remuneration
for which was the inappropriate use of
private health insurance benefits, is contrary to accepted standards of
professional practice
(without having regard to any other characterisation of
the conduct). The Respondent gave the following answers to questions from
investigators from the health insurance funds (exhibit 9 – page 13/14
responses to Q135 & Q136):
Q.135 (Investigator): So in your own words what were they actually asking you
A. Well basically to have treatment without having to pay for the service.
Q.136 (Investigator): Okay. And what did that mean in terms of you being able
to provide that treatment?
A. Well they will come and they will like bring their – people come and
the ones that use their health funds a lot. They normally
– they go around
in groups and if you annoy one person it just spreads and you just don’t
know who knows who. And even
the nicest person might be the one who actually
spreads the – like they basically tell me in Cabramatta you have to talk
your customers differently. Like as a professional when I try to not put them
in place but like say that I don’t want to do
something. They get a bit
annoyed and then I might raise my voice a little bit, not like yelling or
anything at them. I pretty much
just want them to like leave the premises. Like
they will just stand there and then they will just create chaos and it is just
they will have to get what they want before they leave you in peace.
Respondent stated that he was offended by the patients using his professional
services for the purpose of receiving a massage
which would only provide them
with temporary relief of symptoms. He now agreed that by engaging in such
conduct he has brought disrepute
upon the profession of physiotherapy and was
ashamed by the image of the profession that his conduct created.
is of concern to the Tribunal that the Respondent did not practise in a
professional manner so as not to encourage patient dependence
on the therapist.
The Respondent describes a degree of patient dependence that is not compatible
with contemporary professional practice.
is imperative that a registered health practitioner have the appropriate
personal qualities not only to work within any relevant
codes of conduct or
professional guidelines but have the ability to self-identify ethical
obligations and ethical outcomes.
Tribunal also has concerns regarding the Respondent’s personal integrity.
The Respondent did not respond to a question from
a Private Health Insurer
Investigator (exhibit 9) by providing the Anglicised name of ‘Peter’
in circumstances that this
would be an open response. In his oral evidence, in
answer to a question from the Tribunal, the Respondent stated that the person
‘Peter Vu’ who had corresponded with the Registry regarding this
matter was in fact him. When further questioned he stated
that he had started to
use this name at school and it was the name recorded on his university testamur
(for his Bachelor of Physiotherapy).
Further, some of his patients had called
him by the name ‘Peter’.
is of concern that the Respondent was prepared to elect to take an affirmation
in circumstances where he later admitted that he
did not know the difference
between an affirmation and an oath.
with respect to good character the Tribunal notes that the Respondent gave
evidence that he had repaid the ATO monies owed
but will remain an undischarged
bankrupt until October 2012.
willingness on the part of the Respondent to place a gloss onto the evidence was
also evident to the Tribunal. The Respondent gave
evidence to the Tribunal that
he estimated that he saw about 40 patients a day rather than the estimate of 50
recorded in earlier
statements.
are numerous examples of the Respondent’s general lack of insight and
maturity together with a level of naivety. The Tribunal
notes that the
Respondent set out in his ‘submission’ document (R1) how he
describes his own personality and character.
He also gave evidence about his own
personal weaknesses but he did not appear to understand the implications of
these traits upon
professional practice. Examples of how this manifest itself in
the Respondent’s practice was that he was not cognisant of the
impact that
becoming ‘friends’ with his patients (to the extent that they would
‘open up’ to him as if they
were ‘family’) upon his
ability to maintain professional boundaries and be able to exercise objective
judgment. Rather,
the Respondent put this matter forward in his submission (R1)
as an important factor in giving his life purpose.
example was the naivety of the Respondent regarding how to address his
behavioural problems. The Respondent agreed that a
psychologist may be of some
assistance with respect to his own emotions and feelings (shame, guilt etc) but
did not appear to understand
that psychologist can assist with the systematic
recovery of behavioural defects such as risk taking. The Respondent claimed he
not have to deal with the risk taking behaviours of gambling and drinking
alcohol as these only occurred when he was stressed. The
Respondent gave
evidence that he had not gone to a psychologist as he did not think there would
be a psychologist in South Australia
that had any dealings with people in
‘his circumstances’
and it was a matter that should be dealt
with in New South Wales. Further he thought he would become emotional if he went
to a psychologist.
The Respondent stated that going to a psychologist might have
the benefit of providing him with a model of professional behaviour.
before the Tribunal the Respondent stated that he now regretted not taking up
the opportunity for counselling that was
offered to him by Mr Casey.
Tribunal also is of the view that the Respondent’s conduct demonstrates
impaired ability to make appropriate independent
judgments. It appears that a
character flaw of this nature was identified to the Respondent by one of his
tutors at university. The
Respondent stated in his submission (R1) that
‘The only thing I knew about myself was that I have always tried to
conform to people around me, and was once told by a tutor
(in a positive way) to
establish an identity and be myself’
Respondent admits that he was not able to resist pressures placed upon him by
‘groups in the local community’
who presented as patients
without a genuine clinical need for physiotherapy treatment who requested
‘massage treatment’
. These patients placed pressure upon the
Respondent to misuse their Health Insurance to make payment for the service
provided. The
Respondent claimed that other patients who may have had a genuine
clinical need for physiotherapy pressured him to fraudulently claim
payment through their Health Fund by using the benefit entitlement for other
family members. The Respondent stated that
the patients had placed pressure upon
him to provide massage services and to not charge them a gap payment. The
Respondent’s
evidence was that patients compared how much they had been
charged and the amount of the Health Insurance cover and demanded that
Respondent give them the benefit of the best rates. The Respondent admitted that
he was unable to resist these pressures and
stated that if he had not acceded to
their demands that they would have moved on as a group to another practitioner
who would engage
in such conduct leaving him without a practice. This conduct is
also considered by the Tribunal as demonstrative of a lack of an
essential part
of professional integrity.
area of the Respondent’s evidence of concern was his reliance on there
being no choice on his part but to accommodate
expectations placed upon him. The Tribunal notes that the
Respondent initially worked in Cabramatta, or nearby prior to establishing
practice there. Further, at the time he established his practice in Cabramatta
he had experienced working in another area where
there was no
‘culturally embedded’
expectation placed upon him.
Tribunal now considers the Respondent’s insight into the steps required to
remediate his position. The Tribunal notes the
almost total lack of a plan on
his part to rectify the situation in which he had found himself. This had
occurred in 2007 when the
Respondent had been warned by Mr Casey about his
claiming practice and his record keeping. The Respondent gave evidence that
he accepted what Mr Casey said to him he was unable to make any changes to
his situation despite realising his dire financial and
profession position. In
2010 the Respondent applied for registration interstate with the intention of
returning to practice without
addressing any of his personal or professional
issues or the looming HCCC matter. The Respondent also accepted that he had
to re-register and return to work as a physiotherapist without his
colleagues and friends knowing of his misconduct in NSW. He accepted
was the ‘same thinking’ that gave rise to the original problems. The
Tribunal notes this is evident at the
time of the Inquiry from: the
Respondent’s evidence, his unwillingness to engage with potential
referees, his attendance unaccompanied
by a support person before the Tribunal
and his concern that the evidence he was giving would enter the public domain.
The Respondent
admitted that he had come before the Tribunal Inquiry
‘empty handed’ as to a plan for re-entry into the profession and
dependent upon the Tribunal to make orders to guide him back into professional
practice. Later in his evidence the Respondent
stated that he also needed to
find the ‘courage’ to talk to HCCC.
addition to the inability to make appropriate independent decisions the
Respondent also repeatedly failed to take heed of advice
from appropriate
authority figures. While the Tribunal has expressed concern regarding the
Respondent’s ability to make independent
decisions, one of those decisions
should have been when it is appropriate to take advice from a senior colleague
or guidance from
an authority figure.
Tribunal notes the Respondent gave evidence that ‘a lot of the
doctors’ (volume 1, exhibit 3 – page 17.35) advised
him against
entering into a business arrangement with the organisation known as Australian
Medical Cooperative Limited (AMCL). Further,
Mr Casey and another inspector
from a different Health Insurer gave a clear warning to the Respondent in 2007
regarding his manner
of practice and indicated that if he continued he may be
de-recognised. Mr Casey also provided the Respondent with advice regarding
counselling and did not take up his offer thereof. The HCCC noted that the
Respondent had not taken up the opportunity to put documents
such as references
before the Tribunal despite the Chairperson indicating that he was able to
include documents of this nature in
addition to material such as reports from
treating health practitioners.
answer to questions from the Tribunal the Respondent was unable to provide any
evidence regarding concrete action on his part with
respect to professional
development or preparation for re-entry into the profession, action to address
his need for personal counselling,
action to address his need for professional
counselling or any continued use of his professional skills in a workplace or
setting. Further, despite the claim in his submission that he had
altruistic motivation in working in the profession of physiotherapy
engaged in any community service or activities of any kind since ceasing
Tribunal observed in the evidence before it that there was a more general
tendency on the part of the Respondent to avoid effectively
dealing with
situations by just not facing them. By way of example the Respondent stated that
apart from one letter he did not open
any mail addressed to him for a period of
two years after he returned to Adelaide. Further he did not reveal his
difficulties to
friends who could have helped him.
Tribunal notes with grave concern that the Respondent states (R1) that he has
not talked to anyone about the conduct that has
brought him before the Tribunal.
In this circumstance the repeated reference by the Respondent to his shame is
less reflective of
remorse and more indicative of a continuing reluctance to
face his conduct publically and deal with the consequences thereof. The
accepts that the Respondent regrets the conduct that has brought him before the
CV provided by the Respondent at the request of the Tribunal (R2) records the
professional development undertaken by the Respondent.
There was no professional
development for the last four or five years of his practice and the early
professional development undertaken
does not reflect the needs of a new graduate
with limited experience working in private practice wanting to establish as an
independent
practitioner. This is indicative of an inability to undertake
independent consideration of his own professional development. The
notes that the Respondent was a member of the Australian Physiotherapy
Association (APA) from 2002 to 2008, a professional
organisation that offers a
wide range of opportunities to engage in professional development activities.
Tribunal is reinforced in this view by the fact that the Respondent has not
engaged in any activities of a professional nature
from July 2008 until 2012.
Tribunal has set out above the evidence given by the Respondent regarding his
thoughts on how he would rehabilitate himself in
order to return to practice.
The concerns the Tribunal have with the Respondent’s evidence in this
regard is that he made no
comments regarding steps he would take to address
ethical and legal requirements of practice, financial and business practices,
modification particularly regarding risk taking and resisting social
pressure, and stress management.
Tribunal notes that to his credit the Respondent admitted conduct to the
Inspectors from the Health Insurers, to the HCCC Investigators
Tribunal. As noted above the Respondent co-operated with the investigation and
disciplinary process once he ultimately
made contact with the HCCC.
Tribunal also accepts the HCCC submission that the Tribunal should consider the
Respondent’s admissions ‘against interest’.
The Respondent
admitted to the declaration on the application for registration made in SA in
circumstances where it would have been
apparent to him that the HCCC did not
have that document. He conceded that he had not told his close friend in
Adelaide about his
problems in NSW as he intended returning to practice in SA if
his registration was granted without advising anyone of these problems
circumstances where he knew that the HCCC had no way of ascertaining this matter
without the Respondent’s admission thereof.
Tribunal accepts the HCCC submitted that the degree of trust placed in a
physiotherapist is analogous to that placed (in a considerable
amount of case
law) in medical practitioners, and indeed by the community in all registered
health care providers. All health practitioners
have the privilege of being in
trusted positions. In this matter the Respondent was trusted by health insurance
funds to access the
HICAPS system in an appropriate manner.
determining whether the Respondent should be allowed to regain his registration
at the current time the Tribunal took the view
that it must satisfy itself that
the personal and professional deficiencies that might lead to a recurrence of
the unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct did not
persist and were not evident at the time of the hearing. The Respondent
appear to have the self-reflective capacity to seek the professional assistance
that may facilitated the development of insight
into the full extent of his
conduct. It may also have assisted to remedy the defects in his character that
significantly contributed
to his misconduct. While the Respondent made some
indication that hearing the evidence of Ms Kindness regarding his clinical notes
had had a major impact upon him, this situation came about due to his
participation in the Inquiry rather than at the Respondent’s
instigation. This would indicate however that the Respondent may benefit
significantly from the intervention of other professional
people in his life. It
may allow him to develop appropriate professional and personal skills for the
proper practice of the profession
of physiotherapy. The Tribunal is of the view
that it will only be with the intervention of a health practitioner such as a
psychologist
that the Respondent will be able to address his overwhelming level
of concern about what others might think of him and his prior
conduct. Given the
public nature of a decision such as this the Tribunal strongly recommends the
Respondent engages with such a health
professional (or health professionals).
evidence before the Tribunal indicates that the Respondent does not appear to be
able to predict consequences of his actions,
even when warned by people in
authority such as Mr Casey and Ms Kindness.
is unfortunate that the Tribunal has little evidence to show he will not engage
in similar conduct again apart from his own assertions
in evidence.
the Tribunal has not considered the standard of the Respondent’s treatment
in any way in reaching the findings and orders
herein, the identification of
what appears on the face of the clinical records to be the substandard treatment
of a four year old
patient and an elderly patient when only three clinical
records were reviewed in detail by the Tribunal is of great concern. In this
regard the Tribunal notes Ms Kindness’ evidence that these clinical
records were not reflective of appropriate care and Respondent
essentially
agreed. Later in his submission to the Tribunal the Respondent stated that he
would never be negligent of his patients.
The Tribunal only raises this matter
as an issue that should be considered by any tribunal that is dealing with any
application for
re-registration that may be made in the future by the
Respondent. Given the extent of the conduct and the nature of the issues
in this Reasons for Decision the Tribunal is of the view that it
would be appropriate for any application for re-registration to
be considered by
a tribunal.
Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent’s professional integrity was
significantly lacking at the time he committed
the misconduct and he has not
taken any tangible steps to address this deficit since that time. The Tribunal
is also of the view
that there were deficits evident in the Respondent’s
personal integrity at the time he committed the misconduct. While the
has been bankrupted and satisfied the ATO by means that have included (if not
exclusively due to) his gaining employment,
the Tribunal remains concerned that
there have been no proactive steps taken by the Respondent to address the
deficits in his capacity
for personal integrity evident from his conduct. While
the Respondent spoke of the need to enlist professional assistance by way
some form of counselling he had not taken any steps towards receiving such help.
The Tribunal is of the view that the Respondent
has some insight into the steps
required to remediate personal or professional deficits identified by the
offensive conduct but had
not taken steps towards such remediation. While not
discounting in any way the high level of co-operation demonstrated by the
with the Tribunal process, the Tribunal only has the
Respondent’s word as to his otherwise good character, apart from there
being no prior complaints relating to the Respondent of which the Tribunal is
aware. It is difficult to put much weight on the nature
Respondent’s prior professional practice given the limited period of time
he was in practice and the lack of references
from those who he had worked for
prior to setting up his own practices. With respect to insight into the reason
why the conduct attracted
the severe criticism of the Tribunal the Respondent
showed the first glimmers of this while hearing the evidence of Ms Kindness
the Inquiry. The Tribunal does not consider that the Respondent had
gained sufficient insight into his conduct so as to avoid breaches
professional conduct in the future.
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the evidence establishes that the
Respondent is not currently a suitable person to hold
registration (see section
144(e)). Complaint 3 is therefore established.
the fact that the Respondent had not held registration since 2008, the Tribunal
has proceeded with this Complaint under the
National Law in accordance with
section 139G of the National Law.
HCCC submitted that the usual costs order should be made. The Respondent made no
submission on this matter.
Matters for the Respondent to address
evidence before the Tribunal indicates that the Respondent lacked an
understanding of the financial responsibilities associated
not only with running
a private practice in a professional manner but also in relation to financial
matters generally. In the Respondent’s
interview with the HCCC (see
exhibit 3) the Respondent stated that he had been under the impression that any
loss he made on the
share market would be a ‘straight out tax
deduction’ and had not realised that there were any capital gains/capital
implications. Further, he had ‘postponed’ paying his tax with
the hope that his practice would pick up and he would make
enough money to meet
his tax obligations. Quite clearly the Respondent would have to gain a greater
understanding of financial matters
prior to returning to any form of private
practice. Further, an inability to keep one’s private financial affairs in
may also, in some circumstances, impact upon a person’s suitability
to hold registration. This issue has been explored in detail
in a number of
disciplinary cases relating to legal practitioners.
Tribunal also notes from the evidence before it that there may have been issues
with the quality of his clinical care and record
clearly the Respondent will also have to address the deficits in his
understandings of the ethics of professional practice and
develop the capacity
to practice autonomously in a manner consistent with professional standards.
Noting that in accordance with section 149C(4) if the Respondent was still
registered an Order cancelling the Registration of the
Respondent would have
been made by the Tribunal (the Respondent is referred to as the Practitioner for
the purpose of these Orders
being applied to the Register), the Tribunal orders
Practitioner is disqualified from being registered for a period of two years.
The Practitioner is not entitled to apply for registration
as a physiotherapist
for a period of two years from the date of
the Physiotherapy Board of Australia record on the National Register the fact
that had the Practitioner been registered the Tribunal
would have cancelled his Registration (see section
149C(4)(c)).
Practitioner is to pay the costs of the HCCC in relation to
as agreed or assessed. The parties have leave to apply to
the Tribunal to determine the issue of costs if such agreement or assessment
cannot be reached.
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for Decision document is to be forwarded by the
Registry to:
1) The Respondent,
2) The HCCC,
3) The Physiotherapy Board of
4) AHPRA (New South Wales Office),
5) The South Australian
Board of the Physiotherapy Board of Australia,
6) The Physiotherapy Council
of New South Wales,
Health Funds Limited, (Claims Utilisation and Provider Relations Manager),
Contributions Fund of Australia Limited (HCF), Claims Manager, and
the Council and Boards determines.
Dated: 16 August 2012
___________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Elizabeth Ellis
___________________
Darren Rivett
___________________
Christopher Gardiner
Annexure A – Index of documents in evidence
Annexure B –
Submissions of the parties
Annexure C – Schedule of Names Suppressed
INDEX TO THE DOCUMENTS OF
THE HEALTH CARE
COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
VOLUME ONE of TWO
FORMAL DOCUMENTS
(a) Complaint
(b) Confirmation of Registration Status from Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency
(c) Recency of Practice Standard
CD containing electronic interview with the Commission and Mr Vu dated 29 June
Transcript of electronic interview with the Commission and Mr Vu on 29 June
S40 letter from the Commission to the respondent dated 30 September
S40 response to the Commission from the respondent dated 16 October
nib INFORMATION
Letter to Physiotherapists Registration Board from nib Health Fund dated 22
July 2008, notifying of derecognition from nib provider
nib Health Fund Briefing note dated 15 July 2008
CD containing electronic interview with Scott Casey of nib Health Fund and
Mr Vu on 11 July 2008.
Transcript of interview between Scott Casey of nib Health Fund and Mr Vu on
11 July 2008.
Report on money paid out to Mr Vu on behalf of nib Health Fund customers
between February 2007 and July 2008.
Letters to customers from nib Health Fund whose membership cards were found
at Pain Care Physiotherapy.
Letters to nib Health Fund from customers whose membership cards were found
at Pain Care Physiotherapy.
Review of Clinical notes for Mr Vu dated 23 July 2007 by Ms Helen Kindness,
Physiotherapy Consultant
List of nib customers of Mr Vu.
Patient nib membership cards with unsigned HICAPS declarations for services
in the past, seized by NAB inspectors on 9 July 2008
Email from nib to HCCC dated 2 September 2011 and attached excel
spreadsheet showing HICAPs claims for nib customers for 2007 and
HICAPS INFORMATION
Printouts from HICAPS website –
www.hicaps.com.au
HICAPS Provider Agreement Terms and Conditions.
HICAPS provider agreement details signed by Mr Vu dated 20 February
GUIDELINES / POLICIES
NSW Physiotherapists Registration Board Policy for documentation in the
physiotherapy clinical record, 2008
NSW Physiotherapists Registration Board Policy on Professional Conduct,
Volume 2 and 3 of HCCC Documents
Clinical records from Mr Vu’s practice at Cabramatta seized by nib
Patient records marked with green tab
Patient records for nib members – refer to Schedule A of the
Patient records marked with yellow tab
Patient records which were audited on 23 July 2007 by Ms Helen Kindness
– refer to Schedule B of the Complaint
Patient record marked with white tab
Additional patient from records provided by nib to the HCCC – refer
to Schedule A of the Complaint
Index to documents relied upon by Respondent
Respondent’s Submission to the Tribunal
Respondent’s CV
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE HCCC
submissions set out the standard of proof; the complaints; the admission and/or
evidence supporting the complaints; the protective
orders sought by the
Commission and the reasons for those orders and, finally a costs application and
submissions on that issue.
PART 1: THE STANDARD OF PROOF
standard of proof is the civil standard as stated in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1983) 60 CLR 336
at 362-3. However by reason of the seriousness of the
allegations and the gravity of the consequences the Tribunal must be comfortably
satisfied that the matters in the complaint have been established.
use of “comfortably satisfied” does not imply that proof to a higher
standard than the balance of probabilities is
Gianoutsos v Glykis
[2006] NSWCCA 137
(2006) 65 NSWLR 539
at 547-9, applied by the Medical Tribunal in
[2006] NSWMT 1
common law there are only two standards of proof, the civil standard of proof
upon a balance of probabilities, and the criminal
standard of proof beyond
reasonable doubt:
Veterinary Practitioners Board of NSW
[2009] NSWSC 347
standard is not a third
standard or proof. Rather, it is concerned with the quality or sufficiency of
the evidence necessary to discharge
the civil standard.
PART 2: THE COMPLAINTS
14 December 2002 and 14 December 2008, Hung Vu (the practitioner) was a
Registered Physiotherapist registered under the
Physiotherapy Act,
now repealed. The evidence demonstrates that the practitioner ceased practice
some time in July 2008 and has not practised since.
His registration lapsed at
15 December 2008 due to non renewal.
Physiotherapists Tribunal of New South Wales received a Notice of Complaint
dated 30 August 2011 from the Health Care Complaints
Commission following
consultation with the Physiotherapy Council of New South Wales in accordance
with section 39(2) and 90B(3) of
1993 and section 145A of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(the National Law).
are 3 Complaints:
: The practitioner has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
within the meaning of section 139B of the National Law in
that he (i) has
engaged in conduct that demonstrates the judgement possessed, or care exercised,
by him in the practice of physiotherapy
is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
expertise and/or
(ii) has engaged in improper or unethical conduct relating to
his practice (section 144(b) of National Law); Four particulars were
pleaded and
have been subject to admission by the practitioner.
: the practitioner has been guilty of professional misconduct within the
meaning of section 139E of the National Law in that he (i)
has engaged in
conduct that demonstrates the judgement possessed, or care exercised, by him in
the practice of physiotherapy is significantly
below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or expertise
and/or (ii)has engaged in
improper or unethical complaints relating to his
practice (section 144(b) of National Law); Four particulars were pleaded and
been subject to admission by the practitioner
the practitioner is not a suitable person to hold registration in the
practitioner’s profession (section 144(e) of National
Law); Three
particulars were pleaded and have been subject to admission by the
practitioner.
PART 3: ADMISSIONS AND/OR EVIDENCE IN SUPPORT OF EACH
Complaints 1 and 2: Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct and Professional
‘Unsatisfactory
professional conduct’ is defined in s 139B of the National Law.
‘Professional misconduct’
is defined in section 139E of the National
Law. Both terms define the conduct as including
“any other improper or
unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of the
practitioner’s profession”.
“Professional
misconduct” is defined to
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s
registration; or
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional
conduct that, when the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration.
particulars in complaint 2 repeat the four particulars in complaint 1.
of those particulars and both of Complaints 1 and 2 were admitted by the
practitioner, who did so at a Directions Hearing before
the Chairperson of the
Tribunal on 22 February 2011. The practitioner confirmed those admissions before
the Tribunal on 13 March
the circumstances of this particular case, given the admissions made and the
documentary evidence tendered in the Commission’s
case, supported by short
but incisive evidence from each of Helen Kindness, consultant physiotherapist
and Scott Casey, formerly
an investigator with Nib Health Fund, it is not
proposed to make any analysis of the evidence available in support of Complaints
1 and 2 in this outline of submissions.
contention for the Commission is that the Tribunal can be comfortably satisfied
in relation to Complaints 1 and 2 and the particulars
thereof, on the basis of
the material referred to in paragraph 9 hereof.
the Tribunal would be assisted by an analysis of the available evidence, save
reliance on the practitioner’s admissions,
the Commission will be in a
position to take the Tribunal to that material in oral submissions.
Complaint 3: Not suitable to hold registration in the
practitioner’s profession
practitioner admits the three particulars pleaded in relation to Complaint 3,
which mirror the particulars 1, 2 & 3 of Complaints
1 and 2. Those
admissions were made before the Chairperson at the Directions Hearing on 22
February 2012 and confirmed before the
Tribunal on 13 March 2012.
practitioner does not admit Complaint 3 itself, notwithstanding the admission of
the particulars to that Complaint, on which the
Commission relies.
will fall to the Tribunal to determine on the basis of the admitted particulars
and other evidence relied on by the Commission
and the practitioner, whether it
can be comfortably satisfied that the practitioner is not a suitable person to
hold registration.
phrase “suitable person” is not defined in the National Law.
Guidance as to its meaning is provided by section 55(1)
of the National Law
which sets out grounds upon which the National Board may decide that an
individual is not a “suitable person”
to hold a general registration
in a health profession. Those grounds include: after s55(1)(a) to (g), which
enumerate specific grounds
not apposite to this practitioner, s55(1)(h)(i)
“in the Board’s opinion, the individual is for any other
reason (i) not a fit and proper person for general registration
profession.”
Commission contends that the Tribunal is obliged to consider the question of
whether the evidence (and admissions where relevant)
has satisfied it that the
practitioner is “not suitable” for registration
as at the date of
the hearing
case law in this jurisdiction has provided some guidance as to the criteria for
establishing whether a person is a fit and proper
person to be registered as a
health practitioner.
Tribunal seemed to accede to submissions on behalf or the Commission in finding
a Complaint asserting “not a suitable person
National Law
provisions, that the words “not a suitable person” should be
given their everyday meaning in the context of the
submission is that
consistent with dishonesty and a willingness to put one’s own interests
ahead of those of patients being appropriate matters
to have regard to, as
established on the evidence in this matter, on the “not suitable”
behaviour has long been seen as a reason legal practitioners, with their
particular obligations of fidelity, may be disentitled
to practice, for the
protection of the public, as no longer being a fit an proper person to
authority that fraudulent behaviour in medical professionals can properly
disentitle them to practise for a
practitioner also conceded in effect breaching relevant ethical standards, which
can also properly be taken into account in assessing
whether Complaint 3 is made
admitted subject matter of Complaint 3 would cause the Tribunal no difficulty in
finding that the practitioner is not a suitable
person to hold registration in
the profession on the basis of dishonesty inconsistent with the ethical
obligations of a person fit
and proper to be a registered physiotherapist.
the dishonest conduct admitted in the three particulars to Complaint 3 also lead
to admitted breaches of ethical and professional
standard, as enumerated
particularly in the briefing note of Scott
, the Record of
interview between Casey and the
practitioner
practitioner’s oral evidence under cross examination.
practitioner demonstrated that he was not a fit and proper person to practice
physiotherapy at the time of his admitted misconduct
between February 2007 and
July 2008. His misconduct manifested qualities of character incompatible with
the conduct of physiotherapy
involved (a) significant dishonesty in a planned fashion over a not
insignificant period of time and (b) a significant
departure from appropriate
ethical standards of a physiotherapist.
Tribunal is invited to consider submissions found below, relative to proposed
protective orders, in aid of its consideration as
to whether Complaint 3 has
been made out.
PART 4: PROTECTIVE ORDERS
practitioner is no longer a registered health practitioner. He was registered in
NSW on 14 December 2002 until 14 December 2008.
Thereafter the
practitioner’s registration was not renewed and his evidence,
unchallenged, is that he has not practised since
practitioner is no longer registered as a physiotherapist. He has never been
registered under the National
Disciplinary
proceedings are intended to maintain proper ethical and professional standards,
primarily for the protection of the public,
but also for the protection of the
profession:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
NSWLR 630 at 637E.
important aspect of the protective jurisdiction exercised by the Tribunal is the
need to deter both the respondent, and others,
from similar behaviour. In
Society of NSW v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
, Giles JA said (at 471):
[T]he object of protection of the public also includes
deterring the legal practitioner in question from repeating the misconduct,
deterring others who might be tempted to fall short of the high standards
required of them. And the public, and professional
colleagues who practise in
the public interest, must be able to repose confidence in legal practitioners,
so an element of deterrence
is an assurance to the public that serious lapses in
the conduct of legal practitioners will not be passed over or lightly put aside,
but will be appropriately dealt with.
finding of professional misconduct does not necessarily lead to cancellation of
a health practitioner’s registration: Deregistration
is not an automatic
outcome of a finding of professional misconduct, even where that conduct is
sufficiently serious to justify it:
Health Care Complaints Commission v
Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA
the degree of seriousness is sufficient to warrant suspension or deregistration
is a matter of degree and judgment:
Sabag v Health Care Complaints
[2001] NSWCA 411
relevant test applied by this Tribunal is set out in
HCCC v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630 at 638:
The gravity of professional misconduct is not to be measured by
reference to the worst cases, but by the extent to which it departs
from proper
standards. If this is not done there is a risk that the conduct of the
delinquents in a profession will indirectly establish
the standards applied by
the Tribunal.
conduct or the subject of the complaint has to be of such a departure from the
accepted standards of the medical profession as
would reasonably incur the
strong reprobation of professional colleagues of good repute and competence:
Qidwai v Brown
[1984] 1 NSWLR 100
at 105 per Priestley JA;
Meehan; Re Medical
Practitioners Act
[1965] NSWLR 30
at [35] - [36].
Commission seeks the following orders:
Tribunal would have cancelled the practitioner’s registration if he had
The practitioner is disqualified from being registered for 2
(c) an order requiring the Physiotherapy Board to record the fact that the
Tribunal would have cancelled his registration in the National
(c) an application for review of these orders may not be made until after 2
determining the appropriate protective orders, the Tribunal should have regard
(a) The gravity
of the misconduct;
(b) When the
misconduct occurred;
practitioner’s level of remorse and degree of insight, if any, into his
misconduct;
(d) What (if
any) steps have been taken by the practitioner at rehabilitation;
(e) The need to
protect the health and safety of the public. The jurisdiction is protective not
Gravity of misconduct
totality of the misconduct by the practitioner was very serious. The misconduct
spanned a period of 17 months and was planned,
dishonest and known by the
practitioner to be both dishonest and inconsistent with the practitioner’s
ethical obligations as
a physiotherapist. The misconduct continued after Mr
Casey had audited the practitioner’s practice and counselled him to cease
any improper claim activities.
Insight, remorse and rehabilitation
practitioner has demonstrated some limited insight into his own misconduct. It
is accepted by the Commission that the practitioner
made admissions to both
health fund investigators and HCCC investigators, on interview. Further, with
the exception of the gravamen
of Complaint 3, admitted all particulars and the
other two Complaints contended for by the Commission.
practitioner’s
expresses contrition and sorrow for his misconduct and apologises for the
professional misconduct he engaged in and for its consequences.
evidence before the Tribunal would satisfy the Tribunal to a limited extent that
the practitioner has undertaken some self-reflection
in relation to his past
misconduct, and that he has gained some very limited insight into his misconduct
and the reasons for it.
Having said that, the Tribunal would remind itself that
the practitioner’s evidence was limited to his own account, in writing
in oral testimony. The practitioner did not produce any extrinsic material to
suggest that he had taken steps to render himself,
by the date of the
suitable person for registration.
Commission contends that the absence of any evidence of psychological treatment
(given his evidence as both his psychological
challenges to avoid acting the
same way in the future and his evidence of the psychological impact of his
misconduct on his recent
and current state), of any personal or professional
references, absence of any evidence of mentoring and supervisory arrangements
with respected colleague and an absence of any evidence of, or plans for,
further education or re-education as well as informing
the Tribunal’s
finding that the practitioner
at this time
is not a suitable person,
would also impact the proper period of disqualification.
gravity of the misconduct and the finding if made that the practitioner is not
suitable for registration must be marked by a significant
disqualification. The period of 2 years is submitted to be an appropriate period
of disqualification. Even in the event
that Complaint 3 is not made out to the
requisite standard, the Commission would contend that a similar level of
protective order
ought flow in relation to Complaint
expiry of the disqualification period does not mean that the practitioner has an
automatic right to be re-registered as a practitioner.
He will have to
demonstrate that he is a suitable person to be
is a heavy onus. The Commission submits that particularly bearing in the gravity
of the misconduct and the need to protect
the public he should not be considered
for registration for at least two years, notwithstanding the period since July
2008 that he
has not practised physiotherapy.
Tribunal may choose to record some comments for the benefit of a future Tribunal
sitting to determine any application by the practitioner
to become re registered
as to matter consider important for the practitioner to address likely to render
him, in time, more likely
to be the subject of a future finding that he has
become a suitable person for registration.
PART 5: COSTS
Commission seeks an order that the respondent pay the
Commission’s
clause 13 of Schedule 5D of the
National Law
the responsible
may order the registered health practitioner concerned or any other
entitled to appear to pay costs to another person as decided by the
circumstances in which costs should be awarded was considered by the NSW Medical
Tribunal in
HCCC v Dinaker
[2009] NSWMT 8.
Clause 13 of Schedule 5D to
National Law
is for all relevant purposes in the same terms as the
repealed clause 13 of Schedule 2 to the
Medical Practice Act 1992
Tribunal summarised the relevant principles as follows:
successful party to litigation has a reasonable expectation of being awarded
costs against the unsuccessful party.
(b) Fairness
dictates that the unsuccessful party typically bears the liability for costs
unless it is demonstrated that some other
order is appropriate;
for the losing party to establish a basis for any departure from the usual rule,
however, the purpose of an order for costs
is to compensate the person in whose
favour it is made and not to punish the person against whom the order is
discretion to depart from the usual rule is unfettered, however a tribunal ought
not exercise its discretion against the successful
party arbitrarily or
capriciously or on no grounds at all. The discretion must be exercised
judicially and according to rules of
reason and justice, not according to
private opinion, benevolence or sympathy.
(e) Generally
the presumption will only be displaced where there has been some sort of
disentitling conduct on the part of the successful
summary is consistent with the reasoning of the New South Wales Court of Appeal
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77.
In that case the Court,
comprised of Gleeson CJ, Power JA and Cole, held that the principles to be
applied by the Medical Tribunal
in the exercise of its discretion to award costs
regulation 27
are similar to those applied by a court in similar
circumstances, so that costs should follow the event unless the circumstances
the case require the exercise of a discretion not to do so. [79B, 81A,
CJ stated (at 79B) that the nature of an order for costs applies equally:
[T]o civil litigation, summary proceedings and disciplinary
proceedings. This does not mean that the discretionary considerations
to those proceedings are identical. However, the subject of the discretion, that
is, an order for costs, has the same nature,
and that guides the exercise of the
discretion.
The Commission seeks payment of its costs of these proceedings.
Respondent’s Submission to the Tribunal
I, Hung Vu, am writing this statement to clarify the circumstances
surrounding Aches and Pains treatment Centre in Cabramatta in 2007
will cover areas which hopefully give insight and answers to the questions
regarding my physiotherapy practice in Cabramatta.
Days following the closure of my physiotherapy practice in Cabramatta and the
meeting with nib Scott Casey, I had felt an enormous
relief of never having to
However, when all the emotional
turmoil settled I realised that not only have I
ruined my career so early in its life, I had disgraced a profession I was so
to be a part of ever since the opening of my acceptance letter into the
course. Physiotherapy was my life. Treating people was my
passion. Getting
results and getting people better was a daily achievement. All my patients in my
working years were more than just
patients, they were my friends, I earned
their trust and they opened up to me like I was family but more importantly they
purpose when I woke up every morning. No matter how tired I was, the
feeling of people needing my help gave me energy and stamina
to work. Since the
closure of the clinic I have only felt emptiness and a lack of purpose. I think
day I still ask myself how did I go so wrong?
I have tried to search for answers related to myself, my character, my
positive/ negative traits and what goals I had set for myself
that eventually
lead me to this point in my life. Every day, I stand at work for eight hours
thinking to myself what happened in
Sydney? What happened to everything I
learned from my parents, my teachers in school, my lecturers and tutors in
university. I have
been trying to find answers to some of my own questions to
avoid a repeat of history. I ask myself these questions over and over
at work: Did I leave the guidance and nurture of my parents too early? Did I
just get caught up with the fast pace mentality
everyone has in Sydney? Did I
have the will and determination but no direction? Was it too naive to aim too
high? Why was I in a
hurry to achieve beyond my limitation? I was only in my
early twenties when I went to Sydney for work but I always felt there was
enough time. Now I am in my thirties and just trying to appreciate life day by
Now, I would like to express some of the things I have discovered about my
character. I have never taken the time to be self analytical
and have never
really been aware of how others perceived me to be. The only thing I knew about
myself was that I have always tried
to conform to people around me, and was once
told by a tutor (in a positive way) to establish an identity and be myself.
The following points is what I can best describe my personality and
discriminative: I do not think I am the nicest person in the world but I never
make prejudgements about anyone. I give everyone
I meet an opportunity to be who
they are and I will always make an effort to be compatible and engaging. If,
however, their intentions
are not good I will detach very quickly and avoid
them. This is probably why I make a lot of friends but is close to only a very
Opportunistic /
ambitious: I always see the positives in most situations and tend to overlook
any negatives. Sensible people weigh
up their pros and cons but one or two
positives are enough to sway my decision. I get excited easily and always think
will work out well but as I have learnt just because you are wishful
things do not always go to plan.
High admiration
of other people’s success – this probably follows on from the point
above. If I see that someone is successful
or is excelling I aspire to learn
from them and see if I can repeat what I’ve learnt and devise my own way
to improve myself.
I praise people who are willing to give it a go. My no.1 fear
is failing but my grandpa told me when I was younger ‘
nothing is worst
than failing than to have never tried
.’ He was a real doer and not
only did he try he was the best at what he did.
Quiet but not
shy: I think most people I meet perceives me as being quiet and shy but I am
only quiet if something is new to me or
if my understanding is not complete. I
actually like to talk, sometimes I have too much to say and I stumble over my
own words. Working
as a physiotherapist has helped me become more assertive and
ask a lot more questions than I would if I had done a more solitary
However, one of my biggest fears is public speaking and I do not think I will
ever overcome this. It did not help when I had
to do presentations to big groups
of doctors to help promote referrals, even though I had met them individually
beforehand.
Impatient: I
feel this is probably the main cause of all my poor decisions. Sometimes in
hastiness, I try to be overly productive
and instead it becomes
counter-productive and then I am worse off than where I started. Now I truly
understand the saying
‘Patients is a virtue.’
it’s because I rather be a doer and not procrastinate too long in case I
miss out on an opportunity.
Do it yourself
(DIY) attitude: I have always like to be a problem solver and learn the
fundamentals. My maths teacher always told
me ‘you know where you are at;
you know where you want to go, now use your knowledge to make the link.’ I
do regret not
asking for outside help when I came across situations outside my
capabilities. Maybe sometimes I overestimated my limitations and
someone else can do it why can’t I.
0 or 100%: I
have never committed myself half heartedly nor do something I think I can not be
the best at. If I have decided to take
something on I give it 110% but this can
be disastrous as I can become blind sighted if my preparation was poor to begin
have many times found myself in the deep end without an exit plan.
Particular and
fussy: I usually know what I want and my mind is uncompromising to any
variation. In my family I am probably the hardest
person to please. I
don’t like receiving presents because there’s a 99% chance I
won’t be able to hide my disappointment.
I don’t hide much if I
don’t like something. It doesn’t mean I am not appreciative but I
feel it’s unnecessary
to waste other peoples’ time and effort. I
rather give than take because I think it’s easier for me to make others
than vice versa.
Generally happy:
I don’t think I have woken up in a bad mood. However, for over a year
before I began working again I was starting
of my day feeling hollow and lost. I
have always rather make friends than enemies. I find it too tiring and energy
consuming to be
angry and in a bad mood. I was asked by someone at work when was
the last time I was in a fight. I felt a little embarrassed to say
that I have
never been in one before. The only time I was really angry was during a family
gathering. I was eleven and my cousins
destroyed my parents rose garden. I was
chasing them around with my plastic cricket bat but they were bigger and faster
I ended up passing out from my fit of rage and my uncles had to call
the ambulance. After that my parents told me off for getting
too worked up. Ever
since I try to keep a cool head.
101 excuses: My
parents always taught me to be responsible for my own actions. With them I was
always good at coming up with excuses
when I got into trouble. I would convince
myself that it wasn’t my fault or convince my parents how other people
mischievous behaviour. In regards to my current situation I am tired
of finding reasons to excuse what I have done. I know if I don’t
my own shortcomings I will eventually end up in the same situation again. Hence,
it has lead me to be honest and face the
facts about myself .
Influenced by my
surrounding: This probably overlaps a point I made earlier about conforming and
adapting to others. A good example
would be when I was in high school. We were
put in classes according to our capabilities. I was put in the lowest academic
maybe because my surname was one of the last letters in the alphabet. From
year eight to ten my grades averaged a C minus and my
friends were not that
interested in learning. Fortunately, my maths teacher thought that I was capable
of achieving more and pulled
me out. I ended up as one of the top ten students
in the school. My parents were relieved they didn’t waste all that money
on my tuition fees.
I am at a stage in my life where I think I know
who I am, why I make the decisions I make and what I need to do to become a
person. I possibly could have (and regret that if) I could have reached
this earlier when Scott Casey and Luke from HCF offered
me counselling by a
psychologist they recommended. I probably thought my problems were too much for
anyone to comprehend and help.
Even now I have not talked about this to anyone I
know because I don’t think anyone can understand my situation. The only
I get is the few times I’ve been to Sydney to speak to HCCC and the
health tribunal committee personnel and release some of
the pressure I have been
holding inside. I am well aware of what I have done wrong and it cannot be
excused. However, when I worked
with patients I treat them with the utmost care;
give them treatment the best way I can possibly give them. My main priority was
to always put them first. In regards to treatment, I would never be negligent
towards my patients and if I ever was I would voluntarily
walk away from
physiotherapy. Physiotherapy is a tough profession, especially private practice.
Your clientele come in with pain,
depression and sometimes a little upset that
there is no quick fix. It’s our job to correct all this and it is all
when you see them better and knowing that they chose you to help them.
I am back on my feet now and I do want to achieve something in this life time
but I know I need guidance and direction. I don’t
want to stop trying. I
know I’ve failed early in my life but I need to have the feeling of
passion and purpose in my life again.
I really don’t like the feeling of
plateau or not progressing to improve myself. I have had a lot of time to think
and understand
that my decision making can have major consequences attached to
I am writing not to ask for leniency for what I have done, I am an adult and
I need to be responsible for my own decisions and actions.
I am asking for help
to have direction and focus back in my life. Scott Casey from nib and Graham (an
investigator) from HCF tried
to alert me (off the record) that there was no
future in what I was doing in Cabramatta but I didn’t know where to go or
to turn to. I was already in too deep when I neglected my code of ethics as
a health professional by involving myself. I just felt
one wrong thing lead to
another and everything would come to a crashing halt. I just didn’t have
the courage or strength to
walk away. Graham from HCF knew exactly what was
going on when we met in 2008, he tried to give me advice but I was exhausted and
burnt out. I had been running on empty for so long. I didn’t know how to
start again. I knew it was only a matter of time,
but the fear of bankruptcy and
my parents’ disappointment was too much to bear. If a young
physiotherapist was to start out
in Cabramatta and asked me for advice on how to
tackle the problem, I would tell them to avoid the area all together. It is
embedded and if you don’t conform you might as well find a
second job to pay the rent.
I apologise that I cannot return the time so many people have spent on my
case and the time it will still take to bring to a close,
but I do hope this has
provided some answers.
Yours sincerely,
HCCC v Pierce
[2010] NSWNMT 23
, based on the more narrow test of “not of good
character” under the provisions relevant prior to the enactment of the
Association v Evatt
[1968] HCA 20
117 CLR 177
Verma v McGregor NSW CA 294 of
A Solicitor v Law Society of NSW
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
Confirmation of Registration
Section 149C(4) of the National
149C(4) of the National
Section 149C(7) of the National
of Schedule 5D of the National
submitted, in the short to medium term
HCCC v Duong
[2010]NSWPYT2 this Tribunal on a Complint establishing
professional misconduct uner the pre-exisitng law (but without any complaint
relation to “not fit and proper” or “not suitable”) in
relation to fraud of a similar modus opertandi
(but admittedly other Complaints)
effectively cancelled the practitioner’s registartion for 2 years. That
matter is submitted
to be a useful anaogue in consiering protective orders in
this matter.
Section 163
National Law
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (841 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter