URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:59:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cox v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Force [2025] NSWIRComm 28 (7 October 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Cox v Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police Force
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 28
Hearing Date(s):
23–24 June 2025
Date of Orders:
7 October 2025
Decision Date:
7 October 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Paingakulam J, Deputy President
The application is dismissed
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — public sector — police —
application under s 181E
Police Act 1990
(NSW) for review of removal order
— allegations of misconduct in relation to showing colleagues pornographic
material outside
of work and sexually harassing a colleague — related
criminal proceedings dismissed — Commissioner of Police did not
witnesses at hearing and instead relied on statements from related criminal
proceedings — unreasonable and unjust to dismiss
applicant based on
allegations 1, 4 and 5 — allegations 2 and 3 made out — context of
alleged misconduct important —
applicant was an unimpressive witness
— applicant lacks insight into his conduct — significant character
public interest — applicant lacks the integrity necessary
to hold the position of a sworn member of the NSW Police Force —
Commissioner of Police’s dismissal on the basis of allegations 2 and 3 not
harsh, unreasonable or unjust — application
Legislation Cited:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Police Act 1990
Police Regulation 2015
Discrimination Act 1984
Cases Cited:
Commissioner of Police (New South Wales Police Force) v Zisopoulos
[2020] NSWCA 236
Commissioner of Police v Sewell
(2008) 180 IR
[2008] NSWIRComm 147
Council of the New South Wales Bar Association v EFA
(a pseudonym)
(2021) 106 NSWLR 383
[2021] NSWCA 339
Hosemans v Commissioner
(2004) 138 IR 159
[2004] NSWIRComm 253
Lawrance v Commissioner of
(2010) 199 IR 139
[2010] NSWIRComm 149
Morris v Commissioner of
[2016] NSWIRComm 1034
Qantas Airways v Cornwall
(1998) 84 FCR 483
[1998] FCA 865
Toshack v Commissioner of Police
[2008] NSWIRComm
Toshack v Commissioner of Police
(2009) 181 IR 420
[2009] NSWIRComm
Tredinnick v Commissioner of Police
[2016] NSWIRComm 14
Van Huisstede v
Commissioner of Police
(2000) 98 IR 57
[2000] NSWIRComm 97
Principal judgment
Alexander Cox (Applicant)
Commissioner of Police, New South Wales Police
Force (Respondent)
Representation:
H Pararajasingham (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
McGirr & Associates
(Applicant)
Kingston Reid (Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
(1) Pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Commission prohibits the publication of evidence before the Commission or the
disclosure of any matter that identifies
or may lead to the identification of
XY, including:
(a) References to her name and misspellings of her
(b) [REDACTED];
(c) [REDACTED]; and
(d) [REDACTED].
References to [REDACTED] during these proceedings and in transcripts are to use
the pseudonym XY in place of her name.
(3) These orders remain in place for a
period of 20 years unless varied or revoked.
This decision has been edited to
comply with these restrictions.
3 March 2025, Alexander Cox (applicant) was removed from the New South Wales
Police Force pursuant to an order made by the Commissioner
of Police (Police
Commissioner) under
Police Act 1990
) (Order). At the time of dismissal, he was employed as a Constable Level
5 at Sydney City Police Area Command (Sydney City PAC).
13 March 2025, Mr Cox filed an application with the Industrial Registrar
pursuant to
seeking a review of the Order
(Application). The Application contends that the Order was harsh, unreasonable
and unjust. Mr Cox seeks
an order reinstating him to the NSW Police Force and
compensation.
have determined to dismiss the Application. My reasons
Process culminating in the Order
20 July 2023, Mr Cox was charged with several criminal offences, including
[REDACTED]. Those matters were heard in the Local Court
between 16 and 18 April
2024 and the charges were dismissed.
a document served on Mr Cox on 15 November 2024, the Police Commissioner gave
him notice that she was considering his suitability
to continue as a police
officer, taking into account his integrity and conduct (Notice). Some details
not in evidence before the Commission, are able to
be discerned from later correspondence between the parties. It is apparent that
the Notice was stated to have been issued pursuant to
s 181D(3)(a)
Notice informed Mr Cox of five allegations against him and the bases on which
those allegations were said to arise. Four of those
allegations relate to Mr Cox
showing pornographic material to colleagues outside the work context. The
remaining allegation concerns
the playing of audio material of a sexual nature
at work. The allegations made by the Police Commissioner were based on
given as part of the criminal investigation into the charges referred
] above and
the transcript of the criminal proceedings resulting in Mr Cox’s
13 December 2024, Mr Cox submitted a written response to the Notice (Response).
It is not necessary to traverse the details of
the Response. In summary, Mr Cox
characterised the allegations as a “witch hunt”, questioning their
validity in light
of his otherwise unblemished performance record and his
acquittal on criminal charges arising from the same course of conduct. He
characterised the impugned behaviour as “silly mistake[s]”, but
ultimately said he was “just joking around”
in contexts where he was
speaking with close friends either off duty or not in a public facing
environment. He contended that the
five separate allegations of misconduct do
not justify his dismissal from the NSW Police Force, either individually or
collectively.
Police Commissioner made the Order on 3 March 2025. The Order had the effect of
removing Mr Cox from the NSW Police Force on that
day. Annexed to the Order was
a document titled “Statement of Reasons”, which was signed by the
Police Commissioner on
the same day.
Legal principles applying on
is titled “Management of conduct within NSW
Police Force”. For the purposes of these proceedings, this Part relevantly
includes the following provisions:
Division 1B Summary removal of police officers in whom Commissioner does not
have confidence
181D Commissioner may remove police officers
(1) The Commissioner may, by order in writing, remove a police officer from the
NSW Police Force if the Commissioner does not have
confidence in the police
officer’s suitability to continue as a police officer, having regard to
the police officer’s
competence, integrity, performance or conduct.
(3) Before making an order under this section, the Commissioner—
(a) must give the police officer a notice setting out the grounds on which the
Commissioner does not have confidence in the officer’s
suitability to
continue as a police officer, and
(b) must give the police officer at least 21 days within which to make written
submissions to the Commissioner in relation to the
proposed action, and
(c) must take into consideration any written submissions received from the
police officer during that period.
(4) The order must set out the reasons for which the Commissioner has decided to
remove the police officer from the NSW Police Force.
Division 1C Review of Commissioner’s decision under Division 1B
181E Review generally
(1) A police officer who is removed from the NSW Police Force by an order under
section 181D
may apply to the Industrial Relations Commission (referred to in
this Division as the Commission) for a review of the order on the
ground that
the removal is harsh, unreasonable or unjust.
181F Proceedings on a review
(1) In conducting a review under this Division, the Commission must proceed as
(a) firstly, it must consider the Commissioner’s reasons for the decision
to remove the applicant from the NSW Police Force,
(b) secondly, it must consider the case presented by the applicant as to why the
removal is harsh, unreasonable or unjust,
(c) thirdly, it must consider the case presented by the Commissioner in answer
to the applicant’s case.
(2) The applicant has at all times the burden of establishing that the removal
of the applicant from the NSW Police Force is harsh,
unreasonable or unjust.
This subsection has effect despite any law or practice to the contrary.
(3) Without limiting the matters to which the Commission is otherwise required
or permitted to have regard in making its decision,
the Commission must have
(a) the interests of the applicant, and
(b) the public interest (which is taken to include the interest of maintaining
the integrity of the NSW Police Force, and the fact
that the Commissioner made
the order pursuant to
section 181D(1)).
Divisions 1B and 1C of the
were the subject of
consideration in
Commissioner of Police (New South Wales Police Force) v
(2020) 299 IR 314
[2020] NSWCA 236
). In that case, Bell P (as his Honour then was), with whom
Macfarlan JA agreed, observed:
“[83] The nuanced nature of a
review based upon the statutory
criteria of harsh, unreasonable or unjust is one that the legislature has
entrusted to a specialist
tribunal in the form of the IRC. The IRC’s
review is not ‘de novo’ but, on the other hand, as Mr Kirk accepted
in oral argument, is closer to a merits review than judicial review. Assessment
as to whether a particular decision of the Police
Commissioner engages the
statutory criteria necessarily must have regard to the basis and reasoning
employed by the Police Commissioner
in any given case.
[84] Depending upon the basis of the Police Commissioner’s decision, as
the Full Bench said at [27] citing
, the burden of establishing that
a decision to remove a police officer is harsh, unreasonable or unjust may be
satisfied in a given
case by casting sufficient doubt on the Police
Commissioner’s reasoning process so as to justify the IRC’s
intervention.
But it is important always to remember that ‘sufficient
doubt’ is not ‘any doubt’, and the raising of a doubt,
sufficient or otherwise, does not in any way alter or affect the legal burden
which lies on the removed police officer to demonstrate
that his or her removal
was harsh, unreasonable or unjust. So also, the mere ‘going into
evidence’ by, or the raising
of an alternative hypothesis on behalf of, a
removed police officer will not per se establish that a removal was harsh,
unreasonable
or unjust nor will it place an evidentiary or tactical burden on
the Police Commissioner to justify his original decision to remove
the officer.
Whether or not it does will be a function of the basis of the Police
Commissioner’s original decision and of the
strength of the evidence led
by the removed officer and or the credibility of the alternative hypothesis.
[85] If what the Full Bench in the present case referred to as ‘sufficient
doubt’ is raised by the removed officer, an
evidentiary or tactical burden
may arise which will require the Police Commissioner to answer the doubt in
order to defeat the conclusion
which may have become open in light of evidence
before the IRC, namely that the impugned removal decision was harsh,
unreasonable
or unjust.”
observations accord with those of the Full Bench of the Commission in Court
Hosemans v Commissioner of Police
(2004) 138 IR 159
NSWIRComm 253
“... The correct approach is that the Commission is to make a fresh and
independent review decision itself, based on the material
Commissioner as well as any new evidence admitted. Further, that review process
is to be undertaken in accordance with
the provisions of
to the onus borne by an applicant in proceedings under
Tredinnick v Commissioner of Police
[2016] NSWIRComm 14
, the Full Bench
observed at [55]:
“ ...That burden falls to an applicant for review under
although a closer alignment with the provisions of Divs 1B and 1C of the Act
would have that conclusion expressed thus: the burden
falling upon an applicant
is to establish the removal was harsh, unreasonable or unjust. In the case of an
applicant contending that
a removal was unjust because the applicant did not
engage in some or any of the ‘misconduct’ or infringements to the
officer’s duties and responsibilities (of the kind referred to under
s 181D(1)), the burden falls upon the officer to prove
that he is not
guilty of misconduct (or ‘conduct’) in that respect. This may mean
the provision of proof there is no
basis in fact from the allegations or that
the allegations involve a misunderstanding or a misapprehension of the
Full Bench went on to observe at [61]:
“... An applicant may satisfy the burden imposed by s 181F(2) if he or she
satisfies the Commission that the reasons for removal
provided by the respondent
are flawed or defective either in a procedural or substantive sense.”
matters raised by an applicant and the Police Commissioner need to be considered
in the context in which they occurred. As held
by Newell C in
Commissioner of Police
[2016] NSWIRComm 1034
“To be specific, in each case, the matters advanced by both the applicant
and the Commissioner must be examined in their context.
There would be, no
doubt, some kinds of conduct by a police officer which would render a decision
to remove him or her from the Force
not open to any practical challenge
regardless of the context in which they occurred, but those kinds of conduct
would be few. In
general there must be an assessment of the context in which the
conduct which has caused the Commissioner to lose confidence in an
occurred for a fair review to be carried out, and such an approach is mandated
by the relevant provisions of the [Police]
Act and the IR Act.”
The Police Commissioner’s reasons for removal – s
were 5 grounds on which the Police Commissioner determined to remove Mr Cox from
the NSW Police Force. They were as follows:
Allegation 1
I am satisfied that there are grounds for me to conclude that, during your trip
to the Watagans National Park with members of Team
on 24 August 2019,
• showed Constables Kirk and Sibbald and Plain Clothes
Constable Richardson a video of a male and a female engaging in sexual
intercourse, and suggested you were a participant in the video;
• sexually harassed Plain Clothes Constable Richardson by
engaging in unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature; and
on 25 August 2019,
• showed Senior Constable Withey a sexually explicit
photograph of a Caucasian male’s lower torso, genital area and
“Allegation 2
I am satisfied that there are grounds for me to conclude that, in late 2020,
while at the home of Constables Zachary Barrett and
Sam Kirk, you showed them a
video on your mobile phone of a male and a female engaging in sexual
intercourse. [REDACTED].”
“Allegation 3
[REDACTED].”
“Allegation 4
I am satisfied that there are grounds for me to conclude that, in November 2020,
during a team trip to the Hunter Valley, you brought
up the topic of
‘[your] sex video’ when talking with Constable Pratt and, at her
request, showed her a video of a male
and a female having sexual
intercourse.”
Allegation 5
I am satisfied that there are grounds for me to conclude that, during a night
shift in late 2019 or early 2020, at The Rocks Police
Station, you played an
audio recording that sounded like a female during climax.”
The Statement
of Reasons referred to statements that had been obtained from a number of
police officers during the criminal investigation
into Mr Cox. It also referred
to evidence given in the criminal proceedings. A brief summary of the evidence
that the Police Commissioner
relied on is set out
Allegation 1
1 arose from incidents said to have occurred between 24 August 2019 and 26
August 2019, when Mr Cox attended a social getaway
at the Watagans National Park
with members of Team 3 from Sydney City PAC, including Plain Clothes Constable
Emma Richardson, Constables
Sean Sibbald, Sam Kirk and Vanessa Schofields and
Senior Constable Teagan Withey (Watagans Trip). The Watagans Trip was not
by the NSW Police Force and officers in attendance were off duty.
Clothes Constable Richardson (PCC Richardson) stated that, on the evening of 24
August 2019, Mr Cox was discussing with herself
and other officers a sexual
encounter he’d had with a former girlfriend, when he said that he had a
video of himself and his
former girlfriend having sex. PCC Richardson says she
briefly observed a video of a person whom she believed to be Mr Cox and an
unknown female having sexual intercourse and that she did not want to watch it,
so she left the conversation. In the subsequent criminal
proceedings, she said
that she left the conversation as she “didn’t like what [she]
Sibbald stated that Mr Cox showed other officers “sexual pictures and
videos” during the trip and was heard
to say that he had taken multiple
videos and images of himself and ex-partners. Constable Sibbald stated that he
viewed a “sexual
video” on Mr Cox’s mobile phone for no longer
than about five seconds before moving to another group, as he had no interest
viewing it. In subsequent criminal proceedings, Constable Sibbald accepted that
he thought that Mr Cox was in the video because
that is what Mr Cox had told
Kirk stated that on the evening of 25 August 2019, Mr Cox showed a video on his
mobile phone of an intimate act between
a male and a female that lasted
approximately five to 10 seconds. Constable Kirk said that Mr Cox claimed to be
the man in the video
but did not identify the woman. Constable Kirk said that
the video did not contain faces or identifying features and that he could
only the buttocks and lower back of the female. He further stated that at the
time, he thought it was strange, however, the other
officers in attendance did
not question Mr Cox’s conduct.
Constable Withey arrived at the house on 25 August 2019. She stated that during
a conversation with Mr Cox, Constable Schofields
and PCC Richardson that
evening, discussion turned to the video that Mr Cox had shown to the group on
the previous night. Senior
Constable Withey said that Constable Schofields
“was pressuring” Mr Cox to show her the video. Senior Constable
stated that Mr Cox then showed her a photograph on his mobile phone of
“the lower torso, genital area, and upper thighs”
of a Caucasian
male. Senior Constable Withey stated that when she realised what the photograph
contained, she turned away. She said
that it did not offend her, and that she
dismissed it. During subsequent criminal proceedings, Senior Constable Withey
stated that
she did not see a video as she was not there on the first
giving evidence during the criminal proceedings, Mr Cox admitted that he showed
his colleagues a pornographic video from the
internet during the Watagans Trip.
Mr Cox admitted that he told Constable Kirk that he was the male in the video,
stating that it
was “just a bit of shenanigans”. He said that
everyone was laughing and drinking, and no one appeared to be upset with
showing the video. He characterised his actions as a “silly
Statement of Reasons summarised the information provided by Mr Cox in the
Response concerning Allegation 1 as follows:
Your Response
In your Response, submitted by your legal representative, you state that you
were acquitted of the criminal charges and the prosecution
was ordered to pay
your professional costs. You say your acquittal was given little or no weight in
the Notice. You say the Notice
sought to adversely recast the criminal
You admit you showed the pornographic video from the internet of a ‘female
in doggy style’. However, you deny it was
a breach of ethical rules,
statute or regulations. You submit that it could not have been you in the video,
as none of the witnesses
mention your distinctive arm and leg sleeve tattoos.
You say, as per your evidence under oath, it was ‘just a bit of
shenanigans’
and you were ‘just joking around’. You say none
of the officers questioned or raised any issues with your actions.
You submit that the Watagans trip was a ‘
team-building
’ at an Airbnb, all the officers were off duty and the conduct
occurred in a private social setting. You say this context is
You say that Probationary Constable Schofields pressured you to show the video
from the first night to Senior Constable Withey. You
say you very quickly showed
a picture of the lower half of a Caucasian male.
You reiterate that it was a ‘
silly mistake
perhaps, a joke that was in poor taste
’ but it is a
grossly unfair exaggeration
’ that these matters would rise
to the level of sexual harassment warranting removal.”
made the finding set out at [
] above concerning Allegation 1, the Police
Commissioner found Mr Cox’s conduct to be contrary to:
(1) the requirement in
to place integrity above
all, uphold the rule of law and preserve the rights and freedoms of
individuals;
(2) the responsibility contained within cl 9 of the
Police Regulation 2015
(Police Regulation) to comply with the
Police Regulation
and the NSW Police
Force Code of Conduct and Ethics (Code of Conduct) while off duty;
(3) the requirement of point 1 of the Code of Conduct to behave lawfully,
honestly and in a way that upholds the values and the good
reputation of the NSW
Police Force whether on or off duty, and never in a way that brings discredit to
the NSW Police Force;
(4) the requirement of point 3 of the Code of Conduct to comply with all
policies, procedures and guidelines relating to his duties
and to understand and
act in accordance with the standards that govern those duties; and
(5) the requirement of point 4 of the Code of Conduct to treat everyone with
respect, courtesy and fairness.
Allegations 2 and 3
[REDACTED].
[REDACTED].
[REDACTED].
[REDACTED].
played to Constables Kirk and Barrett
Kirk said that around the third quarter of 2020, Mr Cox socially attended his
Denton and Zachary Barrett. He
claimed that at some point that evening, Mr Cox showed him and Constable Barrett
a video from his
phone of a sexual act being performed between a male and
female. [REDACTED].
Barrett said that from November 2020 to September 2021, he lived in a house with
Mr Cox and Constables Kirk and Denton.
He says that during this time,
[REDACTED]. He said that Mr Cox had shown him and Constable Kirk a video on his
mobile phone of a
female in “doggy position” on a bed facing away
from the camera and [REDACTED]. Constable Barrett could not remember
distinctive features of the woman in the video.
his evidence in subsequent criminal proceedings, Mr Cox accepted that he had a
video on his phone of someone who appeared to
be having “doggy
style” intercourse. He also accepted that he showed a “porn
video” of “a female in
doggy style” to Constable Barrett and
[REDACTED]”. [REDACTED] and that Constable Barrett was laughing at the
[REDACTED].
[REDACTED].
Magistrate’s
criminal proceedings on 18 April 2024, Magistrate Kemp stated that [REDACTED]
was “utterly in poor taste, grubby, juvenile
and unacceptable and
disrespectful”. [REDACTED].
Statement of Reasons summarised the information concerning Allegations 2
and 3 provided by Mr Cox in the Response as follows:
Your Response
With respect to Allegations 2 and 3, you concede that you showed another
pornographic video in the presence of Constables Barrett
and Kirk and
[REDACTED].
You say that neither Constables Barrett or Kirk expressed an objection or any
offence to your actions.
[REDACTED]. However, you submit it does not warrant your termination.”
made the finding set out at [
] above concerning Allegation 2, the Police
Commissioner found Mr Cox’s conduct relating to Allegation 2 to be
contrary to:
(2) clause 9 of the
Police Regulation
(3) points 1 and 4 of the Code of Conduct.
made the finding set out at [
] above concerning Allegation 3, the Police
Commissioner found Mr Cox’s conduct relating to Allegation 3 to be
contrary to:
(2) clause 9 of the
Police Regulation
(3) points 1, 3 and 4 of the Code of Conduct;
section 22B
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Anti-Discrimination Act
(5) the NSW Police Force Respectful Workplace Behaviours Guidelines.
Allegation 4
16 to 18 November 2020, Team 3 took a Christmas trip to the Hunter Valley where
they stayed in a rented house (Hunter Valley
Trip). Constable Pratt said that on
17 November 2020, Mr Cox brought up “[his] sex video”. Constable
Pratt said she asked
to see it because, [REDACTED]. Constable Pratt said that Mr
Cox “proudly” showed her a video of him lying on his back
phone recording from his chest area. In the video, he was naked with a naked
female sitting on top of him with her back
towards him, moving up and down.
Constable Pratt says that it was clear that Mr Cox and the woman in the video
were having sexual
intercourse, [REDACTED].
[REDACTED].
Statement of Reasons summarised the information concerning Allegation 4
provided by Mr Cox in the Response as follows:
Your Response
You submit that Constable Pratt has an obvious dislike or hatred for you and
note that she did not give evidence in the criminal
proceedings. You say you
only showed her the video after her continued insistence but [REDACTED].
[REDACTED]. You say your actions could not be deemed disrespectful, unethical or
otherwise irregular
’ as it was an act amongst consenting
adults in a private setting where all parties were telling jokes and drinking
made the finding set out at [
] above concerning Allegation 4, the Police
Commissioner found Mr Cox’s conduct to be contrary to:
section 7(a)
(2) clause 9 of the
Police Regulation
(3) points 1 and 4 of the Code of Conduct.
Allegation 5
Constable Withey stated that in late 2019 or early 2020, she attended The Rocks
Police Station during a night shift with Mr
Cox, Constable Sibbald and Leading
Senior Constable (LSC) Carlo Vicente. Senior Constable Withey said that the
atmosphere was “hyperactive
with joking and mucking around”, and
that LSC Vicente was being “loud and often inappropriate”. After a
from LSC Vicente that Mr Cox play a video on his mobile phone, Mr Cox
played a video which sounded like a female during climax. As
the screen was
facing down, Senior Constable Withey stated that she did not see the video and
barely gave it any notice.
Statement of Reasons summarised the information concerning Allegation 5 as
provided by Mr Cox in the Response as follows:
Your Response
You accept Senior Constable Withey’s account of the factual scenario and
note that Senior Constable Withey believed that Leading
Senior Constable Vicente
pressured you to play the audio.
You say the incident occurred during a night shift with a ‘joking and
mucking around’ atmosphere, led by Leading Senior
Constable Vicente. You
say all parties were willing participants and no one raised any objection or
offence. You say it is difficult
to accept that there was any real or perceived
harm to any police officer, or to the reputation of the NSW Police Force
‘by virtue of a one-off prank’.”
made the finding set out at [
] above concerning Allegation 5, The Police
Commissioner found Mr Cox’s conduct to be contrary to:
section 7(a)
(2) points 1, 3 and 4 of the Code of Conduct.
Other issues raised in the Response
addition to the material which specifically addressed the allegations, the
Statement of Reasons also summarised the information
provided by Mr Cox in the
Response as follows:
Fair Say Response
On 1 August 2024, you provided a response to the Provisional Notice of
Management Action. You highlight your ‘work ethic and
devotion to the NSW
Police Force’. You say that despite the investigation, you continued to
work to the best of your abilities
and have not had any other disciplinary
You say that this matter has caused an ‘enormous toll’ on your
personal life.
Your Response
In your Response, you submit that, were you at a significant risk of
re-offending, there would have been further complaints received
between November
2020 and July 2023. You submit that you have demonstrated insight and
responsibility by performing your duties during
that time, without further
infraction or allegations.
You submit that you have a very strong work ethic. You provided a number of
character references from colleagues, as well as members
of the Australian
Defence Force. These character references assert that you are a highly motivated
officer with a good attitude and
high work rate. Five Sergeants, who provided
character references, attest to your professionalism and dedication.”
Police Commissioner’s Statement of Reasons included the following as part
of her consideration in determining whether to
make the Order:
“In your Response, you admit that you have shown sexually explicit
material, including pornographic videos, to your colleagues.
[REDACTED]. Your
conduct demonstrated a lack of integrity, amounted to sexual harassment, created
a hostile working environment on
the grounds of sex and created a risk to the
health and safety of your colleagues. However, rather than demonstrate any real
in your Response, you continue to describe your actions as
‘shenanigans’, a ‘one off prank’, or ‘a
In considering this matter, I have had regard to my obligations to eliminate or
minimise psychosocial hazards from the workplace
and my positive duty to
eliminate sexual harassment. While I acknowledge your submission that you were
not subject to further complaints
between November 2020 and July 2023, given
your lack of insight into the seriousness of your conduct, I am not persuaded
would not reoffend were you to remain in the NSW Police Force.
I have carefully reviewed all of the material associated with this matter. I
have taken into account the details of your career history
within the NSW Police
Force, and asserted dedication to your duties, as set out in your Response to my
Notice. I have carefully considered
the character references you attached to
your Response, and acknowledge that many of your referees attest to your work
dedication. However, given the gravity of your conduct and your lack
of insight, I see no additional mitigation or reason for your
actions that would
provide me with any basis not to lose confidence in your suitability to remain a
police officer.
I expect, and the law demands, that New South Wales police officers will uphold
their solemn Oath of Office at all times. Our Oath
requires all New South Wales
police officers to act professionally at all times, with ethics and integrity,
and in accordance with
the law. This is our sworn duty.
I want you to clearly understand, and I cannot stress too strongly, that I
expect an appropriate standard of behaviour from all police
officers and I
expect them to adhere to the expectations of ethical and professional conduct,
whether it is on or off duty. You have
clearly breached the New South Wales
Police Code of Conduct and Ethics.”
Police Commissioner therefore determined that she did not have confidence in Mr
Cox’s suitability to remain a member of
the NSW Police Force. The bases
for this decision were Mr Cox’s integrity and
Conclusions
was not in dispute that the Notice was served on Mr Cox pursuant to
s 181D(3)(a)
, and that he was given 21 days to
make a written response to the Police Commissioner in accordance with
s 181D(3)(b).
He availed himself of that opportunity in providing the
Response. Both the Order and the Statement of Reasons suggest that the Response
was taken into consideration, as required by s 181D(3)(c).
Baker v Commissioner of Police
[2015] NSWIRComm 14
, Kite AJ observed at
“[95] The Commissioner is obliged by s 181D(4) of the Act to give reasons.
This statutory duty is an exception to the common
law position in relation to
administrative decisions:
Public Service Board of New South Wales v
(1986) 159 CLR 656.
The adequacy of the content of those reasons is
to be determined, absent any express requirements in the legislation, by an
of statutory construction:
Wingfoot Australia Partners Pty Ltd v
[2013] HCA 43
88 ALJR 52.
[96] The statutory purpose may be inferred from the surrounding provisions, in
particular s 181D(7) and Division 1C of the Act. One
purpose which may be
inferred is to inform the officer directly affected as to why the decision has
been taken so as to allow that
officer to decide whether to commence review
proceedings. Another purpose which may be inferred is to facilitate any such
[97] That then requires a consideration of the nature of these proceedings. As
observed above, while the starting point in such proceedings
Commissioner’s reasons, the burden is upon the applicant to establish
‘that the removal was harsh, unreasonable
or unjust’. The Commission
hears the applicant’s case and the Commissioner’s case in response,
and then makes a
‘fresh and independent review [of the] decision
[98] The adequacy of the content of the reasons is to be measured in this
context. The essence of the reasons is to explain why the
decision has been
taken. It is not necessary, in the reasons, expressly to negate every
possibility: cf
at [274]–[276] ...”
Statement of Reasons explains why the Police Commissioner made the findings that
she did in respect of each of Allegations 1–5.
Considered individually,
many of the allegations do not provide a reasonable basis for the Order.
However, the Order was based on
the Police Commissioner’s findings in
respect of all five allegations. Accordingly, on its face, the Statement of
Reasons provided
a basis for the Order.
The case presented by Mr
Cox – s 181F(1)(b)
Cox’s case distinguished between Allegations 1, 4 and 5 – about
which there was some factual dispute – and what
he considered to be the
more serious Allegations 2 and 3. Mr Cox’s evidentiary case was contained
in a statement that he had
prepared for the purposes of these proceedings,
together with his oral evidence before the Commission.
following facts were agreed between the parties in relation to Allegation
(1) On 24 and 25 August 2019, Mr Cox attended a social getaway at the Watagans
National Park with members of Team 3 from Sydney City
(2) On 24 August 2019, Mr Cox showed PCC Richardson and Constables Kirk and
Sibbald a video depicting a male and female engaging
in sexual intercourse.
(3) Mr Cox told at least Constable Kirk that he was the male in the video.
it was Mr Cox’s case that:
(1) He had close personal friendships with each of the attendees at the Watagans
Trip and had spent significant social time with
each outside of work. He noted
that discussions with these colleagues often traversed personal matters.
(2) Throughout the evening of Saturday 24 August 2019, the group was consuming
large quantities of alcohol. Attendees, including
PCC Richardson and Constable
Schofields, openly spoke about their dating life, personal relationships and
sexual endeavours.
(3) The video which was the subject of the agreed facts was initially accessed
by Constable Schofields without his knowledge or consent.
(4) Due to the reaction of Constable Schofields to the video and the requests of
his more senior colleagues, including PCC Richardson,
he was pressured to share
(5) On 25 August 2019, he was repeatedly asked by Constable Schofields and PCC
Richardson to show Senior Constable Withey the video
that he had shown the
previous night. He repeatedly refused to do so and only obliged due to the
insistent requests by Constable
Schofields and because Senior Constable Withey
was agreeable to viewing the video.
particular, Mr Cox categorically denied sexually harassing PCC Richardson. In
evidence-in-chief, he explained that others in the
group had initiated
conversation about sexual matters. He further stated that Constable Schofields
located the video on his mobile
phone and that PCC Richardson repeatedly
demanded to see it. Mr Cox stated that he relented and showed the video to the
group, including
PCC Richardson, due to pressure from the other participants to
the conversation.
cross-examination, Mr Cox denied that PCC Richardson turned away from the
footage. He stated that the participants in the conversation
crowded around his
mobile phone and asked to see it. He accepted that there was a risk that his
conduct would offend, in particular,
his female colleagues, especially as he
represented to them that he was one of the people in the footage. He accepted
that his conduct
could be viewed as having brought discredit to the NSW Police
Force but stopped short of accepting that it in fact did
Allegation 4
relation to Allegation 4, it was common ground that Mr Cox had attended the
Hunter Valley Trip in November 2020 and that, during
that trip, he had showed
Constable Pratt, at her request, a video of a male and female engaging in sexual
intercourse. However, it
was Mr Cox’s case that:
(1) during the course of the Hunter Valley Trip, the attendees consumed
significant amounts of alcohol and engaged in discussions
dealings, including sexual liaisons;
(2) Constable Pratt instigated a conversation about the video previously shown
on the Watagans Trip; and
(3) Constable Pratt pressured him into showing the video and he did not
volunteer the video or otherwise instigate this pursuit.
Cox gave evidence of a conversation with Constable Pratt which commenced with
her asking whether he had a sex video of himself,
him denying that such a video
existed and Constable Pratt continuing to make repeated requests to see the
video. Mr Cox’s evidence
was that he showed Constable Pratt the video that
he had shown at the Watagans Trip, [REDACTED]. His evidence was that he did so
in order to get Constable Pratt to stop pestering him. Mr Cox stated that his
conduct in showing Constable Pratt the video was consistent
with the nature of
the discussions on the evening in question and the tenor of the banter within
the group. He denied bringing up
the topic of the sex video with Constable
Pratt, which he perceived as being the basis for Allegation
Allegation 5
relation to Allegation 5, it was agreed that Mr Cox played an audio recording of
a woman engaging in sexual conduct on two occasions
during a night shift in late
2019 or early 2020 at The Rocks Police Station. However, it was Mr Cox’s
(1) He was the subject of a prank during this night shift. He inadvertently
played an audio recording, thinking that it was something
(2) He played the recording a second time at the insistence of LSC Vicente. He
did this as a joke and for the purposes of amusing
LSC Vicente and Senior
Constable Withey.
evidence before the Commission, Mr Cox stated that a colleague (whom he did not
recall) sent him a popular prank video clip which
purported to be a sporting
highlight or news clip but, when accessed, played the audio of a female engaging
in sexual conduct. Mr
Cox stated that he accessed the video inadvertently and
that after it had played, LSC Vicente repeatedly asked him to play it again,
which he did. Mr Cox stated that it was meant as a joke and was intended to be
heard only by those in close proximity to him, being
LSC Vicente and Senior
Constable Withey.
cross-examination, Mr Cox accepted that his conduct was unacceptable in the
workplace, particularly around his female colleagues,
and that such conduct
would be inconsistent with the
Police Regulation
, the Code of Conduct and the
standards of professional practice. He accepted that he nonetheless decided to
replay the audio content
knowing it to be inappropriate, and that the fact that
it was a joke did not excuse his poor conduct.
Allegations 2 and
relation to Allegations 2 and 3, it was common ground that while Mr Cox was at
the home of Constables Kirk and Barrett in late
2020, he showed them a video
depicting a male and female having sexual intercourse and [REDACTED]. It was
also common ground that
Mr Cox showed Constables Kirk and Barrett the same video
in November 2020 and [REDACTED]. In relation to those allegations, it was
Cox’s case that:
(1) Throughout his employment he had a close personal relationship with
Constables Kirk and Barrett, would socialise with both of
them outside of work
hours and ultimately lived with them.
(2) He showed Constables Kirk and Barrett the video that was the subject of
these allegations in late 2020 in response to Constable
Barrett’s initial
conduct of showing sexually explicit material.
(3) [REDACTED].
(4) He showed Constables Kirk and Barrett the same video again in November 2020
because of Constable Kirk’s repeated enquiries.
[REDACTED].
Cox’s evidence before the Commission was to this effect. He also
acknowledged that the joke was juvenile, in poor taste and
a misguided attempt
at humour among close friends and that [REDACTED]. In cross-examination, he
accepted the magistrate’s assessment
in the criminal proceedings that his
conduct was in poor taste, grubby, juvenile, unacceptable and disrespectful. Mr
Cox also accepted,
albeit reluctantly because he said it was not his intention,
that his conduct [REDACTED] and discredited the NSW Police
Other witnesses
Cox also relied on the evidence of eight additional witnesses, none of whom were
required for cross-examination and, accordingly,
whose evidence was
unchallenged.
his statement, Sergeant Carlo Vicente stated that the Watagans Trip was a
holiday taken by a group of colleagues in their private
capacity and “had
no relationship or bearing to our roles with the NSW Police Force”.
Sergeant Vicente also stated that
large amounts of alcohol were consumed during
the Watagans Trip and that conversations between colleagues included topics such
relationships and sexual endeavours. Sergeant Vicente recalled Mr Cox showing
a video that was “sexual in nature” but
stated that he did not
identify the participants. He also said that no one expressed any offence.
Moreover, he stated that within
the NSW Police Force, “it is common for
colleagues to discuss sexual matters among themselves in an inoffensive
and sometimes sexually explicit videos were shown “just as
relation to Allegation 5, Sergeant Vicente stated that he had no recollection of
Mr Cox playing a video of a sexual nature whilst
they were on shift at The Rocks
Police Station in 2019 or 2020. He described Mr Cox as “an exceptional
officer” who was
dependable, hardworking and receptive to feedback.
her statement, Senior Constable Teagan Withey adopted her police statement in
which she described Mr Cox as someone who had an
“exceptional” work
ethic and who was “obviously embarrassed” when the topic of the
sexually explicit videos
and images were raised. She also stated that on the
second night of the Watagans Trip, officers present were drinking
amounts of alcohol” and discussing a range of personal
topics, including people’s sexual relationships. She noted that
conversations were not instigated by Mr Cox. Senior Constable Withey also stated
that at a point during the evening, the female
officers removed some of their
clothing and were topless, that Mr Cox was encouraged by Probationary Constable
Schofields to show
the sexually explicit video and that he did not identify to
her the participants in it.
relation to Allegation 5, Senior Constable Withey stated that LSC Vicente
“was insistent” that Mr Cox play the video,
that Mr Cox’s
conduct was not out of the ordinary and that it was consistent with the informal
way officers interact in the
NSW Police Force. Senior Constable Withey said that
she has never witnessed Mr Cox speak or act disrespectfully towards women.
his statement, Sergeant Gerard Manouk stated that he had worked with Mr Cox from
August 2020. He attested to Mr Cox’s motivation,
work ethic and high
performance both before and after he was placed under investigation. Sergeant
Manouk called Mr Cox an “exceptional
police officer”, stating that
he has refused to give references to police officers in the past, but did so for
Mr Cox because
“the New South Wales Police Force and the community needs
more officers like [Mr Cox]”.
his statement, Sergeant Hamish Ryan said that he has known Mr Cox since he
started working at St George Police Area Command (St
George PAC) in 2021. He
characterised Mr Cox’s work ethic as “extremely high”,
“phenomenal” and “infectious”
such that his presence
built confidence within the team. Furthermore, he gave examples of Mr
Cox’s “skill, aptitude and
bravery as a police officer”
stating that his “work rate” was something that “most officers
cannot compare
to or even strive to achieve”. He described Mr Cox as
“one of the most competent officers I have encountered in my 15
the NSW Police Force” and stated that he would “have no hesitation
in having him back within my team”.
his statement, Senior Constable James Karkoulas said that he first met Mr Cox in
January 2021 whilst working at St George PAC.
Senior Constable Karkoulas said
that each time he encountered Mr Cox, he was “always assisting where he
could and sharing his
knowledge” and labelled him as “the most
reliable and hardest worker in our team”. He praised his “proactive
style [p]olicing”. Senior Constable Karkoulas said that it would be an
honour to work with Mr Cox again should he be reinstated.
his statement, Sergeant Lachlan Teasel said he has known Mr Cox since October
2021 when Mr Cox was moved to St George PAC as a
result of an Interim Risk
Management Plan and Sergeant Teasel was assigned as his Mentoring Officer. He
would regularly meet with
Mr Cox to discuss his work performance, interactions
and reception to supervision. He said that he “never once observed any
issues with the [a]pplicant’s work performance”. Further, he stated
that Mr Cox would often top the iWork report in all
incidents and would spend
time helping other officers with their work. Sergeant Teasel commented that Mr
Cox is “blessed with
an innate policing ability”, is a
“natural police officer” and is “an asset to the people of New
South Wales
when it comes to fighting crime and keeping the community safe and
protected”.
his statement, Mr William Reid said that he met Mr Cox over six and a half years
ago when they worked together. He commented on
Mr Cox’s motivation,
reliability and professionalism and said that after he was charged with an
offence in July 2023, he remained
committed to his duties and maintained a
consistently high work output. Mr Reid said that he is confident that should Mr
Cox be reinstated,
he will perform his duties with the same vigour and
enthusiasm that he did before his suspension and termination.
his statement, Mr St Ares (Sam) Gilardi said that he has known Mr Cox for three
years and, in that time, they have served together
in the Australian Defence
Force (ADF). He said that he has consistently observed Mr Cox demonstrate trust,
empathy, loyalty and integrity.
Mr Gilardi stated that Mr Cox was recently
recognised with a Soldier of Merit Award and said that he is “the type of
you want next to you in combat”.
Submissions
written submissions for Mr Cox were supplemented by oral submissions at the
conclusion of the evidence. A brief outline of Mr
Cox’s submissions is set
Allegation 1
Cox contextualised the events of 24 August 2019 as follows:
(1) The Watagans Trip was taken in a private capacity with no direct bearing or
connection to attendees’ employment in the
NSW Police Force. The attendees
were close personal friends who would spend significant social time together
outside of work. There
was no suggestion that the trip was somehow formally
sanctioned by the NSW Police Force.
(2) Discussions during the Watagans Trip traversed personal matters, including
sexual endeavours. These conversations included PCC
Richardson and Constable
Schofields.
(3) Large quantities of alcohol were consumed.
(4) The relevant video was initially accessed by Constable Schofields without Mr
Cox’s knowledge or consent. Following incessant
requests of more senior
colleagues such as PCC Richardson, he was pressured into sharing the video.
(5) The video in question was about five seconds in length and depicted an
intimate sexual act between unknown persons. Mr Cox told
others present that he
was the male in the video. This statement was intended as a joke, was false and
was conveyed sarcastically
and received as such. No attendee expressed offence
at the joke.
assessed in this context, termination on the basis of this episode was
unreasonable and unjust. In particular, Mr Cox did not
accept that he sexually
harassed PCC Richardson in circumstances where she had requested to view the
video and expressed amusement
upon doing so. PCC Richardson’s evidence to
the contrary during the criminal proceedings needed to be viewed in the context
of the rest of her evidence, which included her inability to recall when she
viewed the video, whether or not she was intoxicated
at the time or even to name
one other person who participated in the Watagans Trip. He therefore contended
that there were no grounds
upon which his conduct could be considered unwelcome
conduct of a sexual nature.
relation to the events of 25 August 2019, Mr Cox submitted that, similarly to
the previous evening, attendees had consumed large
quantities of alcohol. He
maintained that he had repeatedly refused to show Senior Constable Withey the
explicit video from the previous
evening and that he only did so because
Constable Schofields and PCC Richardson repeatedly asked him to and Senior
Constable Withey
was agreeable to viewing it. He further noted that neither
Constable Schofields, PCC Richardson nor Senior Constable Withey expressed
offence at the video. Mr Cox pointed to Senior Constable Withey’s evidence
that the conversation pertaining to sexual matters
was not instigated by him,
that Constable Schofields pressured him into showing her the image and that
ultimately no one was offended.
Further, Senior Constable Withey’s
evidence was that some of the female attendees engaged in nudity during the
course of that
Cox once again argued that the Police Commissioner had failed to consider the
context of the environment in which the conduct occurred.
He acknowledged that
the showing of the explicit video was a “silly mistake” and “a
joke that may have been in
poor taste”. However, he argued that, when
assessed in totality, it does not provide a basis to terminate his
employment.
Allegation 4
relation to this allegation, Mr Cox submitted that:
(1) The Hunter Valley Trip was taken in a private capacity with no connection to
attendees’ employment in the NSW Police Force.
(2) Significant quantities of alcohol were consumed and discussions traversed
personal topics including sexual endeavours.
(3) He did not volunteer the explicit video to Constable Pratt or instigate the
conversation surrounding it. Rather, she insisted
on viewing it, and he obliged
so she would stop pressuring him to do so.
(4) He did not identify the male and female in the video [REDACTED].
Cox submitted that Allegation 4 is therefore unfounded. First, the topic of the
sex video was instigated by Constable Pratt, who
continuously requested that Mr
Cox show her the video. She did so in circumstances where, on her own evidence,
she had previously
asked around about the video but could not get anything
confirmed. Second, he again argued that the allegation fails to consider
context of the trip, being a social gathering where large quantities of alcohol
were consumed and personal affairs were discussed.
Cox did not dispute the facts of this allegation. He submitted that:
(1) The relevant shift was quieter than other shifts.
(2) He inadvertently accessed a video which was sent to him as a prank. The
video purported to relate to a sporting highlight or
news clip but proceeded to
consist of audio of a woman engaging in sexual activity.
(3) Upon hearing the video, LSC Vicente repeatedly asked him to “play it
again”. This is confirmed by Senior Constable
(4) He played the video as a joke. His conduct was intended to be playful and
was received as such. No offence was expressed by LSC
Vicente or Senior
Constable Withey. Such behaviour was consistent with the kind of discourse that
he and his colleagues engaged in
from time to time.
Allegations 2 and 3
Cox dealt with Allegations 2 and 3 together in submitting as follows:
(1) He had a close personal relationship with Constables Barrett and Kirk. He
would socialise with them outside of work and they
lived together from around
November 2020.
(2) [REDACTED].
(3) One evening when he was at the home of Constables Barrett and Kirk,
Constable Barrett showed him a sexually explicit video. He
then showed
Constables Barrett and Kirk a sexually explicit video on his phone, [REDACTED].
This was “meant as a joke”
and was a “misguided attempt”
(4) On another occasion while he was living with Constables Barrett and Kirk,
Constable Kirk repeatedly asked him to show the sexually
explicit video
referenced at
above again. He did so, and [REDACTED].
(5) His conduct occurred in the context of close friends engaging in
light-hearted discussions about their private lives and sexual
relationships and
was consistent with “the nature of banter and tenor of humour”
between the three friends.
(6) [REDACTED].
Cox acknowledged that his attempted joke was “juvenile and in poor
taste”. [REDACTED]. [REDACTED] made in the context
of socialising with
close friends outside of work, where discussions often traversed
“ludicrous assertions about sexual activity”,
and that the
respondent failed to take this context into account when considering Allegation
Considering
this context, Mr Cox initially contended that [REDACTED] distorts the nature of
his conduct and that, when assessed in
context, it does not reach the threshold
Anti-Discrimination Act
. However, following his admission
under cross-examination that [REDACTED], Mr Cox submitted that his
acknowledgement of the nature
of his behaviour shows recognition and
self-reflection. He also submitted that the conduct was at the lower end of the
spectrum because
[REDACTED] made to his two closest friends, outside the
workplace and in the context of a relationship underpinned by juvenile and
immature discourse. [REDACTED].
Harsh, unreasonable or
Cox’s evidence-in-chief before the Commission directed at this question
included the following matters:
(1) When considered accurately and in their full context, the allegations do not
warrant his termination.
(2) His conduct was not intended to cause offence and was rather a series of
attempts at humour, usually in private settings and
in the context of close
personal relationships. Regardless, he recognised that his actions were
“in poor taste and juvenile”
and stated that although he did not
intend any harm, he “appreciate[s] that the implications of [his]
behaviour could be perceived
otherwise”, especially in relation to
Allegations 2 and 3. [REDACTED].
(3) His conduct is not emblematic of his overall performance history as a police
officer. He has maintained an exceptional performance
record with the NSW Police
Force and has not been the subject of any further allegations since 2020. In
these circumstances, it was
open for the Commissioner to consider less punitive
measures than dismissal.
(4) The proceedings have had a “significant impact” on his personal
wellbeing, including stress, anxiety, sadness, and
the breakdown of his
long-term relationship.
(5) He is confident that should he be reinstated, he would be able to
effectively discharge his duties.
submissions, Mr Cox contended that his dismissal is unjust and unreasonable as
the respondent mischaracterised his conduct, failed
to consider context and drew
unfounded inferences. Further, he contended that his dismissal is particularly
harsh for the reasons
advanced in his evidence as set out above, and noting
that, especially in relation to XY, he has expressed regret for his immature
The case presented by the Police Commissioner in
answer – s 181F(1)(c)
Police Commissioner did not call any evidence in reply to Mr Cox’s case,
instead submitting that the factual underpinnings
of the allegations were
largely unchallenged. She contended that Mr Cox’s approach of consistent,
almost aggressive denials
was fundamentally undermined by his admission in
cross-examination that [REDACTED]. Moreover, his demonstration of a significant
lack of remorse undermined any submission of harshness.
Police Commissioner contended that I should find Mr Cox to be an unimpressive
witness. In that regard, she relied on the number
of occasions on which he did
not answer questions directly, and the discrepancies in some of his answers
between his evidence-in-chief
and his evidence in cross-examination, or between
his evidence in these proceedings and his evidence in the criminal
proceedings.
Allegation 1
relation to this allegation, the Police Commissioner submitted that:
(1) In his evidence before the Commission, Mr Cox presents a new explanation
regarding his conduct at the Watagans Trip that was
not given in either the
related criminal proceedings or the Response.
(2) Mr Cox’s assertion that he was “pressured” into sharing a
sexually explicit video is inconsistent and implausible.
(3) Even if Mr Cox’s decision to share the video can be classified as a
“silly mistake”, that does not reduce the
severity of the misconduct
or the underlying behaviour.
(4) She acknowledged the social context of the incident but balanced it against
Mr Cox’s obligation to act in a way that upholds
the values and reputation
of the NSW Police Force, even when off-duty.
(5) Mr Cox’s attempt to characterise his conduct as a “joke”
or “shenanigans” demonstrates a lack of
(6) Mr Cox has not discharged his onus in relation to Allegation 1.
Allegation 4
relation to this allegation, the Police Commissioner submitted that:
(1) There are factual discrepancies between the parties. Taking the evidence
into account as a whole, Constable Pratt’s evidence
should be preferred
over that of Mr Cox.
(2) It is implausible to find, in the context of a conversation which occurred
in a group setting and in which Constable Pratt was
subjected to jokes, that Mr
Cox felt pressured by her to show a video that he had previously had no
hesitancy showing Constables
Barrett and Kirk.
(3) Mr Cox has not discharged his onus in relation to Allegation 4.
Allegation 5
relation to this allegation, the Police Commissioner submitted that:
(1) Mr Cox’s evidence should not be accepted in circumstances where
Sergeant Vicente himself cannot provide evidence that supports
version of events.
(2) Mr Cox has not discharged his onus in relation to Allegation 5.
Allegations 2 and 3
relation to these allegations, the Police Commissioner submitted that:
(1) The fact that Mr Cox showed Constables Barrett and Kirk the video in a
social context does not permit him to make false claims
regarding [REDACTED] in
the explicit manner in which he did.
(2) [REDACTED].
(3) [REDACTED].
(4) Whilst criminal charges relating to these events were dismissed, the
presiding Magistrate labelled Mr Cox’s conduct “...utterly
taste, grubby, juvenile and unacceptable and disrespectful to behave in that
way”. Her Honour also said that [REDACTED]”.
(5) Mr Cox has not discharged his onus in relation to Allegations 2 and 3.
Mr Cox’s character evidence
Police Commissioner commented that all of Mr Cox’s witnesses but for
Sergeant Vicente and Senior Constable Withey provided
no evidence regarding the
conduct that is the subject of the Statement of Reasons and Order. Therefore,
such character references
have little, if any relevance to the proceedings and
do not assist Mr Cox in meeting his onus.
Police Commissioner contended that Mr Cox’s evidence on harshness is
limited, only briefly referencing a relationship breakdown,
implications and feelings of anxiety and sadness. She further submitted that his
“alleged exceptional performance
record” should be given little to
no weight, as all police officers are expected to perform their duties to a high
and his length of service was not extensive.
Police Commissioner characterised this case as one where “the public
interest looms large”. She argued that there
is significant public
interest in police officers displaying the highest standards of integrity and
being respectful towards others,
and ensuring that the NSW Police Force is a
workplace free from harassment. She stated that it is not in the public interest
Mr Cox’s explanation of his conduct as a “regrettable
joke” and noted that she takes “very seriously”
the NSW Police
Force’s positive duty pursuant to the
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth) to eliminate sexual harassment in connection with work.
regard to these matters, the Police Commissioner submitted that Mr Cox has not
discharged his onus of proving that his removal
from the NSW Police Force was
harsh, unreasonable or unjust, and contended that the Application should be
Consideration
First preliminary issue – the Police Commissioner’s failure to
call witnesses
set out above, the Police Commissioner relied upon material arising from the
criminal charges laid against Mr Cox to inform her
decision to remove him from
the NSW Police Force pursuant to
proceedings, she elected to rely entirely on that material. She did not call any
evidence in response to Mr Cox’s
case. The Police Commissioner chose to
conduct her case in that manner notwithstanding Mr Cox’s advice to her
that he wished
to cross-examine a number of the witnesses who gave evidence as
part of the criminal process. Mr Cox intended to do so in order to
address the
factual matters which he put in issue in these proceedings.
Cox contended that because of the Police Commissioner’s failure to call
evidence in these proceedings, no weight ought to
be attributed to the evidence
given by witnesses in the criminal proceedings. In support of that submission Mr
Cox relied upon
Van Huisstede v Commissioner of Police
(2000) 98 IR 57
[2000] NSWIRComm 97
where it was held at [147] and [161] that the Police
Commissioner’s decision not to call witnesses deprived the applicant of
fair trial which was not overcome by the fact that those witnesses were
cross-examined in the criminal context.
Police Commissioner submitted that Mr Cox’s criticism of her was misplaced
in circumstances where most of the salient facts
were agreed between the parties
or the subject of admissions by Mr Cox. She further submitted that it was Mr Cox
who bore the onus
of proof, and the only question before the Commission was the
weight to be given to the evidence before the Police Commissioner in
circumstances where the Commission did not see those witnesses. The Police
Commissioner contended that that question fell to be determined
in light of what
occurred in the criminal proceedings and the assessment of Mr Cox’s
evidence. The Police Commissioner rejected
the contention that evidence from the
criminal proceeding on contested matters which was not the subject of
cross-examination ought
simply to be disregarded by the Commission.
the process prescribed by
, I must first
consider the Police Commissioner’s reasons for removing Mr Cox, which are
necessarily informed by the material
before her. If I find that it was open to
her to find that the alleged misconduct took place, and that Mr Cox’s
dismissal was
not unreasonable, unjust or harsh in light of that misconduct, I
then consider whether the case presented by Mr Cox has cast sufficient
the Police Commissioner’s reasons. In so doing, I have regard to the fact
that Mr Cox, who bears the onus at all times,
has contested certain factual
matters upon which the Police Commissioner’s decision was based and was
not afforded the opportunity
in this Commission to test the evidence that was
before her.
is common ground that the question for this Commission is the weight to be
afforded to the evidence of those witnesses whose account
is challenged by Mr
Cox and who were not made available for cross-examination in the instant
proceedings. Ordinarily, the evidence
of such witnesses can only be
given significant weight if there is no denial or contradiction
of their evidence. However, as submitted
by the Police Commissioner, the
consideration of that evidence is also informed by what occurred during the
criminal proceedings
and my assessment of the credibility of Mr Cox.
Accordingly, the weight to be given to the evidence upon which the Police
Commissioner
relied, and which Mr Cox now contests, will need to be informed by
what occurred in the Local Court concerning the contested issue.
excluded the Police Commissioner’s evidence from consideration because the
witnesses were not available for cross-examination
Commission.
Second preliminary issue – the relevance of
context to Mr Cox’s actions
Cox relied on the decision of the Full Court of the Federal Court in
Airways v Cornwall
(1998) 84 FCR 483
[1998] FCA 865
in support of the
submission that conduct which might ordinarily provide a valid reason for
termination of an employee can take on
a different character when viewed in
context. In that case, in determining whether striking a supervisor was a valid
reason for termination,
the Court held at 492:
“... However, conduct is not committed in a vacuum, but in the course of
the interaction of persons and circumstances, and
the events which lead up to an
action and those which accompany it may qualify or characterise the nature of
the conduct involved
was Mr Cox’s contention that context looms large in this matter and that
the Police Commissioner’s case “seeks
to extract in peculiar
isolation purported acts by Mr Cox” rather than to see them in the context
in which they occurred. The
Police Commissioner’s case is that her
decision had regard to the context in which the alleged misconduct was said to
occurred, including the private nature of the social gathering and the fact
that participants were drinking.
have set out at [
above authority for the proposition that the misconduct in which Mr Cox is
alleged to have engaged ought to be viewed in context.
The Police Commissioner
does not cavil with that principle. Rather, she relies on her Statement of
Reasons to demonstrate that the
context in which Mr Cox’s admitted conduct
occurred was a matter to which she gave consideration when making her decision.
I address the context in which the alleged misconduct is said to have occurred
Third preliminary issue – Mr Cox’s
credibility
accept the Police Commissioner’s submission that Mr Cox was an
unimpressive witness. There were a number of occasions on which
he was asked a
question and instead of giving a direct answer to that question, he gave an
answer which sought to contextualise the
obvious answer. To take just a couple
of examples:
“Q: I suggest to you that on 24 August 2019 you showed a video of
pornography to your colleagues?
A: It was accessed without my consent.
Q: And certainly your conduct in behaving in the manner in which you did by
showing that footage discredits the NSW Police Force?
A: At no time did I attempt to discredit the NSW Police Force.”
the discrepancies in Mr Cox’s evidence did not assist him. For example,
when being cross-examined about Allegations
2 and 3, Mr Cox gave the following
“Q: Now, in relation to that conduct, you accept that that conduct was in
poor taste?
A: Yes, I do.
A: Yes, I do.
Q: Juvenile?
A: Yes, I do.
Q: And unacceptable and disrespectful?
[REDACTED].
Q: That’s different to paragraph 48 of your affidavit, isn’t it? Go
to court book page 108?
A: Which paragraph, sorry?
Q: It’s at page 108, paragraph 48. So if you go halfway down the
paragraph, the sentence begins, ‘I acknowledge that’
A. Yes, I do.
Q. So the evidence that you’ve just given is different to that evidence,
A. No, I don’t think so.
Q: Well, it’s more than it could be deemed disrespectful. It was as a
matter of fact disrespectful, wasn’t it?
A: I stand by what I’ve made, and I said it was deemed disrespectful.
Q: It was as a matter of fact disrespectful, wasn’t it?
A: I don’t agree.
[REDACTED].
difficulty was the shift in Mr Cox’s evidence between what he said in the
criminal proceedings and what he said to the
Commission. A clear example of that
is Mr Cox’s evidence about the nature of the Watagans Trip. Before the
Local Court, Mr
Cox accepted that it was a team-building exercise. However,
before this Commission his evidence-in-chief was that:
“The Watagans Trip was taken in our private capacity and had no bearing or
connection to our employment or any NSW Police Force
matter. The purpose of the
trip was to disconnect from work for a few days and enjoy recreational
Cox was asked about that discrepancy in cross-examination. It is worth setting
out that exchange in full:
“Q: That trip away was a team building exercise, wasn’t it?
A: Yes, you could call it that.
Q: No, it’s not about what I’d call it, I’m saying do you
accept that it was a team building exercise?
A: I’d call it a getaway with close work friends.
Q: Have you got the court book in front of you?
A: Yes, I do.
Q: Could I get you please to turn to court book page 423? And I just want to be
clear about your evidence before you go there, you
just said you’d
‘call it a getaway with friends’. Is that right?
Q: If I can get you to go to court book 423? Have you got that in front of
A: Yes, I do.
Q: Could I get you please to go to line 45? You’ll see 45 down the left
hand side of the page. This is a copy of your examination‑in‑chief
by your solicitor, Mr McGirr in your criminal proceedings. Do you accept
A: Yes, I do.
Q: If I can get you to go to 45? Sorry, we’ll start at 40. You’ll
see there Mr McGirr asks you a question about going
to the Watagan National Park
in August 2019?
Q: And he goes down, you answer, ‘Yes, correct.’ ‘An
Airbnb?’ ‘Correct.’ And he asks that it
was a team-building
exercise, and your answer was yes?
Q: Okay. So that’s different, isn’t it, to a getaway with friends,
as you would have described the time away?
A: Not necessarily. I’d, I’d put getaway with friends and
team-building in the context of what we did as police officers
as a similar
Q: Well, I’d suggest to you that a team-building exercise has a much
greater connection with the performance of work than a
getaway with friends?
A: I’d disagree.”
accept that participating in a getaway with friends who happen also to be work
colleagues would almost inevitably strengthen bonds
within the work team.
However, the last answer in particular is difficult to accept. In
re-examination, Mr Cox explained his evidence
as follows:
“Q: Mr Cox, you recall you gave evidence in relation to questioning to my
friend and your evidence in relation to allegation
1 and the Watagans trip was
that it was a team-building exercise, do you recall giving that evidence?
A: Yes, I do.
Q: Why do you say it was a team-building exercise?
A: That’s the terminology that the senior officers use[d] when I was
started at that team for getaways with friends. They would
team-building exercises.”
last answer strains credulity. Further, it does not satisfactorily explain Mr
Cox’s evidence-in-chief that the trip had
“no bearing or connection
to [the participants’] employment” in circumstances where all of the
participants of
the Watagans Trip were members of Team 3 of the Sydney City PAC.
I accept that the trip was undertaken by the participants in their
capacity, as Mr Cox has said. It may be that this was all that Mr Cox intended
to convey. However, that is not the evidence
that he gave when challenged on the
difficulties with Mr Cox’s evidence are relevant to whether I accept his
account of the context in which each of the Police
Commissioner’s
allegations is said to have occurred, especially where that account differs from
that of other persons present
or his own explanation provided in the Response.
They are also relevant to whether he has the integrity to be a member of the NSW
Police Force. I address that matter in detail below.
Cox accepts that he showed Constables Kirk and Sibbald and PCC Richardson a
video of a male and female engaged in sexual intercourse,
and that he suggested
he was a participant in the video to at least some of those present. Mr
Cox’s evidence is that he did
so as a joke and it was conveyed in a
sarcastic manner, that the male in the video was not him and that he had
downloaded the video
from the internet.
Police Commissioner does not allege that the video was in fact Mr Cox. She
alleges (and he accepts) only that he said that it
was him. Mr Cox was not
challenged in cross-examination about the fact that he made that assertion in a
joking manner. That evidence
is consistent both with the Response and the police
statement given by Constable Kirk. Mr Cox’s evidence that the male
in the video could not have been him because that person did not have
his distinctive arm, leg and sleeve tattoos was equally unchallenged.
evidence is also consistent with the Response and the evidence of Constable Kirk
that someone in the group said words to the
effect of “that’s not
you”. Accordingly, I accept that Mr Cox did show the video in a joking
manner in circumstances
where it was apparent to those present that he was not
depicted in the video.
this Commission, Mr Cox asserted that the video shown on the first night of the
Watagans Trip was accessed by Constable Schofields
without his knowledge or
consent and that he was pressured to share the video due to her reaction to it
and other colleagues’
requests to see it, particularly as he was a new
team member. Mr Cox did not make this claim either during the criminal
proceedings
or in the Response. He was not challenged in cross-examination as to
its veracity, but given its centrality to the allegation, I
give no weight to
that aspect of Mr Cox’s account.
Cox also relies on the fact that he had “close personal friendships”
with each of the attendees at the Watagans Trip
and had spent significant social
time with each attendee outside of work. I accept that relationships within the
team became close
over time. However, the contention that the context of the
conduct giving rise to Allegation 1 was that it occurred within a team
relationships were of a close personal nature is difficult to reconcile with Mr
Cox’s evidence that he felt pressured
to acquiesce to requests to behave
as he did because he was a new member of the team.
number of attendees gave evidence that large quantities of alcohol were consumed
on the first night of the Watagans Trip. Senior
Constable Withey stated that
when she arrived on the afternoon of the second day, there were bottles of
alcohol all around the house
and several of the team members appeared hungover.
I accept that attendees were drinking large amounts of alcohol on the night in
question. While the Police Commissioner acknowledged the social setting in her
Statement of Reasons, she made no reference to the
attendees’ consumption
of significant amounts of alcohol.
allegation that Mr Cox sexually harassed PCC Richardson is based firstly on her
police statement that she turned away from the
video because she did not want to
watch it, and secondly, her evidence during the criminal proceedings that
like what I saw, so I turned away”. As submitted by
Mr Cox, that evidence needs to be viewed in the context of PCC
Richardson’s
evidence during the criminal proceedings more generally.
During cross-examination, PCC Richardson stated that she could not name
person (other than Mr Cox) who was present when she was shown the video. She
admitted that her recollection of the event
was poor and in cross-examination
she could not state what time of day she was shown the video or whether she was
intoxicated at
Cox expressly denied that PCC Richardson turned away from the video. His
evidence was that those who viewed the video crowded around
and asked to see it.
His evidence, viewed in isolation, might be regarded as self-serving and
unreliable. However, it needs to be
viewed in the context of evidence given by
others present, such as Constable Kirk, who stated that the whole episode was
a bit of a laugh and that people were consuming significant
quantities of alcohol. It also needs to be viewed in the context of Senior
Constable Withey’s evidence that Constable Schofields pressured Mr Cox
into showing the video to her the next day. This suggests
willing engagement
with the material by at least some of those present on the first night. As PCC
Richardson did not give evidence
before the Commission, I do not accept, on the
balance of probabilities, that Mr Cox sexually harassed her by engaging in
conduct of a sexual nature.
Cox also accepts that he showed a sexually explicit image to Senior Constable
Withey the following evening. His evidence as to
how that came about is
consistent with the police statement given by Senior Constable Withey that
Constable Schofields raised the
issue of the video shown on the previous night
and was “pressuring” Mr Cox to show it to her. The Police
Commissioner
sought to discredit Mr Cox on account of his claim that he could
not resist sharing the video under the circumstances. There was
no evidence from
Constable Schofields before either the Police Commissioner or this Commission. I
accept that Mr Cox showed a sexually
explicit image to Senior Constable Withey
on the second night of the Watagans Trip after Constable Schofields raised the
of the video and urged him to show it to Senior Constable Withey. That
he briefly showed Senior Constable Withey a still image, as
distinct from the
video shown the previous evening, is consistent with the fact that Mr Cox was
not an entirely willing participant
in the activity. It must also be recognised
that he was a probationary constable mixing with more senior officers. In those
circumstances,
little turns on the extent to which Mr Cox’s will was
overborne by the conduct of other officers present.
I note Senior Constable Withey’s unchallenged evidence that female
officers were topless at one point during the second
evening of the trip. That
supports the evidence given by Mr Cox that two named female officers took their
clothes off. It also provides
powerful evidence as to the context in which Mr
Cox’s alleged conduct on night two occurred.
noted above, I do not accept that Mr Cox sexually harassed PCC Richardson. The
Police Commissioner’s reliance on that conduct
as a basis for his removal
from the NSW Police Force was therefore unjust. Further, Mr Cox showed the video
on the first night of
the trip to a group of police officers who were away for a
weekend, drinking and socialising in a private capacity. The video was
fact him and it was shown in a way that persons viewing it would have been aware
that it was not him. On the second night,
he showed a still image to a more
senior officer at the instigation and urging of another officer. Senior
Constable Withey was not
offended. Taking the context of the accepted conduct
into account, I find that it was unreasonable for the Police Commissioner to
rely on that conduct as a basis for Mr Cox’s dismissal because it was
contrary to:
(2) clause 9 of the
Police Regulation
(3) points 1 and 4 of the Code of Conduct.
emphasise that my conclusion as to Allegation 1 is based on my finding that the
video which Mr Cox showed to the group in question
was downloaded from the
internet and did not depict himself and a former girlfriend. If the video in
question had in fact recorded
Mr Cox and a previous partner, then my conclusion
would be very different. However, I note that the Commissioner’s Statement
of Reasons does not allege that the video and still image were in fact Mr Cox
and that, as a consequence, no proposition to that
effect was put to him in
cross-examination.
Allegation 4
Cox accepts that he attended a team trip to the Hunter Valley in 2020 during
which he showed Constable Pratt, at her request, a
video of a male and a female
engaging in sexual intercourse. What is in issue is how that came about. Mr Cox
states that Constable
Pratt initiated the conversation about the video shown on
the Watagans Trip and pressured him into showing it to her. He contends
this occurred in the context of participants consuming significant amounts of
alcohol and discussing personal dealings, including
sexual matters. As noted
above, Constable Pratt’s account is that the conversation was initiated by
Pratt did not give evidence either at Mr Cox’s criminal trial or before
the Commission. In her statement made for
the purposes of the police
investigation, Constable Pratt expressly stated that she had formed a view early
on in her time at Sydney
City PAC that she did not want to be friends with Mr
Cox and did not like him. Her evidence that Mr Cox “often grotesquely
spoke about women and had no respect for his teammates in particular, female
officers” and that he “always treated female
officers, particularly
junior officers, with attitude, is rude towards and puts them down” is in
stark contrast to the evidence
of other officers. To take just a few
(1) Senior Constable Withey’s unchallenged evidence before this Commission
was that “At no point in time have I ever
witnessed [Mr Cox] speak or act
disrespectfully towards women. To the contrary, he has also discharged his role
effectively and has
been a valued team member”.
(2) Sergeant Lachlan Teasel of St George LAC’s unchallenged evidence
before this Commission was that “[Mr Cox’s]
professionalism with
officers, senior and junior was exceptional ... he was humble and respected by
his peers”.
(3) Sergeant Hamish Ryan of St George LAC’s unchallenged evidence before
this Commission was that:
“The team itself became more confident, having [Mr Cox] around with his
knowledge and skills ... His presence and work rate
were infectious with the HVP
During my time managing [Mr Cox] I considered him like my right-hand man, he
would be my go-to officer to train young and new officers.”
Constable Pratt’s evidence about the circumstances in which she came to
view the video was to the effect that the discussion
occurred in a group setting
outside the house where the team was staying, it appeared to her that the group
had been discussing the
video before she joined, she asked to see the video
after Mr Cox raised it with her, and that when jokes were made about that
she played along with them because she wanted to see the video. She
also admitted that she had previously “tried asking around
alleged video but could not get anything confirmed, [REDACTED].
only other evidence concerning Allegation 4 is that of Mr Cox. Mr Cox’s
evidence both in the Response and to this Commission
is that he showed the video
to Constable Pratt at her insistence. This is consistent with Constable
Pratt’s account that she
asked to see it. Mr Cox’s evidence before
this Commission included the following:
“As noted, I only showed Ms Pratt the video so she would stop pestering me
with her inquiries. Also, my conduct in showing
the video was consistent with
the nature of the discussions on the evening of 17 November 2020 and the tenor
of the banter within
this group.”
Cox was not cross-examined in relation to Allegation 4. Further, there is no
evidence before the Commission about how the video
became the subject of the
group discussion in which Constable Pratt found herself when she approached the
group. Constable Pratt’s
account that Mr Cox initiated the subject with
her needs to be viewed in the context that, on her evidence, she walked up to a
where discussion about the video had been occurring.
accept Mr Cox’s evidence that the participants of the Hunter Valley Trip
were discussing matters of a personal nature, including
sexual matters. That is
consistent with Constable Pratt’s account that the group had been
discussing the video before she joined
it. As noted above, that context is
important. As held in
“... serving officers form strong personal bonds, including bonds
involving groups. Those bonds of trust and confidence arise
from cooperation in,
and are necessary to dealing with, dangerous situations. The practical reality
is that no service force where
members are required to place their safety and
potentially their lives at risk can function without those bonds being created
maintained ...”
also accept Mr Cox’s evidence that attendees of the Hunter Valley Trip
were drinking large amounts of alcohol, given the location
and it being accepted
by the Police Commissioner in her Statement of Reasons that the trip was a
Christmas trip. As with Allegation
1, I note that the Police Commissioner did
not expressly consider that context in her Statement of Reasons.
the evidence before the Commission, I am not able to find on the balance of
probabilities that Mr Cox initiated the conversation
Constable Pratt. Her account is entirely untested. She admits that she had been
asking around about the video
before the Hunter Valley Trip occurred. Given that
context, it is possible that she initiated the conversation about the video with
Mr Cox in the manner that he alleges. However, it is unnecessary for me to make
a positive finding in that regard. As it is agreed
that Mr Cox showed the video
to Ms Pratt at her request, and her evidence was that she played along with
jokes in that context, the
Police Commissioner was unreasonable in her finding
that Mr Cox’s conduct provided a basis for his termination because it was
contrary to:
(2) clause 9 of the
Police Regulation
(3) points 1 and 4 of the Code of Conduct.
Allegation 5
is not in dispute that, on two occasions during a night shift in late 2019 or
early 2020 at The Rocks Police Station, Mr Cox played
an audio recording of a
woman engaging in sexual intercourse. Again, the issue for consideration is the
context in which that conduct
was only before this Commission that Mr Cox asserted that he first played the
audio track inadvertently and as the result of a
prank by an unspecified
colleague. However, he was not challenged in cross-examination about that aspect
of his account. Senior Constable
Withey, in a statement made for the purposes of
the criminal proceeding, stated that the audio was consistent with a prank
that appears innocuous but changes to sexualised content. However, her
evidence does not address the playing of the audio on two
accept that the audio may have been the content of a prank email. However, that
does not mean that Mr Cox was unaware of the content
when he played it the first
time. Again, given the centrality of that detail to the allegation, and the fact
that it was not ventilated
in the Response, I am not able to make a positive
finding that Mr Cox was unaware of the nature of the audio recording the first
time that he played it.
I accept Mr Cox’s evidence that the second playing of the audio recording
was at the insistence of LSC Vicente and
was meant in good humour as part of a
discussion among close friends. Senior Constable Withey’s evidence during
the criminal
proceedings was consistent with her police statement in that
respect. She described the atmosphere in the station that night as
“hyperactive
with joking and mucking around”. Her evidence before
the Commission was that LSC Vicente was insistent that Mr Cox play the
a context where LSC Vicente was being loud and often inappropriate. Her evidence
was also that LSC Vicente was the supervisor
on the shift that evening. Mr Cox
was a probationary constable.
playing of sexualised audio content in a workplace as occurred here was conduct
that was in breach of
and points 1, 3 and 4 of the
Code of Conduct. Mr Cox accepted in evidence before this Commission that it was
inconsistent with the
Police Regulation
, the Code of Conduct and the standards
of professional practice. However, the actions of Mr Cox need to be viewed in
the context
of them being not only permitted, but strongly encouraged by a
superior officer who was the senior team member on the night in question.
speaks to the culture at the Sydney City PAC.
Commissioner of Police is entitled to rely on members of the Force acting in
accordance with the
Police Regulation
and the Code of
Conduct. The Commissioner is entitled to impose discipline if there is a failure
by an officer to so act. The question
here, however, is whether the Order made
by the Commissioner was in all the circumstances harsh, unreasonable or
my view it is unreasonable to hold Mr Cox to a standard from which he was
actively encouraged to depart by his superior officer.
That is plainly the case
in relation to the second occurrence. However, the context described by Senior
Constable Withey is also
relevant to the initial decision of Mr Cox to play the
audio – he did so in a jovial environment in which LSC Vicente was being
loud and inappropriate. Accordingly, I find that Mr Cox has met his onus in
establishing that the Police Commissioner’s reliance
on Allegation 5 in
removing him from the NSW Police force was
unreasonable.
Allegation 2
relation to this allegation, Mr Cox has accepted that he showed Constables Kirk
and Barrett, two close friends with whom he lived
shortly thereafter and who
were also his colleagues, a video of two unknown persons having sex [REDACTED].
He accepted that he did
so on two occasions. [REDACTED].
found by the Police Commissioner, Mr Cox’s conduct was in breach of
, cl 9 of the
Police Regulation
and points 1 and 4 of the
Code of Conduct. [REDACTED].
I cannot find on the balance of probabilities that [REDACTED]. Accordingly,
[REDACTED], I find that the Police Commissioner’s
reliance on this conduct
to remove Mr Cox from the NSW Police Force was neither unreasonable nor
making that finding, I place no weight on Mr Cox’s evidence before this
Commission that his initial showing of the video
was in response to Constable
Barrett showing sexually explicit material or that the second showing of the
video was in response to
Constable Kirk’s repeated demands to see it.
Neither detail formed part of Mr Cox’s response to the Police
Commissioner.
Further, even if I did accept that account as truthful,
[REDACTED]. Accordingly, even if I were to give weight to that aspect of
Cox’s account, my view that the Police Commissioner’s reliance upon
this allegation to remove Mr Cox from the NSW
Police Force was neither
unreasonable nor unjust would be unchanged.
Allegation 3
Cox has accepted the conduct to which I have referred at [
] above in relation to
Allegation 2 and [REDACTED]. Accordingly, I have no difficulty accepting the
Police Commissioner’s findings
that the conduct was in breach of
, cl 9 of the
Police Regulation
, points 1, 3 and 4 of the
Code of Conduct,
Anti-Discrimination Act
and the NSW Police
Force Respectful Workplace Behaviour Guidelines. My findings about the context
in which the conduct occurred,
as set out with respect to Allegation 2, apply
equally to Allegation 3. Accordingly, I find that the Police
Commissioner’s
reliance on this conduct to remove Mr Cox from the NSW
Police Force was neither unreasonable nor unjust.
Cox’s dismissal harsh?
noted at the outset, the decision by the Police Commissioner was based on her
finding that each of the five allegations of misconduct
had been made out. I
have determined that the Police Commissioner’s finding that Mr Cox
sexually harassed PCC Richardson was
unjust. I have also determined that the
Police Commissioner’s findings concerning the balance of Allegation 1 and
Allegations
4 and 5 were unreasonable. If I had determined that the Police
Commissioner’s findings were just and reasonable, I would nonetheless
considered the Police Commissioner’s reliance upon those allegations as a
basis for the Order to be harsh. In relation
to Allegations 1 and 4, such a
finding again assumes that Mr Cox was not in fact a participant in the explicit
videos shown to colleagues.
Accordingly,
I am left to determine whether the Order was harsh when based upon only
Allegations 2 and 3, rather than the five allegations
upon which the Police
Commissioner relied. I accept that Allegations 2 and 3 are more serious than
Allegations 1, 4 and 5. [REDACTED].
I also accept that the Police Commissioner
is required to ensure the health and safety of police officers and that sexual
of officers presents a significant risk in that respect.
[REDACTED].
relevant to the harshness of Mr Cox’s removal from the NSW Police Force is
the criminal investigation and trial to which
he was subjected and upon which
the Police Commissioner relied. That experience will have been a salutary
lesson. In that regard,
the decision of the NSW Court of Appeal in
the New South Wales Bar Association v EFA (a pseudonym)
(2021) 106 NSWLR
[2021] NSWCA 339
–[196] is instructive, albeit in the context
of the imposition of disciplinary orders:
“[195] The question for this Court is what measure is called for to mark
the court’s intolerance of conduct of the kind
in question and to convey
its intolerance to others who might be tempted similarly to engage in conduct
that is demeaning to women
and perpetuates unacceptable attitudes. We consider
that, notwithstanding (as we have already mentioned) that the objective of
disciplinary
orders is protective and not punitive, some guidance may be taken
from two well established principles of sentencing law: (i) proportionality
(ii) weight that may be given to extra-curial punishment. It is appropriate to
note the level of extra-curial punishment (in
some respects going far beyond any
action the court could take) that has already been visited on the respondent.
[196] Bad as the respondent’s conduct was, and deserving of condemnation,
so far as the evidence goes, it represents an isolated
instance of departure
from accepted norms of conduct. It is an instance of the “human
frailty” that Kitto J recognised
and was again recognised
by the High Court in
A Solicitor
. It needs to be seen in proportion to
what the conduct has already cost the respondent in personal and emotional, as
well as financial,
conduct which is the subject of Allegations 2 and 3 cannot be regarded as
“an isolated instance” given that Mr Cox
has accepted most of the
conduct which is the subject of Allegations 1–5 and which occurred over an
approximate 18-month period.
However, the humiliation that would have been
associated with his arrest and the criminal proceedings which followed, together
his suspension from active duty, are a consequence of the most serious
aspects of his conduct which gave rise to the Order –
namely, the matters
which were the subject of Allegations 2 and 3.
The interests of
Cox had been a police officer for approximately six years when the Order was
made. That is not a particularly lengthy period of
service. Further, Mr Cox has
been able to apply himself effectively to a new career in the ADF. The financial
implications of his
removal from the NSW Police Force, to which he made passing
reference, were unspecified.
Mr Cox chose the police force as a career, following in the footsteps of
numerous family members. He deposed to feelings
of anxiety and sadness due to
the loss of a career about which he was passionate. He also gave evidence that
the stress associated
with his removal from the NSW Police Force resulted in the
breakdown of his relationship with his partner. I have regard to each
matters, but I find that they are outweighed by the public interest in
maintaining the integrity of the NSW Police Force.
s 181F(3)(b), the public interest is taken to include the interest in
maintaining the integrity of the NSW Police Force and the
fact that the Police
Commissioner made the Order. The public interest also includes the elimination
of conduct which may bring the
NSW Police Force into disrepute:
Commissioner of Police
(2010) 199 IR 139
[2010] NSWIRComm 149
). However, it is appropriate to keep in mind the observation of
the Full Bench of this Commission in
Commissioner of Police v Sewell
(2008) 180 IR 91
[2008] NSWIRComm 147
“There is no warrant for elevating the Commissioner’s loss of
confidence (based on misconduct), or according it some
higher status, or place
of prominence, or priority, above any other factor, or factors, which might fall
for consideration as part
of the balancing exercise between competing interests
under s 181F(3) of the Act ...”
relevant is the finding of Walton J, Vice President in
which was not disturbed on appeal:
“Here, there is required a balancing of considerations between the
Commissioner’s determination, the maintenance of the
integrity of the
Police Force (by the upholding of appropriate standards, even in off duty
situations) and the elimination of conduct
which may bring the Police Force into
disrepute (such as the impugned conduct), and, the maintenance of the service of
a highly trained
officer who has the strong support of his colleagues (because
of his performance in the Police Force) and who is capable of providing
service to the Police Force in the future ...”
Toshack v Commissioner of Police
(2009) 181 IR 420
NSWIRComm 31
, Boland J, President, Walton J, Vice President and Staff J held at
“[46] It has been said, however, in various ways, that the requirement of
a police officer to act with integrity does not constitute
an absolute test of
the officer’s suitability to remain in the Force. See, for
Alexander v Commissioner of Police
[2009] NSWIRComm 3
Sewell v New South Wales Police Force
[2008] NSWIRComm 93
(2008) 174 IR 247
. That must be so, in our opinion, otherwise the whole system of review
under Div 1C of
would be otiose.
[47] Similarly, the Commissioner may promulgate from time to time codes of
conduct or ethics or statements of value which may act
‘touchstone’ of the integrity of the officer. However,
as Haylen J pointed out in
Sewell v NSW Police
(as approved in
Commissioner of Police (NSW) v
[2008] NSWIRComm 147
), such codes ‘should not be
treated as a monolith but should be treated as blueprints with layers indicating
what should be
the behaviour of police officers. Those layers should also
acknowledge a role for flexibility, compassion and fairness in dealing
variety of human behaviour that will be called for review’.”
light of the number and nature of the statements given in support of Mr Cox both
to the Police Commissioner and in these proceedings,
to which I have referred
above, I accept that he was a capable and hard-working police officer. Further,
he demonstrated a degree
of resilience in the manner in which he continued to
apply himself to his duties after he was transferred to St George LAC as a
of the conduct which gave rise to the criminal proceedings. The evidence
is that Mr Cox continued as an operational police officer
from the time of the
investigation into his conduct in 2021 until his suspension from duty in July
2023 and, in doing so, built confidence
in the team by his presence and was a
mentor to more junior officers. I give weight to the unchallenged evidence that
not the subject of any further misconduct issues during that
making these findings, I reject the Police Commissioner’s submission that
“little to no weight” should be given
to the evidence of Mr
Cox’s exceptional performance record, summarised at [
]–[72] above,
because all police officers are expected to perform their duties “in a
manner that preserves the rights
and freedoms of individuals and strives for
citizen and police personal satisfaction”. The fact is that Mr Cox
performed his
duties at a level well above many, if not most, of those around
him. Further, at 23 or 24 years old, Mr Cox was a relatively young
and plainly
immature officer when all of the incidents underpinning the Police
Commissioner’s allegations occurred.
also accept that Mr Cox could have taken an approach to these proceedings which
was contrite, noting his young age and immaturity
and setting out the things
that he has done to rehabilitate himself since these events occurred. Instead,
as submitted by the Police
Commissioner, Mr Cox’s attitude to these
proceedings has been almost aggressive at points, describing them as a
hunt”. That characterisation must be viewed in the context in
which these proceedings occurred: following a criminal process
in which he was
entirely exonerated and about which he may feel aggrieved. However, it would
appear that he still lacks insight into
the seriousness of his misconduct,
particularly in relation to Allegations 2 and 3.
am fortified in that view by Mr Cox’s evidence-in-chief before this
Commission. A number of Mr Cox’s admissions accepted
only that his conduct
could reasonably have been perceived as inappropriate by others, not that it
inappropriate. Some examples include (emphasis added):
(1) “...whilst I did not intend any harm by my conduct, I appreciate that
the implications of my behaviour
could be perceived
otherwise”;
(2) “I recognise that this conduct
may be interpreted
as demeaning,
even though this was not my intention”; and
(3) [when asked whether showing the Allegation 1 footage in the manner that he
did and holding himself out as a participant in the
footage discredited the NSW
Police Force] “It
could be viewed
Mr Cox’s mind, the process which culminated in the Order was an attempt by
the Police Commissioner to “recast”
allegations that were the
subject of an unsuccessful criminal proceeding. Because of that mindset, Mr Cox
has struggled to view some
of the allegations objectively, and his concessions
addition, Mr Cox gave explanations for his conduct in relation to Allegations
1–3 and 5 in his evidence before this Commission,
as referred to above,
which had not previously been raised. Often, those explanations raised important
matters of context. The timing
of their introduction brings his credibility into
question. As is evident from [105]–[111] above, they were not the only
of Mr Cox’s evidence that I found difficult to accept. These
matters give me pause when considering the sincerity of Mr Cox’s
expressions of remorse. I am fortified in that view by Mr Cox’s response
when I asked him what he had learned over the two
years since his arrest, and
which I consider to be largely an expression of regret due to the consequences
which his actions have
brought upon himself:
“Your Honour, I’ve learnt that, I guess, your actions when
you’re immature and young can have significant effects
on people and I, I
am extremely remorseful for my actions all that time ago, and I guess a lot of
self-reflection was had because
I didn’t have a lot of purpose not being a
police officer anymore.”
Mr Cox’s disposition and his apparent lack of candour do not reflect well
on him. When the manner in which Mr Cox conducted
himself before this Commission
is considered together with the conduct which is the subject of Allegations 2
and 3, I find that he
has been unable to discharge his onus to establish that
the Order was harsh. In that regard, the findings of Marks J in
Commissioner of Police
[2008] NSWIRComm 150
are fitting:
“I have earlier set out extracts from the transcripts of the evidence
given by the applicant in these proceedings. In my opinion
he was evasive and
ready to rationalise his evidence in order to enhance his situation for the
purpose of the proceedings. He was
not prepared to readily acknowledge matters
that were plain to see, and he prevaricated in a manner that attempted to avoid
with particular questions directed to particular matters. Again, I
conclude that the applicant’s evidence in these proceedings
inconsistent with the maintenance of a high level of integrity expected of a
police officer whilst giving sworn evidence before
a Tribunal.”
have determined that Mr Cox has not met his onus to establish that the Order was
not harsh, unreasonable or unjust insofar as it
made reference to Allegations 2
determined that the Order was not harsh, unreasonable, or unjust, the only
appropriate order is that the Application be
make the following order:
(1) The application is dismissed.
07 October 2025 - Amended typographical errors.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (489 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter