URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/1088.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Services Union NSW (obo Green) v Health Secretary in respect of NSW Ambulance [2025] NSWIRComm 1088 (9 October 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Health Services Union NSW (obo Green) v Health Secretary in respect of NSW
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 1088
Hearing Date(s):
9 October 2025
Date of Orders:
9 October 2025
Decision Date:
9 October 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Commissioner Muir
The motion of the applicant is refused
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — Termination — Statutory rights
— Unfair dismissal — Threatened dismissal —
likelihood of success — Balance of convenience — Both against
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — Termination — Statutory
rights — Unfair dismissal — Resignation
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Cases Cited:
Allison v Bega Valley Council
[1995] NSWIRComm 175
Lahner v Health
Secretary on behalf of Western Sydney Local Health District
[2023] NSWIRComm
Lyne v Commissioner of Police
[2022] NSWIRComm 1023
Moore v North
Sydney Council
[2018] NSWIRComm 1062
Peat v Industrial Relations Secretary
o/b Department of Communities and Justice (NSW Sheriff’s Office)
NSWIRComm 1067
Public Service Association and Professional Officers
Association Amalgamated Union of New South Wales on behalf of Pearcey, Barnett
and Woelfl v Department of Attorney General and Justice - Corrective Services
[2012] NSWIRComm 33
Sarson v Health Secretary in respect of Nepean Blue
Mountains Local Health District
[2025] NSWIRComm 1084
Smith v Director
General of Education
[1993] NSWIRComm 134
State of New South Wales v Paige
[2002] NSWCA 235
Westaway v Health Secretary on behalf of Northern Sydney
Local Health District
[2024] NSWIRComm 1021
Procedural rulings
Health Services Union NSW (Applicant)
Health Secretary
(Respondent)
Representation:
Representation:
Ms C Lemos (HSU) for the Applicant
Mr D Gardner
(Solicitor) for the Respondent
Solicitors:
Bartier Perry Lawyers for
the Respondent
File Number(s):
2025/00370647
Publication Restriction:
EX TEMPORE DECISION
26 September 2025, the Health Services Union NSW filed an Unfair Dismissal
Application on behalf of their member, Claire Green.
Filed simultaneously was a
motion seeking an order that Ms Green not be dismissed pending determination of
the substantial question
on the fairness of her dismissal.
circumstances which led to the application are said to be ones which are known
colloquially as a “constructive dismissal”.
In this case, Ms Green
gave notice of her resignation to be effective on 26 September 2025, by letter
dated 2 January 2025. On 10
July 2025, Ms Green submitted a formal request to
retract her resignation.
appears that her immediate supervisors approved that action, but subsequently
more senior managers advised Ms Green that NSW Ambulance
“decided not to
accept the recission of Ms Green’s resignation”. Further
correspondence was exchanged between Ms
Green and NSW Ambulance, but the
position of NSW Ambulance did not change.
Commission sat on 26 September 2025 to hear the interlocutory motion. At that
time the respondent gave an undertaking not to give
effect to the resignation
letter, in so far as treating it as effective, until 4pm today, 9 October
undertaking was given so that the Commission could avoid needing to make a
decision on the interlocutory motion of the applicant
on the spot on 26
September 2025. Had the Commission needed to do so, the respondent would have
had no opportunity to file evidence
and would have needed to give purely oral
submissions on the interlocutory motion.
undertaking having been given, the Commission was able to give each party an
opportunity to file evidence and a formal outline
of submissions.
recounting the evidence before the Commission, I record this is an interlocutory
proceeding. Only to the extent necessary should
I make findings of fact. I have
attempted only to recount what is before me and give consideration only
sufficient to determine the
question now before me.
is important to record that Ms Green was not cross-examined. This is not because
the respondent did not seek to cross-examine Ms
Green, but because the applicant
objected, based on a report said to be from a psychologist, Sarah Revelle, of
Coastal Psychology
in Devonport, Tasmania. The applicant sent this to the
registry under cover of an email at 3.05pm yesterday.
is 12 days after I made orders which contemplated Ms Green being cross-examined;
on the day before the hearing, to determine
a notice of motion of some
considerable importance to Ms Green. This is also seven days after the day for
filing of Ms Green’s
evidence, which was on time.
email set out:
“Dear Registrar,
I write regarding the matter above mentioned.
The applicant is seeking leave from the Commission to:
-appear via AVL;
-not be subject to cross-examination;
Due to her currently health state and the impact that that may cause on her
mental health. We have attached, to support the request,
a letter from her
psychologist explaining the clinical reasons why this would be detrimental to
her health.
The Respondent is copied in and has already said they do not consent to the
We also take the opportunity to advise that we informed the Respondent we will
require Ms Melanie Lawler for cross-examination.”
the purpose of today, I proceed on the basis the report is what it purports to
be and what it, apparently, on its face, is, being
a report by a registered
psychologist. In its current form, it is unlikely to be much use at any
substantive hearing. One, it is
not in a proper form of a witness statement,
which is the last of its problems. Two, it does not set out the writer’s
qualification
to give the opinions in the statement. And three, the author is
not available for cross-examination herself, more of a concern at
substantive hearing.
the interlocutory purposes, I accepted the report to the extent that the
applicant can rely on the contents to explain why Ms
Green is not
cross-examined. Without unnecessarily divulging Ms Green’s medical issues,
that amounts to the unreasonable stress,
anxiety and trauma which would be
visited upon Ms Green if she were to be cross-examined.
consequence of this will be that any doubts raised by her evidence in her
witness statement will remain unresolved, any gaps unfilled.
I observe that the
report appears to place beyond doubt that Ms Green resides in Tasmania.
current purposes, it is not necessary to resolve, whichever way today’s
motion is resolved, how the applicant can proceed
if Ms Green cannot give
applicant filed a witness statement by Ms Green and an Applicant’s Outline
of Submission on 1 October 2025. Ms Green’s
statement set out the matters
above as to the events leading to 26 September 2025, which the Commission
understands is essentially
uncontroversial to the level of detail set out above
by the Commission. Ms Green’s statement also set out events she said led
to her submitting her resignation as follows:
“7. In June 2024, I sustained a shoulder injury whilst at work and was
placed on alternative duties.
8. By September 2024, my mental health had severely declined and I knew I needed
to take time away from work in an attempt to recover.
9. I reached out to Ms Melanie Lawler (Zone Manager), who told me that to access
my full leave entitlements, I would need to lodge
something called a notice of
intention to resign, and she further expressed that any application I made for
Leave Without Pay would
10. After 19 years of employment with NSW Ambulance, I knew resigning from my
role is not what I wanted so I attempted to hold off
before eventually accessing
my Annual Leave entitlement in December 2024.
11. On 6 January 2025, after my mental health declined further during the
holidays and whilst I was on leave, I submitted my notice
of intention to resign
effective 27 September 2025 as per my Zone Manager’s instruction. The
notice noted that I had submitted
an application for all of my Long Service
Leave entitlements. A copy of this notice is at annexure
12. At the time of submitting this notice, and based on my Zone Manager’s
advice, I understood that it was the only way for
me to access my leave
entitlements. If I was aware of an alternative course of action, I would have
13. In March 2025, I was diagnosed with work-related Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder and shortly after began receiving treatment and
workers compensations
payments. A copy of the Certificate of Capacity is at annexure
14. On 8 July 2025, I tried to rescind my resignation through the StaffLink
system which still allowed me to make a request to withdraw
my resignation. This
page states the request will be sent to my manager and we would need to agree
before it is approved. A copy
of this StaffLink page is at annexure
15. Both Mr Matthew Bray (Manager) and Ms Patricia Kairouz (People and Culture
Business Partner ) accepted the recission before Ms
Lauren Mansell (Assistant
Director of Clinical Operations) declined it with no explanation other than that
she had conversations
with relevant stakeholders. Evidence of this approval and
the reasons I provided for the request, along with the ADCO email can be
at annexure
last two paragraphs described her attempts to have her resignation
Green then set out her financial circumstances, the effect of which
(1) She lives alone;
(2) She is “a sole income earner”;
(3) She set out her current fortnightly income on workers compensation and her
expenses, which leaves her with about $127 a fortnight
after what she called
“bare necessities”; and
(4) If she was dismissed, she could apply to Centrelink but the most she would
receive would cover less than half of her fortnightly
Green also set out that she had a “flawless” employment record of
nearly 20 years.
Green did not give further oral evidence, as apparently she had intended, but
did correct what she described as an error in the
annexure to her statement.
This correction made her evidence of her resignation letter the same as the
respondent’s evidence
as to her letter of resignation.
Commission did not allow further oral evidence from Ms Green, given that I
accepted she would not be required to be available
for cross-examination. To
have allowed the further evidence orally, but not allow cross-examination would
have unfairly prejudiced
the respondent, who came prepared to address her
written evidence.
Commission allowed the correction to Ms Green’s evidence, notwithstanding
the ruling on oral evidence and cross-examination,
because it appeared proper to
have the evidence that Ms Green agreed was correct, rather than evidence not
agreed by the person giving
that evidence.
respondent filed evidence from:
(1) Megan Smith, Associate Director of Recovery in NSW Ambulance;
(2) Ronald Gavin, whose connection to the proceedings is not set out in his
witness statement;
(3) Lauren Mansell, Associate Director, Clinical Operations, Western Sector NSW
Ambulance; and
(4) Melanie Lawler, Superintendent and Acting Zone Manager for Central West Zone
substance of Ms Smith’s evidence relied on file notes of a subordinate of
Ms Smith, who was a “recovery partner”,
who engaged with Ms Green
for NSW Ambulance in respect of Ms Green’s workers’ compensation
claims. Ms Smith’s evidence
was that the recovery partner was on leave at
the time the respondent was preparing her evidence.
the file notes, Ms Smith’s evidence was that:
(1) Ms Green was open about her plans to cease working for NSW Ambulance;
(2) Ms Green did not wish to continue working for NSW Ambulance;
(3) On 20 February 2025, Ms Green had discussed her trip over Christmas/New Year
2024/2025 to Tasmania, including that Ms Green’s
new house in Tasmania was
ready and that Ms Green said words to the effect:
“20/02/2025 - Claire advised that her trip to Tasmania (took extended
leave over Xmas/ New Year period) was amazing and that
the house that she built
was ready. Claire advised that her decision to resign and relocate felt right
and whilst she had no plans
for what next, she was ok with this. Claire
confirmed that she would finish work on 27/02/2025, would then take LSL, and
then official
resignation. Claire repeated that she was comfortable with her
decision, with a private farewell scheduled for the following evening.
advised she was looking forward to this. Claire advised she had informed QBE of
(4) On 17 April, Ms Green said words to the effect:
“17/04/2025 - Claire reiterated that she had relocated to Tasmania and
that she was having difficulty getting a GP and treatment
providers to assist
with NSW Workers Compensation. Claire added that as she had elected resignation,
she was trying to find other
roles that won’t have the same physical
demands of paramedicine
Smith pointed out Ms Green’s workers compensation medical provider is in
Tasmania and Ms Green’s workers compensation
form has an address in
Tasmania listed for Ms Green.
Gavin’s evidence was that:
(1) He became aware in “2024”, unspecified as to when, that Ms Green
was planning to move to Tasmania. During “that
year”, she had told
Mr Gavin about her plans to buy a block of land in Tasmania;
(2) Mr Gavin received a text from Ms Green on 6 January 2025, sent to a group
including other NSW Ambulance staff. He annexed some
text messages. It would be
fair to describe Ms Green’s text messages as positive about her future,
although without expressly
saying anything about the events causing her to
resign; and
(3) He was asked in June 2025 to be a referee for Ms Green for employment
outside NSW Ambulance; that he performed that task and
that Ms Green later told
him she had been successful in gaining that employment.
Mansell gave evidence that:
(1) She had no recollection of Ms Green raising mental health issues but that Ms
Mansell was aware of Ms Green’s physical injuries;
(2) On 6 January 2025, Ms Mansell received a letter of resignation from Ms
Green. The next day Ms Mansell processed the resignation
and approved the
accompanying long service leave request for Ms Green;
(3) Relevantly, Ms Mansell annexed the letter of resignation she says she
received. It contained a sentence not present in the resignation
letter annexed
to the witness statement of Ms Green as filed on 1 October. The letter in full,
annexed by Ms Mansell, sets out:
“Dear Lauren,
I have submitted an application for all of my Long Service Leave
entitlements.
I am relocating interstate from the 01/03/2025.
I would like to also submit my official notice of intent to resign from NSW
Ambulance once all my leave has been exhausted. The official
date of resignation
that I would like to submit is 27/09/2025.
I am hoping that you are able to approve.
Many thanks
Warmest Regards
Claire Green”
The words “I am relocating interstate from the 01/03/2025” do not
appear in the annexure to Ms Green’s witness statement
as filed. As set
out above, Ms Green corrected this when her evidence was tendered this
(4) After Ms Green’s final day on the road, being 27 February 2025, Ms
Green returned her uniform and completed a uniform accountable
items checklist.
Attached as annexure LM5 was a document that appeared, on its face, to support
the return of uniform on 27 February
2025, apparently signed by Ms Green. The
document on its face, covers resignation, termination, retirement, transfer. The
does not indicate which applied in this case;
(5) It was well known in Bathurst that Ms Green was relocating to Tasmania as
Ms Green spoke about this in her workplace conversations
frequently;
(6) Ms Green told Ms Mansell on or about 29 August 2024 that Ms Green’s
house in Tasmania was then nearly finished;
(7) Ms Mansell initiated processes to recruit to replace Ms Green and this
accomplished from a merit list and was “filled several
(8) She gave evidence Bathurst Station is “over establishment”,
although also stating:
“However, Bathurst is a Category B station, which entitles it to six
Intensive Care Paramedic (ICP) positions. At present,
only two ICPs are
stationed there. Should an ICP apply, they would be prioritised for
consideration.”
(9) As to Ms Green’s request to rescind her resignation:
“21. On 8 July 2025, Claire sought to rescind her resignation.
22. Her request was addressed to Mr Matthew Bray, a Station Officer for the
Respondent.
23. Under the Delegations Manual, the minimum level of approval for such a
request is the Zone Manager. In this case, that is Ms
Melanie Lawler. The Chief
Executive holds the delegation for staff appointments.
24. I also hold the delegation to approve extended long service leave and also
secondary employment requests. At no time did Claire
lodge any secondary
employment application with me.
25. Mr Bray was therefore not the appropriate person to receive or determine
Claire’s request. I became aware of the matter
when Ms Lawler raised it
with me on 17 July 2025, advising that Claire had contacted her regarding the
rescission.
26. I had not previously dealt with a resignation rescission. As this was not a
routine matter, I sought advice from my business
partner, Ashima Ajmani, to
determine whether there were any grounds to accept the request.
27. When the matter was referred to me, I was the Associate Director. I advised
Claire that her request would be declined, as the
necessary administrative and
operational arrangements had already been finalised.
28. There was an email exchange between Claire and me from 30 July 2025 to 10
August 2025 regarding this matter. Annexed and marked
is a copy of
this correspondence.
29. In that exchange, I explained that her resignation could not be rescinded
due to the finalisation of recruitment and operational
30. Claire subsequently sent a further email, to which I did not respond, as she
had by then engaged industrial avenues and the matter
had been referred to our
industrial team.
31. I understand that Claire also raised the matter with the Chief
Executive.”
Lawler’s evidence was that:
(1) She had known Ms Green from 2013;
(2) She had professional and personal interactions with Ms Green, including
visiting Ms Green’s house and engagement with Ms
Green on social media
(3) Through social media, Ms Lawler saw Ms Green’s regular updates on the
construction of Ms Green’s house in Tasmania
and that Ms Green had told Ms
Lawler that Ms Green planned to move to Tasmania;
(4) Ms Lawler understood Ms Green had moved to Tasmania in 2025, unspecified as
to time, and that Ms Lawler had not seen Ms Green
in Bathurst recently;
(5) Ms Lawler no longer had social media contact with Ms Green;
(6) Ms Lawler denied that Ms Green ever raised or disclosed mental health
concerns with Ms Lawler;
(7) Ms Lawler set out:
“I have searched for any form of communication from Claire regarding
paragraph [9] of the Green Statement but have not found
anything. I did not
advise Claire that she was required to resign in order to access Long Service
). Her formal LSL application was not submitted until January
cross-examination, Ms Lawler denied recalling any conversation with Ms Green in
August in 2024. She gave evidence that she was
on leave for part of August 2024.
She denied telling Ms Green that Ms Green would need to resign to get access to
long service leave.
And she denied preventing acceptance of Ms Green’s
attempted recission of her resignation because Ms Lawler “created
problem to begin with”.
Submissions
applicant set out the test which the Commission should apply as:
“6 Section 89(7) of the IR Act empowers the Commission to make
interlocutory orders restraining an employer from dismissing
an employee where a
claim under s 84 of the IR Act concerns a threatened dismissal. One of the
off-cited authorities for this proposition
is the decision of Boland J in
Public Service Association and Professional Officers Association Amalgamated
Union of New South Wales on behalf of Pearcey, Barnett
Department of Attorney General and Justice - Corrective Services NSW
NSWIRComm 33.
confirms that the established approach for the adjudication of
interlocutory relief more generally applies to s 89(7). The test for
interlocutory relief under s 89(7) is whether:
a. there is a
prima facie
case, which does not require proof that success
is more probable than not, but rather that there is a serious question to be
b. whether the balance of convenience favours granting the relief in weighing
the potential harm or inconvenience to the respondent
if the order is made
against the potential harm or inconvenience to the applicant if it is
(Footnotes removed)
it may be a difference without effective distinction, the Commission observes
that his Honour Boland J used different words.
His Honour set out:
“34. Thus, the two tests to be applied are: (i) whether there is a
sufficient likelihood of success by the three officers to
justify in the
circumstances the preservation of the
pending the final
in this case being understood to be the suspension of
the three officers on pay; (ii) whether the inconvenience or injury which the
three officers would be likely to suffer if their interlocutory applications
were refused outweighs or is outweighed by the injury
which the respondent would
suffer if the applications were granted. The second test may be referred to as
the balance of convenience
is the expression of the test used by the Senior Commissioner in
Health Secretary in respect of Nepean Blue Mountains Local Health District
[2025] NSWIRComm 1084
, at [6] and Commissioner Howell in
Industrial Relations Secretary o/b Department of Communities and Justice (NSW
Sheriff’s Office) [
2025] NSWIRComm 1067
. It is the expression
of the test that I used in
Westaway v Health Secretary on behalf of Northern
Sydney Local Health District
[2024] NSWIRComm 1021
by Commissioner McDonald in
Lahner v Health Secretary on behalf of Western
Sydney Local Health District
[2023] NSWIRComm 1060
, both cited by
the applicant. The Commission observes that in
, Commissioner
McDonald expressly rejected the submission that the decision was one that
applied that test.
addressed by the applicant in their submissions was the process by which the
Commission might conclude there is a sufficiently
likelihood of success to
justify preserving the
oral submissions, Ms Lemos for the applicant used the phrase “
case” and I took that as her submission as the test which should
, the Senior Commissioner approached this by effectively asking if,
on each substantive issue, the applicant’s evidence stood,
would it be
expected that the applicant would succeed at the substantive hearing, absent any
other evidence. I think that is reasonably
the level of a
prima facie
case proposed by Ms Lemos.
with the decision of Commissioner Howell in
, the Senior Commissioner
held it was not appropriate to conduct a mini trial and balance the facts before
the Commission now. As
Commissioner Howell set out:
“17. It is well settled that when assessing prima facie case the
Commission does not normally undertake a preliminary or ‘mini’
and give or withhold interlocutory relief upon a forecast as to the ultimate
result of the case. It is generally sufficient
that the applicant show a
sufficient likelihood of success to justify, in the circumstances, the
preservation of the status quo pending
the hearing.”
(Endnotes removed)
respondent simply submitted as to the principles:
“6. There is no explicit power in the IR Act to support the orders sought,
however such power has been held to impliedly exist.
In any event, the
Applicant’s evidence fails satisfy the two limbs recognised as justifying
the making of such orders; namely:
(a) there is insufficient likelihood of success, as she was not
(b) the balance of convenience favours the Respondent because she
(Footnotes removed)
Commission took this agreeing with the analysis above as to the
applicant’s submissions on the legal test the Commission
must answer. The
respondent then set out, at a high level, some decisions of the Commission
addressing what constitutes a dismissal:
“8. Whether an employee has been “dismissed” for the purposes
of s 84 has been variously stated:
Smith v Director General of Education
[1993] NSWIRComm 134
by Full Bench of the Industrial Court of NSW as having its
‘ordinary meaning’ where an employee is being ‘
from employment
the termination of services by the
employer without the employee’s consent
Allison v Bega Valley Council
[1995] NSWIRComm 175
(1995) 63 IR
, where the Full Bench of the Commission confirmed that the real inquiry
should involve an analysis of what has occurred and whether
the employer behaved
in such a way as to render the employer’s conduct the real and
effective initiator of the termination
Moore v North Sydney Council
[2018] NSWIRComm 1062
Commissioner Constant (as she then was) found that ‘
the correct test is
whether when considered objectively, the respondent’s actions were the
effective initiator of the termination
of employment.’
respondent’s submission as to “dismissal” is relevant to one
of the key issues in this case. The citations for
appeared to the Commission particularly relevant in the current case.
respondent then addressed the question of whether an employer is obliged to
“accept a resignation” or “accept
or reject a subsequent
attempt to withdraw a resignation”:
“9. The Full Bench of the Commission considered whether an employer had
any obligation to accept a resignation or to accept
or reject a subsequent
attempt to withdraw a resignation in
Lyne v Commissioner of Police
NSWIRComm 1023.
Referring to the common law position explained by the Court of
State of New South Wales v Paige
[2002] NSWCA 235
, it found that:
(a) Although resignations are often spoken in a contractual context as being
‘tendered’ and ‘accepted’, these
are ‘merely
linguistic courtesies’.
(b) Subject to any contractual or statutory provision to the contrary,
resignation is a unilateral act that takes effect in accordance
with its terms
and does not depend upon acceptance by the person or body to whom the
resignation is directed.
(c) Thus, unilateral withdrawal of a resignation or notice of termination is not
(d) The purpose of providing a period of notice of termination is to enable the
party receiving the notice to make other arrangements.
An employer who receives
notice of resignation needs time to arrange for a substitute employee. It would
be harsh if arrangements
so made during the running of the notice could be
disrupted, and parties could be held to their contracts by unilateral withdrawal
of the notice at the last minute.
(e) Such withdrawal, if possible, could lead to an employer being bound by
contracts of employment with two employees, each being
required to give notice
to one or the other, or possibly to suffer the requirement to forfeit or pay
wages for a period of time.
(f) Withdrawal of a notice of termination of a contract of employment can only
be effected by consent of both parties.
10. The Respondent submits that there is no statutory or award modification of
the common law position in the circumstances of this
11. Moreover, only the Chief Executive of the Ambulance Service of NSW, has the
delegation to employ or dismiss. While
regulation 24
(NSW) allows the Chief Executive to delegate
these functions, those alleged to have consented to or to have approved the
of the Applicant’s resignation (being Matthew Bray and Patricia
(a) did not hold any actual or ostensible delegation to do so; and
(b) could not lawfully consent or represent to reform the contract of employment
in any binding or enforceable way (as if it had
not already been notified at the
initiative of the Applicant as coming to an end by her unilateral action on 2
January 2025).”
(Footnotes removed)
Commission’s task is, therefore, as set out in
determine if:
(1) There is a sufficient likelihood that the applicant’s case will
succeed to warrant the preservation of the status quo;
(2) Determine the balance of convenience in making or not making the order.
CONSIDERATION OF THE EVIDENCE
key paragraph of Ms Green’s evidence is para 9:
“12. I reached out to Ms Melanie Lawler (Zone Manager), who told me that
to access my full leave entitlements, I would need
to lodge something called a
notice of intention to resign, and she further expressed that any application I
made for Leave Without
Pay would be denied.”
its face, it alleges that Ms Green resigned because her employer left her no
choice if she was to access her leave. In light of
all the evidence before the
Commission, it warrants further consideration. It does not set out a
conversation. It does not even set
out the words in the form of “words to
the effect of”. It does not say what Ms Green asked for, or even that she
why she wanted leave.
paragraph says, “to access my full leave entitlements”. That may, as
expressed, be a reasonable answer, because if
an employee resigns, from the day
of the effect of their resignation, the employee is entitled to their full leave
entitlements.
If an employee remains employed, they can, with the agreement of
their employer, access parts of their leave and only over time their
leave entitlements”.
12 of Ms Green’s witness statement uses a different phrase, “leave
entitlements”. This may imply Ms Green
could not get any leave. It is not
clear. In the absence of further oral evidence or cross-examination, this
remains unclear, as
does the full conversation summarised at paragraph 9 of Ms
Green’s witness statement.
key paragraph of Ms Lawler’s evidence is paragraph 8:
“8. I have searched for any form of communication from Claire regarding
paragraph [9] of the Green Statement but have not found
anything. I did not
advise Claire that she was required to resign in order to access Long Service
Leave (LSL). Her formal LSL application
was not submitted until January
first sentence makes sense if Ms Lawler is being thorough. The Commission
observes this because Ms Green never referred to an
email or letter. That said,
in paragraph 9 of Ms Green’s witness statement equally she did not
expressly refer to a phone call
or other face-to-face discussion.
Commission raises this because the rest of paragraph 8 of Ms Lawler’s
witness statement addresses only long service leave
and not full leave
entitlements. It does not address Ms Green’s assertion that Ms Lawler told
Ms Green any application for
leave without pay would also be denied. In
cross-examination, Ms Lawler effectively denied having any conversation at
focus on these parts only of Ms Green’s and Ms Lawler’s evidence
because these are the paragraphs that deal with the
core of the application. If
Ms Green was not told that her gaining access to her leave entitlements was
conditional on her resigning
and/or if she was not told leave without pay would
not be granted, she almost certainly cannot succeed in the substantive
expressed, her evidence is vague. It is open to doubt as to the events it
describes as it leaves gaps that are too big to accept
that if her evidence was
taken at its highest, and no other evidence admitted, that she would be expected
to succeed at the substantive
reach that standard, the Commission would need to read into Ms Green’s
evidence assumptions, including as to
(1) The question asked;
(2) What the phrase attributed to Ms Lawler for leave entitlement responded
(3) The context of the reference to leave without pay; and
(4) What, if any, reason was given by Ms Green for asking for leave.
the absence of being satisfied as to the sufficiency of a likelihood of the
applicant’s success on its first limb, the second
limb of the application,
the refusal to rescind the resignation, appears weak. The second limb is
relatively stronger if the first
limb succeeds.
the employer having caused the resignation letter in the first place, and I need
to analyse the second limb in that context,
having concluded that the first limb
does not reach the requisite level, the second limb is weak, as a stand alone
basis. This is
because the applicant has not set out why it would be harsh,
unjust or unreasonable to refuse to rescind the resignation separate
first limb.
the absence of explaining that, there is no basis to understand how there is a
sufficient likelihood of the application succeeding.
record that I do not consider the bulk of the respondent’s evidence of Ms
Green’s move to Tasmania relevant in respect
of the question of likelihood
to succeed. This is not because it may not be relevant to whether Ms
Green’s evidence will be
believed as to the reason for resignation; it may
be at a substantive hearing.
present purposes, Ms Green’s application could have succeeded in any event
if her evidence as to the reason for resignation
to access the leave had been to
the requisite standard as the real cause of resignation.
am reinforced in this being the correct outcome for reasons I consider important
to set out.
Green could have succeeded today and, despite being refused the order she now
seeks, may ultimately succeed, notwithstanding her
move to Tasmania. The
Commission considers the way in which Ms Green’s evidence has been filed
and tendered lacked due candour.
The application set out Ms Green’s
address as a street in West Bathurst, New South Wales. Her witness statement set
same address. At no point did her witness statement refer to her move to
the material before me, including the psychologist’s report filed by the
applicant, it appears clear that Ms Green lives
in Tasmania. That is
inconsistent with the application and her witness statement.
witness statement sets out her expenses and, in light of the foregoing few
paragraphs, it is odd that it was not carefully set
out in her witness statement
that these apparently relate to her life in Tasmania. On examination of the
annexures, it is clear that
lack of candour would have been a factor of some importance against the
application if the first test for the motion had been
answered in the
applicant’s favour. Both because in seeking an order of this kind, which
by its nature is sought without the
opportunity for a full version of the
relevant facts and legal issues to be ventilated, but also because, by their
very process,
the disadvantage suffered by the respondent because of that lack
of candour would have been a factor in balancing the convenience
is also doubtful, in the short time until a full hearing, with the motion not
succeeding, the economic injury to Ms Green would
have arisen, at least based on
the psychologist’s report. That report does not suggest that Ms Green will
be fit for work and
deprived of ongoing workers compensation payments in the
next few weeks. There was no other medical evidence, if that can be medical
evidence, before the Commission.
was really the only issue put by the applicant as to the balance of convenience
being in favour of the motion.
this is the relatively minor, although existent, inconvenience to the respondent
of a further employee above already excess
complement in the relevant station.
While some inconvenience, it cannot be insurmountable for an organisation the
size of NSW Ambulance.
short, the balance of convenience would not have favoured the applicant.
Commission is not satisfied that there is a sufficient likelihood of success by
the applicant to justify the preservation of the
status quo pending final
Commission would have found the balance of convenience favouring not making the
order, albeit it not overwhelming.
motion of the applicant is refused.
Commissioner
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (298 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter