URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/1086.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:59:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Crown Employees (Child Protection Workers) Award 2025 [2025] NSWIRComm 1086 (26 September 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Crown Employees (Child Protection Workers) Award 2025
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 1086
Hearing Date(s):
22 September 2025
Date of Orders:
22 September 2025
Decision Date:
26 September 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Commissioner Webster
(1) Pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 1996
, the Crown
Employees (Child Protection Workers) Award 2025 is made in the form filed with
the Commission on 22 September 2025.
(2) Subject to order 3, the Crown
Employees (Child Protection Workers) Award 2025 will operate from the first pay
period on or after
1 July 2025.
(3) Clauses 11 and 12 of the Crown Employees
(Child Protection Workers) Award 2025 will operate from 6 October 2025.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — Award — Making of a Consent
Award — New Award to cover Child Protection Workers
– New Award
provides for enhanced wages and conditions - award consistent with object of the
Act to encourage strategies to
attract and retain skilled staff where there are
skill shortages so as to ensure effective an efficient delivery of services - No
issue of principle
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Cases Cited:
State Wage Case 2024 (No 4)
[2024] NSWIRComm 25
; 337 IR 182
Principal judgment
Industrial Relations Secretary (Applicant)
Public Service Association
and Professional Officers’ Association Amalgamated Union of New South
Wales (PSA) (Respondent)
Representation:
Pacey (Department of Communities and Justice)
B Trainor (PSA)
File Number(s):
2025/355475
Publication Restriction:
decision concerns an application for a new award filed for the Industrial
Relations Secretary
(“Applicant”) with the consent of the Public Service Association and
Professional Officers’ Association Amalgamated
Union of New South Wales
(“PSA”). It will cover about 3985 full time equivalent employees
occupying the roles of Caseworker,
Manager Casework, and a new role Leading
Caseworker working within the Department of Communities and Justice
(“Department”).
application seeks the Commission, pursuant to
Relations Act
NSW (“the Act”), to make the Crown
Employees (Child Protection Workers) Award 2025 (“proposed award”).
Applicant relies upon an affidavit, filed 16 September 2025, of Catherine
Carvolth, Chief People Officer, Executive Director People
Branch of the
Department.
the hearing of the application on 22 September 2025, I made the consent orders
sought by the parties without providing my reasons.
I took this approach to
create immediate certainty to the employees covered by the proposed award, given
the retention and recruitment
issues raised by Mr Pacey for the Department which
I have set out at length below. These are my reasons for making the proposed
Carvolth, in her affidavit, gave evidence that the proposed award provides for
the equal remuneration for men and women because,
amongst other things, it
contains a single classification of all employees regardless of gender and
conditions which ensure equal
access to employment for men and women.
Carvolth also gave evidence that the proposed award is in the public interest
having regard to the factors in s 146(2) of the Act.
With specific reference to
the proposed award, she deposed that it accords with the objects of the Act,
including by:
(1) encouraging and facilitating co-operative workplace reform and equitable,
innovative and productive workplace relations by ensuring
that work outside
contract hours is paid; and
(2) introducing Salaries, Salary Translation and Overtime provisions aimed at
attracting and retaining skilled staff in circumstances
where there are skill
shortages to ensure the effective and efficient delivery of services.
Carvolth also gave evidence that the proposed award promotes participation in
industrial relations by employees, their representatives
and employers by
providing for a dispute resolution process that seeks to resolve matters locally
before escalating matters.
Carvolth gave evidence that the proposed award will apply to approximately 3985
full time equivalent employees and it is expected
that it will not change the
Government’s fiscal position and have a negligible impact on the fiscal
position an impact on the
economy of New South Wales.
the hearing, I asked Mr Pacey if he could provide some more context to the
Application. Mr Pacey explained from the bar table that
the proposed award was
created specifically for frontline child protection staff, who are responsible
for working with children and
families to ensure their wellbeing on behalf of
the State. Mr Pacey submitted that when the Crown Employees (Public Sector -
2024 Award (“Salaries Award”) was made, there was an
agreement between the Department and the PSA to create a dedicated
protection workers award as part of a Memorandum of Understanding.
a practical perspective, Mr Pacey submitted that Caseworkers would often
complete a two-year compulsory development programme,
which is highly regarded
across the sector, only to leave for non-government organisations (NGOs) that
offered higher pay. These
NGOs could also select less complex cases, while the
State is left with the most challenging and sensitive matters. This situation
has led to problems with recruitment and retention, as well as increased
overtime for the remaining staff.
address these challenges, the proposed award elevates pay rates for child
protection workers, making them more competitive with
those offered by NGOs. In
response to a question for the Commission as to how the new rates had been
developed, Mr Pacey explained
that the Department conducted a review of the
sector and found that NGOs were starting their caseworkers at a higher grade
Department. By raising the starting grade for graduates to a grade 4,
the Department has through the proposed award sought to align
its pay rates with
those of NGOs, helping to stabilise the workforce and improve equity across the
sector. Mr Pacey also offered
that the Department was able to find the necessary
funding for these increases internally, so there was no additional cost to
addition to pay, the proposed award is part of broader discussions between the
parties which include an incomplete negotiation
for a memorandum of
understanding (MOU) between the Department and the PSA. This proposed MOU covers
several related workforce issues,
including a review of administrative roles in
Community Service Centres, updates to role descriptions, and workload planning
Caseworkers. While the MOU had not yet been formally executed at the time of
the hearing, both parties were working towards its finalisation.
Mr Pacey requested that the proposed award be made immediately, with
remuneration backdated to 1 July 2025. However, he asked
that certain provisions
relating to overtime and flexible work arrangements commence from the next flex
period in October, to allow
for a smoother transition.
Trainor consented to the matters put forward by Mr Pacey with respect to the
making of the proposed award and when it should come
into operation.
Consideration
proposed award provides that the Crown Employees (Public Service Conditions of
Employment) Reviewed Award 2009 and the Salaries
Award apply to employees
covered by the proposed award, except where specifically varied by the proposed
award. In effect the proposed
award enhances remuneration through enhanced
salaries and progression rules, as well as overtime and flex-time arrangements.
am satisfied that the proposed award provides for fair and reasonable pay and
conditions for those employees based on the filed
material as well as the
explanation provided by the Department at the hearing of the matter.
am satisfied that all of the requirements of the Act have been met. Pursuant to
sub-principle 3.1(6) of the 2024-2025 Award Making
Principles:
Case 2024 (No 4)
[2024] NSWIRComm 25
; 337 IR 182 an award may be made
without an application needing to be considered as an arbitrated case under
principle 9 where the
application is consented to by the parties and where the
award otherwise complies with the requirements of the Act.
have had regard to the fact the proposed award is made by consent. I am
satisfied the proposed award provides equal remuneration
for men and women doing
work of equal or comparable value.
regard to the evidence and the uncontested submissions of Mr Pacey at the
hearing, I am satisfied it is in the public interest
to make the proposed award,
taking into account the objects of the Act and notably s 3 (a), (b),(e),(f), (h)
and notably the object,
“(i) to encourage strategies to attract and retain
skilled staff where there are skill shortages so as to ensure effective
efficient delivery of services.” Further in deciding it is in the public
interest to make the award, I have accepted the
evidence of Ms Carvolth as set
out above at [
satisfied that all other relevant statutory requirements have been met,
including ss 14, and 15 (4)(b) of the Act.
was on this basis I made the following consent orders on 22 September 2025:
(1) (1) Pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act 1996
, the Crown
Employees (Child Protection Workers) Award 2025 is made in the form filed with
the Commission on 22 September 2025.
(2) (2) Subject to order 3, the Crown Employees (Child Protection Workers) Award
2025 will operate from the first pay period on or
after 1 July 2025.
(3) (3) Clauses 11 and 12 of the Crown Employees (Child Protection Workers)
Award 2025 will operate from 6 October 2025.
21 October 2025, Commissioner Webster made the following Consent Orders
correcting typographical orders in the Crown Employees
(Child Protection
Workers) Award 2025 made on 22 September 2025:
(1) At Part A – General, Arrangement:
(a) Insert a comma after the word ‘Area’ in ‘5. Area incidence
and duration’.
(b) Delete the last ‘s’ in ‘7. Professional
Qualifications’.
(c) Delete ‘10. Salary Translation’ and insert in lieu thereof
‘10. Salary Transition’.
(d) Delete ‘13. Grievance and dispute resolution procedures’ and
insert in lieu thereof ‘13. Dispute resolution
procedures’.
(2) In clause 1.1, capitalise the letter ‘a’ in the word
(3) In clause 6.2:
(a) Delete the words ‘is this’ in the sentence ‘This
undertaking does not prevent the parties from continuing collaborative
discussions during the term of
this Award to deliver additional
enhancements to remuneration or conditions of employment, and to achieve
additional industry wide
and systemic efficiencies and productivity improvements
to the delivery of Government services to the public.
(b) Capitalise the letter ‘a’ in the word ‘award’
wherever appearing.
(4) At ‘Table A: Salary Translation’ (following clause 10.5) delete
‘Translation’ and insert in lieu thereof
‘Transition’.
(5) In ‘Table A: Salary Transition’, fourth column, eighth row,
delete ‘Year 6’ and insert in lieu thereof
(6) At ‘Table B: Salary Translation’ (following clause 10.8) delete
‘Translation’ and insert in lieu thereof
‘Transition’.
(7) In clause 11:
(a) Capitalise the letter ‘b’ in the word ‘bandwidth’
wherever appearing.
(b) Capitalise the ‘m’ in the word ‘manager’ wherever
(8) In clause 12:
(a) Capitalise the letter ‘a’ in the word ‘award’
wherever appearing.
(b) Capitalise the letter ‘m’ in the word ‘manager’
wherever appearing.
(9) In clause 12.1.1, delete the word ‘flexitime’ and insert in lieu
thereof ‘flex-time’.
(10) In clause 12.1.3, capitalise the first letter of each word in ‘child
protection worker’.
(11) In clause 13, capitalise the letter ‘m’ in the word
‘manager’ wherever appearing.
(12) In clause 13.6, capitalise the letter ‘b’ in the word
(13) At clause 14.5.6, the clause be renumbered as 14.5.2.
Janine Webster
COMMISSIIONER
22 October 2025 - 22 October 2025 - Addendum added
The Industrial Relations
Secretary is, for the purposes of any proceedings relating to public service
employees held before a competent
tribunal having jurisdiction to deal with
industrial matters, taken to be the employer of public service employees.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (244 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter