URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/463.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v WS [2025] NSWDC 463 (7 November 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 463
Hearing Date(s):
27 October 2025
Date of Orders:
7 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Fitzsimmons SC DCJ
[83] I make the following orders:
(1) The offender is convicted of the
(2) The indicative sentences with respect to counts 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
9, 10, 11 and sequences 2, 5, 7, and 10 are set out above.
(3) With respect
to sequences 1, 3 and 9 the offender is convicted without imposing any other
penalty pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
The offender is sentenced to an aggregate term of imprisonment of 10 years
commencing 21 June 2025 and expiring 20 June 2035.
(5) I impose non-parole
period of 6 years 3 months to expire 20 September 2031. The earliest date the
offender is eligible for release
is 20 September 2031.
(6) [ADVO orders
Catchwords:
CRIME — domestic violence — sexual intercourse without consent
— choking, suffocation or strangulation — stalking
or intimidation
— armed with intent to commit indictable offence — common
CRIME — sexual offending — where offending took
place in the context of a highly sexual consent-no-consent
relationship
SENTENCING — where crimes committed against one
victim over extended period — victim impact statement
SENTENCING — aggravating factors — in the presence of
infant — armed with a weapon - where offending took place
victim’s home — where offending aggravated by being in the
victim’s home notwithstanding that the offender and
victim lived in the
CRIME — offences on s 166 certificate found to
be proven by the Court
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
Crimes Act 1900
Cases Cited:
Alseedi v R
[2009] NSWCCA 185
Biddle v The Queen
[2017] NSWCCA 128
[2023] NSWCCA 82
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v
Darcy-Shillingsworth
[2017] NSWCCA 224
(2017) 269 A Crim R 40
[2021] NSWCCA
Hesketh v R
[2021] NSWCCA 262
[2016] NSWCCA 286
[2023] NSWDC 477
[2023] NSWDC 477
R v MAK; R v MSK (2006)
167 A Crim R 159;
[2006] NSWCCA 381
R v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR 270
[1998] 1 VR 359
[2024] NSWCCA 149
Representation:
B Hart (Offender)
Solicitors:
Clowry & Associates (Offender)
for Public Prosecutions (NSW) (Crown)
File Number(s):
2022/00096692
Publication Restriction:
Nothing is to be published which identifies the complainant or is likely to
lead to the identification of the complainant.
26 June 2025, following a trial in the District Court at Wollongong a jury of 11
(unanimous) found the offender guilty of the following
(1) Count 2: Intentionally choke so as to render unconscious, insensible or
incapable of resistance contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
offence carries a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment with no standard
non-parole period.
(2) Counts 3, 4, 5, 6 and 9: Sexual intercourse without consent contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
This offence carries a maximum penalty of 14
years imprisonment with a standard non-parole period of 7 years.
(3) Count 10: Armed with a weapon with intent to commit an indictable offence
(intimidation) contrary to
s 114(1)(a)
Crimes Act 1900
offence carries a maximum penalty of 7 years imprisonment with no standard
non-parole period.
(4) Count 11: Intimidate with intention of causing fear of physical or mental
harm contrary to
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act
. This offence carries a maximum penalty of 5 years imprisonment and or
50 penalty units, with no standard non-parole period.
offences were committed against the same victim, CP, who was in a relationship
with the offender at the time of the offending.
offender was found not guilty of the four remaining counts on the
indictment.
22 October 2025, the Court found that seven additional counts on a s 166
certificate were proven beyond reasonable doubt and the
offender was convicted
of those seven offences. These seven offences were:
(1) Five counts of common assault contrary to
. This offence carries a maximum penalty of two years imprisonment.
(2) Two counts of intimidation contrary to
Crimes (Domestic
and Personal Violence) Act 2007
. This offence carries a maximum penalty of 5
years imprisonment or 50 penalty units.
offender is to be sentenced with respect to the eight counts subject to the
trial proceedings, and the seven counts on the s 166
certificate which the
offender was found guilty of.
maximum penalties for the offences act as a sentencing guidepost or reference
point. Section 54A(1) of the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(CSPA), provides that the standard non parole period (counts 3, 4, 5, 6 and
9) is that which is included in the table of provisions.
Section 54A(2) provides
that the standard non-parole period represents the non-parole period for an
offence that falls within the
middle range of objective seriousness taking into
account only the objective factors affecting the relative seriousness of the
Section 54B(2) provides that the standard non-parole period is a matter
to be taken into account when determining an appropriate
sentence without
limiting the matters that are otherwise required or permitted to be taken into
account. The fixing of a non-parole
period is only one aspect of the task when
determining what is an appropriate sentence.
making relevant findings of fact for the purposes of sentencing I must not take
facts into account in a way that is adverse to
the interests of the offender
unless those facts have been established beyond reasonable doubt. However, to
the extent that facts
in favour of the accused are to be taken into account on
sentencing it is sufficient if those circumstances are proved on the balance
probabilities:
R v Olbrich
(1999) 199 CLR 270
at 281 at [27];
[1998] 1 VR 359
Crown relied on the following evidence on sentence:
(1) Exhibit C1 – Indictment
(2) Exhibit C2 – s 166 certificate
(3) Exhibit C3 – Agreed findings of fact
(4) Exhibit C4 – Criminal history
(5) Exhibit C5 – Custodial history
(6) Exhibit C6 – Victim Impact Statement
offender relied on the following evidence on sentence:
(1) Exhibit O1 – Psychological report of Mr Chafic Awit dated 13 October
Findings as to the offending and objective seriousness
Crown prepared a proposed summary of facts from the evidence at trial. The
offender took no objection to the proposed facts and
accepted that the Court
would sentence the offender in accordance with that document. In any event, my
findings of fact for the purposes
of passing sentence are as follows, consistent
with the guilty verdicts and my s 166 findings.
the time of the offending, the victim and the offender were in a domestic
relationship, having met online in April 2021. The victim
was age 29 and the
offender was aged 49. Over several months the victim progressively spent more
time at the offender’s home
and, by early July 2021, the victim was living
permanently at the home, coinciding with the discovery of her pregnancy.
commenced a sexual relationship shortly after meeting and engaged in all types
of sexual intercourse including anal intercourse.
Whilst not something she
enjoyed, the victim engaged in anal intercourse as it made the offender happy.
The dynamic was such that
the offender would be the dominant or controlling
person in the sexual activity with the victim adopting a submissive role,
in the offender being referred to by the victim as “Daddy" and
the offender calling the victim “Baby Girl". At times
consensual intercourse, the offender would grab the victim by the throat,
consistent with the wishes of the offender and
the agreement of the victim. This
constituted a light pressing of the neck in circumstances where the victim would
nod her head in
agreement. However, the victim had clearly communicated to the
offender that she did not consent to the offender choking her to the
passing out.
Sequence 1 on the s 166 certificate: common assault
(11 May 2021)
11 May 2021, the offender and the victim engaged in an argument culminating in
the offender asking the victim to leave. Having
asked a friend to collect her,
and whilst leaving the house, the offender threw a mug in her direction, from a
distance of approximately
1 to 2 m, where it grazed her shoulder before smashing
on the ground. The offence was relatively short-lived, with the incident
whilst the victim had her back to the offender. There is no suggestion
that the victim suffered any injury as a consequence. I find
this offence falls
within the low range of objective seriousness.
Sequence 2 on the
s 166 certificate: intimidation (7 July 2021)
offender and the victim were engaging in an argument whilst the offender was
ironing clothes inside a bedroom at the home. At
the time, the victim was in the
doorway of the bedroom and there was an argument as to the offender speaking to
other women. The
offender turned to the victim and held the iron in such close
proximity to the victim's face that she could feel the heat emanating
The offender told the victim to leave or he would hit her with it. Having turned
to leave the offender threw the iron onto
the floor. I accept the offending
would have caused significant fear in the victim in circumstances where a hot
iron was held close
to her face whilst the offender issued a threat. I find that
this offence falls more towards the mid-range of objective seriousness
offences contemplated by the section.
Counts 2 and 3:
intentionally choke without consent and sexual intercourse without consent (on
or about 21 July 2021)
Approximately
two weeks after the victim discovered she was pregnant, the offender and the
victim commenced engaging in consensual
penile-vaginal intercourse. The victim
was positioned with her knees on the couch seat in the loungeroom, with the
upper half of
her body leaning over the back of the couch. The offender became
progressively rougher with his left hand on the victim's hip and
his right hand
on her throat. The offender’s nails began to dig in. The offender then
tried to insert his penis anally which
hurt the victim and she told him to stop.
In response to the victim telling the offender that she wanted it to stop, the
instead growled in her ear and continued to apply pressure to the
victim's throat until she blacked out. When the victim regained
consciousness,
the offender had his penis in her vagina and after several minutes he
ejaculated. Further, when the victim regained
consciousness, she was
experiencing a lot of pain where the offender had attempted inserting his penis
into her anus. She also experienced
pain in her vagina and some light
respect to count 2, whilst the offender contended in written submissions that
the activity initially involved consensual choking,
in oral submissions counsel
conceded the evidence did not support such a submission. Whilst it is
acknowledged that the act of choking
did form part of their sexual relationship
(in qualified circumstances), the offender’s conduct involved an
intentional choking
(consistent with the guilty verdict) to the point that the
victim was rendered unconscious. However, as the offender correctly noted,
additional element of the offence is that the offender was reckless as to
rendering the victim unconscious. I am satisfied that
this offence falls towards
the mid-range of objective seriousness.
respect to count 3, in written submissions. counsel for the offender contended
that the Court could not be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the offender
had actual knowledge that the victim did not consent, but rather was reckless as
to consent. However, in
oral submissions, counsel acknowledged that, contrary
written submissions, the unequivocal evidence of the victim, which I accept,
that upon the offender becoming progressively rougher, the victim told him that
it hurt and that he should stop. It was the victim's
evidence, which I accept,
that contrary to the victim's demands, the offender continued, growling in her
ear as he did so. He continued
to engage in sexual intercourse for at least
several minutes (the victim having lost consciousness for an unspecified period)
he ejaculated. As a result of the offending the victim’s anus and
vagina were painful and there was some bleeding. It was contended
offences were committed in the context of a sexual domination/submissive
relationship. As with all of the offences of
sexual intercourse without consent,
the nature of the relationship in this respect does not otherwise diminish the
seriousness of
the offending. The fact that their relationship had a
dominant/submissive foundation does not lessen or mitigate the offending. I
satisfied this offence falls towards the mid-range of objective
seriousness.
Sequences 3 and 5 on the s 166 certificate: common
assault x 2 (on or around 23 July 2021)
the course of another argument about the offender’s interaction with other
women, the offender threw a water bottle at the
victim whilst calling her a
“pretentious bitch". The offence of common assault was fleeting and did
not involve the victim
being struck with the water bottle. I find this offence
falls towards the low end of objective seriousness of the type offending
contemplated by the section. In response to the victim laughing, the offender
charged towards her, before grabbing the victim by
the throat and pushing her up
against a wall in the hallway. The pressure on the victim's neck was such that
she experienced some
dots in her vision before the offender let the victim go.
This offence involved a not insignificant degree of violence in circumstances
where the victim asked him to stop and she was crying throughout the ordeal. I
am satisfied that this offence falls above the mid-range
of objective
seriousness for offences contemplated by the section.
sexual intercourse without consent (July 2021)
number of days prior to this offence, the victim had been released from hospital
for a burst cyst, resulting in severe period style
cramps and, in the vicinity
of the cyst, “horrific pain ... feeling like someone sliced through you".
victim was asleep in her bed naked, lying on her side with her back to the
offender when she began to feel his hands up and down
and his erect penis. She
told the offender that she was not feeling well and that she had fluid leaking
from her vagina. The offender
replied that it was okay as it was “not what
daddy wants anyway". The offender then pushed the victim from her side onto her
stomach before attempting to insert his penis into her anus whilst saying
“be a good girl and give daddy what he wants." She
was conscious of not
making noise or screaming out in circumstances where her son was in the next
room staying overnight. The offender
inserted his penis into the victim's anus
which she described as “immensely painful." The offender ejaculated into
the victim's
anus. Apart from being painful, there was also some bleeding.
am satisfied that the offender had actual knowledge that the victim was not
consenting. No submission was made by the offender to
the contrary. It would
have been clear to the offender, given the victim’s medical condition,
that she did not wish to engage
in sexual intercourse of any form with him. This
is supported by the fact that the offender said to the victim that she was to be
a “good girl” and give the offender what he wanted. I do not accept
that this statement merely reflected the dominant/submissive
relationship, given the circumstances of the complainant’s fragile health
and her statements to the offender immediately
prior to the act of sexual
intercourse. I am satisfied that this offence falls within the mid-range of
objective seriousness.
Sequence 6 on the s 166 certificate:
common assault (5 September 2021)
offender was angry with the victim in circumstances where she had purchased him
a gift on Father's Day. The offender threw the
gift on the table before throwing
things around the house and leaving. When he returned in a similarly bad mood,
the victim said
that she was not going to deal with it and started to walk down
the hallway of the home. At this point the offender pushed the victim
behind, as a result of which she fell and grazed her knees on the tiled floor.
At the time, the victim was at least four months
pregnant. I am satisfied that
this offence, involving a degree of violence, and resulting in the victim
falling to the floor whilst
pregnant, falls towards the mid-range of objective
seriousness for offences contemplated by the section.
and 6: sexual intercourse without consent (28 December 2021)
nights after the victim returned home from hospital, where she was being treated
for contractions and pseudo seizures, she
was still unwell. Whilst in the
shower, the offender entered the shower in circumstances where this was unusual.
When the victim
asked the offender what he was doing the offender said,
“giving daddy's little slut what she needed." The offender then turned
victim around, forcing her upper body into the corner of two solid walls of the
shower before inserting his penis into her vagina.
The victim told the offender
not to do it, that it hurt and that she wasn't feeling well (count 5). I am
satisfied that the offender
knew the victim was not consenting in circumstances
where the victim was unwell, heavily pregnant and they had not previously
in such activity in the shower. Further, the offender’s statement
that he was giving the victim “what she needed" further
supports the
finding that at the time he engaged in the sexual intercourse, he knew the
victim was not consenting. This is further
supported by the victim’s
evidence, which I accept, that she told the offender not to do it as it hurt. I
find this offence
falls towards the mid-range of objective seriousness.
offender then turned the victim around before pushing her to her knees and
inserting his penis into her mouth (count 6). He continued
to engage in oral
intercourse with the victim in circumstances where she was shaking her head at
the offender and crying. At the
same time the offender was telling the victim
how good it was and that was what she needed. This lasted for some time before
offender ejaculated into the victim's mouth.
offending occurred in circumstances where the victim had expressly stated she
did not wish to engage in sexual intercourse with
him. It involved the offender,
despite this, physically manoeuvring the victim whilst she was heavily pregnant,
unwell and distressed,
into a position where he inserted his penis into her
mouth for some time before ejaculating. I am satisfied that this offence falls
above the mid-range of objective seriousness.
Sequence 7 on the s
166 certificate: common assault (8-9 February 2022)
offender and victim’s child was born in February 2022. The night after her
discharge from hospital their child would not
settle for the offender, who told
him to “stop being stupid". When the victim told the offender to go back
to bed, the offender
shoved their child into her arms, as a result of which she
stumbled but did not fall. The offence was brief, and whilst it did involve
their infant child, I am satisfied that this offence falls towards the low range
of objective seriousness.
Count 9 – sexual intercourse
without consent (10 February 2022)
nights after returning from hospital (having given birth), the victim was
sitting on the corner of the couch with her infant
son in a swing. The offender
came out of the bathroom with a towel around his waist and asked if she wanted
to suck his cock. The
victim said that she did not want to do so in
circumstances where she was tired, having just given birth. The offender walked
to the couch, stood with his legs either side of her and told her to be
“a good girl" and to give “daddy" what he wanted.
When their infant
started “fussing", the victim said no. Despite her protestation, the
offender forced his penis into the victim's
mouth for several minutes. At the
same time, the offender had a grip on the back of the victim's head and a chunk
of her hair. It
felt like her scalp was “prickling” and like
“he was going to pull it completely out". The offender ultimately
ejaculated in the victim's mouth during which time their child was in the
vicinity crying.
offending occurred in circumstances where the victim had only recently given
birth to their child and where she clearly indicated
she did not wish to engage
in any sexual activity with the offender. The offending occurred in the presence
of their child. It involved
the offender forcibly inserting his penis in the
victim's mouth and controlling the victim's head before ejaculating. I am
that this offence falls above the mid-range of objective
seriousness.
Counts 10 and 11: armed with intent and intimidation
(11 February 2022)
offender was frustrated with their infant son in the context of a night feed and
where he was crying. He called his child stupid.
The victim took their child
into her arms and told the offender to get the baby seat so she could leave. The
offender repeatedly
told the victim that she could not leave. He then walked
into the kitchen, picking up a knife with a 20 cm blade, before holding
his wrists, saying that if she left he would kill himself. The victim walked
towards the offender while still holding the baby.
The offender then turned the
knife towards where the victim was standing telling her that if she tried to
leave he was going to kill
the victim and their child. The offender thereafter
turned and pointed the knife towards the infant child’s back.
averred indictable offence is one of intimidation, carrying a maximum penalty of
five years imprisonment, being an offence towards
the lower end of the range of
indictable offences contemplated by the provision. The relevant weapon was a
knife and the intimidation
was the offender’s threat to kill himself. I am
satisfied that this offence falls towards the low range of objective seriousness
offences contemplated by the section.
victim thereafter told the offender that he needed help to which he responded
that if she was to call anyone, he would kill her.
The victim thereafter locked
herself and the baby in the bedroom for the rest of the night and until the next
morning. Unlike count
10, the use of the weapon is not an element of count 11
and is a further aggravating factor. Further, each of the offences were
in the presence of a child under the age of 18. I am satisfied that
this offence falls between the low and the mid-range of objective
seriousness.
Sequence 10 on the s 166 certificate: intimidation
(3 March 2022)
the day the victim finally left the offender (3 March 2022) an argument
developed between the two over the care of their son. The
victim ultimately sat
on the couch with the infant and told the offender that she was leaving. The
offender responded by head-butting
the wall. The victim told the offender that
he was out of control and that she was leaving. Whilst in the process of
packing, the
offender grabbed a knife and started slashing photographs that he
had of his other children. He was then walking around the house
with the knife.
The offender then left the house for a period before returning whilst the victim
was still present. When the offender
returned, he was demonstrating the same
temperament. This offence was committed whilst the offender was armed with a
knife and was
clearly acting in an aggressive manner which, self-evidently,
would have instilled significant fear in the victim. I am satisfied
offence falls above the low range of objective seriousness although is less than
at the midrange.
summary, the offender engaged in a course of conduct over a period exceeding
nine months against his partner in a domestic setting
involving repeated sexual
abuse interspersed with other acts of violence and intimidation. All but one of
the offences of sexual
intercourse without consent occurred in full knowledge
that the victim was pregnant with their child, with the last of the acts being
committed days after his birth. It is unsurprising that the offending has had a
profound impact on the victim.
Victim impact statement
victim stated that she continued to be “haunted” by the
offender’s abuse. She continues to experience nightmares
which include
fearing the death of her newborn. She no longer experiences the same joy from
her youngest child given the connection
with the offender. The victim
experiences difficulties trusting her own psychological and emotional health and
on days cannot leave
her house. She startles easily and is constantly reminded
of the offender, fearful of him further causing her harm. She can no longer
clothes touching her neck and experiences adverse reactions to anyone else doing
so. The offending has also significantly impacted
the relationship with her
children. There are constant fears on significant days including birthdays,
Christmas and Father's Day.
The victim is no longer able to relax or unwind, or
for that matter enjoy the simple pleasures. She is unable to be around open
in restaurants given the offender’s occupation. She struggles
with professional and personal relationships and experiences
triggers from
everyday activities and events. The victim experiences discomfort with her
nakedness, and it has significantly impacted
her intimate relationships,
including with her present partner.
Other aggravating factors
respect to each of the offences, a distinctly aggravating factor is that each of
the offences were committed in the victim's
do not accept the offender's submission that the fact the offences occurred in
the residence where
the victim and the offender ordinarily reside renders this
factor any less aggravating:
[2016] NSWCCA 286
As previously observed, counts 9, 10 and 11 occurred in the presence of a child
under 18 years of age: s 21A(2)(ea) of the
history/mitigating factors
offender's criminal record, prior to the present offending, was limited to
convictions in 2000 of several obtain money by deception
offences for which the
offender performed community service and was the subject of a former section
9(1) bond. In the circumstances,
I accept a mitigating factor is that the
offender does not have any significant criminal record of previous convictions:
s 21A(3)(e)
of the CSPA. I accept that the offender is otherwise a person of
good character.
accept as a further mitigating factor that the offending was not otherwise
planned (s 21A(3)(p)) although it is not uncommon for
this to be the case,
particularly in the context of sexual offending within a subsisting
relationship.
Report of Mr Chafic Awit
Awit assessed the offender on 8 October 2025. By way of background, the offender
was raised by his biological mother and stepfather,
with two younger
half-siblings. He has never known the identity of his biological father, only
being made aware that his stepfather
was not his real father at the age of 15.
The offender's parents separated when he was 13 or 14, which the offender
described as
a difficult period given the acrimonious separation. However, prior
to this time, the offender described his upbringing as “great"
father in full-time work as a police officer and his mother as a homemaker 80%
of the time.
had not remained in any regular contact with either his mother or his
half-siblings. The offender described the most traumatic
thing that occurred to
him in his developmental years was finding that his father was not his real
father. This was in circumstances
where his mother has continued to refuse to
provide any information as to his biological father.
offender previously qualified as a chef and has been generally in full-time
employment since leaving school. In more recent years
he has worked as a chef on
the South Coast and was in full-time employment at the time of his arrest.
offender reported use of alcohol from the age of 17 and drank more heavily at
the peak of his depression. He commenced using cannabis
at the age of 22 and has
regularly used it since, apart from a five-year period of abstinence. The
offender has also used ecstasy,
MDMA, speed, cocaine, ketamine and ice at times,
using these substances heavily, although there was a five-year abstinence after
a mental health episode.
offender had previously been diagnosed with bipolar II disorder (2019), had been
under the care of a psychiatrist and was prescribed
Seroquel. The offender told
the psychologist that he had experienced various periods of depression and
increased drug use, particularly
during periods of personal stressors. He
reflected that he may have in fact struggled with depression whilst in high
school, reporting
repeated self-harm (cutting) when performing poorly at school
during his parent's separation. The offender had a two-week inpatient
psych ward at Shellharbour Hospital following a work injury in 2008 leading to
personal and financial stressors and the
mother to his two children leaving him.
The offender found himself homeless, jobless and childless. In 2018 he suffered
a major breakdown
which occurred approximately one year prior to his bipolar
respect to his relationship with the victim, the offender reported that they
were together for 11 months and “despite the
accusations [the offender]
states that this had been the best relationship he had ever been in". The
offender further reported: –
"He never loved anyone as much as he loved her, and never felt love, the way he
felt she loved him."
offender reported that the victim's pregnancy was difficult and it took its toll
on both of them, leading to a worsening of his
mental health. Towards the end of
the relationship the offender had given up his employment and became the
victim's carer due to
a condition she had towards the end of her pregnancy. They
were ultimately evicted from their house due to a lack of finances, causing
further stress which further worsened his mood. Six weeks after their child was
born, the offender found the relationship was over,
and due to the eviction, the
victim and his son moving to her mother's house, he planned a further stay at a
mental health ward.
offender continues to deny the allegations. Whilst he has not had psychological
or psychiatric intervention for some years, his
antipsychotic medication is
being reviewed by his general practitioner. He experiences hypomanic episodes
every four to six weeks
with significant depression thereafter. The mental
health examination was largely unremarkable.
screening revealed the offender was suffering, at the time of assessment,
extremely severe levels of depression, moderate
levels of anxiety and severe
levels of stress. The offender told Mr Awit that he believed that in the period
of the alleged offending
he would have felt even worse. Mr Awit concluded that
during the alleged offending the offender was likely suffering bipolar II
and substance use disorder.
is difficult to accept the offender's assertions that during the period of the
alleged offending he would have felt worse than
at the time of the assessment by
Mr Awit. Self-evidently, at the time of the assessment, the offender was in
custody and on remand
following guilty verdicts for serious offences and facing
a not insignificant sentence of full-time imprisonment. It is unsurprising,
indeed understandable, that the offender would be suffering extremely severe
levels of depression and stress in addition to moderate
levels of anxiety. This
is to be contrasted with the offender’s description that the relationship
with the complainant for
the best part of 11 months was the best relationship he
had been in and that he felt a strong sense of love for the complainant which
considered was reciprocated. That said, I accept that towards the end of the
relationship, the offender's mental health deteriorated,
culminating in the
offender seeking admission to a mental health facility.
sentencing considerations
for the offender conceded that remorse was not relied upon as a statutory
mitigating factor, particularly in circumstances
where the offender continues to
deny the offending.
considering the purposes of sentencing provided in s 3A of the CSPA, the Court
takes into account the harm to the victim so eloquently
expressed in the victim
impact statement. Whilst not a statutory aggravating factor for the purpose of s
21A(2)(j), it is clear from
the victim's statement that the offending has had a
profound impact and permeates every aspect of the victim’s life including
her sleep, her physical and intimate relationships with partners and her
relationship with her children.
and general deterrence remain highly relevant in the sentencing process. As the
Crown contended, the Courts have observed
that general deterrence, community
protection and denunciation are of considerable importance with respect to such
offending and
that any sentence requires “rigorous and demanding
consequences for perpetrators for the purpose of protecting partners, family
members and the wider community”:
Biddle v The Queen
[2017] NSWCCA
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v
Darcy-Shillingsworth
[2017] NSWCCA 224
(2017) 269 A Crim R 40
said, I accept that at the time of the commission of offences constituting
counts 10 and 11, the offender was suffering from
a mental health condition
which played a role of some significance in this offending such that it reduces
the offender's moral culpability
for this offending with less weight to be
afforded to punishment and deterrence:
[2023] NSWCCA 82
– [76]. I accept that these offences were committed in the context of the
offender suffering under considerable stress, no
doubt aggravated by his
underlying mental health condition. This particular offending was in the context
of stress within the relationship
with the victim and further stress because of
the birth of their child.
I am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the offender's
underlying mental health condition otherwise in any
way played a role in the
offender’s offending. I accept that, consistent with the opinion of Mr
Awit, the offender may well
have been experiencing symptoms of bipolar disorder
and substance use disorder during the relationship. However, I am not satisfied
that any underlying mental health condition played a role of any significance in
the offending (
at [74]) or that there is any link, direct or indirect,
between the offending and any mental health condition:
at [76]. It is
inconsistent with the offender’s assertions to the psychologist that
generally his relationship with the complainant
was the best relationship which
he had ever been involved in and from his perspective was a loving one. The
offender did not assert,
either in his evidence or at trial, nor in any history
provided to the psychologist, that his mental health was such that it had
role in his offending.
offender must be made accountable for his actions, and the offending must be
denounced in the strongest terms. The sentence must
ensure that the offender is
adequately punished for his offending against the victim.
contends that the offender is unlikely to reoffend and has good prospects of
rehabilitation. In support of this submission,
it is noted that the offender
will have available in the custodial setting various programs which will support
and enhance his prospects
of rehabilitation, as well as minimising his
likelihood of reoffending.
Self-evidently,
a significant step towards rehabilitation is an acceptance of guilt and a
willingness to address the underlying issues
leading to the offending. The
offender’s continuing denial of the offences in the absence of any remorse
is an obstacle to
his rehabilitation. However, as Giles JA observed in
Alseedi v R
[2009] NSWCCA 185
, there can be rehabilitation without
confession and offenders found guilty after trial are not all but automatically
deprived of
a finding of good prospects of rehabilitation unless they then
acknowledge their guilt: at [65]. I find that the offender’s
prospects of
rehabilitation are somewhat guarded although not altogether hopeless.
is difficult to make a definitive finding as to the likelihood of reoffending,
although a not insignificant period of imprisonment,
in conjunction with
programs available in the custodial setting, should permit the offender to
reflect on his offending and the significant
harm occasioned to the victim. It
should give the offender significant pause for thought as to engaging in similar
behaviour in a
domestic relationship upon his release.
have taken into account that the offender’s mental health impairments
identified in the report of Mr Awit will render the
offender’s experience
in custody more onerous than would otherwise be the case given his underlying
mental health impairments.
for the offender contended that the s 166 offences pale into insignificance when
compared with the offences on the indictment
and accordingly those offences
should be dealt with pursuant to s 10A of the CSPA. The Crown contended that
these offences should
incur additional penalties, particularly the more serious
the violence. Whilst I accept that the more minor offences of common assault
reflected in sequences 1, 3 and 9 are such that they should not attract any
further penalty, I am of the opinion that the more serious
common assaults
reflected in sequences 5 and 7, together with the offences of intimidation
(sequences 2 and 10) should attract a
discrete sentence.
am satisfied the s 5 threshold has been crossed with respect to each of the
counts on the indictment and that no sentence other
than imprisonment is
appropriate. I am further satisfied that the s 5 threshold has been crossed with
respect to sequences 1, 3 and
9 and sequences 2 and 10.
ought to be a finding of special circumstances such that the offender has an
extended period on parole. Such a finding is justified
on the basis that it is
the offender’s first time in custody and that he suffers a significant
mental health impairment for
which he should be afforded every opportunity to
seek treatment in the community. It is hoped that this will further enhance the
offender’s prospects of rehabilitation.
find that this is an appropriate matter for the Court to invoke section 53A of
the CSPA and impose an aggregate sentence. It will
be necessary for me to
indicate what sentences would have been made.
respect to count 2, intentionally choke without consent contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
, an appropriate indicative sentence is 2 years
imprisonment.
respect to count 3, sexual intercourse without consent contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
an appropriate indicative sentence is 4 years
imprisonment with an indicative non-parole period of 2 years, 6 months.
respect to count 4, sexual intercourse without consent contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
an appropriate indicative sentence is 4 years
imprisonment with an indicative non-parole period of 2 years, 6 months.
respect to count 5, sexual intercourse without consent contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
an appropriate indicative sentence is 4 years
imprisonment with an indicative non-parole period of 2 years, 6 months.
respect to count 6, sexual intercourse without consent contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
an appropriate indicative sentence is 4 years, 6 months
imprisonment with an indicative non-parole period of 3 years, 2 months.
respect to count 9, sexual intercourse without consent contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
an appropriate indicative sentence is 4 years, 6 months
imprisonment with an indicative non-parole period of 3 years, 2 months.
respect to count 10, armed with intent contrary to
s 114(1)(a)
an appropriate indicative sentence is 1 year, 6 months
imprisonment.
respect to count 11, intimidation contrary to
Crimes (Domestic
and Personal Violence) Act 2007
an appropriate indicative sentence is 10
months imprisonment.
respect to sequence 1, common assault contrary to
, the offender is convicted without imposing any other penalty pursuant
of the CSPA.
respect to sequence 2, intimidation contrary to
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
an appropriate indicative
sentence is 12 months imprisonment.
respect to sequence 3, common assault contrary to
, the offender is convicted without imposing any other penalty pursuant
of the CSPA.
respect to sequence 5, common assault contrary to
, an appropriate indicative sentence is 3 months imprisonment.
respect to sequence 7, common assault contrary to
, an appropriate indicative sentence is 4 months imprisonment.
respect to sequence 9, common assault contrary to
, the offender is convicted without imposing any other penalty pursuant
of the CSPA.
respect to sequence 10, intimidation contrary to
(Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007
an appropriate indicative
sentence is 10 months imprisonment.
determining the aggregate sentence, it is necessary to ensure that the overall
sentence is just and appropriate in that it reflects
the totality of the
offending behaviour:
[2021] NSWCCA 220
- [63] (per RA
Hulme J with whom Leeming JA and Campbell J agreed). The Court must be mindful
of the "crushing" effect of a long
total sentence which has the potential of
inducing a feeling of hopelessness and destroying any expectation of a useful
R v MAK; R v MSK
(2006) 167 A Crim R 159;
- [17] per Spigelman CJ, Whealy J and Howie JJ;
[2023] NSWDC 477
was again referred to in
[2024] NSWCCA 149
, where the Court noted
that “the severity of the sentence increases at a rate that is not linear
in comparison with the increase
in length. That is, actual imprisonment for a
lengthy period is more than twice as severe as imprisonment for half that
Bell P (as his Honour then was) observed in
Hesketh v R
[2021] NSWCCA 262
where there is underlying factual commonality across the offences for
which the offender is to be sentenced it is important not to
impose punishment
that is disproportionate to the overall criminality involved in the offences:
[2023] NSWDC 477
the offending involved a single victim, it occurred over a not insignificant
period between May 2021 and March 2022. In the
circumstances, there must be some
degree of accumulation although a degree of concurrency remains relevant as to
ensure the overall
sentence reflects the totality of the offending
all the circumstances, an appropriate aggregate sentence is 10 years
imprisonment with a non-parole period of 6 years 3 months.
offender was in custody from 5 August 2022 until 8
August 2022. The
offender was again remanded in custody following the guilty verdict on 26 June
2025 and has remained in custody
until the date of sentencing (7 November 2025).
Accordingly, the offender has spent a total of 139 days in custody and the
is to be backdated to reflect this period.
make the following orders:
(1) The offender is convicted of the offences.
(2) The indicative sentences with respect to counts 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11 and
sequences 2, 5, 7, and 10 are set out above.
(3) With respect to sequences 1, 3 and 9 the offender is convicted without
imposing any other penalty pursuant to s 10A of the CSPA.
(4) The offender is sentenced to an aggregate term of imprisonment of 10 years
commencing 21 June 2025 and expiring 20 June 2035.
(5) I impose non-parole period of 6 years 3 months to expire 20 September 2031.
The earliest date the offender is eligible for release
is 20 September 2031.
(6) [ADVO orders redacted]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (307 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter