URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2013/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Leonard (No 2) [2013] NSWPST 5 (20 December 2013)
PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL
Inquiry pursuant to the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) No 86a
as to Protective Orders consequent upon a finding made by
the Tribunal on 7 November 2013, that the Respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Citation: Health Care Complaints Commission v Leonard (No
[2013] NSWPST 5
Complainant: Health Care Complaints
Respondent: Mr Ross Leonard
Ms Diane Robinson (Chairperson)
Kennedy (Psychologist member)
Mr B Sheridan
(Psychologist member)
Dr J Milne PhD (Lay
Date of Decision
: 20 December 2013
Representation:
Complainant: Ms Hayley Bennett of Counsel, instructed by Ms R Lewis,
Respondent: Mr Peter Morris, Senior Counsel, instructed by Mr I Denham,
NON PUBLICATION ORDER APPLIES
Catchwords:
Unsatisfactory professional conduct; failure to establish
and maintain professional boundaries; use of telephone counselling; appropriate
protective orders; costs
Legislation cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) No. 86a
Cases cited:
HCCC v Ross Leonard No. 1
[2013] NSWPST 4
HCCC v King
[2013] NSW MT 9
; Law Society of NSW v Walsh, unreported 15
December 1997; Childs v Walton, unreported 13 November 1990; HCCC v Khali
Michelle Bard
[2013] NSWNMT 15
; Oshlack v Richmond River
[1998] HCA 11
; Ohn v Walton (1995) 36 NSWLR 77; Arian v
[2001] NSWCA 5
; Williams v Lever
(1974) 2 NSWLR 91
REASONS FOR DECISION
Psychology Tribunal conducted an Inquiry into two Complaints made by the Health
Care Complaints Commission (the Commission) in
relation to Mr Ross Leonard. On 7
November 2013 the Tribunal delivered its decision concerning those Complaints
and found Mr Leonard
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct. The Tribunal
was not comfortably satisfied that Mr Leonard was guilty of professional
misconduct.
Tribunal reconvened on 16 December 2013 to consider further evidence and
submissions in relation to what orders, if any, should
be made consequent upon
the Tribunal’s finding of unsatisfactory professional
Tribunal determined to reprimand Mr Leonard and to place a number of conditions
on his registration. The Tribunal required Mr
Leonard to undertake further
education and to undergo a period of supervision.
addition, an order was made that Mr Leonard pay 90% of the costs of the
Commission.
Tribunal refers to its decision in
HCCC v Ross Leonard No. 1
. The findings made in relation to the Complaints against Mr Leonard
are set out in that decision, as is the background material in
relation to this
addition to the documents considered at the earlier hearing, the Tribunal
received a written statement from Mr Leonard dated 13
December 2013 accompanied
by statements from three psychologists – Ms Mary Sawyer, Ms Sonia Zadro
and Mr Jonathan Gaston.
Commission provided written submissions, dated 27 November 2013 and written
submissions were provided on behalf of Mr Leonard,
dated 12 December
Tribunal did not convene to hear oral evidence.
Evidence of
his statement dated 13 December 2013, Mr Leonard states that he continues to
practice as a psychologist in private practice, with
work in rural and remote
areas being his principal interest.
stated that he has implemented a number of changes to the way he works. He no
longer uses telephone coaching. If he does provide
his mobile phone number to a
client it is only for the purpose of facilitating a face-to-face
appointment.
no longer sees clients outside business hours and he has changed his practice in
relation to his record keeping.
Leonard states that he has had professional supervision with Mr Jonathan Gaston,
a clinical psychologist, on a monthly basis since
March 2013 and finds these
sessions helpful.
Tribunal considered the supporting statements provided by Mr Leonard. Ms Sawyer
and Ms Zadro indicated that they had read the
decision of the Tribunal in
relation to Mr Leonard made on 7 November 2013. Ms Zadro is surprised to hear of
Mr Leonard’s ethical
problems and Ms Sawyer considers them to be
“out of character”. It is unclear from Mr Gaston’s brief
whether he has been made aware of the Tribunal’s findings in
relation to Mr Leonard.
SUBMISSIONS
Commissions’ submissions
Commission notes that in finding Mr Leonard guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct the Tribunal found all of the Particulars
complained of to
Commission also notes that while the Tribunal did not make a finding of
professional misconduct, it did find Mr Leonard's conduct
to be of a serious
nature. Mr Leonard committed a serious boundary violation and the Tribunal
found that he acted either in ignorance
or reckless disregard of his
professional ethical obligations.
Commission also relies on the fact that the Tribunal considered Mr Leonard's
conduct to be both improper and unethical. It was
in breach of the Code of
Ethics published by the Australian Psychological Society.
Commission stresses that Mr Leonard had little insight into his conduct, even at
the time of the hearing. He demonstrated a lack
of awareness of the relationship
between his conduct and boundary violations.
Commission also makes a number of submissions based on the Tribunal's findings
in relation to Mr Leonard's presentation as a witness.
The Tribunal considered
that Mr Leonard's evidence was inconsistent and at times contradictory. He was
unwilling and/or unable to
directly answer the questions put to him and many of
his responses could be described as evasive. The Tribunal had little confidence
in Mr Leonard as a reliable witness.
Commission submits,
“The Tribunal often found Mr Leonard's evidence is difficult to
evaluate and contradictory. It is submitted this demonstrates
on the part of Mr
Leonard, either a lack of recognition and on his part of the inappropriateness
of his conduct, and a lack of insight
into its seriousness, or else a lack of
candour in the giving of his evidence.”
Commission asserts that the Tribunal's findings in relation to Mr Leonard's
candour and credibility should attract significant
“The Tribunal was left with serious concerns as to the insight and
contrition and acknowledgement on the part of Mr Leonard,
and ought to make
orders which facilitate Mr Leonard coming to terms with his
Commission proposes that Mr Leonard be reprimanded and that he be required to
undergo supervision for a period of two years and
to attend an ethics course at
the St James Ethics Centre.
Mr Leonard’s
submissions
Leonard asserts that he is currently undergoing supervision with Mr Gaston. This
is working well and he states “is likely
to continue”. He asserts
there is no need for supervision to be increased in frequency or for
prescriptive obligations to be
imposed by the Tribunal in relation to
supervision.
Leonard's submission queries the existence of the Ethics course proposed by the
Commission. He states,
“There is no evidence that such a course exists. The St James Ethics
Centre website makes no mention of it. The Tribunal ought
to be reluctant to
impose conditions which carry a distinct risk that they will not be able to be
fulfilled.”
He asserts that in any event an ethics course will not assist in protecting
the public.
Leonard refers to the decision in
HCCC v King
[2013] NSW MT 9
Medical Tribunal identified five matters pertinent to its protective
“The health and safety of the public encompasses a range of
considerations. First, there may be a need to protect the public
against further
misconduct by a practitioner. Second, there is a need for general deterrence.
Third, the high professional standards
of the profession must be reinforced and
transgressions must be denounced. Four, public confidence in the profession must
be maintained.
Fifth, it may be desirable to make available to the public any
special skills possessed by a practitioner. It may be that the circumstances
a particular matter require the Tribunal to give greater weight to some of these
considerations, or to consider other matters
bearing on the health and safety of
the public.”
is asserted that there is no substantial risk of ongoing misconduct and that the
second, third and fourth issues referred to in
have been addressed
by the public findings made in the Tribunal’s decision on 7 November
Leonard asserts that the fifth factor is relevant and that as much of his work
is in rural and remote NSW,
“a substantial impediment to his practice
would disadvantage, rather than protect, the clients in those
Leonard does not completely oppose the Commission’s proposal in relation
to supervision but argues that supervision should
last for one year rather than
two and that meetings should occur on a monthly rather than a fortnightly
Leonard opposes the suggestion that he attend an ethics course.
The Tribunal’s decision
considerations
Commission’s submission is helpful in setting out some relevant legal
principles.
general considerations when making protective orders are first and foremost the
protection of the public but also the maintenance
of high professional
standards, general deterrence and fostering public confidence in the
profession.
insight and understanding a practitioner has in relation to his wrongdoing is
important when considering the risk of recurrence
Law Society of NSW v
Walsh, unreported, 15 December 1997
) and contrition is an important
consideration in making protective orders (see
Childs v Walton, unreported,
13 November 1990
Tribunal has found that Mr Leonard is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct in that he committed a number of serious boundary
violations. Over an
extended period of time he sent a large number of text messages and made a large
number of telephone calls to
Client A. These calls and messages were sent late
at night and on weekends and given their frequency and timing represented a
of proper professional boundaries.
Leonard also sent Client A two photographs of himself and met her on three
occasions in coffee shops where clinical issues were
discussed. He failed to
adequately address an identified boundary issue and was unable to manage the
power differential in the psychologist/client
relationship in an adequate and
professional fashion.
Leonard used telephone counselling in a situation where there was an identified
boundary issue, without due regard to the boundary
risks inherent in such
counselling.
Tribunal considers that Mr Leonard’s conduct in relation to Client A is
reprehensible. His conduct constitutes a breach
of trust between himself and his
client and in a more general sense, a breach of trust with the community. He has
brought the psychology
profession into disrepute.
Tribunal considers Mr Leonard’s conduct to be a very serious case of
unsatisfactory professional conduct, at the high end
of the range of conduct
which constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct. For this reason it is
appropriate that Mr Leonard
be reprimanded in the strongest possible
Supervision
Leonard’s failure to establish and maintain proper professional boundaries
with Client A occurred at a time when he did not
have adequate supervision, he
was relatively professionally isolated and he did not discuss Client A with his
Leonard has made some attempt to remedy this lack of supervision by seeing
Jonathan Gaston once a month, since March 2013. In his
statement dated 13
December 2013 he states that his current supervision
“is working well
and is likely to continue”.
supervision is compulsory for all psychologists, the Tribunal considers that Mr
Leonard requires, for the protection of the
public, additional and focused
supervision to address his failure to appreciate and manage boundary issues. Mr
Leonard’s boundary
violations took various forms, were repeated and
occurred over a considerable period of time. During the hearing he failed to
acknowledge
the inappropriateness of his behaviour and maintained that he had
behaved professionally.
his statement dated 13 December 2013, Mr Leonard fails to demonstrate a clear
commitment to ongoing supervision. The Tribunal considers
that the supervision
required by Mr Leonard needs to be mandated to protect the public from a
recurrence of the same or similar behaviour
as occurred with Client
the nature of Mr Leonard’s unsatisfactory professional conduct the
Tribunal considers that the supervision mandated by
the Tribunal should continue
for at least 24 months and that it should occur on a fortnightly
Ethics instruction
Throughout the earlier hearing, the Tribunal found that Mr Leonard demonstrated
a lack of understanding of ethical issues and his
professional responsibilities
with respect to boundary issues.
Tribunal notes that Mr Leonard made no admissions, nor did he fully acknowledge
the inappropriateness of his conduct. He lacked
insight into the nature and
seriousness of his ethical shortcomings and maintained, throughout the hearing,
that his conduct was
appropriate. He demonstrated a significant lack of candour
with the Tribunal.
Commission submits,
“The Tribunal was left with serious concerns as to the insight and
contrition and acknowledgement on the part of Mr Leonard,
and ought to make
orders which facilitate Mr Leonard coming to terms with his
Tribunal accepts this submission and considers that Mr Leonard could benefit
from formal ethics instruction. Although Mr Leonard
is unaware of the
‘Ethics Counsel Program’, it is offered by the St James Ethics
Centre and provides comprehensive, tailored
instruction and counselling in
relation to ethical issues. This program, including individual face to face
sessions, will assist
Mr Leonard in developing an understanding of his ethical
obligations.
General comments
conditions imposed on Mr Leonard’s registration will not preclude him from
travelling to regional areas and continuing his
work there. On the contrary,
they will support him to appropriately deal with boundary issues which, on his
own evidence, are a more
common challenge in rural areas because of small
populations and the increased likelihood of encountering clients in social
situations.
the better protection of the public, given the nature of Mr Leonard’s
boundary violations, the Tribunal also considered
it to be appropriate to
require Mr Leonard to inform the Council of any change in the nature or place of
his practice and to authorise
copies of the Tribunal’s decisions to be
provided by the Council to any future employer.
Commission submits that Mr Leonard should be ordered to pay the costs of the
Commission.
Leonard submits that the outcome of his case does not attract the general
principle that costs are awarded in favour of the successful
party. As no
finding of professional misconduct was made, the Commission cannot be regarded
as entirely successful. He proposes that
each party pay their own costs or in
the alternative he pay a percentage of the Commission’s
the recent decision of the Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal in
HCCC v Khali
Michelle Bard
[2013] NSWNMT 15
the Tribunal provided the following
useful summary of the law in this area:
“The power to award costs under the National Law is found in
Schedule 5D Cl. 13 (1). That provision reposes a discretion in
Tribunal to award costs in respect of an inquiry or an appeal.
The principles to be applied in determining whether to award costs
pursuant to a statutory power such as found in the National Law
established. They are set out in a number of leading cases and are summarised
comprehensively in the judgment of Kirby J
in Oshlack v Richmond River
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
In summary:
normally in
disciplinary proceedings, as in other civil litigation, costs should follow the
event unless the circumstances of the
case require, in the exercise of
discretion, not to do so (see Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77).
This position is
frequently referred to as “the usual rule” or “traditional
rule” in respect of costs;
an award of
costs is to compensate, in the form of a partial indemnity, the person in whose
favour it is made. It is not to punish
the person ordered to pay
the onus is
normally on the “losing” or unsuccessful party to establish any
departure from the “usual” rule;
discretion to depart from the “usual” rule is unfettered, but must
be exercised judicially (see Oshlack; Williams
(1974) 2 NSWLR 91
generally the
presumption the “usual” rule applies will only be displaced where
there has been some sort of disentitling
conduct on the part of the successful
party (see Oshlack; Arian v Nguyen
[2001] NSWCA 5
exercising its discretion to award costs, the Tribunal had regard to the
following matters:
complaint of professional misconduct was not established against Mr
Leonard’s assertion that proceedings would have taken a different course
if the complaint of professional misconduct had
not been maintained and pressed
to the final stage;
Commission properly brought the proceedings before the Tribunal and produced
evidence to establish all the Particulars and one
Complaints;
Particulars for unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct
were the same and the evidence canvassed before
the Tribunal in relation to the
factual basis for those Particulars was the same.
Commission notes that Mr Leonard made no admissions in relation to the
Particulars even though all Particulars were found to be
its earlier decision, the Tribunal noted that Mr Leonard changed his evidence in
relation to acknowledging his wrongdoing.
“In the letter to the Commission dated, 19 October 2011, Mr Leonard
concedes, with the benefit of hindsight, he should have
been more definitive in
his efforts to control the frequency of contact with Client A. He also states
that with hindsight, sending
photographs may have been inappropriate.
In his written statement provided to the Tribunal on 13 February 2013, Mr
Leonard makes no such acknowledgements or concessions. In
these proceedings he
made no formal admissions in relation to the Complaints and throughout his oral
evidence asserted that his professional
behaviour was
appropriate...........
It is difficult in these circumstances for the Tribunal to be satisfied
that Mr Leonard has a robust understanding of or insight into
the nature and
impropriety of his conduct. He appears to have retracted his earlier
acknowledgement that his behaviour may not have
been entirely
appropriate.”
Tribunal hearing ran for 4 days. The length of the hearing was not so much the
result of the failure by the Commission to relinquish
the claim of professional
misconduct, but rather reflected the need to hear extensive evidence from Mr
Leonard in relation to each
Particular, given that he had not made any
concessions in relation to them.
Leonard’s presentation as a witness, his failure to answer questions
directly and clearly, meant that considerable time was
spent collecting and
clarifying his evidence.
Considering
all the circumstances above, the Tribunal has decided that a proportion of the
Commission’s costs should be paid
by Mr Leonard.
that the underlying factual circumstances were common to each Complaint and that
it was the failure of Mr Leonard to make appropriate
admissions that occasioned
the nature and length of the hearing, the Tribunal considers that 90% of the
Commission’s costs
should be borne by the
Respondent.
Having found Mr Ross Leonard
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct, the Tribunal makes the following
Tribunal reprimands Mr Leonard in the strongest possible
Supervision
practitioner must within 28 days of receipt of this decision nominate a
supervisor to be approved by the Psychology Council of
NSW (The Council). He is
to provide the Council with the name, contact details and resume of a nominated
senior psychologist. The
nominated supervisor must not be a personal friend or a
close professional associate of the practitioner.
the event that the nominated supervisor is not approved by the Council, or is
unable or unwilling to act as a supervisor, the practitioner
is to nominate
another supervisor for approval by the Council within 28 days.
the event that the approved supervisor is no longer willing or able to continue
as supervisor, the practitioner is to nominate
another supervisor for approval
by the Council within 28 days of the cessation of the original supervision
relationship.
costs associated with the supervision are to be borne by the practitioner.
practitioner is to provide the supervisor with a copy of the Tribunal’s
decision in Health Care Complaints Commission v
Leonard (No 1)
[2013] NSWPST 4
and Health Care Complaints Commission v Leonard (No 2)
[2013] NSWPST
practitioner must ensure the following:
with the supervisor on a fortnightly basis for at least one hour, the first
meeting to occur within one fortnight of being advised
by the Council that his
nominated supervisor has been approved.
each meeting the discussion should address concerns raised by the Tribunal, such
as boundary issues.
each meeting, the supervisor completes a record of matters discussed at the
meeting in a format prescribed or approved by the Council.
supervisor forwards to the Council, initially on a fortnightly basis for the
first six (6) months and then subsequently on a monthly
basis, a supervision
report in a format prescribed or approved by the Council.
supervisor informs the Council immediately if there is any concern in relation
to the practitioner’s compliance with the
supervision requirements,
compliance with other conditions of registration, clinical performance, or if
the supervision relationship
ceases. The practitioner is to authorise the
supervisor to provide such information to the Council.
the supervision arrangement remains in place for at least 24 months from the
date of this order, with the supervision period
being extended if upon
consideration of the supervision reports received, the Council deems such
extension necessary.
practitioner is to complete within 12 months of the date of this decision, and
at his own expense, the “Ethics Counsel program”
offered by the St
James Ethics Centre, and:
one (1) week of the date of enrolment, the practitioner must provide evidence to
the Council of enrolment in the Ethics course;
two (2) weeks of completing the Ethics course, the practitioner is to provide
documentary evidence to the Council that he has
satisfactorily completed the
practitioner shall notify the Council if there is any change in the nature or
place of his employment.
practitioner authorises the Council to provide any future employer with a copy
of the Tribunal’s decisions in relation to
conditions may be varied, amended or removed at the discretion of the Council
and the Council is the appropriate review body
for the purposes of Division 8 of
Part 8 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law No
the practitioner seeks to change or remove any of the conditions imposed as a
result of the Tribunal’s orders when his principal
practice of practice is
anywhere in Australia other than in New South Wales, sections 125 to 127
inclusive of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law No 86a
to apply, so that a review of these conditions can be conducted by the
Psychology Board of Australia.
Non publication order
accordance with Schedule 5D, Clause 7 of the National Law, The Tribunal orders
that the name, address and any other information
identifying the
practitioner’s client, referred to in these Reasons as Client A, or her
son is not to be published.
Tribunal orders that the practitioner pay 90% of the Commissions’
.......................
Chairperson
for the Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (269 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter