URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2013/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v SHAFFER [2013] NSWPHT 3 (1 May 2013)
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION OF NEW SOUTH WALES
SUSAN SHAFFER
AN INQUIRY BY THE
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL CONSTIUTED UNDER SECTION 165A OF THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER
REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) (“THE
NATIONAL LAW”) INTO COMPLAINTS
REFERRED TO THE TRIBUNAL UNDER SECTION 145D AND CONDUCTED UNDER SECTION 167,
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
Pursuant to Clause 7
of Schedule 5D of the National Law, the Tribunal has made a non-publication
order in respect of the name and
address of any patient or of any prescriber
resident in the USA, or of material that may identify any such patient or
prescriber;
HCCC v SHAFFER
[2013] NSWPHT
Health Care Complaints Commission of New
South Wales
(Complainant)
Susan Shaffer
(Respondent pharmacist)
: Mr. Peter
Dwyer, Chairperson
Mr. Russell Benda (Pharmacist
Mr. Jonathan Chen (Pharmacist Member)
Dr. Noel Greenaway (Lay Member)
14, 15 June; 9 October, 2012.
APPEARANCES:
Ms. Gail B. Furness of
Senior Counsel, instructed by Mr. M. Darmody, Solicitor (HCCC), for the
Complainant;
The Respondent did not appear in person or by a legal
representative, at the Inquiry, on 14 and 15 June 2012 when adjourned, part
heard. Respondent appeared in person at the resumed Inquiry on 9 October,
Pharmacist—Unsatisfactory Professional
Conduct—Professional Misconduct—dispensing of medications prescribed
practitioners in USA for their patients in USA—prescriptions
subsequently made available electronically to Respondent pharmacist
Sydney—prescriptions authorised locally by NSW-registered medical
practitioner—dispensed medications dispatched by
Respondent’s
pharmacy to patients in USA—failure to apply Pharmacy Board of NSW
Mail Order Dispensing
1998—failure to
comply with requirements of NSW
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
LEGISLATION CITED
Poisons & Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
2002: Clauses 34 (1) & (2); 38 (1); 53;
CASES CITED
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
Pillai v Messiter [No.2]
(1989) 16 NSWLR
The Tribunal finds the Respondent guilty
Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct
Professional
REASONS FOR DECISION
decision is concerned only, with the Tribunal’s findings with respect to
the complaints as particularised. The Tribunal
will conduct a further hearing
for the purpose only, of receiving submissions of the Complainant and
Respondent, as to consequential
Orders the Tribunal should
The Inquiry
Respondent did not appear personally or by a legal representative, at the
Inquiry when it commenced on 14 June 2012 nor on the
second day 15 June 2012
having earlier indicated to the Tribunal Coordinator that she would not be
attending the Inquiry. On 14 June
Complainant’s Counsel submitted that
with the Respondent not participating, a three-stage Inquiry should be adopted;
once the Inquiry into the Complaint was completed, the Complainant
would prepare written submissions on the evidence, but only as
and a copy thereof would be provided to the
Respondent and to the Tribunal. The Respondent could then provide submissions in
to the Complainant and to the Tribunal. A further hearing day would
then be required to receive the addresses of the Complainant
and Respondent and
to allow the Tribunal to canvass any issues relevant to the evidence and its
findings. If there was a finding
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
it would be necessary for the Tribunal to
allocate a further hearing day, to receive submissions as to what consequential
, should be made.
Tribunal considered the Complainant’s submissions and in all the
circumstances, notwithstanding the Respondent’s decision
participate in the Inquiry in any way, accepted such submissions and determined
that the above process would be followed;
Tribunal also indicated that a copy of the transcript of evidence taken at the
first-stage hearing would be provided to the Respondent
to assist her
consideration as to any submissions she might wish to make. Complainant’s
Counsel expressed concern to the Tribunal
that given the Respondent’s
decision not to participate in the Inquiry, it should be made clear to her that
provision of the
transcript was not for any other purpose. The Tribunal agreed
to have the Tribunal Coordinator convey the above purpose of the transcript
the Respondent when providing it to her and directed accordingly. A copy of the
Coordinator’s letter to the Respondent accompanying
the transcript of
evidence, was provided to the Complainant’s solicitor Mr. Darmody, at the
Inquiry was adjourned on 15 June 2012. Given the nature and extent of the
Tribunal’s questions asked of the witness Mr.
Peter Gilfedder, of the
Pharmaceutical Services Branch
(as it was formerly known)
NSW Department of Health (“PSB”) in respect of paragraph 5 (b) of
the Particulars of the complaints, the Complainant
sought leave to produce all
prescriptions relevant to paragraph 5 (b)—concerning the dispensing of
multiple prescriptions
medications—and to provide these to the Tribunal soon after the
Inquiry was adjourned. The Tribunal gave leave to the Complainant;
and indicated
that such material in fairness, should also be provided to the Respondent,
notwithstanding her decision not to participate
in the Inquiry;
the adjournment, the Complainant informed the Tribunal that it would not now be
relying on the particulars in paragraph
5 (b) of each complaint; The Complainant
had earlier indicated that it would not be relying on those particulars in
paragraph 9 of
each complaint; and the above prescriptions intended to be
produced by the Complainant, were no longer relevant. The issue of
multiple prescriptions
” was one of two specifically
particularised “
circumstances
” originally described in the
preamble to paragraph 5 of the Particulars of complaints;
Complainant provided written submissions dated 20 July 2012. In further
submissions dated 17 September 2012, in response to the
Respondent’s
submissions apparently filed on 29 August 2012 and provided to the Complainant
at the Tribunal’s Directions
Hearing in September 2012, the Complainant
noted that the two pages comprising the Respondent’s submissions were
and the balance of documents accompanying the above two pages appeared
to be irrelevant to the submissions and accordingly, Complainant
submitted the
Tribunal should not take them into consideration. The Tribunal ultimately
accepted to the extent they were relevant,
only the above two pages, as the
Respondent’s written submissions;
resumption of the Tribunal’s Inquiry on 9 October 2012, the Respondent
appeared personally, having been notified that the
day had been allocated for
the purpose of submissions as to the Tribunal’s findings with respect to
the complaints. During
the Respondent’s submissions, some matters appeared
to the Tribunal to need clarification especially as the evidence thus far,
not adequately assisted the Tribunal’s understanding of some processes in
the Respondent’s dispensing relevantly,
of medications to patients in the
USA. The Complainant objected to such evidence being allowed at the submissions
stage, emphasising
that the Respondent had declined to appear at the Inquiry.
Whilst appreciating the Complainant’s understandable submissions
aspect, in the interests of fairness, and to assist it, the Tribunal allowed the
Respondent to give limited evidence;
Introduction
were two complaints before the Tribunal the first that the Respondent pharmacist
(“the Pharmacist”) was guilty of
unsatisfactory professional
in that her conduct as a pharmacist, was below the reasonable
standard described in Section 139B (a) and that it was improper and
pursuant to Section 139B (l), of the National Law; and the second, that her
unsatisfactory professional conduct
amounted to
professional
as defined by Section 139E of the National Law;
Respondent was registered in New South Wales, as a pharmacist in 1987 having
qualified with the degree of Bachelor of Pharmacy
from the University of Sydney,
in 1987; she remains registered;
conduct the subject of the complaints concerned the Respondent as the proprietor
at the relevant time, of the
Australiawide Pharmacy
situated at
Watson’s Bay, a Sydney suburb (“the Pharmacy”) during the
period 15 November 2005 to 30 November 2007;
Respondent participated in an arrangement whereby prescriptions written and
issued by US medical practitioners for their patients
in the USA, would be
forwarded to one or more pharmacies in Canada, which then undertook certain
procedures, in effect, to determine
the validity of such prescriptions. Once
relevantly satisfied, the Canadian pharmacy would electronically, transmit the
prescriptions
to the Respondent at the Pharmacy;
received at the Pharmacy each such prescription would be provided
electronically, to a nearby, locally registered medical practitioner,
Dr. John McKenzie, who would be able to access relevant patient data following
which if satisfied that it was appropriate
to do so, would
electronically, the Respondent to dispense the prescription. The Pharmacy
the prescription to await the
prescriber’s calling at the Pharmacy, to sign the prescription;
authorised by the local prescriber, the Pharmacist or an employed pharmacist,
would dispense the prescribed and authorised, medication
for the patient. It
would seem from evidence before the Tribunal, that in the early stage of this
arrangement, Dr. McKenzie would
visit the Pharmacy regularly to sign such
authorised prescriptions
the dispensed medication being
dispatched to patients in the USA. However, over time, and it would seem, for
the local prescriber’s
convenience, this practice apparently changed to a
weekly visit usually on a Friday, when Dr. McKenzie would sign all
prescriptions in effect,
the prescribed and authorised,
medications had already been dispensed and dispatched, to patients in the
the relevant period of the complaint (approximately two years), 60 to 100
prescriptions were dispensed daily, for patients
in the USA. Most of the
medications were for relevantly ongoing indications, with none apparently, in
any group with a potential
for abuse. Essentially, the Respondent did not
challenge the evidence concerning the relevant system as summarised
complaints relied on the Respondent’s failures to have in place at the
Pharmacy, certain procedures designed to be protective
of patients receiving
dispensed medications in the way outlined above, contrary to the
Guidelines for Mail Order Dispensing
...” published by the
NSW Pharmacy Board
(as it then was) in 1998 (“the
”). These included the need for a
standard operating
to have been submitted to the Board; the need to obtain
information about new patients whether by a comprehensive
direct telephone contact with the patient; and a need for a
in place at the Pharmacy, to ensure that the patient received
medication dispensed in the above way. During a recorded interview
below, the Respondent admitted such failures relevant to the
as particularised in the complaint [Particulars, paragraph 4];
complaints particularised the Respondent’s failures relevant to
requirements of the NSW
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Regulation
(PTGR) in that she could not have been satisfied that the medications dispensed
as above, were in a quantity consistent with
the recognized
therapeutic standard
...” as to what was appropriate “...
the circumstances
...” where she”...
local prescriber]...
had not examined the patient
.” [Particulars,
paragraph 5 (a)];
Particulars of the complaints addressed failures within varying periods, to
comply with PTGR requirements—in not having
signed prescription
the Respondent
(PTGR) medications
to patients (Particulars, paragraph 6); in dispensing
medications where the prescriptions did not include the name, strength and
quantity of such medications (Particulars, paragraph 7);
and in dispensing
medications without
at such times
prescription (Particulars, paragraph 8);
indicated above, Paragraph 9 of the Particulars of each complaint had been
withdrawn by the Complainant and removed from the complaints;
and paragraph 5
(b) (which appears below), was not relied on by the Complainant.
The particulars of the amended complaints
(in which the Respondent is described
as “the pharmacist’) are as follows:
Particulars
of Complaints
all material times the pharmacist was the sole proprietor of Australiawide
Pharmacy at 3/14-16 Military Road, Watsons Bay.
15 November 2005 and 30 November 2007 (the period), the pharmacist had an
arrangement whereby
prescription which had been written in the United States of America was
forwarded to one or more pharmacies in Canada;
pharmacies scanned and electronically made available the prescription to the
pharmacist;
pharmacist made available that prescription to a medical practitioner, usually
Dr John McKenzie;
medical practitioner electronically authorised the pharmacist to dispense the
medication prescribed;
pharmacist printed the prescription form and posted the medications to the
pharmacist collected the printed prescription forms for a medical practitioner
the period, the pharmacist dispensed up to 60 to 100 prescriptions in this
manner each day.
the period, and contrary to the
Guidelines for Mail Order Dispensing
issued by the Pharmacy Board of NSW in August 1998:
pharmacist did not have a standard operating procedure which had been submitted
to the Pharmacy Board of NSW;
pharmacist did not obtain information for new patients by way of a comprehensive
form or telephoning the patient directly;
pharmacist did not have a control system in place to ensure that the medication
was received.
the period, the pharmacist could not have been satisfied that each supply was in
a quantity that accorded with the recognized
therapeutic standard of what was
appropriate in the circumstances contrary to clause 53 of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
, in circumstances where
pharmacist knew that the prescribing medical practitioner had not examined the
occasions, the pharmacist dispensed multiple prescriptions for the same Schedule
4 medication to the same patient.
1 August 2006 and 23 July 2007, the pharmacist dispensed Schedule 4 medications
to the patients in circumstances where the
prescription was not signed by the
medical practitioner contrary to
clause 34(2) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
16 November 2005 and 14 December 2007, the pharmacist dispensed the Schedule 4
medications to patients in circumstances where
the prescription did not specify
the name, strength and quantity of the substance to be supplied contrary to
clause 34(1)(c) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
21 June 2006 and 27 July 2007, the pharmacist dispensed Schedule 4 medications
to patients in circumstances where the pharmacist
did not, at the time of
dispensing, have a valid prescription contrary to clause 38(1) of the
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
Complainant’s evidence
Complainant’s evidence included documents relevant to the PSB
investigation of the Respondent and her Pharmacy, admitted
into evidence as
Exhibits C-1
inclusive; and Exhibits C-A, C-B, and C-C.
Included in such evidence was a PSB
Investigation Report
February 2010; (Exhibit C-3); and a Record of Interview with the Respondent
dated 22 August 2008 (Exhibit C-16). Also included,
were documents relevant to
the NSW Pharmacy Board (“the Board”) and its successor on
introduction of the National Law
–the Pharmacy Council of New South Wales
(“the Council”); some materials relevant to Dr. John McKenzie
a decision of the NSW Medical Tribunal; correspondence between the PSB
and the Respondent; Prescribing / Dispensing Tables summarising
prescriptions
relevant to the Particulars of the complaints; and
” prescriptions relevant to the Particulars of the
complaints;
copies of selected prescriptions
within Exhibits C-A, C-B, C-C and C-D,
relevant respectively, to the Particulars contained in Paragraphs 6, 7, 8, and 5
complaints were prepared from those materials seized by the
Complainant Commission at the Pharmacy in execution of a search warrant.
C-D is no longer relevant, given the Complainant’s decision not to pursue
Paragraph 5(b) of the Particulars of the
complaints, relating to alleged
dispensing of “
prescriptions
Peter Gilfedder, a Senior Pharmaceutical Officer with the
Pharmaceutical
Services Unit
(“PSU” formerly PSB), NSW Health, gave evidence
before the Tribunal;
evidence of the type known as
peer review
, was called by the Complainant
which relied on the particulars of the complaints alone—failure to comply
(in paragraph 4); the supply of medications contrary
to PTGR (in paragraph 5); and dispensing contrary to the PTGR (paragraphs 6,
and 8) each of which in effect, required no
peer review
evidence, in the
Complainant’s submission, in order to be proved. The Tribunal notes in the
Record of Interview with the Respondent
(Exhibit C-16), at page 48, Mr.
Gilfedder told the Respondent that a “report” would be written
and passed to your peers
...”. Asked by the Tribunal about
the identity of such
, Mr. Gilfedder explained that if the
information gathered about this matter was “...
considered worthy of a
...[then such information]...
will be the subject of being judged
by her fellow pharmacists, if that’s something that’s reasonable for
a pharmacist
Additional evidence
Tribunal referred Complainant’s Counsel to the Record of Interview with
the Respondent (Exhibit C-16) where at pages 39
to 41, there were questions and
answers concerning publication of a Board
, September 2004,
Volume 1, Issue 2, apparently distributed to all New South Wales registered
pharmacists, at page one of which appeared
an item entitled: “
Pharmacists export Drugs to Canada?...No!
” The Complainant told the
Tribunal it did not rely on the above document. The Tribunal admitted the
document as Tribunal
Exhibit T-1
. It included reference to the
requirement for prescriptions for
medications to be written by
a locally registered medical practitioner; and noted an apparent practice that
involved “...
many Americans crossing the border to Canada to obtain
their prescription medicines, saving, on average, 50-80% on the
The Tribunal had five E-mail messages between the Tribunal Coordinator, Mr. D.
McMahon and the Respondent, each dated 13 June 2012,
relevant only, to the
Respondent’s non-appearance at the Inquiry; these were admitted as
Exhibit T-2
Record of Interview with Respondent
Gilfedder with a PSB colleague, Mr. Thomson, interviewed the Respondent on 22
August 2008 (Exhibit C-16). The Tribunal has considered
the record of interview
of which, only some parts are addressed below;
Respondent confirmed her ownership of the Pharmacy and described the system
utilised for the dispensing of the prescriptions for
the US patients; including
the receipt from the Canadian pharmacies, electronically, of the “order
details” together
with the ‘scanned’ original US prescription.
Once having checked relevantly these details, the Respondent would
it to Dr. McKenzie who apparently, also received relevant
patient history from the Canadian source; but the Respondent did not receive
such information and she was not sure what that entailed. Once apparently
satisfied, Dr. McKenzie would authorise the Respondent
to ‘download’
and print the relevant prescription form; and the medication would be dispensed
and dispatched to the patient
in the USA. The ‘downloaded’
prescriptions for those items dispensed and dispatched, would be held at the
Pharmacy to
await Dr. McKenzie’s visit to the Pharmacy, to actually sign
the prescriptions authorised by him, as above, “...
usually on Thursdays
and Fridays
...” (Page 5, Exhibit C-16]. Originally, the local
prescriber (Dr. McKenzie) would download, print and sign, the authorised
prescriptions and later, bring them to the Pharmacy. The Respondent’s
system included the placing of a “
” on the form she
held, to confirm that it had been dispensed;
Respondent confirmed in effect, that if there was a ‘
dispensed of originally authorised, prescribed (by the local prescriber) and
dispatched (by the Respondent) medication, then the
actual form
didn’t actually have the doctor’s name on
.” (Page 7, Exhibit, Ibid.). The issue of
” of such prescribed medication is relevant to the
particulars in Paragraphs 6 and 7 of the complaints and is discussed further
these reasons;
Respondent confirmed that she had never contacted any US prescriber to query a
prescription or to ask for information. She had
occasionally received enquiries
from US patients by E-mail or by telephone contact; she told the interviewers
that she did not think
that any quantities of the dispensed medications were
excessive. The Respondent admitted (at page 39, Record of
Interview—Exhibit
C-16) that she was not complying with those requirements
within the Board’s
for Mail Order Dispensing issued in
the Board’s
in 1998, referred to above, which were shown
to the Respondent during the recorded interview. These
Exhibit C-42 in the Inquiry and are relevant to Paragraph 4 of the Particulars
of complaints. In response to Mr. Gilfedder’s
question, the Respondent
confirmed that since December 2007 she was not supplying medications to any
overseas patient and had not
done so in 2008;
Evidence of Mr. Gilfe
Gilfedder gave evidence before the Tribunal including the PSB / PSU
investigation which took place over several years since it
first started in
2003, when “
information
” was available; but he
described how it was not “...
prioritised for a while
then, as time went on, it became a “...
investigation
” shortly before Mr. Gilfedder’s visit to the
Pharmacy in 2007; the delay in progress occurring as Mr. Gilfedder told
Tribunal, because of the “
subject operation at the Pharmacy; and a lack of departmental resources at the
relevant time [TS, page 72]; the purpose
of the above, initial visit to the
Pharmacy was to determine the system of dispensing to overseas patients and to
investigate whether
there had been breaches of the NSW Poisons & Therapeutic
Goods legislation;
Tribunal notes, in responding to a question from Complainant’s Counsel,
Mr. Gilfedder confirmed that during the above visit
to the Pharmacy, no
” was administered to the
Respondent;
response to Complainant’s questions concerning “
” of the relevant, dispensed medications to overseas
patients, Mr. Gilfedder explained his reasoning process for such a description,
as follows:
Well, I mean, this is of course a matter of professional
judgment. Perhaps other pharmacists might disagree but they certainly appear
to be well over what would be a six months supply at the maximum usual dose of
that drug and I would think that if there were one
patient taking that supply
then normally you would expect the patient to be at least reviewed, say, every
six months.
He added that it is not “...
an exact science
...” and it
was his professional opinion about which “...
.” [TS 44]; later adding, that his six-month criterion above,
rule of thumb
” which, without knowing anything about
the particular patient, should certainly “...
set the alarm bells
ringing in the pharmacist’s mind that this might be an
...[excessive
quantity]...”;
referred by Complainant’s Counsel to prescription forms in evidence,
bearing no medication name, strength or quantity,
but with only, a
” bearing some relevant details on it, affixed to
such forms, Mr. Gilfedder expressed the view that “...
possibly be a valid ‘script
.” [TS 40] and that such could not
comply with the PTGR. Asked further, whether such form “...
properly come about because it was a repeat?”
Mr. Gilfedder could not
say how it came about as “...
I didn’t notice any prescriptions
like that when I was there. I would be only guessing and speculating.
Gilfedder told the Tribunal that during his visit to the Pharmacy, having
selected prescriptions “
”, he asked the
Respondent to print from her computer system any documentation relevant to that
supply but that she did not
produce anything that met the description of
“...the customer’s medical history.” Mr. Gilfedder added that
McKenzie had said that he (Dr. McKenzie) was able to access such medical
histories “...
but then he didn’t bother to
its questions of Mr. Gilfedder the Tribunal sought to better understand the
evidence before it, relevant to the Particulars of
the complaints contained in
paragraphs 5(a), 6, 7 and 8, as each alleged a breach of the
Tribunal was told by Mr. Gilfedder that by about, 2005-2006, the majority of
prescriptions generally, were electronically printed
or computer-printed and
then, signed by the prescriber. Relevant to Clause 53 of the PTGR and to the
Particulars in paragraph 5 (a)
of the complaints, he told the Tribunal that a
pharmacist assesses
recognized therapeutic standard
by accessing
information approved by the Commonwealth
Therapeutic Goods Administration
(TGA) available
in a publication known as MIMS, that
pharmacists have readily available to them; and also, that “...
it was obvious, the pharmacist would need to discover the purpose or the
...[for which it was prescribed]...” [TS 55]. Mr. Gilfedder
told the Tribunal that from the “
” of those materials
he had seen, “...
the vast majority of the medicines are medicines that
are usually taken on an ongoing basis
...”. He agreed that it was not
uncommon for a prescriber of such ongoing-basis medications to omit specific
instructions for
the patient’s taking of it “...
but it is not
good practice
by the Tribunal whether the “
circumstances
” so-described in
paragraph 5(a) of the Particulars
. where “...
the pharmacist
knew that the prescribing medical practitioner...
[i.e. relevantly, the local
prescriber]...
the patient
...” (Emphasis
added) were within what was contemplated by Clause 53 of the PTGR cited in
paragraph 5(a), Mr. Gilfedder responded
as follows:
Well, no, clause 53 says that a pharmacist must not supply a restricted
substance in a quantity or for a purpose that is not in accordance
recognised therapeutic standard that is appropriate in the circumstances. So
the Complainant is putting it and I would agree
that in the circumstances where
the pharmacist knew that the medical practitioner had not examined the patient,
in fact didn't
even know the patient, had never met the patient, then that on
its own would seem to preclude the pharmacist being able to judge
know, that prescription was issued or those prescriptions were issued in the
knowledge that what was being prescribed
was within therapeutic standards.
When suggested by the Tribunal that normally, a pharmacist has no knowledge
that a registered medical practitioner has in fact, “
” a patient, Mr. Gilfedder responded:
Normally the pharmacist would have no reason to suspect that there was
anything normally, I guess, the pharmacist would assume reasonably
patient was under the doctor's ongoing care and the doctor had examined the
patient and taken a history or whatever was
necessary to justify issuing the
prescription.
Gilfedder confirmed when asked by the Tribunal about “
” the Complainant obtained from the Pharmacy following
execution of a search warrant, that he did not see any of those prescriptions;
and had “...
only seen what’s in the evidence
80]; and he had seen a list with the names of the medications on it. Of those
medications that were on such list, he
told the Tribunal, he believed that none
that were sent to the US in 2006-2007 were within a class of what may be
described as “
drugs of abuse
.” On further reflection, Mr.
Gilfedder added that there were “...
some which are erectile dysfunction
drugs, Viagra-type drugs and they are sometimes abused as in supplied illicitly
and used for non-therapeutic
.” [TS 80]; There was no evidence
before the Tribunal, of any such described drugs being
to page 1384 within Exhibit C-A (containing
copies of selected
prescriptions
relevant to paragraph 6 of the Particulars) and specifically
on that page, to the word “
” appearing on the
” on such page, the Tribunal asked Mr. Gilfedder
whether this could indicate it was a “
repeat order
original prescription
“ and he responded as
No, well, the document is not an original prescription anyway but I am
saying the word "refill" is, I guess, Ms Shaffer's or the
Canadian's way of
reporting that this is the second time or subsequent time that this patient has
ordered this drug from the pharmacy.
The following questions initiated by the Tribunal and Mr. Gilfedder’s
answers, also addressed page 1384, above:
Q. Did you investigate or ask Ms Shaffer whether she could produce a
valid prescription for this socalled supply?
A. Well, this document was seized by the Commission, not by me.
Q. Do you know whether they investigated or whether you investigated
whether there was another valid prescription to this supply?
A. Well, I can't answer for what the Commission did but I know that with
the prescriptions, as she called them, and documents that
I took from Ms
Shaffer on my visit, she told me that what she had given me were all of the
documents relating to those particular
supplies and that there were no others,
so yes, certainly I understood from her that there was no separate prescription
by Dr McKenzie other than, you know, what she printed out from her
computer in the pharmacy and showed to me.
questions were asked of Mr. Gilfedder relevant to the evidence and the
particulars of the complaints in paragraphs 6, 7 and
8, including the ambit and
application of Clauses 34 and 38 of the PTGR and the validity or otherwise of
relevant prescriptions;
Respondent’s evidence
indicated above, the Tribunal allowed some evidence to be given by the
Respondent when the Inquiry resumed on 9 October 2012 for
the purpose of
submissions, as to the Tribunal’s findings; especially when there were
indications from the Respondent that
might assist the Tribunal to further
consider and comprehend, some issues including those relevant to paragraphs 6, 7
and 8 of the
Particulars of the complaints, that arose during the Inquiry,
including during Mr. Gilfedder’s evidence; and in fairness to
Respondent, in having such issues clarified, given the serious nature of the
complaints;
by the Tribunal as to the temporal pathway from the Pharmacy’s receipt of
a prescription from Canada, for a patient in
the US, the Respondent confirmed
that once authorised by Dr. McKenzie, it would be processed; relevant labels
printed; and the prescribed
medication dispensed and dispatched to the US
patient, prior to Dr. McKenzie’s attendance at the Pharmacy later in the
to actually sign the prescription form for the medication he had
authorised. The Respondent told the Tribunal that no medication
Pharmacy without prior authorisation by the local prescriber, Dr.
to page 1384 of
Exhibit C-A (
copies of selected prescriptions
to paragraph 6 of the Particulars of the complaints
documents were also included in Exhibit C-B relevant to paragraph 7 of the
complaints]—the Respondent confirmed
to the Tribunal that the word
” appearing in a “
related to the dispensing of a
of originally dispensed medication;
that the original prescription endorsed by the local prescriber’s
signature, had already
been dispensed; and that the original prescription
specified the total amount of medication prescribed such that a
’ would follow as
’; and that by access to the computer records, the
balance yet to be dispensed as ‘
‘, was identified. The Respondent told the Tribunal
that the process was equivalent in effect, to the local process used for
dispensed medications with ‘repeat authorisations’ being issued once
the original prescription had been dispensed;
Respondent told the Tribunal that Dr. McKenzie did not have to validate the
dispensing of a ‘
having originally authorised the prescription with the quantities available for
’. From time to time, she told the Tribunal
there might be a need to refer to the
, original prescription.
Originally, Dr. McKenzie was signing the prescriptions at his home and bringing
them into the Pharmacy on
a Friday; because of “duplication of work”
this system was later changed and the Pharmacy would download and print the
and place a “
” on it as proof that it had been
dispensed; and then, such form with the sticker attached, would be signed by Dr.
having previously authorised it; at this stage the prescribed
medications had already been dispensed and dispatched to the US; the
able to be dispensed and dispatched to the US, apparently to comply with US
laws, was 90 days supply; and there was no evidence
before the Tribunal, to the
taken to page 1384 of Exhibit C-A, the Respondent told the Tribunal that by
accessing the relevant ‘software’ the
original prescription could be
located; however a “
” was kept at the Pharmacy in which
the actual, forms were stored, but which did not need to be accessed given the
access described above;
Tribunal next took the Respondent to
Exhibit C-B (copies of selected
prescriptions relevant to paragraph 7 of the Particulars of the complaints)
who confirmed that these forms related to ‘
’. She took
the Tribunal to page 2148 in the above Exhibit, which showed on it, a
related to an original (that is “
“) supply—a prescription for
Celebrex capsules
; and another
” on that same page, with the word
’ on it being relevant to
Imigran tablets
McKenzie signed this page (form), but his signature is relevant
prescription for
Celebrex capsules
. The Respondent
told the Tribunal that the
actually applied to dispensed
medications were different from the “
” described
Additionally,
relevant to both paragraphs 6 and 7 of the Particulars of the complaints, the
Respondent told the Tribunal, that absent
from such a form with a
” thereon, with the word “
on it—thereby indicating a “
”— would be
that information identifying the medication, quantity, dosage and strength, and
prescriber, in the appropriate,
imprinted, places, found in
” prescriptions;
Tribunal asked the Respondent about
Exhibit C-C (
copies of selected
prescriptions
relevant to paragraph 8 of the Particulars of the
complaints)
. She agreed with the proposition put to her by the Tribunal with
respect to the forms (prescriptions) within this exhibit, that
Pharmacy dispensed and dispatched the relevant medications to US patients,
although having been
by Dr. McKenzie,
the Pharmacy did not
then, have a
prescription in its possession
, that is, a
prescription
actually signed by Dr. McKenzie
. In effect, the Respondent
conceded the Particulars contained in paragraph 8 of the
complaints;
Respondent was cross-examined by Complainant’s Counsel including as to
certain aspects concerning the “
” date on relevant
documents and as to whether when Dr. McKenzie signed a prescription, the date
and the ‘timestamp’
appearing thereon, were applied by him. The
Respondent told the Tribunal that Dr. McKenzie did not apply these as they were
automatically
generated but that she “suspected” that these
represented the time and date that Dr. McKenzie “validated”
prescription. The Respondent also confirmed that she was not responsible for
putting any date on the prescriptions; and that
when Dr. McKenzie
came on Fridays he signed scripts for the previous week’s
Notwithstanding
the evidence before it including that of Mr. Gilfedder and the Respondent, the
Tribunal was left in some uncertainty
despite its efforts, about the precise
purpose of some abbreviations that appeared on
Complainant did not seek any adjournment of the Inquiry, following the
Respondent’s evidence;
Submissions
submissions of the parties are not repeated in their entirety in these
but the Tribunal has taken them into account in reaching its
determinations;
Complainant’s Submissions—an outline
Complainant’s Counsel provided written submissions to the Tribunal and to
the Respondent; and briefly, supplemented those
submissions orally, at the
resumed Inquiry on 9 October, 2012;
Complainant
submitted that most of those written submissions provided by the Respondent were
unrelated to the complaints and none
were based on the evidence taken at the
Complainant relied on the Record of Interview with the Respondent (Exhibit C-16)
and her admission therein, to the particulars
in paragraph 1 of the complaints,
that she was relevantly, the sole proprietor of the Pharmacy; and for the
Respondent’s admission
arrangements
” specified
in paragraph 2 of the particulars of complaints, such admission being consistent
with the statement of Dr. McKenzie
(Exhibit C-29); and for the
Respondent’s admission that during the relevant period, 60 to 100
prescriptions were dispensed
daily in the manner described in the above
“arrangements” as particularised in paragraph 3 of the particulars
complaints;
relied on by the Complainant were the Respondent’s admissions in her
Record of Interview, that she did not, comply with
the Board’s
Guidelines for Mail Order Dispensing
issued in August, 1998, with respect
to those items particularised in paragraph 4 of the complaints;
respect of the Particulars in paragraph 5(a) of the complaints, relevant to
Clause 53 of the PTGR, the Complainant relied on the
Respondent’s
admissions in the above Record of Interview, that she did not contact any of the
relevant prescribers; did not
challenge Dr. McKenzie’s “prescribing
habits”; was “...not privy to the purpose”; and “...did
not query the reason people were taking...[the prescribed medication]...”;
additionally, Complainant submitted that these particulars
were supported by Mr.
Gilfedder’s evidence and evidence of “...
the details of
prescriptions noted as having a dispensing sticker.
was Complainant’s submission that relevant to Clause 34(2) of the PTGR,
the Particulars of paragraph 6 of the complaints
were supported by
spreadsheet
...”(in Exhibit C-43) detailing
each prescription “...
noted as having a dispensing
...” and the selected prescriptions in Exhibit C-A; and that
the Complainant also relied on Mr. Gilfedder’s evidence that
prescriptions described in Exhibit C-43, did not comply with the relevant
Regulation;
Complainant
submitted that the Particulars in paragraph 7 of the complaints were supported
by the “...
spreadsheet
in Exhibit C-44 noted as having a
dispensing sticker and the prescriptions contained in Exhibit
to paragraph 8 of the Particulars of the complaints, Complainant relied on Mr.
Gilfedder’s evidence that the spreadsheet
of prescriptions in Exhibit C-45
and the selection of prescriptions in Exhibit C-C, did not comply with the
Regulations; and that
the prescriptions were dispensed prior to the Respondent
having the signed prescription; submitted also, that there was no evidence
any emergency such as might allow supply in such circumstances; and the relevant
arrangement was of itself, contrary to any such
Accordingly,
Complainant submitted that all of the particulars of the complaints were proved
to the requisite standard;
Complainant also made submissions concerning the Respondent’s failure to
give evidence during the Inquiry. Its written submissions
had been provided
prior to the resumption of the Inquiry, when as noted above, the Tribunal
allowed the Respondent to give limited
evidence involving some aspects of the
documentary materials which in the Tribunal’s view needed clarification.
Complainant
cited the NSW Court of Appeal’s review of the authorities in
Lucire v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 99
, including its
reference to (amongst others),
Council of the NSW Bar Association v Power
[2008] NSWCA 135
71 NSWLR 451
in which “...
Hodgson JA (with whom
Beazley and McColl JJA agreed) noted that an explanation could be proffered in
disciplinary proceedings without
the practitioner (in that case a barrister)
entering the witness box.
” The Complainant submitted that the Tribunal
should draw an adverse inference against the Respondent, given her refusal to
attend the Inquiry and give evidence; and further, that it should express some
criticism of the Respondent for her failure to give
considering the distinction between
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct,
Complainant
the words of
Pillai v Messiter [No. 2]
Departures from elementary and generally accepted standards of
which a medical practitioner could scarcely be heard to say that he
ignorant could amount to professional misconduct. But the statutory test is not
met by mere professional incompetence
or by deficiencies in the practice of the
profession. Something more is required. It includes
a deliberate
departure from accepted standards or such serious negligence as although not
deliberate, to portray indifference
and an abuse of the privileges which
accompany registration as a medical practitioner
Complainant referred also, to the findings of the NSW Medical Tribunal in its
Inquiry into a complaint against Dr. McKenzie;
was the Complainant’s submission that the seriousness of the
Respondent’s conduct amounts to
professional misconduct
Respondent’s submissions—an outline
Respondent referred to the inability of a pharmacist at the Pharmacy to dispense
a prescription (for a patient in the US) without
Dr. McKenzie seeing the
original prescription provided by the relevant American prescriber; for such a
prescription to go into the
Pharmacy’s “dispense queue”. She
emphasized that no such medication left the Pharmacy without Dr. McKenzie having
authorised it.
effect, the Respondent submitted that she tried to follow the relevant system
and emphasised that it was “
Respondent’s written submissions included an apology for not attending the
initial stage of the Tribunal’s Inquiry;
and she also expressed an apology
to the Tribunal, for not having provided to the (then) Pharmacy Board of New
South Wales, a copy
of the Pharmacy’s protocols relevant to the dispensing
of medications to patients in the US;
Complainant bears the onus of proof in satisfying the Tribunal that the
complaints have been proved. The Tribunal must consider
the evidence before it,
in order to be reasonably satisfied that the complaints are proved according to
the standard articulated
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
, that is, comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities, but
that having regard to the serious nature of the complaints and
the consequences,
such satisfaction cannot be produced by “
inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony or indirect references
As provided by the National law, two members of the Tribunal are registered
pharmacists; and as such, the Tribunal is an ‘
expert professional
’, so described by the NSW Court of Appeal in respect of
another professional disciplinary tribunal, in
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
1 NSWLR 256
JA. As noted by Complainant’s Counsel during her submissions, in the
context of questions asked by the Tribunal concerning
interpretation of
abbreviations on “
” on prescription forms, the
Tribunal’s professional members are entitled to rely on their professional
knowledge of matters
that ordinarily, would come within that
Tribunal has considered carefully, the evidence before it. With respect to the
Particulars in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3
, of the complaints, the Tribunal is
reasonably satisfied according to the requisite standard, that each of these
particulars has
been proved and it finds accordingly;
Respondent has made admissions concerning
paragraph 4
of the Particulars
of the complaints; and the Tribunal notes the confirmation by the Pharmacy
Council (C/F Exhibit C-26) that following
a search of all available records of
the Board, transferred to the Council on 1 July 2010, there is no record of the
Respondent having
submitted a written
standard operating procedure
referred to in the former Board’s “
Guidelines for Mail Order
were included in its “
” dated August 1998, distributed to each pharmacist registered in
new South Wales. Its introductory preamble to the topic included
Board’s statement that it did not encourage “...
the delivery of
medication or Scheduled items, by mail order or other courier
...”. The Tribunal notes relevant to the Board’s
reference above, to “
Scheduled items
”, that the Particulars
of complaints in paragraphs 6, 7 and 8, each address dispensing of
Schedule 4 medications
.” The Board in its
emphasised that with such “
” supplied directly, to
patients, the pharmacist is to “...
fulfill all professional
requirements to ensure safe and correct use of the medicine and to exercise
proper and reasonable care in
respect of that supply
were directed to ensuring that patients supplied as above,
with medications have “...
the same high quality of professional care
that is available with personal appearances by the patient or agent, in a
.” [Exhibit C-42].
followed publication of the document addressing
Distance Dispensing
” representing “...
the current
official position of the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia (PSA) with respect
relating to Distance Dispensing
” endorsed by the
National Council of the PSA in 1997 [Exhibit C-41];
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Particulars in
paragraph 4
proved and it finds accordingly;
paragraph 5(a)
of the Particulars of the complaints, the
Tribunal notes Mr. Gilfedder’s evidence that
unless it was obvious
the pharmacist would need to discover the purpose or the indication, for which
the medication was prescribed. From those samples
of relevant prescriptions that
he had seen, Mr. Gilfedder told the Tribunal that the vast majority of the
prescribed medications
were in effect, of such a nature, that they are taken by
patients on an ongoing basis. There was no evidence before the Tribunal
reports of adverse effects arising from medications dispensed by the Pharmacy
within the relevant period.
her ‘opening’, Complainant’s Counsel referred to the
Respondent having described the relevant “scheme”
in her Record of
Interview; and that the Complainant had no evidence to put to the contrary to
such description, but it was not submitted
that the “scheme” so
described, was necessarily an accurate description “...
as it applied
.” From Mr. Gilfedder’s evidence it seemed that the PSB
/ PSU had not had any contact with any relevant Canadian or US
authorities,
concerning the system participated in by the Respondent. There was no evidence
before the Tribunal, suggesting that
any US prescription was not genuine; or
that any US patient experienced anything adverse, related to the
Pharmacy’s dispensing;
Tribunal notes that apparently, the initiating Canadian entity—pharmacy or
pharmacies—provided clinical information
to the local prescriber mostly
Dr. McKenzie, relevant to his consideration as to whether the
electronically-communicated, medication
prescribed by the treating US medical
practitioner, would be authorized by Dr. McKenzie, or any other local
prescriber, such that
the Pharmacy could then dispense it. In a Record of
Interview with Dr. McKenzie conducted by Mr. Gilfedder and a PSB colleague Mr.
Power, on 19 December 2007 (Exhibit C-27), he confirmed that he had access to a
(US) patient’s history and that if “...
it was something
...[it could be looked up]...
but it was always straightforward.
We virtually prescribed Lipitor the whole time...and a few other
things...Celebrex was a big one
.” [Ibid. page 7]; Dr. McKenzie also
had patients’ telephone numbers if needed; but he had not telephoned any
there was never any need to
.” He was also
provided electronically, with “...
...” of the US
prescriber’s original prescription; and he had never had the need to
prescription as
they were always straightforward
...” [Ibid. page 8]; Dr.
McKenzie confirmed that in the prescriptions he had authorised, there were
no drugs subject to abuse
no Panadeine Forte
anything like that
...[and that the prescriptions]...
were all very
straightforward
.” [Ibid. Page 16];
5(a) of the Particulars of the complaints, states specifically, the
circumstances
” in which the Respondent
not have been satisfied
...” relevant to
Clause 53 of the PTGR, namely, “...
...[the Respondent]...
knew that the
...[local prescriber]...
had not examined
the patient
.” As raised with Mr. Gilfedder during his evidence, the
Tribunal does not regard a pharmacist’s knowledge of an
examination’
by a medical practitioner who prescribed
medication for a patient and whose prescription is presented to a pharmacist for
dispensing,
as a necessary prerequisite for the medication to be dispensed. The
Tribunal refers to the matters described above, relevant to Mr.
Gilfedder and
Dr. McKenzie, concerning the nature of the medications prescribed by the US
prescribers and authorised by him;
The Tribunal is not reasonably satisfied that the Particulars in
paragraph 5(a
) have been proved to the requisite standard and it
finds accordingly;
Tribunal has carefully considered the evidence with respect to
of the Particulars of the complaints including the “
selected prescriptions
” in Exhibit C-A, none of which includes in the
designated places, any medication name, strength, dosage or quantity on the
actual form itself. On each form there is a “
which is included, such details as are described above, but which are missing
from the designated places on the form itself.
Each of these forms also includes
”, the word “
form at page 33 of the above Exhibit C-A, has an additional
” attached to it which has the same medication
details as on the “
” sticker on that page, but having
regard for the Respondent’s evidence as to the difference between the
“sticker” and her evidence about the system for
dispensing “
originally authorised and prescribed medications, it seems that the additional
label attached to the form on page 33, is
a dispensing label for some reason,
unclear to the Tribunal; such additional “
” at page 33
does not have upon it the word “
” unlike on those
copies of selected prescriptions
” in Exhibit C-C, relevant
to the Particulars in paragraph 8 of the complaints;
selected copies of prescriptions
in Exhibit C-A relevant to
paragraph 6
of the Particulars, are clearly, different in important
aspects, from those
selected prescriptions
relevant to
paragraph 8
of the Particulars of complaints included in Exhibit C-C, each of which [but for
pages 15 and 37—on each of which is an
” with the word “
it]—includes the name, strength, directions and quantity of prescribed
medication; and Dr. McKenzie’s signature
(but for the form at page 30,
upon which a signature does not appear);
Tribunal notes the Respondent’s evidence (outlined above) concerning the
system whereby (as with the forms in Exhibit C-A)
” on it, attached to
the form, represented in effect, that a “
originally prescribed and dispensed medication, had been dispensed; also, the
evidence referred to earlier, concerning
the absence of certain information in
the designated spaces on the form, indicating the form related to a
”. The Respondent likened the above process, to the
usual, local procedure where an original prescription was dispensed and
authorisation form is issued to the patient, for production to any pharmacy,
when a repeat of the medication was needed.
If necessary, the Respondent could
electronically, access the original prescription, authorised and signed, by Dr.
McKenzie; although
the actual, originally signed form (prescription) was stored
” at the Pharmacy, if ever needed;
Having considered the evidence, the Tribunal is not
reasonably satisfied that the Particulars in
paragraph 6
complaints, have been proved to the requisite standard and it finds
accordingly;
copies of selected prescriptions
within Exhibit C-B, are relevant to
paragraph 7
of the Particulars of the complaints. But for the forms
numbered page 5 and page 26, all other forms are unsigned by the prescriber,
McKenzie; Page 5 has two “
” on it: one with the word
” on it (for
tablets); and the other
capsules), bears the word “
includes on the form, in the specified place, the name, strength, quantity of
and directions for, the medication (
” relates to the same patient. The form according to
the Respondent’s evidence as to “
” stickers,
above, therefore includes a “
” of one medication
) and a newly authorised and prescribed, medication (for
). The form numbered as page 26, although signed by Dr. McKenzie,
has only one “sticker” on it with the word thereon,
”; but there is no medication name, quantity, strength
or directions imprinted in the usual, specified space on the form; The
notes that the
particularised in
paragraph 7
complaints, is greater than the entire period of the
arrangement
” particularised in paragraph 2 of the
complaints;
carefully considered the evidence and including for reasons similar to those
expressed above, in relation to paragraph 6 of
the Particulars of the
complaints, the Tribunal is not reasonably satisfied that the Particulars in
paragraph 7
of the complaints, have been proved to the requisite standard
and the Tribunal finds accordingly;
paragraph 8
of the Particulars of the complaints are the
selected prescriptions
within Exhibit C-C. Each of these copies shows a date
next to the signature of Dr. McKenzie; and on each “
) on each form, there is the word “
Each copy of prescription includes relevantly, the name, strength, quantity and
directions for use of the medication. Included
on each of pages 1, 15 and 37, is
” with the word
” on it related to another medication not detailed
within the usually designated space for
product information
on the form;
and each of those three copies is completed by the inclusion of such product
information on the “
relevant period particularised in paragraph 8 of the complaints, is
approximately 13 months; and the Tribunal notes that the conduct
the subject of
the Respondent’s “
arrangement
” as described in
paragraph 2 of the complaints, is approximately, two years;
Tribunal notes the Respondent’s admissions referred to above, in effect,
that over time, from the commencement of the dispensing
to US patients, the
arrangements with respect to Dr. McKenzie’s signing of the prescriptions
he authorised, changed; such that
once the dispensing of medications was
by him, the Respondent would ‘download’ and copy
the prescription and
dispense and dispatch, the prescribed
medication to the US; and Dr. McKenzie would later visit the Pharmacy usually on
to formally sign the prescriptions he had previously authorised.
Strictly therefore,
at the time of dispensing
the authorised medication,
the Pharmacy did not have in its possession, a
prescription, as it
not yet been signed
by Dr. McKenzie;
Tribunal is reasonably satisfied having regard for the evidence and the
Respondent’s admissions, that
paragraph 8
of the Particulars of the
complaints, has been proved to the requisite standard and the Tribunal finds
accordingly;
regard for the nature and extent of the conduct within the Particulars of the
complaints found to have been proved, the Tribunal
considers that such conduct
satisfies the definition of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
Section 139B (1) of the National Law in that it demonstrates that the
Respondent’s knowledge, skill and care exercised, was
significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist of an equivalent level of
training or experience; and additionally,
such conduct was unethical.
Accordingly, the Tribunal finds the Respondent guilty of
unsatisfactory
professional conduct
Complainant submitted that the Tribunal should further find the Respondent
professional misconduct
as defined in Section 139E of the
National Law being
unsatisfactory professional conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of her registration as a
where the instances of such
unsatisfactory professional
taken together, amount to conduct of a sufficiently serious nature
to justify suspension or cancellation of her registration;
Complainant relied
, on the words of
Honour then was, in
Pillai v Messiter
, quoted above, addressing the
distinction between
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
. Counsel for the Complainant observed in her
‘opening’ address to the Tribunal, in effect, that in the context of
significant numbers of prescriptions dispensed over the period of this
system of dispensing to US patients, the fact that the Respondent
occasions, dispensed the prescribed medications
the prescription
was signed by the prescriber, in effect, indicates that the prescriptions were
considered to be
(by Dr. McKenzie)
visited the Pharmacy to sign them;
reference to the evidence, Complainant’s Counsel further noted, that
compared with the total number of prescriptions dispensed
(admitted as
particularised—60 to 100 prescriptions dispensed daily) over an
approximately two year period, the number thereof
dispensed before the
prescriber signed the prescription, was, in effect, far less. Counsel also
suggested during her ‘opening’
that the system was not a
carefully thought out professional activity by either
Respondent or Dr. McKenzie]...[and]...
so it fell through the
.” It was noted by Counsel that it was not the
Complainant’s case that this was deliberate; and further noted that in
of itself, having an arrangement with somebody in America is “...
unlawful thing to do
It is the by-product of it that makes
...[the]...
subject of a complaint in
...[Complainant’s]...
Respondent’s admitted failure to conduct the relevant system in dispensing
medications to patients in the US, without utilizing
the Board’s
Guidelines for Mail Order Dispensing
as particularised in paragraph 4 of
the Particulars of the complaints, in effect, ignores the intended benefits
thereof to potential
patients such as those relevantly, in the USA. In the
Tribunal’s view, the need for measures such as those in the
, should in any event, be obvious to all pharmacists but
especially, to one as experienced as the Respondent at the relevant time.
Respondent as a pharmacist privileged to hold registration as such, in New South
Wales, was on notice of the
. The absence of any evidence that
any patient suffered untoward effects, does not detract from the significant
objectives of the
. A pharmacist’s protective role is and
must remain,
, in the best interests of patients receiving
dispensed medications. Additionally, pharmacists’ compliance with the NSW
Poisons & therapeutic Goods
legislation is essential, given its
statutory, protective purpose;
statutory test to determine whether the Respondent’s
unsatisfactory
professional conduct
professional misconduct
goes beyond
mere professional incompetence or by deficiencies in the practice
of the profession
...” as observed by
something more is required.”
Applying the
P. to the Respondent, the Tribunal finds her conduct to be
serious negligence as, although not deliberate, to
portray indifference and an abuse of the privileges which accompany
registration
...[as a pharmacist]...”;
considered together, the proved instances of the Respondent’s
unsatisfactory professional conduct
amount to conduct of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the Respondent’s
registration as
a pharmacist;
Accordingly,
the Tribunal finds the respondent guilty of
professional
its written submissions, the Complainant submitted that the Tribunal should
consistent with authorities cited, express some criticism
of the Respondent for
failing to give evidence during the Inquiry conducted on 14 and 15 June 2012.
Through the Tribunal Coordinator,
the Tribunal had, prior to the Inquiry
commencing, communicated extensively with the Respondent to ensure, not being
legally represented,
that she understood fully, the Tribunal’s procedures
and processes including the date and venue of the Inquiry;
its Directions Hearings, the Tribunal also assisted the Respondent concerning
these matters. The Respondent had indicated that
she had parental
responsibilities and obligations concerning her children’s attendance at
school. The Tribunal had also indicated
that the daily Inquiry timetable could
as far as reasonably possible, be adjusted to assist her in that regard. In any
Respondent did not attend the Inquiry on 14 and 15 June 2012;
noted above, she did provide some written submissions in response to those of
the Complainant, two pages of which were to some
extent, accepted as relevant.
In these submissions, the Respondent expressed what was understood to be in
effect, an apology for
not attending the Inquiry because “...
of the documents was overwhelming and over reaching
...”. On the final
day of the Inquiry intended for submissions as noted earlier, the Respondent did
attend and some evidence
was permitted at that late stage; and the Tribunal
notes, that with the agreement of the Complainant, the luncheon adjournment was
deferred, in order to assist the Respondent with her parental responsibilities;
all the circumstances and after considering the Complainant’s submissions
and the cited authorities, the Tribunal declines
to express criticism of the
Respondent. However, it does express its disappointment that the Respondent did
not participate in the
initial stage of the Tribunal’s
noted above, following this decision as to the findings relevant to the
complaints, the Tribunal will conduct a Directions Hearing
and issue Directions
for the Parties’ submissions and for the resumed hearing, as to
consequential Orders.
......................................................
Chairperson
...............................................................
-------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------
Dated: 1 May 2013.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (322 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter