URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/569.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wakeling v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2025] NSWPIC 569; (22 October 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
Wakeling v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2025] NSWPIC
Kristy Lee Wakeling
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA
Gary Victor Patterson
DATE OF DECISION:
22 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; common law
damages claim; right front of claimant’s vehicle collided with left rear
of insured’s vehicle; differing
versions as to what lead up to the
collision; both claimant and insured driver gave evidence and were
cross-examined; reference to
Road Rules 2014
(NSW); findings made on
credit and reliability of evidence; evidence of insured driver preferred;
finding that claimant failed
to keep a proper lookout and insured driver failed
to observe proximity of mini-bus behind and take necessary action to avoid
both drivers found equally at fault; insurer conceded entitlement to
damages for non-economic loss; references to
AAI Limited t/as GIO v
Manley v Alexander
Eskander v QBE Insurance
(Australia) Limited
– award for $439,185.94 after
adjusting for 50% contributory negligence.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
Certificate issued under s 7.36(4) of the
Accident Injuries Act
Assessment of claim for damages under Division 7.6 of the
The findings of this assessment are as follows:
is apportioned equally between the claimant and the insured driver as to
responsibility for the accident.
amount of damages in respect of this claim is $439,185.95 after allowing for the
claimant’s contributory negligence as found.
amount of the claimant’s costs, assessed in accordance with the Motor
Accidents Injuries Regulation 2017, taking into account
the amount of damages in
respect of this claim is $40,809.04 inclusive of GST.
of the assessment and reasons for this decision are attached to this
Certificate.
REASONS FOR DECISION –
GENERAL ASSESSMENT
Common law claim –
Motor Accident Injuries Act
INTRODUCTION
Lee Wakeling (the claimant) was involved in a motor accident on 3 September 2021
claimant was the driver of a
12-seater mini-bus that collided with the rear of the insured vehicle at an
intersection near Wagga
Wagga Base Hospital (“the accident”). What
is disputed is how the insured vehicle came to be in front of the
vehicle and in what lane(s) the insured vehicle was situated
when the collision occurred.
(the insurer) indemnifies the owner and/or the driver of the insured vehicle for
liability to pay to the claimant any damages
and/or statutory benefits under the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(Act). By its Liability Notice dated 2
April 2024, the insurer denied liability for the claimant’s common law
damages claim,
on the basis that there was no breach of the duty of care owed by
the insured person to the claimant. The dispute pertains to breach
insured’s duty of care.
the claimant has a concurrent worker’s compensation claim against her
employer, the insurer has not paid any statutory benefits,
relaying upon s 3.35
of the Act, as well as its denial of liability.
the time of the accident, the claimant was working as a disability support
worker. Her job was mainly driving a community bus owned
by her employer. Her
role was to collect and transport supported persons. On the day of the accident,
the claimant was the sole occupant
of the bus, which was being driven in a
northerly direction along Docker Street at Wagga Wagga. After stopping at, and
passing through,
the intersection with the Sturt Highway controlled by traffic
lights, the claimant’s vehicle proceeded along Docker Street
intersection with Morgan Street. At that point, the right front corner of the
bus struck the left rear corner of the insured
vehicle, whilst it was in the
process of turning right into Morgan Street, in circumstances that are
claimant had to brake heavily and was thrown up and down significantly in her
seat, landing heavily on her tailbone. She was aware
of immediate low back as
well as bruising across her abdomen due to the seatbelt. Police attended the
accident scene. The claimant
was collected by her work colleagues who took her
to the office where an incident report was prepared. The claimant was sent home
and rested over the weekend. She consulted her GP several days later and was
diagnosed with a whiplash type injury. The claimant
returned to light duties and
eventually managed to return to work on her usual full-time duties.
the next few weeks, the claimant noted increasing low back pain, which
subsequently radiated into her right leg. She consulted
an osteopath as her leg
pain worsened. The osteopath suggested a possible causal connection with the
accident. Eventually, the claimant
presented to hospital, complaining of pain
down the back of her right leg to her foot. Several injections provided no
lasting relief.
her failure to settle, the claimant came under the care of a neurosurgeon, Dr
Ow-Yang, who performed a lumbosacral fusion in
July 2020. This provided some
improvement with her right leg pain but the claimant still had residual symptoms
in her leg of weakness
and dysesthesia. She also has ongoing back pain,
particularly with sitting, on a background of a pre-accident history of
of sciatica. The claimant has not returned to work since her lumbar
claimant also has been diagnosed with depression and anxiety, chronic pain and
PTSD. She is under the care of a treating psychiatrist
psychologist.
AGREED MATTERS
parties agreed the following
Description
Date of accident
3 September 2021
Date of birth
16 February 1982 (43.50 years)
Date of retirement
16 February 2049 (23.50 years)
Life expectancy
5% multiplier for life expectancy
Vicissitudes
Superannuation on past loss of earnings
Superannuation on future loss of earnings
ISSUES IN DISPUTE
following issues arise for my determination in this matter:
(a) the claimant’s credit /
(b) liability for the accident /
(c) the medical consequences of the accident /
(d) amount of damages for non-economic loss /
(e) amount of damages for past economic loss /
(f) amount of damages for future economic loss /
There is no claim for past gratuitous care, nor future care, either on a
gratuitous or commercial basis. Nor are claims made for past
or future treatment
DETERMINATION OF ISSUE 1 – THE
CLAIMANT’S CREDIT
insurer challenged the claimant’s credit on two main bases:
(a) the inclusion of tax-deductible work-related expenses in her post-accident
tax returns for periods when the claimant was not
engaged in paid employment,
(b) her repeated denial of a pre-accident history of sciatica notwithstanding
the objective evidence of her treating doctor’s
clinical notes.
to (a) above, I note that the claimant remained in employment, notwithstanding
that she was in receipt of worker’s compensation
benefits. I accept the
claimant’s evidence that some of her claimed expenses may have related to
her attendance at medical
appointments related to her claim. I also accept the
claimant’s evidence that she has taken steps to see that her accountant
adjusts any anomalies in her tax returns.
to (b) above, I am concerned that the claimant, under cross-examination by Mr
Jones, repeatedly denied having problems with her
back and suffering symptoms of
sciatica, prior to the subject accident. It appears that the claimant also gave
that false history
to the orthopaedic surgeon, Dr Geoffrey Rosenberg, who was
qualified by her solicitors. The claimant also denied that pre-accident
to Dr Todd Gothelf, orthopaedic surgeon, who was qualified by the
insurer’s lawyers.
Gothelf noted the relevant entries in the pre-accident clinical records to the
claimant who maintained she could not recall a prior
back issue and had not seen
a specialist for her back, prior to the subject accident. As observed by Dr
Gothelf, an entry dated 2
October 2019 in the Kooringal Medical Centre clinical
notes states that a CT scan shows disc protrusion at L5/S1 with nerve root
impingement on right at S1, for which the claimant was referred to a
neurosurgeon and likely will need surgery, back likely to be
a problem for some
time. Dr Gothelf noted that medical entries continued until 22 June 2020 with no
mention of lower back condition
since 14 October 2019. I note that the claimant
consulted Dr Enis Sedrak on
21 December 2020 when it was noted the reason
for contact was back pain with radiculopathy upon a history of musculoskeletal
pain and sciatica (insurer’s bundle page 347).
may be that the other multifarious medical conditions recorded in the treating
doctors’ clinical notes (of which it is not
necessary to recite details)
may have caused the claimant to lose sight of her pre-accident back condition.
However, that might be,
in giving her evidence, the claimant was at times
unclear and imprecise. Nevertheless, I accept that the claimant was doing her
in difficult and unfamiliar circumstances. The claimant did not strike me
as being deliberately dishonest. Whilst the claimant’s
evidence about her
pre-accident medical history causes me some disquiet, I accept that she
generally is a truthful witness.
DETERMINATION OF ISSUE 2 –
THE MEDICAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE MOTOR ACCIDENT
of the claim requires, amongst other things, a consideration of the medical
to the claimant’s physical injuries and impairments, there is little
dispute. The evidence of the parties’ respective
orthopaedic specialists
is very similar. Dr Rosenberg diagnosed a lumbosacral disc injury which required
a fusion. He assessed 20%
whole person impairment (WPI) utilising the AMA Guides
Edition and the NSW Worker’s Compensation Guides,
Edition. He deducted 10% for pre-existing degeneration, which
calculates to 18% WPI. He added 3% WPI for residual symptoms despite
surgery and
another 2% WPI for the effect on activities of daily living which equates to 22%
insurer’s Dr Gothelf provided the following diagnosis:
Lumbar spine
strain, aggravation of pre-existing degenerative L5/S1 disc herniation with
right-sided S1 radiculopathy. A CT of the
lumbar spine 25 November 2021 revealed
degenerative changes at the L5/S1 with posterior osteophytes contacting the
right S1 nerve.
Surgery was performed 5 July 2022 for a right L5/S1
decompression and fusion. Ms Wakeling reported persistent radicular symptoms
down the right leg, with positive nerve root retention signs, loss of ankle
reflex, 4/5 gastric muscle strength, and loss of sensation
in the right S1 nerve
distribution, which satisfies s 138 page 108 of the Motor Accident Permanent
Impairment Guidelines (Guidelines)
criteria for a
radiculopathy.
Dr Gothelf assessed 25% WPI for the lumbar
reject Mr Jones’ submission that I should not be satisfied the
claimant’s need for surgery was due to the motor accident.
Whilst he made
a valiant attempt to walk back from Dr Gothelf’s report, I am satisfied,
based upon the parties’ medical
evidence, that the claimant’s
pre-existing back condition was aggravated by the spinal trauma that she
suffered in the motor accident, causing her to come to spinal
to the effects of the accident on the claimant’s mental health, I note
that the insurer’s qualified psychiatrist, Dr
Yajuvendra Bisht gives a
diagnosis of major depressive disorder with anxious distress, as per DSM-5,
directly and causally related
to the subject accident. Dr Bisht does not
consider the claimant fit for her pre-injury employment. Although she has some
working capacity, from a psychological/psychiatric perspective. If Dr
Bisht provided an assessment of whole person impairment, it
is not in evidence
claimant’s qualified consultant psychiatrist, Dr Ben Teoh, makes a
diagnosis of Chronic Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (DSM-5
Diagnostic Criteria),
which he attributes to the subject motor accident. Dr Teoh thinks that the
claimant is fit for suitable duties,
and that her prognosis is poor, as her
condition has become chronic. He assesses 15% WPI utilising the psychiatric
impairment rating
scale (PIRS).
note that the insurer concedes the claimant satisfies the 10% threshold for an
award of damages for non-economic loss (s 4.11 of
DETERMINATION OF ISSUE 3 – LIABILITY FOR THE
Claimant’s submissions
claimant submits there is no doubt that the insured breached her duty of care,
owed to the claimant, causing significant injuries.
claimant submits that the insured driver caused the accident by merging into the
claimant’s lane and stopping, without any
warning, in circumstances that
did not provide the claimant with adequate time to stop and/or avoid the
is submitted that version of events is consistent with the following:
(a) claimant’s statement dated 2 May 2024;
(b) Valmar Incident Report Form dated 3 September 2021;
(c) statement of Colleen Healy dated 1 August 2023, and
(d) what is recorded in the Police documents, including the Police report dated
29 February 2024.
I shall return to each of those documents.
addition to the above, the claimant’s allegations are that the insured
stopped, once she merged in an unsafe manner into
the claimant’s lane, and
stopped when it was unsafe to do so, and stopped without activating her blinkers
to indicate an intention
to make a right-hand turn.
claimant submits that the insured’s version of events is not consistent in
what is recorded in the remainder of the evidence
and is consistent with the
claimant’s contention that the accident occurred because the insured
abruptly, and negligently,
stopped in front of the claimant’s vehicle,
causing a collision in circumstances where the claimant did not have enough time
to stop her vehicle.
Insurer’s submissions
insurer submits that the insured driver did not breach her duty of care to the
claimant and was not negligent for the accident.
insurer adopts the notation in the Police report (R2 and R5) which
“About 9.55am on Friday the 3
2021, the insured vehicle was traveling north bound on Docker Street when
approaching the intersection of Morgan Street,
Wagga Wagga. The insured driver
indicated before coming to a stop in lane 2 due oncoming traffic. Unfortunately,
the claimant at
that very time failed to observe the indication and slowing of
the insured vehicle which undoubtedly resulted in a small collision.
vehicles only sustained minor damage before they were respectively driven into
Morgan Street.”
The insurer contends that the insured driver had her right-turn indicators on
when turning and shortly before she began to execute
the turning manoeuvre.
insurer notes that the owner of the insured vehicle lodged a property damage
claim with the comprehensive insurer of that vehicle
which, in turn, sought
recovery from the insurer of the vehicle driven by the claimant. That insurer
accepted liability for the property
damage claim on 14 September 2021 (R6).
insurer submits that the photographic evidence of damage to both vehicles shows
the insured vehicle to have damage to the rear
and mostly the left rear side and
that the damage to the claimant’s vehicle is to the right front side. I
accept that submission
as the photographs speak for themselves.
insurer submits that such damage could not have occurred if the insured driver
had swerved in front of the claimant’s vehicle,
from the left-hand lane,
as the claimant alleges.
insurer submits that the more likely scenario is that the damage was sustained
when the claimant attempted to avoid colliding
with the rear of the insured
vehicle by manoeuvring her minibus to the left.
insurer submits that the totality of the evidence supports the claimant’s
having been at fault for the accident. The insurer
contends the claimant failed
to keep a proper lookout and failed to keep a safe distance from the vehicle in
insurer finally submits that, if the insured driver is found to have been
somehow negligent, the claimant was clearly not paying
attention to the road and
vehicle in front and did not leave a safe and reasonable space with the vehicle
in front, failing to avoid
colliding into the rear of that vehicle. Hence, a
reduction should be made for contributory negligence.
THE EVIDENCE
Incident Report Form
claimant completed her employer’s Incident Report Form (claimant’s
document 2.1) on the day of the accident. The claimant
relevantly wrote as
“I was driving along Docker Street and ran into a car
turning right into Morgan Street. I did not see her blinker and she stopped
suddenly not giving me time to stop in time, which led to me running into the
back of her car!”
The claimant’s Personal Injury Claim Form has not been placed into
evidence by either party.
Police Report
relevant sections of the Police report have been stated
previously.
Claimant’s Statement dated 2 May 2024
(claimant’s document 1.1)
relevant paragraphs of the claimant’s statement are as
“10. I was driving north bound on Docker Street and
stopped at a red light on the intersection of Docker Street and Edward Street
(adjacent to the Wagga Wagga Base Hospital). When the light turned green, I
continued through the intersection and continue to drive
north along Docker
Street which, at that point, is a dual-lane road. I was driving in the right
hand lane. Just prior to the intersection
of Docker Street and Morgan Street, a
red vehicle in the left hand lane suddenly swerved into my lane in front of me
and immediately
slammed on his brakes. The vehicle did not have its indicator
was travelling at no more than 50 km/h at the time of the accident. I was
concentrating on the road and looking straight ahead.
I had a clear view of the
other vehicle when it swerved in front of me. I did not have enough time to stop
and collided up the back
of the vehicle. On impact, I was thrown upward off the
seat and came down hard on my tailbone colliding with the seat underneath
proceeded to get out the bus. The driver of the other vehicle had already exited
her vehicle. She seemed to be shaken up and I assisted
her to sit down on the
gutter. The name of the other driver was Colleen Goode. We had a conversation in
words to the following effect:
Colleen said: “I’m from
Cootamundra and had just been at the hospital. I saw the Morgan Street sign and
was planning on
going to the bakery.... before I went home.”
I said: “You crossed into my lane and didn’t have your blinker
Colleen said: “I’m so sorry. I
didn’t know where I was going. I just saw the Morgan Street sign and moved
made a call to the Police Station on my mobile phone to notify them of the
accident. In the meantime, two of my colleagues from
Valmar arrived at the
accident scene.”
Statement of Collen Healy dated 2 August
(claimant’s document 1.2)
relevant portions of this statement are as
“3. I parked my car in
front of a red car, which I later found out belonged to the other driver. This
had damage to the back
of the car. I went and spoke to Kristy near the accident
site. Kristy appeared all shaken up and seemed upset. She said “I
didn’t see the indicator of the car” and was questioning if the
driver of the other car had their indicator on.
what I can remember about the accident on the day, I thought Kristy had been
driving along Docker Street and was turning right
into Morgan Street. The other
driver was coming in the opposite direction and turning left in Morgan Street.
Kristy definitely ran
into the back of her car but said she didn’t her
indicator on.
I note that Ms Healy gives a version of
events which is quite different from the parties’ descriptions, in that Ms
that the parties were driving in opposite directions, and that the
claimant’s vehicle collided with the insured vehicle as
both were turning
into Morgan Street. That discrepancy is not surprising as Ms Healy was not an
eyewitness to the accident.
Claimant’s oral evidence
her oral evidence, the claimant resiled from her statement that the insured
vehicle suddenly stopped in front of her. The following
passages appear in the
transcript at pages 50 to 52:
“Mr Jones: So you accept when
you say in your statement and in that form that the other vehicle stopped, that
is not true?
Ms Wakeling: I don’t recall.
Mr Jones: You see, you said before that – as I understand your version
of events it swerved in suddenly, no blinker.....
Ms Wakeling: Yep.
Mr Jones: And then you ran in to the back of it without it stopping at all.
So you say when you said it stopped suddenly in your statement
Ms Wakeling: No. Yeah, so she’s come over to stop but because
it’s all one motion, it’s all just like she’s
come over and
I’ve gone boom straight at the back of her.
Mr Jones: So it didn’t stop at all? That’s what I am suggesting,
Ms Wakeling. When you say it stopped suddenly, slammed
on its brakes..........
Ms Wakeling: Yeah.
Mr Jones: That is wrong?
Ms Wakeling: Why is it wrong?
Mr Jones: Well, you said in your statement it came in front of you and
immediately slammed on its brakes but now you’re describing
motion, swerving in and it doesn’t stop. This is your statement, Ms
Wakeling. You see:
The red vehicle in the left hand lane swerved suddenly into my lane in front
of me and immediately slammed on its brakes.
Ms Wakeling: Yep.....
Mr Jones: In the form you say it stopped suddenly.
Ms Wakeling: Yeah. So if the blinker wasn’t on, may be the brake
lights didn’t work, I don’t know but the blinker
wasn’t on and
she just pulled out in front of me so I don’t recall the brake lights,
I’m sorry about that, but
I know she definitely didn’t have her
blinker on.
Mr Jones: See Ms Wakeling, what I want to suggest to you is that because you
enjoyed your job and because of fears about what might
happen to you at the job
that you have given a version of events which doesn’t put you at fault, it
was the other driver at
Ms Wakeling: She was at fault.
Mr Jones: What I want to suggest to you is you weren’t keeping a
proper lookout?
Ms Wakeling: No.
Mr Jones: You didn’t see the vehicle in front of you slowed down and
Ms Wakeling: No.
Mr Jones: .... and you ran in to the back of her?
Ms Wakeling: No. I do not go with that at all. I was good at what I did,
massively good at what I did. As I drove all the roads all
day, every day, I
knew every road, every back road where you had to slow down. I knew those roads.
I did nothing wrong that day.”
page 81 of the transcript, the following excerpt appears:
Jones: You said you didn’t have time to swerve so you just continued
Ms Wakeling: It was all too quick.”
pages 137 to 141 of the transcript, the following
“Member: From the moment that you went through the
traffic light controlled intersection, how long before the collision occurs?
Ms Wakeling: May be a few minutes.
Member: And what were you doing during those few minutes from the time you
went through the traffic lights intersection to the impact?
Ms Wakeling: I was just driving. As I said, checking my speed, looking at my
surroundings, driving my bus, doing the right thing.
Member: How many vehicles were in front of you?
Ms Wakeling: None.
Member: When did you first see the red car driven by?
Ms Wakeling: It was pretty much at the same time as it all happened. Yeah.
It’s not far so she obviously come through the lights
and then straight
over. Yeah.
Member: Did you see her go through the lights?
Ms Wakeling: No, I don’t think so. Well, I mean, I would have been
checking my surroundings but I wouldn’t have pin-pointed
exactly that car
at the time, if that make sense.
Member: Do you recall seeing that car passing you on the left?
Ms Wakeling: No, because she come over as – too quick, yeah. Like I
remember seeing her quickly but then I wasn’t expecting
her to come across
into the lane.
Member: So do you recall seeing her passing you on the left? Is that your
Ms Wakeling: Can I just think in my head for a second?
Member: Please do.
Ms Wakeling: Yeah, because I just don’t see how to explain it in words
but only seen her coming across.
Member: So you don’t recall seeing her going past you?
Ms Wakeling: No, because she didn’t go past me.
Member: ..........(not transcribable).... She had not going past you and she
wasn’t in front of you.
Ms Wakeling: I mean, I thought you meant like did she fully go like drive
past me or, sorry, say your question again.
Member: Your evidence is in your statement, is it not?
Ms Wakeling: Yes.
Member: That this lady came from the left hand lane?
Ms Wakeling: Yes, yes.
Member: And pulled or swerved into your......
Ms Wakeling: She came over to my left, yes.
Member: Do you recall seeing her going past you on the left?
Ms Wakeling: Yes, she was visible on my left, yes, but I wasn’t
expecting her to come straight across into my lane. It all happened
Member: And after she went past you on the left, how far do you estimate she
was in front of you before she pulled into your lane?
Ms Wakeling: Pretty much if like.
Member: Not in time, but in distance?
Ms Wakeling: Very close, it wouldn’t be – like it’s very,
very short.
Member: Are you able to estimate the speed that she was travelling at the
moment she went past you?
Ms Wakeling: No, I wouldn’t be able to estimate that.
Member: So your evidence is that she went past you and almost instantaneously
pulled into your lane and stopped?
Ms Wakeling: Yes. Yep, all in one motion, yeah.
Member: That’s the best of your recollection?
Ms Wakeling: No audible reply.”
Statement of Colleen Goode (insured driver) dated 14 July 2024
relevant portion of this statement is as follows:
following is in answer to questions asked of me in regard to this matter:
Where my right
indicators on when turning right at the time of the accident? My answer is yes
they were on as I had put them on shortly
before I began to execute the
How do I know
they were on? My answer is I could hear when I pushed the indicator stalk to go
to the right, the audible click click
sound they make coming from the dash of my
Did I switched
them on and see them on my dash? My answer is that I did not look at the dash to
see them flash but heard the audible
click click they made.
In addition, the
Police tested my indicators after the crash and found they were
Record of telephone interview
between Bruce Coates (investigator) and Colleen Goode (insured driver) dated 14
portions of this record of interview are as follows:
relation to what you remember, can you just tell me in your own words what
happened please?
slowed down and I was turning right and just as I sort of slowed down a bit more
to turn right, I was hit from behind and she hit
me on the passenger side at
that reverse and it was very close to ..... it was only 10cm off sort of missing
me, if you know what
Q62 You were on Docker Street going
north bound, and you were going to turn to the left. You put your indicator on
to turn left and
she was behind you when she ......
was turning right.
Q63 Turning right, sorry. And she was behind you
at the time.
We just not long came through an intersection, and it was right hand turn, right
at the intersection. So, there wasn’t
much traffic behind
Q64 And there’s traffic lights at that intersection, is
the one I turned at, but the one just before it.
Q80 Where there any
independent witnesses to it, do you know, or you don’t know?
no. There was no one else.
Q81 Alright. So, she’s put a Claim
Form in as you know in relation to the matter. I just read what she says, and
you can comment
on it. Alright?
said: “On Friday, 3 September I was at work and driving the community
transport vehicle which was a 12 seater bus. I
was on my way to collect a
client. I was the only occupant in the vehicle. I was driving north bound on
Docker Street in the right
hand lane and stopped at the red light at the
intersection of Docker and Edward Streets. When the light turned green, I
through the intersection and continue to drive along Docker Street.
Just prior to the intersection of Docker and Morgan Streets,
a red vehicle in
the left hand lane suddenly swerved into my lane in front of me and immediately
slammed on its brakes. The vehicle
did not have its indicator on. I was
travelling at no more than 50 km/h. I was concentrating on the road looking
straight ahead.
I had a clear view of the other vehicle when it swerved in front
of me. I did not have enough time to stop and collided up the back
vehicle.” So, what do you want to say about that?
I was in the right hand lane......
Q83 Yes. And you didn’t
swerve in front of her?
didn’t swerve in front of her.
Q84 Because she’s saying:
I continued along and the red vehicle in the left lane suddenly
swerved into my lane and I slammed on my brakes.
” That didn’t
was in the right hand lane.
Q87 She slammed into the back of
It was like she clipped the left hand side as she was trying to go around
Oral evidence of Colleen Goode
from the oral evidence of Colleen Goode are as follows:
Adhikari: And you had no reason not to tell the truth, did you, Mrs Goode?
Ms Goode: No.
Mr Adhikar: And you were honest in the responses that you provided to Mr
Ms Goode: Yes.
(Transcript pages 158 and 159)
Mr Adhikari: I put it to you that the reason why you didn’t activate
your right hand indicators was because you didn’t
noticed Ms Wakeling was
travelling in the right hand lane, what do you say to that?
Ms Goode: No, I would have indicated anyway.
(Transcript page 189)
Member: How much time do you estimate elapsed between when you passed through
that intersection and the collision?
Ms Goode: Just a minute or two.
Member: And at any point did you see Ms Wakeling’s van in your rear
view mirror?
Ms Goode: No.
Member: Now, when you were turning from Docker Street into Morgan Street, did
you bring your vehicle to a halt before turning or did
you just turn straight
from Docker Street into Morgan Street?
Ms Goode: I just slowed down and was turning right.
Member: So, you slowed down, and your evidence is that you put on your right
hand indicator?
Ms Goode: Yes.
Member: But you didn’t bring your vehicle to a halt, is that your
Ms Goode: Yeah.
Mr Jones: Did you apply the brakes in order to slow down?
Ms Goode: Just slightly, yeah.
(Transcript pages 194 to 197)
Goode gave her evidence in a straight-forward manner. She was not shaken under
vigorous cross-examination by Mr Adhikari. I found
Ms Goode to be an impressive
witness. Where they are inconsistencies between the claimant’s evidence
and Ms Goode’s evidence,
I prefer the latter.
Findings of
am satisfied on the evidence as to the following matters:
(a) the accident occurred at the intersection of Docker Street and Morgan Street
at Wagga Wagga when traffic conditions were relatively
light. At that point in
Docker Street, there were two lanes proceeding in each direction;
(b) before the accident, both drivers were proceeding in a northerly direction
along Docker Street, in the right-hand lane 2, as
they approached the
intersection with Morgan Street. Both vehicles were being driven within the
speed limit. The insured vehicle
was ahead of the claimant’s vehicle;
(c) I reject the claimant’s evidence that the insured vehicle overtook her
vehicle in the left side lane 1, swerved into the
claimant’s path without
warning and came to an abrupt halt, without indicating an intention to turn
right. I find the claimant’s
evidence in that regard to be inherently
improbable and unconvincing. That being said, I do accept that the claimant
genuinely, but
mistakenly, believes her version of events, as Mr Jones
(d) I accept Ms Goode’s evidence that she turned right from Edward Street
into the right-hand lane 1 of Docker Street, and
remained in that lane, with the
intention of turning right into Morgan Street;
(e) I am satisfied that the claimant did not pull to the left, in an attempt to
avoid the insured’s vehicle, but was driving
straight ahead, when the
collision occurred with the insured’s vehicle, which was then only
partially in the north bound lane
3 and partially in the oncoming south bound
(f) I accept Ms Goode’s evidence, that as she approached the intersection
with Morgan Street, she lightly applied her brake
to slow the vehicle, and
activated the right turn indicator, before starting to turn across the oncoming
lane, when the claimant’s
vehicle struck the left rear corner of the
insured’s vehicle;
(g) I am satisfied that, contrary to her evidence, the claimant failed to keep a
proper lookout leading up to the collision;
(h) I also find that, before commencing her turn, Ms Goode failed to check her
rear-view mirror for the presence and proximity of
vehicle behind her, as was
the claimant’s minibus, and
(i) I am satisfied that, had Ms Goode taken that precaution, the collision could
have been avoided.
CONSIDERATION OF THE ISSUES
the course of her reasons in the
, when dealing with a statutory
benefits case, Justice Mitchelmore said:
(a) the phrase “wholly or mostly” in sections 3.11 and 3.28 of the
Act is a composite phrase no to concepts, and is addressed
towards the
claimant’s contributory negligence (56) relevant to the accident (not the
injury) (57), and
(b) section 3.38, and the assessment of contributory negligence requires the
enacted law of “contributory negligence”
to be applied, including
Civil Liability Act 2002
and that the test of
contributory negligence is “the standard of care required of the person
who suffered harm is that of a
reasonable person in the position of that
person” (60).
claimant’s submissions referred to
Road Rules 2014
(NSW) particularly
(driver changing direction to the right) and
(driver overtaking). I
which says:
“A driver must drive a
sufficient distance behind a vehicle travelling in front of the driver so the
driver can, if necessary,
stop safely to avoid a collision with the
breach of the road rules is not determinative of the matter. The Court of Appeal
Berryt v Schoupp
following observation at (4):
“....... The determination of
what reasonable care requires in any given case is not resolved by asking
whether the relevant
conduct was or was not prohibited by one of those rules.
Nevertheless, the fact that particular conduct is prohibited may in some
be a fact appointing to the conclusion that reasonable care was not
taken.....”
parties referred me to numerous decided cases in support of their respective
positions. I do not think it is necessary for me
to refer to those authorities.
Whilst neither party referred to it, I note what was said by the High Court in
Manley v Alexander
particular this passage at (12):
“But the reasonable care that
a driver must exercise when driving a vehicle on the road requires that the
driver control the
speed and direction of the vehicle in such a way that the
driver may know what is happening in the vicinity of the vehicle in time
reasonable steps to react to those events.”
That maxim applies equally to the conduct of both drivers in this case.
the principles stated in oft-quoted decisions of superior and appellate Courts
provide guidance to proper curial decision-making,
ultimately each case must be
decided on its own facts. See for instance,
similarities to the present case
am satisfied on the facts that I have found that the claimant contributed to the
accident because she was not keeping a proper
lookout and did not see Ms Goode
in time to stop safely. I am satisfied on the facts that I have found that the
insured driver contributed
to the accident because she was not sufficiently
aware of what was happening in her immediate vicinity at the time that she
her vehicle and commenced her turn. Had she been aware of the close
proximity of the minibus behind her, I infer that Ms Goode may
have not turned
at all, or turned more quickly, so avoiding the collision.
is the degree of culpability of each party?
I have found that the claimant and the insured driver each have departed from
the standard of care of a reasonable person in her
position, and each is
contributorily negligent, I must make an assessment of the degree of
contributory negligence that is “just
and equitable in the circumstances
of the case” (
the basis of the findings I have made on the evidence put before me, I am
satisfied that the fault or culpability on the part of
the claimant is 50% and
that the fault of the insured driver is 50% for the
DETERMINATION OF ISSUE 4 – AMOUNT OF NON-ECONOMIC
parties agree that the claimant is entitled to an award of damages for
non-economic loss. The maximum amount of damages for non-economic
loss currently
is $654,000 as indexed. Section 1.4 of the Act defines non-economic loss as
(a) pain and suffering;
(b) loss of amenities of life;
(c) loss of expectation of life, and
(d) disfigurement.
The claimant has an agreed life expectancy of 42 years. There is no medical
evidence that her life expectancy has been reduced by
reason of the motor
to (a) and (b) above, I note what is said by the claimant in her written
statement, particularly paragraphs 41 to 43 inclusive.
I have determined the
medical consequences of the motor accident. I note the list of cases helpfully
provided by Mr Adhikari in relation
to the amount of non-economic loss awarded
in some recent decisions. I note the submissions made by the parties in relation
amount of non-economic loss that should be awarded in the circumstances
of this case.
am satisfied that the motor accident has had a significant impact on the
claimant’s quality of life and will continue to do
so. I accept that the
claimant’s physical injuries and psychiatric disturbance, attributable to
the motor accident, will adversely
affect her work, social and family life
significantly. I have had regard to her age and the negative impact that the
impairments will have upon her ability to pursue her preferred
activities and pastimes.
have attempted to assess damages for non-economic loss in accordance with common
law principles having considered the evidence and
the parties’
submissions, I allow
for non-economic
DETERMINATION OF ISSUE 5 – PAST ECONOMIC LOSS
claimant submits that she has been unable to work since the motor accident,
apart from a brief period of return to her normal
duties, before undergoing
lumbar surgery. The claim for past economic loss is formulated as follows:
loss wages from 03.09.2021 to 02.09.2025 – 208 weeks at $808.12 net per
week = $168,088.96.
Less actual earnings = $8,052.57
$160,036.09
lost superannuation:
11% x $160,036.09
= $17,603.97
insurer submits the claimant would have only required a brief period of time off
work, as the accident was only minor, and her
injuries were an aggravation of
the multiple pre-existing medical issues she had prior to the accident. The
insurer allows $800.00
net per week for 12 months ($41,600.00) plus
superannuation at 11% ($4,576.00) rounded to:
reject the insurer’s submission regarding the claimant’s working
capacity since the motor accident because it is contrary
to the insurer’s
own expert medical evidence.
income statements most recently provided by the claimant’s employer detail
her worker’s compensation benefits. There
is no evidence from the
employer, nor from any other source, as to what the claimant would likely have
earned, but for the accident.
The only evidence in that regard is the
claimant’s employment contract and the Valmar Support Services Limited
Enterprise Agreement
2016, which are of little utility in estimating the
claimant’s likely past earnings, absent direct evidence from the employer.
In those circumstances, I think that the best guide is the claimant’s ATO
Notice of Assessment for the year ended 30 June 2021,
which indicates that her
earnings in that financial year were $894.98 net per week, which exceeds the
amount claimed. In those circumstances,
$160,036.09
economic loss inclusive of superannuation.
DETERMINATION OF ISSUE
6 – FUTURE ECONOMIC LOSS
claim is made for future economic loss in the sum of almost $850,000.00
particularised as
Likely current net earnings
$1,188.86 per week
5% multiplier ($734.98) = $873,788.32
Discount for vicissitudes
(15%) = $131,068.25
$742,720.07
Future loss superannuation
14.59% x $742,720.07
$108,362.86
Any cushion for future loss of earning capacity
$150,000.00
It appears that the buffer is claimed to compensate the claimant for
inability to move to a higher paid employment.
insurer submits the claimant is not totally incapacitated from undertaking work
duties for the rest of her working life. The insurer
further does not accept the
claimant’s buffer claim. The insurer says there is no evidence to support
the proposition the claimant
would have gained a higher paid employment, in the
future, but for the subject accident.
insurer submits the claimant will require very little time off work due to her
accident-related injuries and does not agree that
she has no residual earning
capacity, especially where the claimant is currently only 43 years of age. The
insurer further submits
the claimant had significant pre-existing medical issues
and applied for a disability support pension prior to the accident. In those
circumstances, the insurer submits that the accident-related injuries have not
significantly impacted the claimant’s future
earning capacity.
insurer submits a buffer of $50,000.00 inclusive of superannuation foregone is
appropriate for future economic loss. That is calculated
at a partial loss of
$70.00 net per week for 24 years to retirement age.
observed the claimant closely while she gave her evidence, and having considered
the medical and other expert evidence, I am
not satisfied that the claimant has
no residual earning capacity. I note that the claimant has thought of retraining
as a teacher’s
aide. I think that the claimant should have the ability to
work in some administrative capacity after appropriate retraining.
am mindful of what has been said by the Court of Appeal about the desirability
of adopting an arithmetic approach, instead of a
buffer, in the calculation of
future economic loss. See
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v
, Allianz Australia
Insurance Limited v Sprod
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v
. In the circumstances
of this case, Mr Jones contends for a buffer, whereas Mr Adhikari contends for
considered all of the evidence, I am satisfied on the balance of probability
(a) at the time of the accident, Ms Wakeling had a reduced earning capacity, due
to her pre-existing medical conditions, for which
she had unsuccessfully applied
for a disability support pension;
(b) her earning capacity has been reduced further by reason of the injuries
caused by the accident, for which she has undergone lumbar
(c) that further reduction in earning capacity is likely to be productive of
future economic loss, and
(d) but for the subject accident, the claimant would likely have continued
working in her then employment, or similar employment,
until her agreed
retirement age, noting that the insurer has allowed a partial loss of earnings
for 24 years.
the best I can, on the basis of the evidence, I propose to allow future economic
loss for 23 years in the sum of $400.00 per
week. The calculation is as
$400.00 x 721.2 (5% multiplier) x 85% (vicissitudes) =
$245,208.00
I allow $35,775.84 for superannuation at 14.59% of the net loss. I do not
think it appropriate to allow an additional cushion for
future loss of earning
capacity. I make no provision for travel expenses under s 4.4 (1) (b) of the
ASSESSMENT OF DAMAGE SUMMARY
assess the claim as follows on the above
Description of the award
Non-economic loss
Past economic loss
$168,088.96
Past superannuation
Future economic loss
$245,208.00
Future superannuation
TOTAL DAMAGES ASSESSED
$439,185.94
I allow $439,185.94 after adjusting for 50% contributory negligence.
COSTS AND DISBURSEMENTS
allow the claimant’s costs and disbursements in the sum of $40,809.84
inclusive of GST as agreed.
AAI Limited t/as GIO v Evic
[2024] NSWSC
[2015] NSWCA 128
Eskander v QBE Insurance
(Australia) Limited
[2025] NSWPIC
[2012] NSWCA
[2012] NSWCA
[2013] NSWSC 579
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (531 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter