URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2010/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
XY [2010] NSWPHT 1 (22 April 2010)
[2010] NSWPHT 1
22 April 2010
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES:
IN THE MATTER OF AN APPEAL BY
A REGISTERED PHARMACIST, UNDER SECTION 89(1) (b) OF THE PHARMACY
PRACTICE ACT 2006
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
Mr. Peter Dwyer (Chairman)
Mrs. Virginia Bear
(Registered Pharmacist Member)
Mr. Jonathan Chen (Registered Pharmacist
Dr. Siew-Foong Liew (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING:
25 February and 8 March 2010
DATE OF DECISION:
22 April 2010
Pharmacist—impairment—conditions imposed on
registration as a pharmacist—appeal against conditions.
LEGISLATION CITED
Pharmacy Practice Act
; Sections: 10 (1); 67 (1); 89(1), (5);
Division 6;
Section 124
(1); Clause 6 of Schedule 6;
CASES CITED
Allied Operations Pty. Limited v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
[2000] HCA 47
Medical Board
[2009] NSWMT 3;
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
APPEARANCES
Ms. Julia Lonergan
of Counsel, with
Mr. D. Grant (Guild Legal), appeared for the appellant pharmacist.
Mr. Peter Freeman
, Deputy Registrar of the Pharmacy Board of New South
Wales and Secretary of the Impaired Registrants Panel, appeared as
to assist the Tribunal if and when necessary, during the hearing of
the appeal.
Ms Christine Campbell B.A. LL.B.
, Tribunal Coordinator, assisted the
ORDERS OF THE TRIBUNAL
conditions imposed on XY, a registered pharmacist, by the Pharmacy Board of New
South Wales (“the Board”), the subject
of this appeal, are altered
by removal of the supervision conditions applied to the pharmacist’s
direct patient contact and
to the pharmacist’s dispensing and preparation
of medication and by the imposition of the following new conditions on the
pharmacist’s
registration;
is to continue under the guidance and support of the Impaired Registrants Panel
(“the Panel”) and to meet with it at
such times and for such period
as the Board considers necessary having regard for the evidence before and
findings of, the Tribunal;
for subsequent reports to the Panel from the
treating psychiatrist and by any examining psychiatrist retained by the Board;
for any reports to the Board by any employer by whom the pharmacist is
practice as a pharmacist is to be in an employed, permanent or
permanent-part-time position only and not in a
capacity, such
practice to be undertaken in a pharmacy (community or hospital) located within
the Greater Sydney metropolitan area
and in which at all times there is another
registered pharmacist on duty able to assist XY if and when, necessary. Such
is to be continuous and for not less than twenty (20) hours weekly
and preferably in the same pharmacy, or as may otherwise be approved
Board. Should XY experience difficulty in complying with the precise terms of
this condition, the pharmacist is to notify
the Board promptly;
is to provide the Board not later than seven (7) days prior to the commencement
of any employment as a pharmacist, with the name
and contact details of each
prospective employer; and the pharmacist is to authorize the Board to provide to
any prospective employer
such information as is sufficient to convey the nature
of and the need for, these conditions on the registration as a pharmacist;
is to authorize each employer to provide a report to the Board on the practice
as a pharmacist, at intervals to be determined by
the Board, and if and when
otherwise considered necessary by any employer;
is to notify the Board immediately on ceasing any employment as a
pharmacist;
is to undertake
to assist in practice as a pharmacist, to be
provided by a mentor who is a registered pharmacist, to be appointed by the
Board having
regard for the evidence before and findings of, the Tribunal. Such
mentor is to report to the Board following each meeting held with
should take place monthly for the first three (3) months from the date the
pharmacist commences employment as a pharmacist
as set forth in these conditions
and thereafter at such intervals and for such period as may be determined by the
Board. The costs
of such mentoring are to be met by XY;
is to authorize Dr. Craig Wilson or any other treating psychiatrist, to provide
a report to the Board following each consultation
with XY; or if XY discontinues
treatment with Dr. Wilson or with any other treating psychiatrist, to authorize
such practitioner
to notify the Board promptly, of any such discontinuance;
is to notify the Board immediately of any change of treating psychiatrist.
conditions are to be reviewed by the Pharmacy Board on a regular basis but in
any event, to be reviewed at the completion of
the first three (3) months of
XY’s employment in accordance with the above conditions or at any time
should the Pharmacy Board
consider review necessary in the public interest or
that of XY.
Date of Orders:
These Orders are to take effect on and
from the date of this decision.
REASONS FOR DECISION
to Section 89(1) (b) of the New South Wales
Pharmacy Practice Act
(“the Act”), XY, a registered pharmacist (“the
pharmacist”) appeals against conditions imposed on the practice
pharmacist by the Pharmacy Board of New South Wales (“the
the commencement of the hearing of this appeal, the Chairman directed pursuant
to Clause 6 (1) (b) of Schedule 6,
Pharmacy Practice Act
name of the pharmacist not be published
that of the complainant in
respect of a letter of complaint to the Pharmacy Board of NSW dated 17 June
. The Tribunal’s decision identifying the pharmacist and the
complainant (above) is to be made available to the pharmacist,
advisers and to the Board and to the Impaired Registrants Panel on the basis and
acceptance, of the non-publication Order.
Any other publication of the
Tribunal’s decision must comply with the non-publication Order and be in
unidentified / unidentifiable
Board imposed conditions on the pharmacist’s practice pursuant to the
powers available to it under Section 67 (1) (b) of
the Act having been satisfied
such action was necessary for the protection of the public (Part 4, Division 6
of the Act).
conditions imposed by the Board, followed recommendations made to it by an
Impaired Registrants Panel (“the Panel”)
to which the Board had
referred the matter having apparently considered that the pharmacist suffered
from an impairment, defined
by the Act to include”...
mental impairment, disability, condition or disorder that detrimentally
affects or is likely to detrimentally affect...
pharmacist’s)...
mental capacity to practise pharmacy
[Section 10 (1)].
Board’s conditions on registration the subject of this appeal were
notified to the pharmacist by letter from the Registrar
dated 16 October 2009
Exhibit “Bundle A” item 39
are to have no direct patient contact, and
You are not
to undertake any role in the dispensing and / or preparation of medication,
practise pharmacy, within the restrictions imposed
...(by the above
conditions)...
only under the supervision of another registered
lodged with the Registrar, the pharmacist’s letter exercising the right to
appeal against the imposed conditions was referred
to the Tribunal pursuant to
the procedure provided in Section 89 of the Act.
pharmacist’s letter of appeal included relevantly “...
for appealing is that these are very severe penalties and prohibit me resuming
work as a locum Pharmacist or as a Pharmacist
in industry.
Exhibit “Bundle A” Item 1
Tribunal was constituted in accordance with the procedures set out in Part 10 of
89 (5) of the Act relevantly provides that “...on an appeal, the Tribunal
may do any of the following:
(a) dismiss the
(b) remove or
alter the conditions...(including by imposing new conditions on the
pharmacist’s registration).
is the first appeal to come before the Tribunal. It is to conduct proceedings on
an appeal “...as it thinks fit.”
[Section 124 (1) of the Act].
observed by Kirby J., in
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Limited v Australian
Industrial Relations Commission
[2000] HCA 47
In every case where the issue is that of the duty and
function of an appellate court or tribunal, the only safe starting point is
careful examination of the language and context of the statutory provisions as
affording the appellate right, together with a consideration
of the powers
enjoyed by, and duties imposed on, the body to which the appeal
These words were recently cited by Murrell DCJ in the NSW Medical Tribunal,
Woolcock v Medical Board
[2009] NSWMT 3 at [5]
the powers available to it on an appeal, and by applying the approach adopted by
Kirby, J. in
Coal and Allied
, above, the Tribunal took the view that it
was entitled to and should, consider the material upon which the Board based its
(including the Panel’s recommendations); and in addition, any
relevant evidence concerning the pharmacist from the time of
the imposition of
the conditions up to and as current at, the hearing of the appeal. This approach
was necessary in the Tribunal’s
view especially given the period since the
conditions were imposed and acknowledging that the appeal concerns
, which, as the evidence before the Tribunal disclosed, was
under ongoing treatment. There was no objection by the pharmacist’s
advisers to the Tribunal’s approach.
the request of the pharmacist’s legal representative, hearing of the
appeal was expedited.
To facilitate the appeal and without objection by the pharmacist’s legal
representative, the documentary evidence to be relied
upon at the hearing was
provided to the Tribunal members in advance of the hearing.
The evidence
The materials admitted into evidence before the Tribunal, are described in the
List of Exhibits
which appears below as
Appendix “A”
to the Panel by the pharmacist’s then treating psychiatrist
commencing in November 2006 with her final report dated 4 September
2009, were in evidence before the Tribunal (
Exhibit “Bundle A”,
items 3 A to 3 I inclusive
report by psychiatrist
Dr. Peter Morse
dated 15 October 2006 to the Board
following a request for assessment of the pharmacist and any recommendations
concerning the level
of impairment which would affect the ability to practise as
a pharmacist, was in evidence before the Tribunal (
Exhibit “Bundle
to the above reports of Drs. Morse and Bernardi, were the various reports by the
Panel to the Board the first dated 25 March
2008 and the latest dated 8
September 2009 (
Exhibit “Bundle A” Items 12 to 17 inclusive
Each of these reports followed a meeting between the Panel members and the
pharmacist as part of the Panel’s ongoing management
of the pharmacist
having been referred to it by the Board.
The pharmacist’s
undertakings
to the Board’s then Health
Panel (later under the Act,
Registrants Panel
November 2006; 14 December 2006; and 30 September 2008, were in evidence before
the Tribunal as
Exhibit “Bundle A” Items 9, 10
respectively.
Without any objection from the pharmacist’s legal representative when the
Tribunal’s proposed direction was advised prior
to the hearing of the
appeal, the Tribunal directed that the psychiatric evidence be given
concurrently; to be preceded preferably,
by a telephone conference between the
psychiatrists prior to their appearance before the Tribunal, to identify
relevant issues upon
which they agreed or disagreed. To assist the telephone
conference, the Tribunal provided each psychiatrist with an identical form
diagnosis, prognosis, treatment (type, frequency, duration)
and capacity to practise as a pharmacist according to their respective
It was not intended as an exhaustive list of topics, for their
consideration.
psychiatrists who gave evidence concurrently, before the Tribunal were:
Craig Wilson
(currently the pharmacist’s treating psychiatrist);
Dr. Leonard Lee
(retained by the pharmacist as an examining psychiatrist
for the purpose of the appeal); and
Dr. Chris Rikard-Bell
(engaged by the
Board to examine and assess the pharmacist in 2009; and by whom a further
assessment was undertaken for the purposes
of the appeal hearing). The Tribunal
records its gratitude to each of the psychiatrists for their
co-operation.
Dr. Rikard-Bell
dated 6 Ocotober 2009 and 21 January 2010
requested by the Board, were in evidence before the Tribunal:
“Bundle A” Items 6
respectively. A report dated 8
January 2010, following an assessment undertaken by
Dr. Leonard Lee
at the request of the pharmacist’s lawyers, was admitted into evidence
before the Tribunal as
Exhibit “Bundle A” Item 8B
dated 17 February 2010, was in evidence before the
Tribunal as
Exhibit “Bundle A”, Item 4B
. This included
reference to the pharmacist having been referred to him on 8 October 2009 by the
pharmacist’s General Practitioner
for psychiatric care and the first consultation was conducted on
that day. Subsequent consultations took place on 20 October 2009;
2009; 17 November 2009; 11 December 2009; and 8 February 2010. Dr.
Wilson’s report included his observations and
assessment at each of the
above consultations. He records the pharmacist’s currently prescribed
medication as
Aripiprazole
(Abilify) 10mg daily. Dr. Cigolini continues
as the pharmacist’s GP.
At each of the above consultations Dr. Wilson provided the pharmacist with some
hand-written notes of his assessment including his
impressions,
suggestions—including the importance of adequate medication—and
optimal treatment objectives: these were
admitted into evidence before the
tribunal as
Exhibit “C”
. The note recorded at the first
consultation (8 October 2009) gave as an impression:
Clear presentation of a
major psychotic illness, almost certainly Schizophrenia.
Subsequent notes
include the need for the pharmacist to “...
give medication a good
religiously
.” This is a
significantly relevant aspect of Dr. Wilson’s treatment as there are
indications in evidence before the Tribunal
that the pharmacist in the past has
not been as compliant with the medication regimen considered optimal for the
diagnosed condition.
It is also an important issue for the Tribunal in
considering its decision in this appeal and the powers available to it
the pharmacist’s registration.
The hospital patient-records of the pharmacist during an admission to the
Royal North Shore Hospital
from 8 to 10 August 2009 were admitted into
evidence without objection as
Exhibit “B”
and were made
available to Drs. Wilson, Rikard-Bell and Lee, for their consideration. During
this admission the pharmacist commenced
taking the medication,
Tribunal-directed telephone conference between the psychiatrists was held on the
first day of the hearing and each of them completed
Notes of Telephone
Conference.
These were admitted into evidence without objection:
(Dr. Wilson);
Exhibit “G”
Rikard-Bell);
Exhibit “H”
(Dr Lee), and explained to the
extent necessary, during their concurrent evidence before the Tribunal.
Tribunal was assisted by a
prepared by Ms. Lonergan and made
available to the Tribunal during the course of the hearing.
from the concurrent evidence of the psychiatrists the only other oral evidence
was that of the pharmacist commencing on the
first day and concluding on the
final day, of the hearing.
testimonial
were tendered on behalf of the pharmacist and
admitted into evidence:
Exhibit “D”
Ms. Sally Giles
22 February 2009);
Exhibit “E”
Dr. Maria Sukkar
February 2009). Ms. Giles and Dr. Sukkar had each known the pharmacist for in
excess of 20 years.
The medical evidence
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Drs. Wilson, Rikard-Bell and Lee that the
of the pharmacist’s clinical condition is
schizophrenia
. Their agreed
of the pharmacist can be
described from their evidence as in effect, qualifiedly optimistic being
dependent upon continuing treatment
by Dr. Wilson, by compliance with the
prescribed medication and by increased insight. Dr. Wilson has emphasized also,
the important
role of the pharmacist’s GP, Dr. Cigolini within the
therapeutic relationship.
evidence addressing the pharmacist’s present
as a pharmacist, occupied a significant part of the
psychiatrists’ concurrent evidence before the Tribunal. Much attention
given during their evidence as to whether the pharmacist needs
supervision
should the pharmacist return to pharmacy practice. Likewise, they discussed
the nature and extent of any
program that should be
implemented. The terminology used by the doctors during their discussion of
these issues, was the subject of
considerable attention by the
pharmacist’s Counsel in her submissions—essentially that the
psychiatrists were not sufficiently
or necessarily, familiar with the precise
nature of a pharmacist’s practice and accordingly, the Tribunal should be
adopting a need for
supervision
of the pharmacist (by another
pharmacist) should the pharmacist be able to return to practice. Counsel noted
in effect, the specialist
nature of the Tribunal with two of its members
required by the Act, to be registered pharmacists and hence, the Tribunal is
able to formulate whatever form of pharmacy practice is responsive to the
evidence before the Tribunal.
aspect relevant to the question of
supervision
as discussed by Dr. Wilson
and also addressed by Counsel during her submissions, is the absence of any
errors made by the pharmacist
in the practice beyond the evidence of one frank
error the pharmacist had made in 2006 but which was detected appropriately by a
colleague. It was also conceded by the pharmacist through the Counsel, that
another instance was not an error made by her but rather
where a prescriber failed to comply with the usual prescribing regimen for
Prednisone.
evidence before the Tribunal included some prior employment difficulties
experienced by the pharmacist especially in hospital
pharmacy practice and
included locum positions. In its Report, 8 September 2009
“Bundle A” Item 17
the Panel noted “...
of recurring issues involving personality clashes and conflict with other staff
members whilst employed at a number of hospital
and community
A complaint was made with the Board concerning this
behaviour in August 2005 and the matter was referred to the Health Panel.”
This was the commencement of the Panel’s ongoing assistance to XY.
This issue was described generically, from time to time
during the concurrent
medical evidence before the Tribunal, as difficulties in
interpersonal
relationships
June 2009 the Board received a complaint arising out of the dispensing of a
prescription for
at a community pharmacy, the precise details of
which are set out in the registrar’s letter to the pharmacist dated 17
Exhibit “Bundle A” Item 29)
. The pharmacist
responded to the registrar’s letter on 7 July 2009 (
the issue involved in the above complaint, Dr. Wilson said [at TS 21.3]
“...(XY)...
has consistently struggled to really understand what was
wrong with that and so it is just not one day and one event, it is the fact
(XY) has failed to adequately grasp what was wrong
look, I realize I shouldn’t have done that, but whether that is because of
this whole process, or whether XY has gained
a deeper insight into why that was
not the right thing to do, I’m not sure
Lee expressed his opinion that the pharmacist’s behaviour the subject of
the above complaint, could have been related to
the under-medication at that
time and that (in considering Dr. Wilson’s evidence of observed
improvement with appropriate medication)
Dr. Lee said [at TS 22.3]
I believe it is consistent with a view that adequate medication
would markedly reduce the likelihood of that occurring again
considering what was claimed to have been said by the pharmacist in the
complaint incident ([34] [35] above), in the context of
the issue of fitness in
the relevant legislative context (to practise as a pharmacist) “...
the purpose of protecting the life or physical or mental health of any
...” [TS 22.9] Dr. Wilson told the Tribunal [at TS 23.3]
I think that potentially would be detrimental to the mental health
person...that what happened at that point was a serious
lapse in judgment and more than one could really excuse on the basis of having
different religious backgrounds, but I also at the same time think it is quite
likely that the judgment was less good because the
mental illness was in an
untreated or poorly treated state at that time
this issue Dr. Rikard-Bell [at TS 32.5] said: “
...the pharmacist
probably does have these religious beliefs, but I think that the ability to
contain (one’s) own beliefs and
...(them)...
interfere with
the professional functioning is affected by the state of how well the pharmacist
is with the underlying illness. I
think the pharmacist is more likely to be able
to contain (those) beliefs and not let them impact on the professional
functioning
if the pharmacist is well controlled
his report dated 17 February 2010, as the pharmacist’s treating
psychiatrist (
Exhibit “Bundle A” Item 4B
), Dr Wilson
expressed his opinion that...”
the pharmacist is likely to be clinically
competent with regard to the calculation of medication doses and the dispensing
medications
...(and)...
the propensity for inappropriate
less likely when the pharmacist is in a well
psychiatric state
...(there remains)...
will behave
in an inappropriate fashion in future as
the pharmacist does not fully seem to understand the ramifications of the
It may be that with further treatment the pharmacist will gain
deeper insight into the inappropriateness of the interactions with
patients in
the pharmacy role in the past
psychiatrists were positive in respect of the pharmacist’s
albeit this is apparently not yet complete [TS 33-34]. Dr. Wilson told the
Tribunal of his impression that the pharmacist “...
does appear to
realize that there is some benefit in taking the medication and the pharmacist
realizes that there is great concern
pharmacist does not take the medication, which I think reflects a degree of
insight, but not
at the most absolute positive end of the spectrum
[TS 33.5] and Dr. Rikard-Bell [at TS 33.9] “
I don’t think it
would surprise us that somebody with this condition, even though (XY) is a
has some difficulties with having full
The evidence indicates improvement with the pharmacist’s current
medication regimen reflecting continuing compliance; this
will also be dependent
on regular consultation with Dr. Wilson and liaison with the pharmacist’s
GP [TS 34]. Dr. Wilson did
note that prior to his involvement there were
long documented problems with compliance with medication that
predates my involvement
...” but he remained confident on present
indications [TS 15.8].
summary, the psychiatrists recommended that the pharmacist be assisted by
in the practice as a pharmacist and that the Panel continue its
monitoring role in an ongoing way; and as noted by Dr. Wilson [at
if all goes well for a long period of time
free of all regulation and that would have to be a determination of
Board as well”
, a point which Dr. Wilson agreed, has
not yet been reached [Ibid].
of the psychiatrists considered the records of the pharmacist’s two-day
hospital admission (
Exhibit “B”
) and saw no need to amend
their reports or evidence, consequent upon their consideration [TS 36].
The pharmacist’s evidence
The pharmacist acknowledged that treatment of the condition would need to be
maintained for “...
quite a number of years, that it also
involved—it also implies that I may have some social inadequacies, so I
have done a lot
of reading in regards to social skills and I will try and
improve in that area
.” [TS 45.8].
pharmacist told the Tribunal of the training after graduation, in hospitals and
when I eventually did go into retail
...(pharmacy)...
full-time it was only for brief periods.
Basically I have been
locuming. I have
never really been supervised in retail. I have always
been on my own
.” [TS 49.1-49.4]. The pharmacist had spent
approximately nine years in hospital pharmacy and seven or eight years in retail
pharmacy of which “...
90 percent has been locum. I really only held a
permanent job...in community pharmacy... for...maybe about 17
”one job of eight months and another
[TS 64.8-65.2]
pharmacist agreed that it was essential to continue psychiatric treatment with
Dr. Wilson including compliance in taking prescribed
medication; and to continue
to meet with the Panel [TS 57.8]. The pharmacist informed the Tribunal of the
current continuing pharmacy
education efforts and although not a current member
of the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia it had occurred to the pharmacist
again become a member [TS 71]. The pharmacist would be willing to accept
mentoring both in a pharmacy and in a personal context.
The pharmacist accepted
the diagnosis of
schizophrenia
with difficulty on a personal basis but
realized that “...
practising pharmacy
necessary requirement
.” [TS 79.8]. The pharmacist accepted the need
for ongoing treatment [TS 80.9] and saw merit in demonstrating a period during
which the pharmacist continued to improve [TS 81.2.]. The pharmacist found the
Panel helpful and supportive [TS 81.4].
pharmacist was first registered as a pharmacist in 19XX having graduated from
the University of Sydney in 19XX. In 20XX the pharmacist
was conferred with the
degree of Master of Clinical Pharmacy, also by that University.
Tribunal accepts the medical evidence of the diagnosis of the pharmacist’s
condition and the consequent need for ongoing
specialist psychiatric treatment
including the current need for medication and liaison with the GP.
pharmacist has demonstrated significant academic achievement in attaining a
higher degree in clinical pharmacy. The pharmacist
is clearly an intelligent
young (person) with much to offer to the community and to the chosen profession.
The pharmacist appears
to have accepted albeit with some understandable
difficulty, that the pharmacist has a diagnosed illness which, with the
provided by Dr. Wilson in liaison with the pharmacist’s General
Medical Practitioner, appears according to the evidence, to
provide a reasonably
optimistic prognosis provided the pharmacist maintains the compliance with such
treatment and especially with
the taking of medication. Insight into the
condition—noted by the Panel on occasions to be in effect,
inadequate—appears
to have improved according to the evidence before the
Tribunal accepts the evidence that the pharmacist should remain within the
support and assistance of the Panel. The relevant statutory
provisions in Part 5
of the Act introduced a system for the management of impaired pharmacists. The
pharmacist acknowledged before
the Tribunal, the benefit the pharmacist has
received from the Panel. The Act looks to the Panel to manage impairment and to
and to make recommendations to, the Board as appropriate. The pharmacist
has been within the Panel’s oversight since 2005.
Tribunal notes the Panel’s observations of the pharmacist in its Report to
the Board (
Exhibit “Bundle A” Item 17
at Summary, page 3)
dated 8 September 2009: “
There is no evidence of any inaccuracies in
the pharmacist’s dispensing practice.”
Tribunal is mindful of its exclusively
consequent need to carefully consider the medical evidence before it, in the
context of whether the pharmacist’s
current condition and ongoing
apparently encouraging, treatment causes reason for concern on the question of
errors in dispensing.
matter, the Tribunal must
necessarily, place considerable reliance upon the medical evidence.
considering the evidence before it, the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied to the
level required by the principle in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
direct supervision
of the pharmacist in carrying out the range
of activities in
is not presently indicated should the
pharmacist be able to return to practice and the Tribunal finds accordingly.
The Tribunal notes however, that Dr. Wilson’s treatment is at a
comparatively early stage and the tentative prognosis as expressed
his colleagues in evidence, remains dependent upon compliance with treatment
including prescribed medication and increased
Tribunal accepts the evidence that if the pharmacist is to return to practice
there will need to be in place, an opportunity for
assistance given the evidence
concerning what have been described as interpersonal issues, of the kind
relevant to the incident in
June 2009, which led to a complaint to the Board.
The Tribunal notes Counsel’s submission [TS 94.2] to the effect that the
pharmacist answered appropriately to a question from Tribunal member Mrs. Bear
as to how the pharmacist would now respond in practice,
to a request for the
‘morning after pill’ [TS 51.1].
Tribunal is satisfied on the evidence before it, applying the principle in
, that if the pharmacist is to return to practice it should be
for a period to be determined by the Board, in an employed, permanent
full-time or part-time, and not as a
pharmacist. This was reflected
in submissions from Counsel to the effect that the pharmacist really enjoyed
permanent part-time work;
and that if permitted to practise with conditions
along the lines of those in force prior to October 2009 even with an added
requiring mentoring, the pharmacist would probably cease the teaching
degree course or defer it, and practise probably, two days
weekly. To best
assist the pharmacist it is the Tribunal’s view that such employment must
be continuous and not less than twenty
(20) hours weekly and preferably in the
same pharmacy. In reaching this view, the Tribunal notes the pharmacist’s
(quoted above at [45]) concerning the past practice as a
pharmacist.
the pharmacist’s Counsel the pharmacist acknowledged that any prospective
employer would need to be informed of the
matters before the Tribunal and that
such employer would need to report back to the Board as to the course of the
pharmacist’s
employment and any encountered problems. Likewise, the
pharmacist acknowledged, any mentor would also need to report to the
seems to the Tribunal from the evidence, that the process of mentoring of the
pharmacist will be best provided by a mentor being
a registered pharmacist,
appointed by the Board to meet with the pharmacist on a regular basis and to
report back to the Board as
arranged; and for the process to continue for such
period as the Board determines.
a period to be determined by the Board dependent on its ongoing review, the
pharmacist should be employed in a pharmacy (community
or hospital) where
another pharmacist is on duty at the same time. Not only would this assist any
potential difficulty on any interpersonal
issues that might arise but it may
also assist the pharmacist to gain more experience which seems necessary given
the evidence about
past employment. Another pharmacist nearby, would provide
ready assurance if needed.
the pharmacist’s Counsel, the pharmacist accepted the basic underlying
requirements of the pharmacist’s continuing
to practise as a
pharmacist—continuing medical monitoring, compliance with prescribed
medication and attendance at meetings
with the Panel. The Tribunal acknowledges
the pharmacist’s acceptance of the need for such requirements.
the pharmacist’s submissions Counsel for the pharmacist by reference to
the report to the Board by psychiatrist Dr. Morse
in 2006, in evidence before
the Tribunal, suggested as entirely appropriate then and now, his opinion that
appropriate management
of the pharmacist required referral to the Panel and
monitoring, regular psychiatric assessment and reporting to the Board,
encouragement
to maintain the therapeutic relationship and medication and
overall monitoring and review. The Tribunal accepts those submissions.
Tribunal contemplates that any alteration it makes to the conditions imposed by
the Board the subject of this appeal, by the imposition
of new conditions on the
pharmacist’s registration, will remain under the management and review of
the Panel and the Board
consistent with the Act. The Board will be assisted by
regular reports on the pharmacist’s progress from Dr. Wilson or any
treating psychiatrist who may treat the pharmacist. Dr. Wilson expressed
optimism with the pharmacist’s progress.
pharmacist was prepared to give evidence before the Tribunal, which in the
circumstances must have been stressful for the pharmacist.
The pharmacist seems
to have confronted the health problem and its consequences that have interfered
with the pharmacist’s
practice. The pharmacist has conveyed a
determination to overcome them. The pharmacist does have significant skills and
which should be utilized in the interest of the community by return to
practice provided that appropriate measures are in place to
meet those concerns
in evidence earlier before the Panel and before the Tribunal. The pharmacist
also has another, considerable asset—the
obvious support of the
pharmacist’s family, to help the pharmacist on the road to recovery and
towards restoration of the pharmacist’s
professional practice as a
pharmacist.
has been diagnosed with
schizophrenia,
which is being treated by the
pharmacist’s psychiatrist Dr. Craig Wilson whose evidence before the
Tribunal suggests thus far,
significant benefit and whose prognosis is in
effect, qualifiedly optimistic, dependent upon the pharmacist’s continuing
with the treatment program including prescribed medication;
the evidence before the Tribunal concerning errors in dispensing and the medical
evidence of the treatment, the Tribunal finds
that the conditions imposed by
the Board requiring supervision of XY’s direct patient contact, of the
dispensing and of the
preparation of medication, are no longer required to
protect the public;
Tribunal finds that on the medical evidence before it, XY needs assistance in
the practice of pharmacy by
, to support the continuing
resolution of those interpersonal / conflict issues described in the evidence
especially of the type which
led to a complaint to the Board in June 2009 and
which could detrimentally affect members of the public; and to otherwise assist
XY in the practice as a pharmacist given the nature and extent of the past
Tribunal finds on the evidence, that XY should continue under the guidance and
support of the Impaired Registrants Panel until
such time as the Panel
recommends otherwise; and that the pharmacist authorize the treating
psychiatrist Dr. Wilson or any other
psychiatrist to provide regular reports to
the Board following each consultation or as otherwise considered necessary by
those treating
the pharmacist. The pharmacist will be required to advise the
Board immediately, if the pharmacist changes the treating psychiatrist;
should be reviewed by a psychiatrist nominated by the Board when considered
necessary as has occurred in the past when assessed
firstly by Dr. Morse and
later by Dr. Rikard-Bell.
the evidence of the pharmacist’s past practice, the Tribunal finds that XY
should not practise in a
capacity but rather in an employed,
permanent or permanent part-time position; and, for a period to be determined by
ongoing review
of the Impaired Registrants Panel and the Board and only in a
pharmacy (community or hospital) where at all times there is another
on duty, readily available to assist XY if necessary. Such employment should be
within the Greater Sydney metropolitan
area, to facilitate ongoing treatment and
support. To assist the pharmacist’s practice such employment should be
and for a period of not less than twenty (20) hours weekly and
preferably undertaken in the same pharmacy or as may be otherwise
approved by
the Board. Should XY experience any difficulty in compliance with the precise
terms of this condition, the pharmacist
is to notify the Board accordingly;
should authorize each employer to report to the Board as and when required by it
or as may be considered otherwise necessary by
any employer; and to authorize
the Board to provide any employer with such information as is necessary to
convey the nature of and
the need for, the conditions imposed by the Tribunal on
the pharmacist’s registration as a pharmacist; the pharmacist will
required to notify the Board promptly, of any change in employment
Being relevant to
the new conditions
imposed by the Tribunal upon XY’s registration as a pharmacist will be
managed by the Board and by the Impaired
Registrants Panel in accordance with
The Tribunal encourages XY to rejoin the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia
of which the pharmacist was formerly a member, or any
other similar professional
organization, to benefit from continuing education programs and to receive the
benefit of greater peer
profession.
In conclusion, although there was no evidence before it on this point, the
Tribunal notes the availability in Victoria of the
Pharmacists Support
, an advisory service to assist pharmacists with impairment and other
issues. It would appear from a recent article that it is the
only service of its
kind presently available in Australia: C/F Chaar, B. “Legislative Change
in Australian Pharmacy—History
in the making”
Vol. 29—March #03, pp 195-199 at 198.
: 22 April 2010
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (273 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter