URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICPD/2025/77.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pereira v ARA Fire Protection Services Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPICPD 77; (3 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY A MEMBER
Pereira v ARA Fire Protection Services Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPICPD
Jacqueline Pereira
FIRST RESPONDENT:
ARA Fire Protection Services Pty Ltd
SECOND RESPONDENT:
Monique Pereira
THIRD RESPONDENT:
Jayden Pereira
FOURTH RESPONDENT:
Jennifer Thompson
Employers Mutual NSW Limited
FILE NUMBER:
A1-W24182/24
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Acting Deputy President Geoffrey Parker SC
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
3 November 2025
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
appeal is dismissed.
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 13 January 2025 is
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION –
Workers Compensation Act
– main contributing factor within the meaning of
Workers Compensation Act
– failure to establish that the
nature of work was the main contributing factor to the aggravation of an
underlying condition
which caused a heart attack injury
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr P Stockley, counsel
Acorn Lawyers
First Respondent:
Mr B McManamey, counsel
Moray & Agnew Lawyers
Second Respondent:
Mr M Forshaw, solicitor
Carroll & O’Dea Lawyers
Third Respondent:
Ms M Walsh, solicitor
Turner Freeman
Fourth Respondent:
Ms S Molenaar, solicitor
RMB Lawyers
DECISION UNDER APPEAL:
Pereira v ARA Fire Protection Services Pty Ltd & Ors
DATE OF MEMBER’S DECISION:
13 January 2025
INTRODUCTION
is an appeal from a Certificate of Determination dated 13 January 2025 in which
an award for the first respondent was made.
appellant is the widow of the late Max Pereira, who passed away on
17 September 2021. The second, third and fourth respondents
deceased's adult daughter, his son, and ex-wife, respectively. The first
respondent was Mr Pereira’s employer at the
time of his passing.
appellant widow was the applicant before the Member. The second, third and
fourth respondents support the appeal but have not
filed separate submissions.
the reasons that follow the appeal is dismissed. The Certificate of
Determination is confirmed.
MEMBER’S STATEMENT OF REASONS
Pereira died at his residence on 17 September 2021. According to the widow, the
deceased’s duties were in the nature of a
project manager who from time to
time worked “on the tools”.
parties agreed that the cause of the deceased’s death was a heart attack
caused by the rupture of plaque in his coronary
artery against a background of
coronary artery disease.
Member identified the issue between the parties as:
question at issue is whether the deceased’s employment was the main
contributing factor to the aggravation of the
underlying heart disease to the
point the deceased suffered the fatal heart attack. If that is the case, the
additional question
arises as to whether the deceased’s employment led to
a significantly higher risk of the heart attack injury
occurring.”
the Member refined that statement of the relevant issues
“As noted, there is no question the deceased suffered
from pre-existing heart disease and given the manner in which the parties
approach the matter in their submissions, the question at issue is plainly
whether the deceased’s employment was the main
contributing factor to the
aggravation of the underlying disease which caused the fatal myocardial
infarction (heart attack). If
that is the case, the question for determination
is whether the nature of the deceased’s employment gave rise to a
significantly
greater risk of him suffering the heart attack which led to his
death than had he not been employed in employment of that
Member directed himself as to the relevant statutory
observing that there was
a “substantial evidentiary overlap when considering matters relevant to
and s 9B” of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
summarising the statement evidence filed by the parties, the Member said the
evidence of Juliana Tio, the project engineer,
was relevant to the case and
He had “little
difficulty placing some limits on the weight of Mr Turk’s evidence, given
he had not worked with the deceased
for some months before the date of his
death. However, [he was] not prepared to make such a finding in relation to Mr
Spowart’s evidence confirmed the deceased was labouring with him on his
final workday.
Member made findings with respect to the lay evidence:
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the deceased was exposed to
dust in the course of his employment with
the first respondent. Indeed, some of
the more measured lay witnesses relied on by the respondent admit, quite
appropriately, this
is the case. I also have no difficulty in accepting the
deceased was a man who, from time to time, despite his position being generally
supervisory in nature, assisted his colleagues with carrying out manual
only evidence in relation to the specific duties being carried out by the
[deceased] on his last shift preceding his death is
that of Mr Spowart.
Notwithstanding Ms Walker’s challenge to his credibility, I am minded to
accept Mr Spowart’s evidence.
that is not the end of the matters to be determined. I also have no difficulty
accepting Ms Tio’s evidence that the
[deceased] was already complaining of
chest pain before the commencement of his last shift, and that his complaints,
consistent with
the evidence of Mr Spowart, continued until he went
my view, the timing of the heart attack is not determinative of the question of
workplace injury, however, the fact the deceased
was complaining of chest pain
before he commenced his shift is a factor which must be taken into consideration
in any commonsense
evaluation of the evidence and causal chain.”
Member considered the medical evidence, summarising that evidence in
noted the medical experts were
as to the cause of the
deceased’s death, namely, heart attack against a background of an
atherosclerotic disease. The proximate
medical cause of the heart attack was
agreed to be the rupturing of arterial plaque in the circumflex coronary
parties agreed:
“the allegation of injury is that the heart
attack is the culmination of an aggravation of a disease process, said by the
[appellant]
to have been aggravated by the deceased’s employment to the
point where that employment was the main contributing factor to
the aggravation,
and whose nature gave rise to a significantly greater risk of the deceased
suffering the heart attack
Member quoted from the autopsy report and postmortem
examination:
“Sections of the coronary arteries (left anterior
descending, left circumflex and right coronary arteries) showed significant
atherosclerosis, many of them with prominent calcification and chronic
inflammation in the walls. In a section of the left circumflex
artery, marked
artifactual disruption of the atherosclerotic plaque was seen, but there was
also a suggestion of possible haemorrhage
Member noted from cardiologist, Dr Helprin’s report, who was qualified by
the appellant:
“1. Mr Pereira was a long-term smoker and had
pre-existent coronary artery disease.
plaque in the circumflex coronary artery ruptured causing a fatal heart attack.
Predisposing factors was working physically very
hard in a very hot and dusty
environment and this could have easily precipitated the plaque rupture and the
fatal heart attack.
Inflammatory
mediators are very important in coronary artery disease and certainly silica
inhalation can increase inflammation and
weaken the plaque in the coronary
arteries and precipitate a plaque rupture as well.
on the balance of probabilities, I agree that Mr Pereira’s employment with
ARA gave rise to a significantly higher
risk of him suffering a heart attack
than had he not been so employed.
Autopsy Report is consistent with the death of someone who suffered a cardiac
arrest as a result of exposure to silica particulate,
i.e. a coronary plaque
rupture causing a fatal heart
these passages the Member said:
“64. Dr Helprin qualifies his
own findings by noting only silica inhalation
increase inflammation
and weaken arterial plaque, and that working in a hot and dusty environment
have precipitated the arterial plaque rupture. I do not make that
comment in criticism of Dr Helprin, however, the qualification
is important for
two reasons.
Dr Helprin does not go so far as to give reasons as to why silica inhalation
and/or workplace environmental factors
give rise to the heart attack,
only that they could have. Although Dr Helprin’s conclusion was the
deceased’s employment
significantly increased the risk of a heart attack,
Dr Helprin does not appear to have been appraised of the deceased already
complaining
of chest pain at the commencement of his shift. Nor does Dr Helprin
provide an evidentiary basis for his conclusion the deceased
had both inhaled
silica dust and that the findings on autopsy were consistent with such
inhalation and consequent inflammation of
the coronary tissue.
the [appellant] has the onus of proving her case. In order for the [appellant]
to succeed, it is necessary for there to
be sufficient evidence to ground an
actual persuasion of comfortable satisfaction of the existence of a fact. ...
Nguyen v Cosmopolitan Homes
[2008] NSWCA 246
...”. (emphasis in the
Member thereafter identified:
“the relevant facts to be
established are not merely the presence of dust in a workplace which was hot and
heavy, but also:
(a) such dust was inhaled by the deceased, and
(b) the inhalation of the dust was the main contributing factor to the rupturing
of the arterial plaque which caused the heart
the alternative, the Member said “there needs to be an actual persuasion
not only that the deceased was carrying out heavy
work in a hot humid
environment, but also that such work was the main contributing factor to the
aggravation of his underlying condition
which caused the heart attack injury. In
my view, the fact the deceased presented to the workplace for the start of his
shift while
already complaining of chest pain is a relevant matter in
determining this aspect of the
Member considered respiratory physician Dr Freiberg’s evidence and
explanation, who was qualified by the appellant, that
acute exposure to particle
dust can release inflammatory mediators from the lungs which can then circulate
through the body, causing
oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction,
triggering vasoconstriction, increasing heart rate, blood pressure, and reducing
rate variability. These can lead to cardiovascular events such as
myocardial infarction – particularly in susceptible individuals
deceased, who had established coronary artery disease and who was exposed to
silica in a hot, dusty work environment. Although
training and masks were
available, mask usage was inconsistent, raising the risk of inhalation and
consequent heart attack. Thus,
the deceased’s job significantly increased
his likelihood of suffering a myocardial
infarction.
those comments the Member said this:
“It is unclear whether Dr
Freiberg had access to the autopsy report. However, as with Dr Helprin, his
opinion relies on general
findings rather than specific aspects of the
condition.”
Respiratory
physician, Dr Kaufman, qualified by the first respondent, noted that X-rays
performed in September of 2020 showed clear
lung fields with no evidence of
pneumoconiosis. Dr Kaufman said this indicates an absence of radiological
evidence of silicosis.
Likewise, airway lung function measurements carried out
at the same time gave normal results, indicating normal airway function with
airflow limitation.
Member said:
“73. Dr Kaufman indicated his view that no aspect
of the deceased’s employment would have been a contributing factor to
heart attack. He noted there was no primary lung disease which would cause
complications to the heart. He said:
‘In severe cases of silicosis, right heart failure may occur, primarily
from pulmonary vascular disease secondary to destruction
of large portions of
the lung or impingement on pulmonary arteries (the artery is taking blood from
the right side of the heart to
the lungs). At autopsy, there was no suggestion
of such disease. X-ray did not show any evidence of silicosis, either severe or
and spirometry measuring airway function was normal. In some cases, silica
can cause airflow limitation in the absence of silicosis.
This was not
balance, I prefer the views of Dr Kaufman to those of Dr Freiberg.
Dr Kaufman makes reference to specific investigations of the
deceased’s lungs and the findings on autopsy. He is the only medicolegal
expert to specifically address the relevant autopsy
findings on the presence or
otherwise of dust in the deceased’s airways. Having examined the autopsy
report, Dr Kaufman made
specific and persuasive findings as to the absence of
silica dust.”
Member also referred to the evidence of the cardiologist Dr Herman, qualified by
the first respondent. His evidence was that the
deceased had a history of severe
coronary artery disease, cigarette smoking and obesity. Studies on small
particulate matter linking
it to increased heart attack risk led Dr Herman to
conclude that, compared to smoking and obesity, employment with the first
was a very low risk factor. Dr Herman also observed that the deceased
was used to hot, humid work environments and did not consider
contributing factor.
the issue of silica exposure, Dr Herman stated the risk of silica promoting
plaque rupture in an individual wearing appropriate
equipment was negligible
compared to the risk of plaque rupture occurring in an obese actively smoking
individual.
Member then referred to the supplementary report from Dr Helprin dated 26 August
a more extensive quotation, the Member quoted the following passage from Dr
“Thus the acute work
environment did precipitate the heart attack. There is clearly a very strong
temporal relationship of the
heart attack to work and there is strong biological
plausibility that the work environment as described precipitated the plaque
in the circumflex artery that caused the heart
this passage the Member said this:
“Without being critical of
Dr Helprin, I note he was unaware the deceased was complaining of chest pain
before entering the
tunnel on the last date at work, and there is no actual
evidence of the presence of silicosis or silica dust in the autopsy findings.
noted, it is necessary in cases such as this to be satisfied after a commonsense
evaluation of the causal chain that the [deceased’s]
employment was the
main contributing factor to the aggravation of the underlying condition in the
nature of the fatal heart attack.
In so finding, there must be an actual
persuasion of the relevant facts in issue.
In this case, there are several difficulties for the [appellant]. The first
is, the deceased was provided with an appropriate mask
to wear. I accept the
deceased wore a beard at the time of death, however, there is no expert opinion
to the effect the nature of
his facial hair would have obviated the filtering
effects of the mask with which he was provided. Such a finding cannot, absent
expert evidence, merely be inferred. Additionally, the radiological
evidence from 2020 establishes there was no evidence of silicosis
[deceased’s] lungs. The autopsy report also makes no mention of any silica
in the [deceased’s] pulmonary system,
despite tissue samples being taken
and evaluated.”
Member said that he had no difficulty accepting that exposure to silica dust can
cause cardiac pulmonary issues:
“However, in this matter, I do
not have an actual persuasion either of such relevant exposure nor of any
exposure being the
main contributing factor to the rupture of the arterial
plaque. As the authorities make clear, there can only be one main contributing
factor to an injury.
I am also not persuaded on the balance of probabilities that the [deceased]
carrying out work in a hot environment, which he was used
to, was the main
contributing factor to his heart attack, against a background of advanced
coronary artery disease, smoking and obesity.
I am likewise not so persuaded in
relation to the carrying out physical
Member rejected the evidence of Dr Helprin that the findings on autopsy were
consistent with death by cardiac arrest as a result
of exposure to silica
particulate because there was “no evidence of the presence of silica
particulate upon autopsy
examination”.
He accepted
Dr Freiberg’s conclusions that both long term and acute silica exposure
can precipitate cardiac events but said
that the “contemporaneous evidence
in this matter does not establish the presence of silica particulates in the
Member accepted Dr Helprin’s opinion that the plaque rupture was
precipitated by physical work in a hot and dusty environment
“there is no rationale provided as to why such work was the main
contributing factor to the heart attack, and not
merely one contributing factor
among many.”
Member concluded:
“In my view, the causes of the
deceased’s fatal heart attack was multi-factorial. The evidence does not
persuade me on
the balance of probabilities that his employment was the main
contributing factor to the heart attack injury and accordingly the
[appellant’s] claim must
view of that finding, the Member did not find it necessary to determine the
issue under s 9B.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
parties agree that the appeal has been filed in time and that the amount in
question exceeds the monetary threshold for appeal.
party has requested an oral hearing. I am satisfied on the basis of the
submissions and the materials before me that I can
determine the matter without
an oral hearing.
Workplace Injury Management and
Workers Compensation Act 1998
is one limited to identifying and correcting
errors of fact, law or discretion.
State of New South Wales v
a Full Bench of five
Justices of the Court of Appeal concluded:
“Future appeals
should apply the approach in
Warren v Combes
. Appropriate deference is to be given to members where their findings
are based on evidence in respect of which they have an advantage
(such as the
kind identified in
at [55]) over the Presidential Member
hearing an appeal. But it is not sufficient for an appeal to be dismissed on the
an inference was ‘open’ to the member, as if the member
were a jury and there was some evidence supporting it. If the
Presidential
Member, after making appropriate allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the
member, would reach a different conclusion
on a question of fact, he or she
should not shrink from giving effect to it. Otherwise, the Presidential Member
will be dismissing
an appeal but without fully addressing whether there is an
error of fact, law or discretion.”
this matter the first respondent submits:
“As was set out in
the primary submissions, the conclusions reached by the Member were not just
open to him but were the correct
conclusions when the evidence is considered.
There is no basis for finding an error, recalling that it is still the case that
availability of another [inference] is not sufficient to uphold an
appeal. The Presidential Member must come to the view that the
my view that submission accords with the ratio in
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant relies on the following three grounds of appeal:
– Error of law in incorrectly defining the wrong question for
determination.
– Error of law in taking into account an irrelevant
consideration, namely the timing of the onset of the deceased’s
– Error of law in taking into account an irrelevant
consideration, namely the absence of postmortem evidence of silicosis.
Ground 1 – Error of law in incorrectly defining the wrong
question for determination
Appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the first respondent’s dispute notice denied injury
and raised a defence pursuant to s 9B of the
1987 Act. The first
respondent’s defence asserted that the appellant’s medical case was
predicated upon an incorrect
assumption that the deceased had been exposed to
silica in the course of his work. The defence relied upon the evidence of
to say that the deceased had not been exposed to silica as
appellant submits that exposure to dust particles in the deceased’s
workplace was an element of the appellant’s expert
medical case on
causation. The opinions of Dr David Freiberg were to the effect that such
exposure can be associated with increased
cardiovascular risk and can lead to
the development of cardiovascular events including myocardial infarction.
appellant submits that the deceased’s exposure to silica at work in the
days before his death presented a significantly
higher risk of suffering a
myocardial infarction than had he not been so employed. The appellant submits
that the conclusion of Dr
Freiberg to this effect is supported by Dr Helprin in
his supplementary report of 26 August 2024 where he expressed the view that
there was a causal nexus between the deceased’s work conditions and his
heart attack.
appellant submits that the Member initially correctly identified the ultimate
issues at paragraph [15] of the reasons, but that
he subsequently fell into
error by stating at paragraph [67] of his reasons the appellant was required to
establish that “the
inhalation of the dust was the main contributing
factor to the
rupturing of the arterial plaque
which caused the heart
attack” (appellant’s emphasis).
is submitted this erroneously (re)defined the issue from a question of cause to
a question of consequence of the disease and its
aggravation.
the Member asked himself the wrong legal question, his answer was nugatory and
appellate intervention is required.
Additionally
the appellant submits that the Member found that as a general proposition the
deceased had been exposed to dust in the
course of his employment and that
despite his position as a supervisor he insisted on carrying out manual work.
these findings the appellant submits:
“These factual findings
established the underpinnings for the assumptions relied upon by Dr Herman and
Dr Kaufman. So long as
their scientific opinion were accepted the
[appellant’s] claim was made out.
However, having satisfied himself of these matters to the required standard,
the Member strayed from a proper consideration of the
matter before him by
laying significance on two considerations that the appellant submits were
irrelevant and therefore
erroneous.”
am not sure the appellant intended to refer to Drs Herman and Kaufmann who were
qualified for the first respondent. I assume the
intention was to refer to Drs
appellant then goes on to consider those two allegedly erroneous considerations
in Grounds 2 and 3 of the appeal (I deal with
those submissions
First respondent’s submissions
first respondent submits that the Member correctly identified the issue to be
determined when he made the statement at paragraph
[15] of the reasons. The
first respondent submits that the medical evidence in the case established the
deceased had underlying coronary
heart disease. His death occurred following a
rupturing of the arterial plaque in the circumflex coronary artery.
first respondent submits that at paragraph [55] the Member correctly identified
that the parties agreed that the allegation of
injury is that the heart attack
is the culmination of an aggravation of a disease process, said by the appellant
to have been aggravated
by the deceased’s employment to the point where
employment was the main contributing factor to the aggravation, and whose nature
gave rise to a significantly greater risk of the deceased suffering the heart
attack injury.
medical evidence only identified the heart attack as being the aggravation of
the pre-existing condition. It did not identify
anything else as being the
aggravation of the underlying disease.
Member was correct when he noted that Dr Helprin observed that there was a
complex coronary plaque rupture which was obviously
the cause of the heart
attack. Dr Helprin described predisposing factors as working physically very
hard in a very hot and dusty
environment and this could easily precipitate the
plaque rupture and the fatal heart attack. But Dr Helprin did not identify any
other matter that constituted aggravation of the pre-existing disease.
“Ultimately Dr [Helprin] did not say that the work was
a contributing
factor to the aggravation let alone the main contributing factor. As correctly
pointed out by the Member, Dr [Helprin’s]
opinion was only that silica
inhalation and working physically very hard in a very hot and dusty environment
could have given rise
to the heart
Freiberg also identified the myocardial infarction as the relevant aggravation
of the disease. Dr Freiberg did not opine that the
employment was the main
contributing factor to any aggravation. Rather he presumed that there had been
acute exposure to silica in
the hot and dusty environment where the deceased
worked in the days before his death.
the basis of that assumption he said that the deceased’s employment gave
rise to a significantly higher risk of him suffering
a myocardial infarction
injury than had he not been so employed. Dr Freiberg also identified the
myocardial infarction injury as
the aggravation and whilst he thought there was
a higher risk, he did not opine that the work factors which he presumed were
contemporaneous
with the onset of the heart attack were the main contributing
factor to any aggravation etc. of the disease condition.
first respondent submits:
“Ultimately the Member, as he was
entitled to do, preferred the opinion of Dr Kaufman. The Member explained why he
those views (at [74]) and the appeal does not challenge that part of
the Member’s
reasoning.”
first respondent says that it is significant that the appellant does not
identify what the aggravation of the disease condition
was if it was not the
rupturing of the arterial plaque.
Consideration
submissions, with respect, stray from the point of this ground of the appeal. It
is difficult to identify from the appellant’s
submission how it is said
that the Member fell into error or what is meant by the appellant’s
statement at [9] of her submission
that the Member erroneously redefined the
issue from a question of cause to a question of consequence of the disease and
its aggravation
at paragraph [67] of the reasons.
Member identified the statutory questions at [7] and again at [15]. There is no
error in the formulation of the statutory questions
relevant to s 4(b)(ii) and s
9B in the formulation adopted by the Member in those two paragraphs.
Furthermore,
the Member said at paragraph [13]:
“The [appellant] relies on
three factors of the deceased’s employment which she submits contributed
to an aggravation
of his heart disease, namely:
(a) exposure to silica dust;
(b) physical exertion, and
(c) working in a hot environment.”
is no submission or ground of appeal that the Member incorrectly identified the
three factors relied upon by the appellant to
support her claim. The Member then
dealt systematically with each of those issues summarising his findings at
reasons [47]–[48].
Member accepted that the workplace was hot and the work was heavy. The Member
was correct to say that the onus was on the appellant
to establish that the
deceased inhaled silica, bearing in mind the use of protective masks, and
further, to prove that the inhalation
of dust was the main contributing factor
to rupture of the arterial plaque which caused the heart attack. She did
am not convinced that the Member departed from the statutory inquiry as to what
was the main contributing factor to the rupture
of the arterial plaque. In
paragraph [68] of the reasons the Member makes the same point that the appellant
needed to persuade him
not only that the deceased was carrying out physical work
in a hot and humid environment, “but also that such work was the
contributing factor to the aggravation of his underlying condition which caused
the heart attack injury”. He was not so
Member persistently maintained a focus on identification of the main
contributing factor. The appellant simply failed to persuade
him that the
factors identified in [13] had been made out as the main contributing factor to
the myocardial infarction.
my view the Member did not depart from the statutory question correctly posed at
[7] and [15] in his deliberations. Ground 1 of
the appeal is
Ground 2 – Error of law in taking into account an
irrelevant consideration, namely the timing of the onset of the deceased’s
Appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the fact that the deceased experienced chest pain before
the commencement of the last shift was an irrelevant
consideration. The
appellant specifically at paragraph [14] of her submissions refers to the
Member’s “comments at Reasons
appellant submits that it was not part of her case that there was a temporal
connection between the work exposure and the onset
of observable symptoms. The
appellant’s submission “in short” is as
“the fact the [deceased] might have experienced chest
pain before the commencement of his last shift is consistent with [the
appellant’s] case because it was simply the manifestation of the disease
condition that was caused by his working conditions
that he faced well before
the commencement of that chest pain.”
appellant submits that it was an error of principle for the Member to
erroneously dismiss the contribution of physical exertion
to the plaque
First respondent’s submissions
first respondent submits that the appellant does not challenge the factual
determination that the myocardial infarction had commenced
before the deceased
started work on 16 September 2021.
first respondent submits that the Member correctly identified that the timing of
the heart attack was not determinative. However,
it was a matter which had to be
taken into consideration in any commonsense evaluation of the evidence and
causal chain.
submits that if the manifestation of the aggravation occurred when the deceased
was not at work then there would need to be medical
evidence which explained how
the employment was the main contributing factor to an occurrence at a later
time. There was no such
Furthermore,
because Dr Freiberg identified hard, physical work in a hot and dusty
environment as one of the risk factors, his opinion
was based upon the idea that
the heart attack had commenced within close proximity of that work being
performed. The evidence did
not support that conclusion.
appellant was unsuccessful because she could not discharge the onus of proof.
The Member correctly identified that there was no
evidence to support the
conclusion that there had been an aggravation due to exposure to silica dust.
The Member correctly identified
that it was for the appellant, who bore the
onus, to bring evidence to establish that the mask worn by the deceased was
ineffective
or evidence that there had been silica in the deceased’s
system. In the absence of such evidence the Member correctly concluded
could not be satisfied that the exposure to silica was a cause of, let alone the
main contributing factor to, any aggravation
of the underlying condition. Dr
the heart attack.
Member ultimately concluded that the cause of the deceased’s fatal heart
attack was multifactorial. The evidence did not
establish that employment was
the main contributing factor. The respondent submits:
highest at which the appellant’s case could be put was that there were
some aspects of the employment which may have
resulted in an increased risk of
heart attack. Those factors of course had to be balanced against the
deceased’s obesity, his
smoking and the natural progression of the
underlying disease
condition.”
Member’s conclusion (that the cause of the deceased’s fatal heart
attack was multifactorial) was the only correct
conclusion which could be
reached on the evidence.
Consideration
appellant’s reference to paragraph [48] of the reasons is unclear. In that
paragraph the Member expresses his acceptance
of Mr Spowart’s evidence.
That evidence related to the specific duties described by Mr Spowart in his
statement and recorded
by the Member at paragraph [22] of the reasons.
significance in Mr Spowart’s statement is that the deceased was already
experiencing chest pain when the deceased arrived
at work on 16 September 2021.
Mr Spowart described the work at paragraph [9] of the statement quoted by the
Member and the fact that
the work was performed under very hot conditions in the
paragraph [48] of the reasons the Member accepts Mr Spowart’s evidence as
to the specific duties being carried out by the
deceased on his last shift
preceding his death. The Member seems to have accepted the appellant’s
case at this point and I
am unable to understand how what appears at reasons
[48] supports the contention that the Member addressed an irrelevant
consideration.
Dr Helprin’s report of 26 August 2024 the doctor
“In the context of working in a physically demanding
environment labouring in the tunnel, fixing door jambs and hammering and
drilling bolts into the concrete and being exposed to silica it is more likely
than not that the acute physical work together with
exposure to silica caused a
fissuring or rupture of a pre-existent coronary plaque and this leads to
thrombosis (blood clotting)
which leads to the fatal heart attack.
Thus the acute work environment did precipitate the heart attack.
There’s clearly a very strong temporal relationship of the heart attack
to work and there’s strong biological plausibility
that the work
environment as described precipitated the plaque rupture in the circumflex
artery that caused the heart
conclusion, which is the highest the evidence gets in terms of causation, is
dependent on the “very strong temporal relationship
of the heart attack to
work”. However, as the Member points out at reasons [78], the temporal
relationship between work and
the heart attack is falsified by the fact that the
deceased was complaining of chest pain before entering the tunnel and the
of actual evidence of the presence of silicosis or silica dust in the
autopsy findings or the earlier X-ray findings.
Member’s acceptance of the evidence of Ms Tio that the deceased was
already complaining of chest pains before the commencement
of his last shift,
which is consistent with the evidence of Mr Spowart of his continued complaints
of chest pain until he went home
is directly against the
“very strong” temporal connection contemplated by
Dr Helprin.
Furthermore,
the Member accepted that exposure to silica dust can cause cardiopulmonary
issues. But what he was not persuaded of was
that such relevant exposure or any
exposure had occurred in this case and was the main contributing factor to the
rupture of the
addition, the Member accepted the views of Dr Kaufman that no aspect of the
deceased’s employment would have been a contributing
factor to the heart
The appellant has not
displaced the Member’s acceptance of Dr Kaufman’s evidence.
temporal connection was made relevant by the appellant’s evidence. The
basis of that temporal connection was falsified by
the other evidence which was
accepted by the Member.
Member did not erroneously dismiss the contribution of physical exertion to the
plaque rupture, rather he concluded that the deceased
was complaining of
symptoms before he commenced his shift on 16 September.
Member did not find that to be determinative, indeed he expressly said that the
temporal connection was not determinative. However,
it was a relevant factor
which he was required to take account of and the appellant’s contention
that it was an irrelevant
matter is not made out.
2 of the appeal is dismissed.
Ground 3 – Error of law in taking into account an
irrelevant consideration, namely the absence of postmortem evidence of
Appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the Member placed impermissible weight on the postmortem
absence of silicosis to dismiss the connection
between dust exposure and the
aggravation of the coronary artery disease. The case theory offered by Dr
Freiberg was that dust exposure
can release inflammatory mediators from the
lungs. He did not identify the presence of silicosis as part of the causal
appellant submits furthermore that the first respondent’s medical
commentators did not suggest that the presence of signs
of silicosis would have
made any difference to their respective opinions. In his erroneous consideration
of this question the Member
compounded his mistake by stating that it was
unclear whether Dr Freiberg had access to the autopsy report. However, there can
no doubt, not only did Dr Freiberg’s report acknowledge the autopsy
report as part of his documentary review, he referred to
its findings in the
body of his report. The autopsy demonstrated that the deceased had pre-existing
atherosclerosis.
error may not give rise to a separate ground of appeal because it is a mistake
made in consideration of an already irrelevant
consideration, however, it gives
some insight into the Member’s approach that may help explain how he fell
into error.
First respondent’s submissions
first respondent submits that the appellant seeks to argue that it is not
relevant whether or not there was postmortem evidence
of silicosis.
first respondent submits that there can be no doubt that Dr Freiberg was trying
to draw a connection between silica inhalation
and the risk of myocardial
infarction.
Member expressly stated, at reasons [74], that he preferred the views of Dr
Kaufman. Dr Kaufman had said that right heart failure
may occur in severe
cases of silicosis. He expressly said, “at autopsy there was no suggestion
of such disease. X-ray did not
show any evidence of silicosis, either severe or
mild, and spirometry measuring airway function was normal. In some cases, silica
can cause the airflow limitation in the absence of true silicosis. This was not
Kaufman made it quite clear that the absence of any evidence of silicosis was a
significant matter in his reasoning.
first respondent submits it was not only correct to consider whether there was
evidence of silicosis but also that proper evaluation
of the evidence required
the Member to do so.
far as the Member stated that it was unclear whether Dr Freiberg had access to
the autopsy report or not, the first respondent
submits that the important part
of the Member’s comment was that whilst the document may have been
acknowledged as part of
the document review Dr Freiberg undertook, his reference
to the autopsy was to its demonstration of pre-existing atherosclerosis,
Freiberg did not otherwise comment on the contents of the autopsy report. Most
significantly, he did not comment upon the significant
findings referred to by
Dr Kaufman.
Freiberg did not address the question of how the heart attack could be
attributed to silicosis when the autopsy report had eliminated
that possibility.
The failure to consider such an important question suggests that Dr Freiberg did
not have access to the full report
or did not consider it fully.
Consideration
I am not clear as to what the appellant’s observation at paragraph [22] of
her submissions is intended to mean. This
is either a ground of appeal relied on
Freiberg’s report of 7 June 2023 favouring the appellant’s case
depended on his assumption that the deceased had been
exposed to silica. Indeed
“Therefore in this obese smoking man with his
pre-existing atherosclerosis the acute exposure to silica was highly likely in
the hot and dusty environment where he worked in the days before his death.
Despite the appropriate training and availability of
masks in the workplace
there is a high incidence of these masks not being utilised sufficiently
throughout the entire work period
to prevent particle inhalation. There is
sufficient evidence of the effects acutely of this silica inhalation and the
risk of myocardial
infarction. On the balance of probabilities therefore the
nature of the late Mr Pereira’s employment with ARA gave rise to
significantly higher risk of him suffering a myocardial infarction injury than
had he not been so
difficulty with that conclusion and hypothesis, which is quoted by the Member at
reasons [70] in greater detail, is that the autopsy
report does not confirm
exposure to silica.
Furthermore,
the Member accepted Dr Kaufman’s opinion based on X-rays in September
2020, together with no evidence of pneumoconiosis,
that there was an absence of
radiological evidence of
point is not whether Dr Freiberg had access to the autopsy report but the
“specific and persuasive findings” of Dr
Kaufman as to the absence
of silica dust.
accept the first respondent’s submission that the Member was correct to
consider whether there was evidence of silica exposure
and the Member’s
conclusion that such evidence did not exist was in fact correct.
3 of the appeal is not made out and is dismissed.
accept the first respondent’s submission that the appellant failed because
there were a range of factors which contributed
to the onset of the heart attack
outside work hours.
most the appellant’s medical case was that some factors at work such as
heavy, physical work in the hot environment, and
exposure to dust, primarily
silica, gave rise to an increased risk of heart attack. There was, however, no
evidence that that risk
had materialised by causing the aggravation of the
underlying condition or that such an aggravation was the cause of the fatal
Member did not find it necessary to deal with the s 9B point. Strictly that
conclusion is correct.
appeal is dismissed.
Member’s Certificate of Determination dated 13 January 2025 is
Geoffrey Parker SC
ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT
3 November 2025
Pereira v ARA Fire
Protection Services Pty Ltd & Ors
[2025] NSWPIC 11
[2025] NSWCA 157
First respondent’s submissions dated 16 September 2025,
Appellant’s
submissions dated 7 February 2025,
respondent’s submissions dated 12 March 2025,
respondent’s submissions dated 12 March 2025,
respondent’s submissions dated 12 March 2025,
Application to Admit
Late Documents dated 9 September 2024, p
Appellant’s submissions dated 7 February 2025,
Application in Respect
of Death of Worker, p 24.
Reasons, [72]–[74].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.54 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter