URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2024/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Davis v Amaca Pty Ltd [2024] NSWDDT 2 (22 February 2024)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
Davis v Amaca Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWDDT 2
Hearing Date(s):
7, 8 February 2024
Date of Orders:
22 February 2024
Decision Date:
22 February 2024
Judge Russell SC
(1) Judgment for the plaintiff against the defendant for
$897,020.64.
(2) Order the defendant to pay the
plaintiff’s costs.
Catchwords:
DAMAGES – mesothelioma – general damages – different
assessments in different States – common law of
DAMAGES – mesothelioma – assessment of need
for care in the future – evidence of occupational therapists
Legislation Cited:
Civil Liability Act 2002
Civil Proceedings Act 2001 (QLD), s
Cases Cited:
Amaca Pty Ltd v King
[2011] VSCA 447
Amaca Pty Ltd v Werfel
Dell v Dalton
[1991] NSWCA 76
(1991) 23 NSWLR 528
John Pfeiffer Pty
Limited v Rogerson
[2000] HCA 36
(2000) 203 CLR 503
Director of Public Prosecutions
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51
Amaca Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWDDT 21
Kennedy v CMIC Group Ltd and CPB Contractors
[2020] NSWDDT 7
Lipohar v The Queen
[1999] HCA 65
(1999) 200 CLR
Murfett v Wallaby Grip
(2000) 20 NSWCCR 638
NSW Insurance Ministerial
Corporation v Hay
(1993) 18 MVR 375
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa [1968]
(1968) 119 CLR 118
Reid v Seltsam Pty Ltd
[2021] VSC 653
Bridgestone Australia Ltd
[2004] NSWDDT 4
Southgate v Waterford
Todorovic v Waller
[1981] HCA 72
(1981) 150 CLR 402
[2018] NSWDDT 10
Principal judgment
Barry Davis (Plaintiff)
Amaca Pty Ltd (formerly James Hardie & Coy
Pty Ltd) (Defendant)
Representation:
S Tzouganatos (Plaintiff)
J Sheller SC
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
VBR Law (Plaintiff)
Holman Webb
(Defendant)
File Number(s):
DDT 2023/232314
Introduction
a Statement of Claim filed on 21 July 2023 Mr Barry Davis seeks damages against
Amaca Pty Limited (Amaca) for the fatal disease
of mesothelioma. Mr Davis was
born in 1941 and is presently 82 years of age. Mr Davis was employed as a
carpenter in South Australia
between 1955 and 1968. He was employed as a
carpenter in Queensland between 1969 and 1977. He was a self-employed carpenter
in Queensland
between 1977 and 1983. In 1969 and again in 1978 Mr Davis built
two homes in Queensland.
all periods of employment and self-employment as a carpenter, and during the
dust and fibre from Amaca (ie
James Hardie) products.
matter has been through the Claims Resolution Process. The Mediator’s
Certificate indicates that the only issue to be determined
is quantum. In those
circumstances I will not recite the detailed evidence concerning causative
exposure to James Hardie asbestos
cement building
Applicable Law
accepted that Mr Davis had sufficient exposure in South Australia alone to cause
his mesothelioma. Similarly, Amaca accepted
that Mr Davis had sufficient
exposure in Queensland alone to cause his mesothelioma (Tcpt 86/2). All
exposure, which is not trivial,
causes or contributes to the disease of
mesothelioma. Mr Davis is therefore to be compensated as the victim of a South
tort and as the victim of a Queensland tort. This raises the
potential of different assessments of damage caused by the South Australian
exposure and the Queensland exposure.
test to be applied as to the governing law is clear, as a result of the decision
of the High Court in John Pfeiffer Pty Limited
[2000] HCA 36
(2000) 203 CLR 503 (Pfeiffer).
In that case a
plaintiff sued in the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory for
damages for personal injuries suffered
in New South Wales. The question which
arose was whether the applicable law for the assessment of damages was the law
of the State
or of the Territory.
High Court examined various possibilities for a choice of law rule. The
possibilities which emerged were the lex fori (the law
of the forum), the lex
loci delicti (the law of the place of the wrong) or the proper law of the tort.
reasons set out at pars [72]-[87], the High Court came to the view that
“the common law should now be developed so that
the lex loci delicti is
the governing law with respect to torts committed in Australia but which have an
inter-State element”
High Court also held that all questions about the kinds of damage, or the amount
of damages that may be recovered, would likewise
be treated as substantive
issues governed by the lex loci delicti – at [100].
mesothelioma is an indivisible injury and because the exposure in South
Australia and the exposure in Queensland each made a
material contribution to
causing the disease,
means that the court must apply the lex
loci delicti, being the law of South Australia and the law of Queensland to the
determination
of quantum.
General Damages - Submissions
both South Australia and Queensland, the assessment of general damages for the
dust disease of mesothelioma is a common law assessment.
There is no statute in
either State which modifies the common law in relation to the assessment of
general damages.
is no State common law. There is one indivisible common law of Australia –
Kable v Director of Public Prosecutions
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51
Lipohar v The Queen
[1999] HCA 65
(1999) 200 CLR 485
Counsel for Amaca submitted that it was appropriate in assessing damages,
applying the law of South Australia, to consider
the decision of the Full Court
of the Supreme Court of South Australia in
Amaca Pty Ltd v Werfel
SASCFC 125.
In that case a judge of the District Court of South Australia had
assessed general damages at $400,000. The Full Court on appeal
reduced such
damages to $280,000. The court said: “The review of the award of damages
made in this case must give primary
emphasis to the general level of damages
awarded in South Australia” – at [416]. Further, the court said at
“...It would be wrong to fail to give primary emphasis to awards made in
this State. Though there is no reason why the pain
and suffering of a South
Australian should be assessed at anything less than the pain and suffering of
any other Australian, there
remain differences nevertheless.”
conclusion of the Full Court was that the award of $400,000 for general damages
“was manifestly excessive and out of step
with the general level of
damages awarded in this State” – at [419]. The Full Court set aside
that part of the award
and fixed a figure of $280,000 for general damages.
for the plaintiff submitted (MFI 4) that:
(1) The decision in
is distinguishable, as Mr Werfel had
mesothelioma of the tunica vaginalis, whereas Mr Davis suffers from pleural
mesothelioma. Mesothelioma
of the tunica vaginalis is an extremely rare
condition, involving mesothelioma of the serous membrane within the scrotum. Its
and effects are very different to those of pleural mesothelioma.
(2) The substantive law which the Tribunal must apply to the assessment of
damages is the common law of Australia, which is one indivisible
common law. The
Dust Diseases Tribunal has previously rejected the argument advanced by Amaca in
this case that a lower amount should
be awarded in the Tribunal for general
damages to a plaintiff injured by an interstate tort. The cases cited were:
Murfett v Wallaby Grip
(2000) 20 NSWCCR 638
per Curtis J (South
Australian exposure);
Kennedy v Amaca Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWDDT 21
President O’Meally (Queensland exposure);
Routley v Bridgestone
Australia Ltd
[2004] NSWDDT 4
per Curtis J (South Australian exposure). By
contrast, there have been two decisions of the Tribunal where general damages
were awarded
in different amounts where a plaintiff suffered exposure in two
Webber v Comcare
[2018] NSWDDT 10
Kennedy v CMIC Group
Ltd and CPB Contractors Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWDDT 7.
However, the differential
assessments in both those cases arose from the fact that in the New South Wales
at [135]; (
at [171]) there had been a statutory
modification of the assessment of general damages. That modification, arising
s 15B(5)(b)
Civil Liability Act 2002
(NSW), is not relevant
to the issues in this case and does not lead to different assessments.
(3) The submission for Amaca was contrary to the principle set out by the High
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
[1968] HCA 62;
(1968) 119 CLR
where the High Court said: “The judgment of a court awarding damages
is not to be overborne by what other minds adjudged right
and proper in other
situations”.
(4) There should not be any difference in the general damages to be awarded to
Mr Davis depending on the location of the forum in
which they are to be
assessed. Nor should the assessment depend on where the suffering has occurred.
Counsel for Amaca submitted (MFI 5):
(1) There are significant differences in the evaluation of general damages from
authority from the High
Court as to what is the appropriate quantum of damages for a person suffering
from mesothelioma, variations
between jurisdictions will exist.
(2) There is a “gross incoherence” when a 42-year-old sufferer of
mesothelioma such as Mr Werfel receives $280,000 for
a tort occurring in South
Australia but Mr Davis, who is 82 years old, would receive a much larger sum if
the submission for the
plaintiff is adopted.
(3) The post-tort residence of Mr Davis is not a relevant consideration. Regard
should be had to the binding effect of the decision
of the intermediate
appellate court in South Australia, being the place of the tort.
General Damages – Consideration
for the plaintiff submitted that an appropriate award of general damages, having
regard to both South Australian and Queensland
exposure, would be $485,000.
Senior Counsel for Amaca submitted that an award of general damages of $340,000
would accord with the
approach to general damages in the courts of South
Australia. In respect of the Queensland exposure Senior Counsel for Amaca
that there was no particular guidance provided by courts in that
State, and thus a “New South Wales approach” could be
taken to the
assessment of general damages arising from the Queensland tort (Tcpt
correct and proper concession means that the debate, about whether general
damages should be lower in this case because of a
South Australian tort, is
rather academic.
assessing damages for pain and suffering, there is no “grisly table of
catastrophes”:
Southgate v Waterford
(1990) 21 NSWLR 427
Dell v Dalton
[1991] NSWCA 76
(1991) 23 NSWLR 528
at 533, the Court of Appeal said that
the assessment of damages for personal injuries:
“...will involve questions of fact and degree, and matters of opinion,
impression, speculation, and estimation, calling for
the exercise of common
sense and judgment.”
accept the submission of Senior Counsel for Amaca that the different awards of
damages in different States of the Commonwealth do
lead to a “gross
incoherence” (MFI 5, par 22), given that there is one common law of
Australia. It is to be noted that
while awards in South Australia are generally
lower than awards made by this Tribunal, some awards in Victoria for general
for mesothelioma have been higher than in New South Wales – see
for example
Amaca Pty Ltd v King
[2011] VSCA 447
($730,000) and
Seltsam Pty Ltd
[2021] VSC 653
($580,000).
Judge Curtis said at [8]:
“Second, even if it were the case that South Australian judges award less
than may be awarded by New South Wales judges on
identical facts, they purport
to apply the same law. There being a one and indivisible common law system
throughout Australia each
judge exercising common law jurisdiction must apply
that same law with the same intention of fairly but adequately compensating the
plaintiff. The assessment of general damages
‘...is not a matter to be
resolved by reference to some norm or standard supposedly to be derived from a
consideration of amounts
awarded in a number of other specific cases’
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
(1968) 11 CLR 118
at 124 - 125. If
it were the case that there was a persistent difference in awards between State
entity that is Australia, it is for the High
Court in the exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction to determine whether any
verdict allowed to stand by a State Court of Appeal was
high or so low that it is outside the range of what could reasonably be regarded
as appropriate to the circumstances of
Carson v John
Fairfax & Sons Ltd
[1993] HCA 31
(1993) 178 CLR 44.
must be emphasised that the Full Court in
made it plain that they
were expressing their “opinion” about the appropriate level of
general damages for that particular
claimant – at [419]. I will approach
the assessment of general damages in this case on the same basis. My opinion
will be based
on my findings of fact, and “matters of opinion, impression,
speculation, and estimation, calling for the exercise of common
judgment”. I will have some regard for awards of general damages for
mesothelioma made in the past five years (see
MFI 3, par 39). However, common
sense, and a correct legal approach, mandates that each case must be decided on
its own facts.
Discount Rate for Future Losses
law of South Australia imposes no statutory discount rate in relation to future
losses. The common law discount rate of 3% thus
Todorovic v
[1981] HCA 72
(1981) 150 CLR 402.
In Queensland, a 5% discount rate
applies because of s 61 of the
Civil Proceedings Act 2001
(QLD). These
two discount rates were the subject of agreement between counsel.
there will be different assessments of damages for the lump sum for future care,
in relation to the South Australian tort and
in relation to the Queensland tort.
The application of the tables to figures for the future, where there are so many
imponderables,
tends to lend an air of precision to what is really a broad
evaluative exercise. In this case the court has to make findings about:
expectancy; when immunotherapy treatment will start; whether there will be side
effects from such treatment; and whether such
treatment will be efficacious. In
those circumstances, to apply different deferral figures (calculated to three
decimal places),
while completely artificial and illusory, is necessary as a
matter of law.
Evidence of Mr Davis
evidence-in-chief of Mr Davis was given by an affidavit sworn on 11 January 2024
(PX 1, p 1).
affidavit provided detailed evidence in relation to the symptoms and
disabilities of Mr Davis since he first noticed in 2020 that
he was short of
breath. His evidence concerning medical treatment is in accord with the medical
records and clinical notes which
were tendered (PX 1, pp 51-105).
noticing that he was short of breath in about 2020, Mr Davis consulted his GP Dr
Kapadia on 6 July 2021. Dr Kapadia conducted
various tests and referred Mr Davis
to a cardiologist.
22 November 2022 Mr Davis was walking up a hill near his home when he
experienced right-sided chest pain which was intense. He
suffered the pain again
two days later when he was at home walking up stairs. He went back to Dr Kapadia
on 29 November 2022. His
chest pain had resolved by that time.
14 April 2023 Mr Davis saw Dr Kapadia due to a chronic cough and wheezing. He
was referred for a chest x-ray. This test was done,
and it showed a left lung
opacity and a pleural effusion. Dr Kapadia referred Mr Davis for a CT scan of
his chest. Mr Davis was also
referred to Dr Deller, a respiratory
specialist.
Davis saw Dr Deller on 22 May 2023 when he was referred for an ultrasound
drainage of his chest. 1,250ml of fluid was drained via
a large needle inserted
into his lungs from his back. A chest x-ray performed following this procedure
showed a left lower lobe collapse.
The cytopathology from the pleural fluid
showed no malignant cells. Dr Deller referred Mr Davis to the John Flynn Private
for a left video-assisted thoracoscopy (VATS) and pleurodesis.
30 June 2023 at that hospital Mr Davis had the left VATS, a talc pleurodesis, a
biopsy, an abrasive pleurodesis and an intercostal
nerve block under the care of
Dr Sanders. He was in intense pain after that surgery. Mr Davis was discharged
from the hospital on
4 July 2023.
Davis saw Dr Deller on 14 July 2023 when he was informed that the results of the
procedures were consistent with epithelioid mesothelioma.
He was advised that
the disease was terminal. Dr Deller referred Mr Davis to an oncologist, Dr
Davis saw Dr Horwood on 10 July 2023. He told the doctor that he was feeling
better since the surgery and he was back to walking
30 minutes per day. Dr
Horwood discussed combination immunotherapy as an option but given that the
symptoms were not great at that
time, it was decided to simply observe the
condition. Mr Davis was advised by Dr Horwood to commence treatment once he
began to experience
severe pain and shortness of breath caused by the
mesothelioma.
28 July 2023 Mr Davis had a repeat CT scan of the chest. He consulted Dr Horwood
again on 2 August 2023 and was advised that the
CT scan showed a small volume of
pleural fluid remaining in the base of the left lung, but no evidence of a
progressive pleural mass
lesion. Dr Horwood advised that there was no indication
to proceed at that time with immunotherapy.
Davis had another CT scan of the chest on 17 October 2023. He saw Dr Horwood
again on 25 October 2023 and again was advised that
there was no need to
commence immunotherapy at that time. An appointment with Dr Horwood was
scheduled for early 2024.
Davis said that before he was diagnosed with mesothelioma, he was enjoying
living “an active and busy lifestyle”. Since
his diagnosis he has
lost a lot of energy and has experienced breathlessness every day. He also
suffers from giddiness. He has lost
10kg in weight and has lost his
Davis has been a member of the Men’s Shed at Ashmore for about five years.
There he has used his skills as a carpenter to
complete maintenance and joinery
work. He used to go to the Men’s Shed five days per week. He enjoyed this
work and felt that
his volunteering helped members of the community. By the time
of his affidavit he was only going to the Men’s Shed about once
Davis has been a member of the Ulysses Club, which is a social club for
motorcyclists aged over 40 years. He received the Telemachus
award for excellent
services to the Ulysses Club in 2022. He was the president of the Gold Coast
branch about five years ago. Mr
Davis attended meetings in Nerang once a month
and went to social events. Mr Davis has no longer been able to do club rides due
his declining mental and physical health. He gets out of the house and goes
to see off the motorcyclists for their rides.
Davis used to travel by motorcycle to the AGM of the Ulysses Club, which meant
travelling all over eastern Australia. He and his
wife used to go away for
camping trips. He is unable to do this anymore.
to 2020 Mr Davis used to walk for over an hour each day at a brisk pace. By the
time of his affidavit he could only manage to
go about twice per week for 30
minutes. He feels very puffed during and after his walks. Dr Horwood has advised
him to continue walking
for as long as he can.
Davis is a keen wood carver. He now struggles to stand up for long periods of
time to do this task.
Davis’ wife Gwyneth (known as Gwen) retired in 2020. The couple wanted to
travel around Australia together and had been
looking at brochures in relation
to travelling to Perth, the Kimberly, the Flinders Ranges and on the Indian
Pacific train. After
Mr Davis was diagnosed, they threw the brochures out. Mr
Davis has not been able to travel as he has needed to be home for medical
appointments. Mr Davis used to travel to a family reunion every four years in
South Australia but was unable to attend the 2023 reunion
because of his
condition. Mr Davis said that he was looking forward to enjoying his retired
years with his family and his wife Gwen,
but he regards his future as
“bleak”. The thought of leaving Gwen behind “is sometimes too
much for me to bear”.
Davis lives with his wife and his son Curt in a five-bedroom, three-bathroom,
two-storey house in Ashmore which he and his wife
built 45 years ago. There are
15 stairs to get from the bottom level to the top level. When the affidavit was
sworn Mr Davis was
able to shower and dress himself independently. He installed
shower rails in case he had a fall. He experiences shortness of breath
bending forward to put on underwear or socks or shoes. His wife Gwen is 10 years
younger and is in good health. Gwen has always
taken care of the majority of the
domestic chores. She is now responsible for the lawnmowing.
Mr Davis was diagnosed with mesothelioma, he carried out maintenance work around
the house. He still does small jobs but cannot
do anything heavy and will often
ask his son for assistance. Mr Davis used to do the hedging every few months
using hand shears,
but this task now takes much longer as he has to have breaks
as needed. He paid a worker $500 to come to his home and cut back the
palms. That task was too heavy and hard for him.
Davis said that he understands that because he has a terminal disease, his
symptoms will progress and he will deteriorate. He said
that he has been
independent his whole life and does not want to be a burden to his wife or
others around him. Mr Davis said “I
will pay for any assistance I need as
my condition progresses”.
his oral evidence-in-chief Mr Davis spoke in more detail about his love of
motorcycles and motorcycling. He said that before he
became ill, he used to lead
the Sunday ride for the Ulysses Club. Mr Davis has stopped riding his motorcycle
because he has lost
confidence in doing so. He said that he felt dejected about
not riding motorcycles “because I’m missing out on the fun”.
He said that it had been a large part of his life and he missed the
companionship of riding with his mates.
Davis also gave more detailed evidence about his involvement in the Men’s
Shed. He was involved in initially renovating the
shed when it was first
purchased by two Rotary Clubs. He said that the Men’s Shed was a place
where men could get together
and socialise and build things. It gave them a
sense of worth. He described it as “basically all about men’s
He said that he obtained a lot of enjoyment out of his
involvement with the Men’s Shed. Since he became ill, he has lost interest
in making things. He is still one of the Shed captains and goes there to keep an
eye on people to see that they are using the equipment
properly. He also helps
with the clean-up at the end of the day.
Davis gave evidence that although he was not suffering pain while giving his
evidence, he had found that he was breathless at times,
particularly when going
up or down stairs. He struggles for wind when he goes out walking, which he can
still do for half an hour.
Davis said that he now suffers from anxiety. Little things get him quite upset.
He said that the diagnosis had hit him “like
a tonne of bricks”. He
now loses track of what he is doing and loses track of what he is saying.
Davis was asked about that part of his affidavit where he said that he wanted to
stay home for as long as possible. This is something
which he has discussed with
his wife Gwen. They built the house in which they live in 1978. Both husband and
wife worked on building
the house. They still have great pride in the house, not
only because they built it, but also because they brought up their family
Mr Davis said that he loves the house and so does his wife. Mr Davis said that
his wife was determined to stay there and was
determined to look after him for
as long as she could.
Davis was asked by counsel to describe how he felt about the future. He said
that he had lost a lot of the things he was looking
forward to doing. This was
not only motorcycling and the Men’s Shed, but he had a passion for hiking
which he can no longer
cross-examination Mr Davis was asked firstly about his sleep apnoea. He said
that he had consulted doctors for sleep apnoea but
that using a machine had not
really helped him.
Davis was asked about his motorcycle accident in 2015. He ran off the road in
fog having swerved to avoid a wombat. He had an operation
which resulted in a
lumbar fusion. His 1300cc Honda motorcycle was written off in that accident. In
2016 Mr Davis bought another
motorcycle, a Honda 650cc bike (“the little
Honda”). With the little Honda Mr Davis went back to riding with the
Club. He became a ride leader. Until two months prior to the trial, Mr
Davis had ridden his motorcycle once a week, as a ride leader.
It was a day
ride, where the group rode together in the morning, had a break somewhere for
lunch, and rode home a different way.
Mr Davis said that he was not riding at
present as he had lost confidence in his ability to ride. He had not ridden for
two months.
cross-examination Mr Davis said that before his diagnosis he was going to the
Men’s Shed four times a week. He could not
go five days, as he was riding
his bike on the fifth day. Mr Davis said that it was a very popular Men’s
Shed, with about 95
members. On a good day 25 men would turn up to the shed. He
now gets to the shed once a week.
Davis was asked about being diagnosed with depression in 2017. He admitted that
this was so, and he related his depression to some
problems he had in the
business at that time. He said that he had never suffered from any sort of
anxiety before his diagnosis.
Evidence of Mrs Davis
evidence-in-chief of Mrs Davis is contained in her affidavit sworn on 11 January
2024 (PX 1, p 11). The couple were married in
1970. Mrs Davis was born in 1951
and is presently 72 years of age.
Davis said that she first noticed her husband slowing down and becoming short of
breath in about 2020. He was also going for fewer
walks than usual and she
noticed he was puffing and needed to sit down and rest after a walk. Her
affidavit corroborates the evidence
of Mr Davis concerning his medical
Davis said that her husband has always been an active person. She regarded him
as fit, strong and healthy before he was diagnosed
with mesothelioma. Mrs Davis
and her husband had built two homes together and before the mesothelioma Mr
Davis was able to manage
very heavy hands-on tasks. She and her husband were
enjoying living an active and busy lifestyle.
Davis said that since the diagnosis her husband has lost a lot of energy. She
can hear him breathing heavily and sees him puffing
when he walks too far or up
stairs. She has observed him to be breathless when bending over. She knows that
he has lost his appetite
and his weight has reduced by about 10kg. Mrs Davis
corroborated the evidence of her husband regarding involvement in the
Shed and the Ulysses Club.
Davis retired in 2020 and she and her husband had plans to travel around
Australia together. Those plans have since been abandoned.
Davis has observed that her husband spends a lot more time reading and looking
into space rather than getting out and about in
the community and doing tasks
around the house. She said:
“It is hard watching him slowly lose his energy. I can see him
deteriorating in front of me. I can see that he is sad and that
he is carrying
the burden of the terminal diagnosis on his mind.”
Davis corroborated the evidence of her husband regarding the work he used to do
around the house, and the things that he can now
do. She said:
“I want to help and assist Barry as best I can. However, as time goes on
and we need help with Barry we will have to pay for
her oral evidence-in-chief Mrs Davis said that prior to her husband’s
diagnosis with mesothelioma, she had never been concerned
or anxiety from which he had suffered. She said that he did suffer depression in
2017 but that he made a recovery
from that episode.
Davis said that her husband’s life was his family, and as husband and wife
they had enjoyed being together during their
53-year marriage. Mrs Davis said
that the motorcycle was her husband’s “pride and joy”. She
also said that he loved
going to the Men’s Shed “because he’s
a very talented man”. Mrs Davis described how Mr Davis had made most
the furniture in their home and had become a wood carver since his retirement.
Davis said that since the diagnosis of mesothelioma, her husband had become very
withdrawn. He sometimes got agitated with her,
and while she found this
difficult, she understood that it was a result of his disease and his reaction
cross-examination Mrs Davis said that her husband had always enjoyed being busy
and “was always on a mission to keep himself
occupied”. Mrs Davis
said that her husband was not a person to wallow and feel sorry for himself.
Neither of them are.
Davis was cross-examined about past episodes of depression. She described her
husband as a quiet man and a proud man. She said
that he did have short periods
of time feeling uncomfortable about something, but that everyone had had those
feelings. Mrs Davis
said that her husband was a sensitive man who valued
fairness and honesty. He was proud of who he was and had always taken pride
being a good husband and father. Mrs Davis confirmed that she and her husband
took pride in what they had achieved and the home
they had built. She said that
she keeps the home nice because “I like to see people come and feel at
Credibility of Mr and Mrs Davis
have no hesitation in accepting everything said by Mr and Mrs Davis as the
unadorned truth. There was no submission to the contrary
made by the
Expert Evidence
Deller is a respiratory and sleep physician who was first consulted by Mr Davis
in July 2022 for sleep-related issues. In May 2023
Dr Deller saw Mr Davis for
respiratory-related concerns which led to a diagnosis of mesothelioma. Dr Deller
offered the opinion in
a report dated 28 July 2023 (PX 1, p 51) that Mr Davis
had a life expectancy of less than 18 months. He estimated that Mr Davis would
remain at a low dependency level for a further 9-12 months, before experiencing
moderate dependency for 4-6 months, high dependency
for 1-2 months, and complete
dependency for a couple of weeks or less before his death.
Deller provided estimates of the cost of medical care based on an estimated
survival of less than 18 months. I will return to the
precise figures after
dealing with the opinion of other medico-legal experts discussed below.
was no cross-examination of Dr Deller.
Horwood is a medical oncologist who was first consulted by Mr Davis in July
2023. In a report dated 6 December 2023 (PX 1, p 64)
Dr Horwood said that Mr
Davis has been diagnosed with epithelioid mesothelioma. Dr Horwood thought that
because the malignancy was
of a lower grade there was no indication at the
present time for active treatment. In his report dated 6 July 2023 Dr Horwood
that the life expectancy was in the order of 18 months to 2 years. He
thought at that time that Mr Davis would have a low level of
dependency for 12
months, then have 6 months of moderate dependency, 3 to 4 months of high
dependency and 1 to 2 weeks of complete
dependency before his ultimate death.
Horwood provided a second report which is dated 31 January 2024 (PX 6). He
considered the reports of Professor Fox dated 20 January
2024 and Mr Stephen
Hoey, occupational therapist, dated 19 October 2023. Those reports are discussed
further below.
Horwood reported that he saw Mr Davis again on 31 January 2024. A CT scan showed
no significant change compared to a scan performed
in October 2023. There was no
evidence of progression of the pleural-based tumours and no evidence of pleural
effusion. Dr Horwood
said that Mr Davis continued to remain well and was walking
30 minutes per day without stopping. Mr Davis continued to do light gardening
including pruning. He denied any pain. His appetite was good and his weight was
examination on 31 January 2024 Dr Horwood found reduced breath sounds in the
left base of the chest. He thought that Mr Davis was
deteriorating very slowly.
He confirmed the life expectancy opinion given in the report of 6 December 2023
(ie 18-24 months from
6 December 2023).
Horwood agreed with the assessment of Professor Fox, that the mesothelioma was
progressing slowly. For that reason, Dr Horwood
elected not to proceed with
combination immunotherapy. Mr Davis will be reviewed again in May 2024. Dr
Horwood said that he would
start immunotherapy based on symptomatic or
radiologic progression.
Horwood said that he agreed with the contents of Mr Hoey’s report. He
believed that the level of care requirements noted
in each Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG) dependency phase was “reasonable
and appropriate”.
The concept of ECOG is discussed below.
Horwood provided a third report dated 22 January 2024 (PX 8) which confirmed his
compliance with the Expert Witness Code of Conduct.
Horwood gave oral evidence by telephone from Queensland. The connection was very
clear and I was at no disadvantage in hearing
but not seeing Dr Horwood.
his evidence-in-chief Dr Horwood explained that there are several different
be less aggressive and
progresses more slowly than some of the other variants. At the aggressive end of
the spectrum is sarcomatoid
mesothelioma. Patients with epithelioid mesothelioma
live significantly longer than patients with other types of the disease. The
disadvantage of this is that the symptom burden is spread out over a longer time
period. Patients often require more care and support
over an extended period of
time. Dr Horwood said that the symptoms as the mesothelioma progresses will be
the same as the symptoms
suffered by other patients with a different form of the
disease. These future symptoms include breathlessness, chest pain and weight
loss. Patients with mesothelioma develop progressive chest pain related to chest
wall and nerve entrapment. They then require larger
and larger doses of
analgesics, often opioids. There is a general deterioration in appetite and the
patient loses weight and strength.
Eventually the patient becomes bed-bound and
is unable to care for themself.
Horwood explained that he had not commenced immunotherapy treatment, as this
treatment would not cure the condition, but would
only slow the rate of change.
Dr Horwood said that Mr Davis is still functioning, so the treatment would be
commenced at some future
time when there was progression of the disease. Once
immunotherapy was commenced, Dr Horwood hoped that it would continue for
12 months”. The immunotherapy drugs are available on the
PBS system, and thus there would be no cost to Mr Davis in having
treatment. However, the administration of the drugs would require admission to
an oncology day unit every three weeks. The drugs
would be administered
intravenously. There is a day admission fee which is “perhaps
$1,000-$1,200 every time he came along”.
There would also be a medical
supervision fee of $200. Dr Horwood said that Mr Davis would require a CT scan
every three months,
but that once treatment was started the CT scans would
become more frequent. They would then be done every nine weeks to monitor
progress. Each scan would cost about $400.
Horward said that there was a possibility that Mr Davis would require
radiotherapy to help with pain control. Dr Horwood said that
it was undoubted
that Mr Davis would require pain medication in the future. He said that there
were possible side effects of immunotherapy,
which occurred in between 7% and
10% of patients. Complications could include abnormal liver function, diarrhoea,
endocrine or glandular
complications, abnormal thyroid and adrenal function. If
these side effects occurred, they would require treatment. Another possibility
was that Mr Davis might develop very stiff joints or arthritic-type of pain. The
immunotherapy could create an auto immune response
which would lead to
rheumatological complications. Dr Horwood thought that it was certain that Mr
Davis would require oxygen at home.
relation to future hospital admissions, Dr Horwood said that Mr Davis would need
at least four or five hospital admissions.
cross-examination Dr Horwood confirmed that once immunotherapy started it would
continue for up to 12 months. Progress would be
monitored every nine weeks, and
treatment would only be stopped because of side effects or because there was a
clear-cut indication
that the mesothelioma had progressed despite the treatment.
Dr Horwood said that most patients stop immunotherapy within a 12-month
but there were some patients who had it for up to two years.
Horwood was asked whether a patient, who had needed four or five hospital
admissions, would get to the point where they could no
longer be cared for at
be kept under control and
other symptoms managed. He did say that there was a
point of deterioration where the patient would not be able to be managed at
The terminal phase of patients with mesothelioma was usually dealt with in
a hospital or a hospice. Dr Horwood said that some patients
were able to have
their end-of-life care managed at home, but the majority of patients ended up in
hospital or a hospice.
Horwood was specifically asked about the report of Dr Deller dated 28 July 2023.
Attention was drawn to Dr Deller’s estimates
of the periods of time in
which Mr Davis would progress through the ECOG phases. He said that he agreed
with the views of Dr Deller
expressed in the report. There would be low
dependency for 9-12 months, but he expected probably more than 12 months. In
to moderate dependency, Dr Horwood thought that this would be more
likely 6 months rather than 4 months. Generally, he foresaw the
dependency of Mr
Davis as being at the upper end of each range put forward by Dr Deller. Dr
Horwood agreed that this would make the
total life expectancy closer to two
Professor Fox
tendered the report of Professor Fox dated 20 January 2024 (DX 1). Professor Fox
had not seen Mr Davis but had been asked to
comment upon the various reports. He
agreed with the diagnosis of epithelioid mesothelioma. Professor Fox also agreed
that the disease
would progress, and he put forward a total survival time of 18
months. Professor Fox hypothesised that the disease would progress
months, at which time Mr Davis would pass through the ECOG 2 phase for 6-7
months. He would then have 2 months in the ECOG
3 phase and 2 weeks in the ECOG
4 phase. Based on clinical trial evidence, Professor Fox thought that the life
expectancy was 12-18
months. He did not identify any other medical conditions
which would have affected life expectancy.
Fox agreed with the prognosis put forward by Dr Deller. Professor Fox was also
in general agreement with Dr Horwood’s
report. Professor Fox noted that
the median survival time in initial clinical trials of immunotherapy was 18
Fox was asked to comment on the occupational therapy report of Mr Hoey
(discussed below). He noted the report and said “these
are reasonable
figures”. Professor Fox said there was little need for care until the
disease progressed.
Fox was not required for cross-examination.
Occupational Therapy
Stephen Hoey, occupational therapist, provided a report dated 19 October 2023 at
the request of the solicitor for the plaintiff
(PX 1, p 54). He conducted a
telephone interview with Mr Davis on 6 October 2023 but later spoke to Mr Davis
in person. His report
contains photographs of parts of the family home.
Hoey gave an opinion by reference to the ECOG scale. Mr Hoey made assumptions
at different levels of
dependency, by adopting the figures in the report of Dr Deller. To repeat, those
figures were:
(1) ECOG 1 (low dependency) – 9-12 months.
(2) ECOG 2 (moderate dependency) – 4-6 months
(3) ECOG 3 (high dependency) – 1-2 months.
(4) ECOG 4 (complete dependency) – a couple of weeks or less.
Hoey described the activities which a person at various ECOG levels could
perform and those which would have to be performed for
them. There was no
dispute between the experts about the efficacy of the ECOG scale and the
description of the various stages on
Hoey provided an opinion as to the “market cost of providing services to
Mr Davis (expressed as an hourly rate)”. Mr
Hoey said that these rates
were in his view “conservative”. He explained that the National
Disability Insurance Scheme
(NDIS) had created an unprecedented demand for care
workers in the community. Mr Hoey said that demand for care services far
capacity. Mr Hoey has over 26 years of experience in providing support
or case management to persons with medical conditions or disability,
who require
care in their home to assist with activities of daily living. He said that he
had never before seen a situation like
the present, where demand for care is so
high. The experience of Mr Hoey was that people in organisations are now paying
market rate just to secure carers. It was for those reasons that he
said that the rates he put forward in his report were a conservative
view of the
market cost of services.
hourly rates in the report of Mr Hoey were as
Public Holiday
Inactive sleepover
Hoey said that Mr Davis was presently at the ECOG 1, or low dependency, phase.
His needs at the moment are for assistance with
outdoor chores, including lawn,
garden and house maintenance, as well as carrying groceries upstairs. He put the
need at no less
than five hours per week. Lawn or garden services can be sourced
at $55 per hour, and thus the cost of providing five hours per week
market was $275.
the moderate dependency phase (ECOG 2) Mr Davis will require not only outside
assistance, but will also need assistance with indoor
chores including cleaning,
laundry, cooking, and transportation to and from medical appointments. Mr Hoey
put the need at four hours
per day. Using his market rate figures, this results
in a figure of $2,260 per week, on top of the $275 per week for outdoor chores
and maintenance, a total of $2,535 per week. The calculations are set out in par
30 of his report.
the high dependency phase (ECOG 3) Mr Hoey said that Mr Davis would only be
capable of limited self-care, and would be confined
to a bed or chair for more
than 50% of his waking hours. He would be dependent on carers for assistance
with basic tasks such as
showering, dressing or toileting. Assistance would be
required with all domestic chores and transportation to medical appointments.
Davis will need pressure care management including turning in bed or
repositioning in his chair. There would be a need for overnight
assistance with
pain management or toileting.
Davis would need direct care during his waking hours (12-16 hours per day) as
well as the presence of an inactive sleepover carer.
This is defined as a carer
who sleeps within the home, but is available to tend to the patient for up to
two hours per night. His
calculation of the market costs of these services was
$10,010 per week plus $275 for outdoor chores and maintenance, a total of
The calculations are set out in par 32 of his report.
the complete dependency phase (ECOG 4) Mr Hoey said that Mr Davis would be
completely disabled and unable to care for himself,
being totally confined to a
bed or chair. Mr Hoey said that this palliative stage of care can be met in a
hospice setting, but in
his experience many patients prefer to die at home. He
said that this could be managed with proper support and experienced carers.
market cost of providing those services is $13,810 per week plus the $275 for
outdoor chores and maintenance, a total of $14,085.
The calculations are set out
in par 36 of his report.
par 28 of his report Mr Hoey said that the Davis home is on a sloping block with
multiple stairs, which would pose difficulties
for a disabled person. The main
living area is upstairs. Mr Hoey said that Mr Davis will require the following
expenditure on home
modifications:
(1) Installation of an internal chair lift - $11,000.
(2) Outside extendable ramps - $20 per week.
(3) Two suction support bars in the upstairs bathroom - $300.
(4) Anti-slip floor mats in the shower as well as the bathroom floor - $180.
(5) A disability shower handset and wall connection - $185.
(6) Hire of a dual-motor electric lift chair - $65 per week.
(7) Pressure relief cushion - $35 per week.
(8) A lightweight wheelchair for outings - $35 per week.
Hoey also said that to set up the care services and coordinate the hire and
purchase of equipment, as well as the instruction of
carers, would require 10
hours of consultation with an occupational therapist at of cost of $200 per
hour. The total was $2,000.
the high dependency phase Mr Hoey said in pars 33 and 34 of his report that the
following would be required.
(1) If an internal chair lift is installed, then a ShowerBuddy SB1 can be
installed in the upstairs bathroom - $3,100 to purchase
or $110 per week to
(2) If the internal stair access is not installed, then Mr Davis would need to
move to the downstairs bathroom, which will need renovation
at a cost of
(3) Hire of an adjustable hospital bed - $95 per week.
(4) Hire of an alternating air mattress overlay - $80 per week.
(5) Hire of an overbed table - $15 per week.
Hoey provided a second report dated 19 January 2024 (PX 4) which confirmed his
compliance with the Expert Witness Code of Conduct.
Hoey provided a third report dated 5 February 2024 (PX 5) which referred to a
face-to-face interview and examination of Mr Davis
at his home on 31 January
2024. He said that he had now had the benefit of viewing the residence which was
a very large two-storey
garden shed area. His opinion was unchanged as a result of that meeting.
Hoey came from Brisbane and gave evidence in court. He said that he spent over
an hour at the residence looking inside and outside
the home. He spoke to Mr
Davis and Mrs Davis separately but also together. Mr Hoey said that it is the
cornerstone of occupational
therapy to visit people in their homes to understand
the dynamics of the home environment. He was reliant upon medical specialists
to diagnosis and prognosis. The role of an occupational therapist was to look at
the disability that a person may suffer within
their home. Mr Hoey said that he
did not think that a proper opinion could be provided about the nature and
extent of care needs
without speaking to Mr Davis or his wife.
Hoey had been an occupational therapist for almost 28 years. He has been in
private practice in Brisbane for 25 years with a staff
of up to 10 occupational
therapists. He has completed a post-graduate diploma in palliative care and has
seen patients with mesothelioma
at various stages of the course of their
disease. He has seen such patients towards the end of their life. Mr Hoey was
epithelioid mesothelioma patients have a longer life expectancy. He
said that the care and the suffering was something that such
patients went
through for a longer than average period.
Hoey was asked about the hourly rates in his first report. He said that they
were the published rates from the NDIS for home care.
Mr Hoey confirmed that it
was difficult to find carers since the NDIS started. He described this as
follows: “A daily battle
for myself and occupational therapists who work
with me is the ability to source carers full stop, let alone source carers who
appropriate to the disability we’re dealing with”. He confirmed
that in his experience people were paying above the prescribed
rate to obtain
appropriate carers.
Hoey was asked about the opinion of Mr Woolley, the defendant’s
occupational therapist. His report is discussed below. Mr
Woolley had made
reference to a Calvary Care website which referred to a per 24-hour shift rate
of $733.20 Monday to Friday and $953.28
per shift rate for Saturday and Sunday.
Mr Hoey acknowledged that Calvary Care did offer this rate, but he said
a cheaper rate that advocates [sic] for someone with, for
example, more basic needs”. Mr Hoey said that the needs of a person
mesothelioma, who is dying, are far more complex than a generic 24-hour rate can
provide. He said that such care would not meet
the needs of a person with
mesothelioma. Mr Hoey doubted that anyone could be found to do care at the
24-hour rate, when the published
NDIS rates were much higher, and carers were
aware of this and charged accordingly.
Hoey disputed that a mesothelioma patient could obtain 24-hour rate care from
Calvary Care. He also pointed out that Calvary Care
adds fees and charges to the
24-hour rate. Further, that organisation sends an occupational therapist to
determine the appropriate
rate of care. Mr Hoey offered the view that the model
was “not appropriate to a patient with mesothelioma”.
cross-examination Mr Hoey said that patients with mesothelioma have unique
circumstances in their dying stages. Mr Hoey agreed
that if a patient suffered
from mesothelioma they could ring up a care agency and ask someone to come out
to assess whether they
were suitable for 24-hour care at the 24-hour rate. He
confirmed his opinion that appropriate care could only be provided at the
rate set out in his report. He emphasised that these were market rates.
Hoey acknowledged that the report of Mr Woolley did contain hourly rate figures
similar to his own, and the difference between
the reports related to the
proposed Calvary Care 24-hour rate.
cross-examination Mr Hoey said that during his visit to the Davis home, he
walked around the property with Mr Davis and was able
to identify multiple areas
where Mr Davis had been unable to continue with outside work. To date this had
involved getting someone
in to deal with palm trees and large trees that ran
along the fence line which Mr Davis could no longer trim. Some of the work had
simply not been done because Mr Davis could not do it.
Hoey was cross-examined about whether he had discussions with Mr and Mrs Davis
concerning their willingness or desire to install
an internal chair lift. He
said that Mrs Davis said that she was happy with the chair lift he had
suggested. Mr Davis suggested an
alternative of installing a lift.
Counsel for Amaca drew the attention of Mr Davis to that part of his report
where a weekly figure of $13,810 was quoted for
the complete dependency phase.
When it was suggested that Mr Hoey was not familiar with circumstances in which
agencies were quoting
that amount, Mr Hoey said (Tcpt 41/10):
“The agency I consult to, we provide quotes of that amount on a weekly
defendant tendered the report of Mr Woolley dated 13 January 2024 (DX 2). Mr
Woolley is an occupational therapist and also a registered
nurse. Mr Woolley
acknowledged that his report was prepared without an assessment of Mr Davis. Mr
Woolley is based in Victoria. Mr
Woolley also used the ECOG performance
Woolley assumed that Mr Davis would progress through the ECOG scale over a
12-month period. He based this upon a study published
in a medical journal
concerning the median survival rate for mesothelioma, which was just less than
12 months. I say immediately
that I reject this as a valid assumption in this
case. There is evidence from Dr Deller and Dr Horwood, both treating doctors of
Mr Davis, who posit an 18-24-month life expectancy. Professor Fox agrees with
them. That having been said, the figures provided by
Mr Woolley, if otherwise
accepted, can be adjusted for an appropriate longer life expectancy.
Woolley disagreed with the opinion of Dr Hoey that care in the complete
dependency phase had to be provided at the hourly rates
set out. Mr Woolley said
that there was a commercial care model which provides 8 hours of active care and
16 hours of inactive care
per day for clients who need 24-hour care. In a
footnote he cited the Calvary Care website with the figures of $733.20 per shift
Monday to Friday and $953.28 per shift Saturday and Sunday.
fee schedule of Calvary Care, taken from the website, was tendered as DX 4. It
does set out these figures, describing them as
“24-Hour Care (Includes
eight hours of active support)”. The same website also refers to a package
management fee per
fortnight and a case management fee per fortnight.
garden and handyman assistance, Mr Woolley offered the opinion that two hours of
weekly commercial garden and handyman assistance
would be sufficient to mow
lawns, whipper snip edges, maintain the gardens, complete home maintenance tasks
and clean the outdoor
areas. There was no indication that Mr Woolley took into
account the size or scale of the home, and in this regard I accept the evidence
of Mr Hoey who had the benefit of a home visit and an interview with Mr and Mrs
Davis. In any event, I would regard two hours per
week to perform all of those
tasks in a suburban home as unrealistic.
relation to home modifications Mr Woolley agreed with the recommendations of Mr
Hoey for an internal chair lift, suction grab rails
for the bathroom and a
disability shower handset.
Woolley also said that Mr Davis would need 15 items of assistive equipment,
detailed in Section 10 of his report. Mr Woolley said
that there would need to
be 8 hours of occupational therapist reviews conducted over a 12-month
the palliative care stage, Mr Woolley divided the time up into 15 weeks and a
final 9 weeks. In the first 15 weeks he offered
the opinion that Mr Davis would
need a personal care attendant for two hours per day and a registered nurse for
one hour per week.
For the later period of 9 weeks, Mr Woolley offered the
opinion that Mr Davis would need a personal care attendant of four hours
and a registered nurse for one hour three times per week. For the final two
weeks of life Mr Woolley said that the cost of
hospital palliative care was
$1,663.50 per day. This equates to $11,644.50 per week, as opposed to Mr
Hoey’s figure of $13,810
for Mr Davis to be cared for at home just before
the last two weeks of life, if it were provided in home, Mr Woolley said that Mr
Davis would need a personal care attendant 24
hours per day and a registered
nurse for two hours per day. The personal care attendant for 24 hours per day
was costed at the Calvary
Care rates cited in the report.
Woolley gave evidence by AVL from Melbourne. The connection was very clear and I
had no difficulty in seeing and hearing Mr Woolley.
Counsel were not at a
disadvantage in conducting this part of the case by AVL.
oral evidence-in-chief Mr Woolley confirmed that he had assumed a 12-month life
expectancy, of which the last six months would
require palliative care.
Woolley said that by the time a patient got to the 24-hour care per day phase,
there would need to be active care for eight hours
and the carer would then be
in the house but inactive. He said this included an “overnight
sleepover”. These sleepovers
included the provision of two hours of active
care, to assist with toileting, pressure area care, hydration and pain relief. A
would be in the residence all the time. There may be two or three shifts
over the 24 hours but there would be someone there at all
times to assist the
patient. If a patient needed help while the carer was on an inactive sleepover,
a family member could rouse the
carer to provide services.
Woolley was asked about whether end-of-life care could be provided at home, and
he said that this depended on the individual and
the families. Mr Woolley said
that it could be done if services were in place to allow the patient to have a
dignified passing. Mr
Woolley said that if an agency offered a 24-hour shift
with an overnight sleepover, and more than two hours care was required, then
hourly rate would be applied to the active care that was provided. If it was
required, a second person might provide additional
assistance.
General Damages
I accept the evidence of Mr Davis and his wife, and because there is no dispute
between the medical specialists, I make the
following findings of fact in
relation to general damages:
(1) Mr Davis first noted symptoms in 2020 when he became short of breath.
(2) Mr Davis consulted his GP in July 2021 and was referred to a cardiologist.
(3) In November 2022 Mr Davis was walking up a hill when he experienced chest
pain which was intense.
(4) In April 2023 Mr Davis saw his GP due to a chronic cough and wheezing.
(5) In April 2023 a chest x-ray and CT scan showed a left lung opacity and
pleural effusion. Mr Davis commenced seeing Dr Deller,
a respiratory
specialist.
(6) In May 2023 Mr Davis had 1,250ml of fluid drained by means of a large needle
inserted into his lungs from his back.
(7) In June 2023 Mr Davis had a left VATS and pleurodesis performed. He was in
intense pain after that surgery.
(8) In July 2023 Mr Davis was informed by Dr Deller that a biopsy taken during
the hospital admission in June 2023 showed that he
had epithelioid mesothelioma.
He was advised that the condition was terminal.
(9) Mr Davis first consulted Dr Horwood, oncologist, in July 2023. Dr Horwood
discussed the prospect of future immunotherapy but
decided to simply observe the
(10) Mr Davis has continued to consult Dr Horwood and has had repeat CT scans.
(11) Before he was diagnosed with mesothelioma, Mr Davis was living an active
and busy lifestyle. While he had medical conditions
in the past, the reality is
that he was busily engaged five days a week until he fell unwell. Four of those
days he spent as a captain
at the Men’s Shed at Ashmore and on the fifth
day he rode his motorcycle with the Ulysses Club.
(12) In addition, Mr Davis performed all of the outside work at his home,
including gardening work and home maintenance.
(13) Mr and Mrs Davis had an active lifestyle, which included walking, going on
holidays and hiking.
(14) Mr Davis has lost his confidence about motorcycle riding and no longer
participates in this activity, which was his great passion.
(15) He only goes to the Men’s Shed on occasions.
(16) Mr Davis still walks twice a week for 30 minutes but feels very puffed
during and after his walks.
(17) Mr Davis has been married to his wife Gwen for 53 years. He was looking
forward to enjoying his retired years with his family
and his wife.
(18) Mr Davis now regards his future as “bleak” and the thought of
leaving his wife behind “is sometimes too much
for me to bear”.
(19) Mr Davis has understood since his diagnosis that he has a terminal disease,
that his symptoms will progress and that he will
deteriorate, eventually dying
from his condition.
(20) Mr Davis has been independent his whole life and does not want to be a
burden to his wife and others. He expressed the wish
to pay for any assistance
he needs as his condition progresses.
must take into account the plaintiff’s age in coming to an appropriate
figure for general damages. In
NSW Insurance Ministerial Corporation v
(1993) 18 MVR 375
, Meagher JA said (in the context of a motor vehicle
accident damages claim):
“It must also be remembered that the accident has destroyed the entire
quality of the plaintiff’s remaining years at
a time when those years were
at their sweetest.”
phrase sums up precisely what has happened to Mr Davis as a result of the
negligence of the defendant, leading to Mr Davis contracting
the fatal disease
of mesothelioma, at a time when he was enjoying his life to the fullest.
my view an appropriate figure for general damages is
Interest on Past General Damages
worst is yet to come for Mr Davis. I will allow interest on $200,000 for past
general damages at 2% per annum. The calculation
is: $200,000 x 2% x 3.5 years =
Loss of Expectation of Life
plaintiff submitted that the appropriate figure was $6,500 and the defendant
submitted $5,000.
Davis is presently 82 years of age. The prediction of Dr Horwood last December
was that Mr Davis will survive for another 18 months
to two years. Having regard
to the opinion of Dr Horwood concerning the very slow progress to date of the
disease, I find that the
life expectancy of Mr Davis will be to December 2025.
By then he will be 84 and 7 months. The medium life expectancy tables for an
84-year-old male show a life expectancy of 7.08 years. I will allow the
plaintiff’s figure of $6,500 for this head of damages.
Out-of-Pocket Expenses
parties agreed that the appropriate figure for past out-of-pocket expenses is
$23,550.29.
Future Out-of-Pocket Expenses
evidence in support of future medical and treatment expenses comes from the
report of Dr Deller, as modified by the opinion of
Dr Horwood, oncologist,
regarding immunotherapy and future progress. There was a measure of agreement on
some of the items claimed
for future out-of-pocket expenses (see MFI 2 and MFI
3, Schedule B).
find that the plaintiff is entitled to the following items for future medical
and treatment
GP review monthly for 18 months
Hospitalisation (four times for a week each time)
CT scans (four scans)
Chest x-ray (six x-rays)
Palliative radiation – this may not be necessary, unless it is to
treat a side effect of immunotherapy. The figure of $5,000
for such radiation is
claimed, and given that side effects occur in 7%-10% of immunotherapy patients
(as per Dr Horwood) I allow
the figure of $500
Immunotherapy (every three weeks for a period of 12 months at a cost of
$1,400 per session, which includes the consultation fee for
Dr Horwood)
Medications including analgesia
Modifications, Aids and Equipment
accept the opinion of Mr Hoey, the occupational therapist, about the equipment
needed and the modifications required to the house
of Mr Davis. Mr Hoey had the
advantage of going to the house and speaking to Mr and Mrs Davis. The main
expense is the installation
of an indoor chair lift at a cost of $11,000. Mr
Hoey specifically raised this with both Mr and Mrs Davis, and they were not only
willing to have their house modified in this way but indicated that they wanted
such a modification to be made.
for the plaintiff set out in MFI 3 Schedule C, the particular items for which a
claim was made. I do not allow the claim for
$23,000 for bathroom modifications,
as that was very much an alternative to the installation of an indoor chair lift
to convey Mr
Davis to the upstairs living area and bathroom. In relation to the
items which can be hired, I accept the calculations made by counsel
Schedule C.
find that the plaintiff is entitled to the following modifications, aids and
Occupational therapy consultation
Indoor chair lift
Suction support bars
Anti-slip floor mats
Disability shower handset and wall connection
Outside ramps (hire)
Wheelchair (hire)
Electric lift chair (hire)
Pressure relief cushion (hire)
Shower stool
Over-toilet frame
Future Care
have already indicated that I accept the evidence of Mr and Mrs Davis that when
Mr Davis needs care in the future, it should be
provided by others. Both in
South Australia and Queensland the law provides that care is to be assessed at
commercial rates.
evidence of the two occupational therapists has been reviewed above. I accept
the opinion of Mr Hoey and reject the opinion of
Mr Woolley for the following
(1) Mr Hoey visited the Davis home and spoke to Mr and Mrs Davis. Mr Hoey
described such a visit as “the cornerstone of occupational
so that the therapist can understand the dynamics of the home environment. Mr
Woolley did not have the advantage
of a home visit.
(2) The hourly rates quoted by both occupational therapists were very similar. I
accept the rates quoted by Mr Hoey, as these are
published rates from the NDIS
for home care.
(3) Mr Hoey gave evidence that in his considerable experience, the NDIS had
created an enormous need for carers, and the shortage
of such workers meant that
people were paying above the NDIS rates to obtain home care. I accept the
evidence of Mr Hoey when he
described his hourly rates as
“conservative”.
(4) I accept the evidence of Mr Hoey that while Calvary Care offers a 24-hour
rate (something which Mr Woolley only knew from searching
a website), a 24-hour
rate is not suitable for someone with the complex needs of a mesothelioma
patient. I accept the evidence of
Mr Hoey that this cheaper rate is for someone
with more basic needs.
(5) In any event, Calvary Care adds fees and charges to its 24-hour rate and
sends an occupational therapist out to the home to assess
whether the patient is
suitable at all for the 24-hour rate of care. There was no indication in the
report of Mr Woolley that he
knew what the processes and procedures were of
Calvary Care in this regard, and no opinion as to whether such occupational
might find that the 24-hour rate was suitable for Mr Davis as he
deteriorates.
(6) Mr Hoey gave evidence in cross-examination that his weekly figure of $13,810
for the complete dependency phase came from his
experience, which included
providing “quotes of that amount on a weekly basis”.
(7) The figure of two hours a day for the first 15 weeks of the palliative care
phase, and four hours per day for the last nine weeks
of the palliative care
phase, seem to me to be unrealistic. These were the figures put forward by Mr
Woolley. Further, he suggested
that in the last two weeks of life, there could
be active care for eight hours a day and the carer would then be inactive. In
regard I accept the evidence of Mr Hoey that eight hours of active care
would be insufficient to meet the needs of a person who was
in the last two
weeks of life. In any event, the prescription of Mr Woolley required someone
else to be in the house to rouse the
carer during the inactive hours if care was
required. In my view that is a wholly unsatisfactory way of providing care to a
in the last few weeks of life.
for the plaintiff set out his calculations for future care in MFI 3, Schedule E.
I accept this approach. It accords with:
(1) My finding above that the life expectancy of Mr Davis is two years,
calculated from December 2023.
(2) The opinion of Dr Horwood regarding immunotherapy and its likely benefits
for Mr Davis.
(3) My acceptance of the opinion of Mr Hoey over the opinion of Mr Woolley.
the calculations made in MFI 3, Schedule E, I have added an extra column using a
5% deferral figure, to reflect the law of Queensland.
My calculations are set
out in the following
(3% Deferral)
(5% Deferral)
09.02.2024 -31.12.2024
(47 weeks approx.)
Outdoor chores
01.01.2025 -14.07.2025
ECOG2 Indoor chores
$2,260.00 X 28 weeks x 0.959 (3% discount multiplier for 1.4 years)
= $60,685.52
$2,260.00 X 28 weeks x 0.934 (5% discount multiplier for 1.4 years)
= $59,103.52
1.01.2025 -14.07.2025
ECOG2 Outdoor chores
$275.00 X 28 weeks x 0.959 (3% discount multiplier for 1.4 years)
= $7,384.30
$275.00 X 28 weeks x 0.934 (5% discount multiplier for 1.4 years)
= $7,191.80
15.07.2025-17.11.2025
Inactive sleepover carer
2 hours during the night
7 nights at $300.00 per night=
$2,100.00x18 weeks x 0.949 (3% discount multiplier for 1.77 years)
= $35,872.20
$2,100.00x18 weeks x 0.917 (5% discount multiplier for 1.77 years)
= $34,662.60
15.07.2025-17.11.2025
Direct care during the waking hours
12 to 16 hours per day
$7,910.00 X 18 weeks x 0.949 (3% discount multiplier for 1.77 years)
= $135,118.62
$7,910.00 X 18 weeks x 0.917 (5% discount multiplier for 1.77 years)
= $130,562.46
15.07.2025- 17.11.2025
ECOG3 Outdoor maintenance
$275.00 X 18 weeks x 0.949 (3% discount multiplier for 1.77 years)
= $4,697.55
$275.00 X 18 weeks x 0.917 (5% discount multiplier for 1.77 years)
= $4,539.15
18.11.2025-01.12.2025
ECOG4 Around the clock care
Around the clock care
$13,810.00 X 2 weeks x 0.948 (3% discount multiplier for 1.81 years)
= $26,183.76
$13,810.00 X 2 weeks x 0.916 (5% discount multiplier for 1.81 years)
= $25,299.92
18.11.2025 -01.12.2025
Outdoor maintenance
$275.00 X 2 weeks x 0.948 (3% discount multiplier for 1.81 years)
$275.00 X 2 weeks x 0.916 (5% discount multiplier for 1.81 years)
$283,388.35
$274,788.25
Conclusion and Orders
award the following heads of damage to Mr Davis, assessed under the law of South
Head of Damage
General Damages
$475,000.00
Interest on Past General Damages
Loss of Expectation of Life
Past Out-of-Pocket Expenses
Future Treatment and Medical Expenses
Modification, Aids and Equipment
Future Care
$283,388.35
$897,020.64
award the following heads of damage to Mr Davis, assessed under the law of
Queensland:
Head of Damage
General Damages
$475,000.00
Interest on Past General Damages
Loss of Expectation of Life
Past Out-of-Pocket Expenses
Future Treatment and Medical Expenses
Modification, Aids and Equipment
Future Care
$274,788.25
$888,420.54
Davis is entitled to a single judgment for the higher of these two totals.
orders are:
(1) Judgment for the plaintiff against the defendant for $897,020.64.
(2) Order the defendant to pay the plaintiff’s costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (462 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter