URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/54.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Baker v Commissioner of Police NSW Police Force (GD) [2013] NSWADTAP 54 (10 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Baker v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force (GD)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 54
Hearing Date(s):
3 December 2013
Decision Date:
10 December 2013
Appeal Panel - Internal
Judge K P O'Connor, President
P Molony, Judicial Member
Non-judicial Member
Appeal dismissed
Catchwords:
FIREARMS LICENSING - revocation on ground of public interest - affirmed by
Tribunal - licensee declined to be cross-examined - procedural
adequacy of Tribunal's explanation - no error - leave to extend to merits
refused - appeal dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Administrative Decisions
Tribunal Rules 1998
Firearms Act 1996
Firearms Regulation 2006
Cases Cited:
Baker v Attorney General for New South Wales
[2013] NSWCA 329
New South Wales Police
[2013] NSWSC 57
Principal judgment
Patricia Baker (Appellant)
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
(Respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
Mr C Baker (Appellant's agent)
Mr J Mattson, Bartier Perry
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
General Division
- Date of Decision:
22 August 2013
- Citation:
Baker v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2013] NSWADT 190
- Court File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
17 February 2012 the Commissioner of Police, as administrator of the
(the Act), revoked the AB firearms licence first issued to Patricia
Mae Baker in June 2003, and subsequently renewed. The Commissioner's
decision to
revoke the licence had as its background a police visit on the evening of 18
November 2011 to a farm property at Quirindi
that Mrs Baker occupies with her
husband, Cyril Brett Baker.
purpose of the visit was to execute an arrest warrant on Mr Baker. The
Commissioner's decision to take action in respect of Mrs
Baker's licence flowed
from concerns over answers given by Mrs Baker, as a person licensed to possess
firearms, to questions as to
whether there were any firearms in the home that
were asked by the attending police before they entered the home.
Commissioner's decision relied on two separate statutory grounds: that Mrs Baker
might not be able to personally exercise continuous
and responsible control over
the firearms because of her living and domestic circumstances: the discretion
of the Act; and that it was not in the public
interest for Mrs Baker to continue to hold a licence: the discretion given by
, read in conjunction with cl 19 of the
Firearms Regulation
Baker applied for review. The Tribunal affirmed the Commissioner's decision on
the second of these grounds (that it would not
be in the public interest for her
to continue to hold a licence in the circumstances). The Tribunal did not
consider it necessary
to address the other ground, but did find that she did not
understand her obligations as a licensee.
Baker now appeals. An appeal may be made on a 'question of law', and an appeal
may with the leave of the Appeal Panel be extended
to the merits:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
. Both parties
have filed written submissions.
the appeal hearing, Mr Baker announced his appearance of behalf of Mrs Baker. He
was informed that as a non-lawyer he must obtain
the Appeal Panel's leave to
appear. Mrs Baker had appeared before the Tribunal in person without any
assistance.
Baker's attention was drawn to s 71 of the ADT Act, and
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Rules 1998
. Mr Mattson, for the
Commissioner, opposed leave on the ground that Mr Baker was implicated in the
events of 18 November 2011, and
might not be expected therefore to bring the
detachment to the matter to be expected of a representative. He also expressed
that he might use the opportunity to provide a platform for promoting
his own views and not confine himself to the issues relevant
to the appeal. With
some hesitation, the Appeal Panel granted Mr Baker leave, but warned him that
the Panel had the power to revoke
leave at any time. The hearing then
Baker's opening points challenged the legitimacy of the proceedings and
functionaries connected to the proceedings. So, for example,
he questioned the
Tribunal's competence to deal with the appeal on the ground that those members
whose appointments were made by
the Governor-in-council (in this instance the
presiding member, the President) were invalid because the Governor's own
appointment
was invalid. He also questioned the Tribunal's competence to sit on
the ground that the tribunal was not a 'court' and on the ground
that it did not
have a jury to decide matters of fact, citing provisions of the Commonwealth
Constitution. Similar submissions were
recently addressed by the Supreme Court
in a case where Mr Baker was a party. Mr Baker's submissions were rejected. The
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal is bound by the decisions of the Supreme
Court, and there is nothing in the statutory setting of the present case
might require us to question the applicability of the Supreme Court rulings to
the present circumstances: see
Baker v New South Wales Police
NSWSC 57 (Latham
J); on appeal,
Baker v Attorney General for New South
[2013] NSWCA 329 (Basten
, Ward JJA).
Baker also questioned the authority of the Commissioner of Police to act as he
had in this matter. He described the Commissioner
as an employee of the NSW
Police Force. What the significance of that point was - if an accurate way of
describing the employment
status of the Commissioner - is not clear to us.
Commissioner of Police holds a statutory office. Under the
Firearms Act
Commissioner is vested with statutory responsibility to administer the firearms
licensing scheme, and exercise the statutory
powers vested in him. As a
practical matter, these powers are discharged by authorised officers acting
under delegation.
Baker then turned to the reasoning of the Tribunal in relation to the merits of
his wife's case. He provided (from the bar table)
his version of what happened
on the evening of 18 November 2011. This is, of course, not proper practice on
the part of a person
appearing as a representative of a party. This was the
possibility that Mr Mattson had anticipated in his initial objection. In the
interests of expedition, the Appeal Panel did not intervene to consider whether
to revoke his leave to appear. Mr Mattson, in opposing
any consideration being
given to what Mr Baker had to say, noted, properly, that he did not give
evidence at the Tribunal below and
could have been called by Mrs Baker on that
one point that Mr Baker raised that, in our view, warrants closer attention
concerned procedural fairness. He noted that the Tribunal
had preferred the
account given by the two attending police as to the conduct of Mrs Baker on the
night in question over the account
given by Mrs Baker. He noted that the
Tribunal in its reasons had referred adversely to Mrs Baker's decision not to
submit to cross-examination
on the written statement of evidence she had filed.
The police officers had given oral evidence and submitted to cross-examination.
The Tribunal had the opportunity to ask questions.
Baker submitted that Mrs Baker had not been fairly dealt with in relation to the
implications for her case that flowed from her
decision not to submit herself to
cross-examination. He submitted that the Tribunal had not explained to her the
possible consequences
of her electing to take that course. Section 73(4) of the
ADT Act places some obligations on members to assist parties in making
decisions in relation to the conduct of their case. It provides:
(4) The Tribunal is to take such measures as are reasonably
practicable:
(a) to ensure that the parties to the proceedings before it understand the
nature of the assertions made in the proceedings and the
legal implications of
those assertions, and
(b) if requested to do so-to explain to the parties any aspect of the
procedure of the Tribunal, or any decision or ruling made by
the Tribunal, that
relates to the proceedings, and
(c) to ensure that the parties have the fullest opportunity practicable to be
heard or otherwise have their submissions considered
in the proceedings.
reply Mr Mattson referred to Mrs Baker's level of education (she has had a long
career as a high school teacher), the point as
we understand it being that she
is likely to have made a considered decision on this matter. Further he referred
to relevant passages
from the transcript which he had typed from the cassette
(sic) tape of the Tribunal hearing which was held at Tamworth.
our experience, it is most unusual for a licensee not to give oral evidence at a
hearing relating to the loss of their licence
on discretionary grounds.
Revocation decisions frequently involve character assessments or other
assessments of a personal nature.
Plainly, direct evidence from the licensee is
this case the Commissioner had put in issue Mrs Baker's ability to maintain
personal control of the firearms she was authorised
to possess, influenced by
the domestic violence incidents to which the Tribunal's reasons refer in greater
detail, and by the possible
influence her husband might have over her in
relation to the keeping and use of those weapons. These are concerns of a very
nature where direct evidence from the licensee might have been
have reviewed the transcript. We are satisfied that the Tribunal member raised
in an appropriate way with Mrs Baker the possible
consequences of her
other points made in the grounds of appeal, spread over 28 points, and in the
subsequent written submissions (14 pages), mainly
debate the way the Tribunal
dealt with the evidence, and put in issue some factual conclusions, and its
overall exercise of discretion.
are no matters of law raised by the appeal which, in our opinion, reveal any
error of law on the part of the Tribunal. While
leave may be given to extend an
appeal to the merits without there being any error of law, this is not a case
where any of the disputes
over matters of fact raised by the notice of appeal or
the submissions in support point to a possible injustice of a kind that might
warrant a grant of leave.
Tribunal conducted a hearing that considered closely the evidence of the
visiting police officers. The Tribunal had regard to
the appropriate law, had
regard to all relevant material, and made a decision that was open to it on the
material before it. It gave
weight to the objects of the
Firearms Act
especially its public safety functions.
our view, it had proper regard to the understandable concern of police visiting
a remote property, for the purpose of arresting
a person, that they receive
accurate answers to questions about the presence or otherwise of firearms on the
property, in particular
from a person who was a licensed person with authority
to keep weapons at the property. Further, the setting on that night was one
where the police had to pass by aggressively- expressed 'no trespassing' signs
at the entrance to the property that named a variety
of officials as, in effect,
not welcome including police.
Appeal dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (132 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter