URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/295.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Walker v Wakehurst Golf Club Ltd [2013] NSWADT 295 (20 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Walker v Wakehurst Golf Club Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 295
Hearing Date(s):
10 December 2013
Decision Date:
20 December 2013
Equal Opportunity Division
Magistrate N Hennessy, Deputy President
1. The Respondent's application for the Applicant's complaints of sex
discrimination to be summarily dismissed is refused.
2. The Applicant's
application for costs is refused.
Catchwords:
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION - summary dismissal - registered clubs - sporting
activity - scope of s 34A and s 38 of
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
Interpretation Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Fricke v Corbett Research Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWADT 128
Margan v University
of Technology, Sydney
[2003] NSWADTAP 65
Re Australian Federation of
Construction Contractors; Ex parte Billing
[1986] HCA 74
(1986) 68 ALR 416
Bowling & Citizens Club v Lander
[1984] 2 NSWLR 32
Interlocutory applications
Susan Walker (Applicant)
Wakehurst Golf Club Ltd (Respondent)
Representation
Ms E Raper (Applicant)
Ms C Ronalds SC (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Mary Cunningham (Applicant)
Phillip McLeod, Lawyer (Respondent)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Introduction
Walker, who is a member of Wakehurst Golf Club Ltd, complained that the Club had
discriminated against her on the ground of sex
and victimised her in breach of
Anti-Discrimination Act
(AD Act). The Club has applied to the
Tribunal for Ms Walker's complaints of sex discrimination (but not the complaint
of victimisation)
to be summarily dismissed prior to hearing. The basis for the
Club's application is that the direct discrimination complaints are
misconceived, lacking in substance or fail to disclose a contravention of the AD
Act: AD Act, s 102 and s 92(1)(a)(i) and (ii).
Club makes its application on two bases. The first is that Ms Walker's complaint
under s 34A(2), relating to discrimination on
the ground of sex by a registered
club, cannot be substantiated because that section relates to entitlements of
members of the club
and does not "cover the playing of a game of golf". The
second basis is that Ms Walker's complaint comes within the exemption in
which allows a club to exclude men or women from participation in any single sex
sporting activity.
Club hosts separate women's and men's golfing competitions on Saturdays. Ms
Walker is not complaining about the fact that there
are separate competitions
for men and women. Her complaint is that the competitions are not comparable. In
particular the men's competition
offers certain prizes and awards that are not
offered in the women's competition.
Walker brings her complaints of sex discrimination under both the registered
clubs provision (s 34A) and the 'goods and services'
provision (s 33). Her goods
and services complaint is that the Club breached s 33(1)(a) and (b) of the AD
Act by refusing to provide
her with the service of "scheduling, hosting and
running gendered golf competitions on the weekend" or by providing that service
on certain unfavourable terms. Section 33 states that:
33 Provision of goods and services
(1) It is unlawful for a person who provides, for payment or not, goods or
services to discriminate against another person on the
ground of sex:
(a) by refusing to provide the person with those goods or services, or
(b) in the terms on which he or she provides the person with those goods or
(2) Where a skill is commonly exercised in a different way in relation to men
and women, a person does not contravene subsection (1)
by exercising the skill
in relation to men only, or women only, in accordance with the person's normal
second complaint under the registered clubs provision is that the Club breached
s 34A(2)(a), (b) and (c) of the AD Act.
34A Registered clubs
(2) It is unlawful for a registered club to discriminate against a person who
is a member of a registered club on the ground of sex:
(a) by denying the person access, or limiting the person's access, to any
benefit provided by the registered club,
(b) by depriving the person of membership or varying the terms of the
person's membership, or
(c) by subjecting the person to any other detriment.
exception in s 38 applies to the whole of Part 3 of the AD Act relating to sex
discrimination, including sections 33 and s 34A.
Nothing in this Part renders unlawful the exclusion of persons of the one sex
from participation in any sporting activity not being
the coaching of persons
engaged in any sporting activity, the administration of any sporting activity or
any prescribed sporting
Principles of summary dismissal
discretion to summarily dismiss a complaint is to be exercised with extreme
Fricke v Corbett Research Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWADT 128
2004) at [41] and [42]. The Tribunal must take the applicant's case at its
highest and determine whether, on the basis of
that evidence, he or she could
possibly substantiate the complaint.
Margan v University of Technology, Sydney
[2003] NSWADTAP 65
Panel set out the scope of the summary dismissal power in relation to s 111, the
former summary dismissal provision of
the AD Act. A [10] the Appeal Panel
discussed set out the law where it is submitted that the complaint does not
disclose a contravention
of the AD Act because, for example, of the operation of
an exemption:
10 The failure of the complaint to disclose a contravention of the Act is
analogous to the inherent and/or statutory power of courts
proceedings when the pleadings fail to show a reasonable cause of action. For
example, Part 13, rule 5 of the
Supreme Court Rules 1970
allows the Court to
stay or dismiss proceedings where no reasonable cause of action is disclosed.
The rule gives the Court a discretionary
power to dismiss the plaintiff's case
when it is so weak that to permit the proceedings to go to trial would be
Peter Kent Developments Pty Ltd v Australia & New Zealand Banking
(SC (NSW), Hunt J, 6 May 1980, unreported).
Ritchie's Supreme
Court Procedure NSW
(Peter Taylor SC ed, Butterworths 1984) notes at 2325
that "The test to be applied has variously been described as whether the matter
is `so obviously untenable that it cannot possibly succeed', `manifestly
groundless', `so manifestly faulty that it does not admit
of argument', one
which `the court is satisfied cannot succeed', one where under no possibility
can there be a good cause of action'",
or one which `would involve useless
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Pannizutti v Trask
Rajski v Powell
(1987) 11 NSWLR 522
v Rocla Concrete Pipes Ltd
[1982] 2 NSWLR 937
Complaint under s 34A - registered clubs
Club's first submission is that s 34A(2) does not cover the playing of the game
of golf. The sole focus of that provision is on
categories of membership.
According to the respondent, the way the Club organises its competitions is a
matter for the Club. As long
as the capacity to vote and run for the board is
gender neutral, then the AD Act has no application.
1 June 1981, the AD Act was amended to make certain conduct by registered clubs
unlawful. When introducing the amendments the then
Premier, Mr Wran QC,
discussed the effect of the amendments on rules about membership of clubs and
access to facilities. He went
on to say that the amendments do not affect games
like golf and bowls being played according to different rules for men and women.
The then Premier then tabled a Guide to the amendments. While the Guide has no
legislative status it is a type of 'extrinsic material'
Interpretation Act
Interpretation Act
) and can be taken into
account in certain circumstances.
Guide states, in part, that the amendments, "will not affect sporting activities
or competitions organized for persons of the
one sex." The Guide goes on to
state, in relation to golf clubs, that ". . . if full members of both sexes
desired to take part in
weekend play then the club would have to allocate a fair
and reasonable period of time for full members of both sexes to use the
Ronalds SC submitted that the use of extrinsic material, such as Second Reading
Speeches and the Guide is warranted in this case.
Ms Raper, representing Ms
Walker, disagreed.
Interpretation Act
governs the use of extrinsic material. Where
the provision under consideration is clear, extrinsic material may only be used
the ordinary meaning: Pearce DC & Geddes RS, Statutory
Interpretation in Australia (7th ed) at [3.17] and
Re Australian Federation
of Construction Contractors; Ex parte Billing
[1986] HCA 74
(1986) 68 ALR 416
ordinary meaning is clear in this case.
Section 34A
applies to members and those
who wish to be members of registered clubs. It is a broad provision which makes
certain conduct unlawful
including by denying the person access, or limiting the
person's access, to any benefit provided by the registered club and subjecting
member to "any other detriment". There is no basis for concluding that a benefit
or detriment cannot relate to the type and level
of prizes or awards available
when participating in sporting activities. Indeed,
addresses the
situation separate benefits are provided to men and women:
(4) Nothing in subsection (1) (paragraph (a) excepted) or subsection (2)
renders unlawful discrimination by a registered club against
a person on the
ground of sex if the discrimination occurs in relation to the use or enjoyment
of any benefit provided by the registered
club where:
(a) it is not practicable for the benefit to be used or enjoyed:
(i) simultaneously, or
(ii) to the same extent,
by both men and women, and
(b) either:
(i) the same, or an equivalent, benefit is provided for the use of men and
women separately from each other, or
(ii) men and women are each entitled to a fair and reasonable proportion of
the use and enjoyment of the benefit.
(5) In determining any matter relating to the application of subsection (4),
regard shall be had to:
(a) the purposes for which the registered club is established,
(b) the membership of the registered club, including any class or type of
membership,
(c) the nature of the benefits provided by the registered club,
(d) the opportunities for the use and enjoyment of those benefits by men and
(e) any other relevant circumstance.
any case, the extrinsic material does not suggest otherwise. The Guide says that
the amendments, "will not affect sporting activities
or competitions organized
for persons of the one sex." A club is obliged to "allocate a fair and
reasonable period of time for full
members of both sexes to use the course." It
follows from that comment that
does not exclude the Club being equitable
in terms of prizes and awards for competitions for both men and women.
to the Club's submission,
does not relate exclusively to categories of
membership. It also includes denying or limiting a person's access to any
benefit provided
by the Club and subjecting a member to "any other detriment".
One of the benefits provided by the Club is access to golfing competitions
to the prizes awarded in those competitions. For that reason I do not accept the
Club's submission that the way the Club organises
its golf competitions is
solely a matter for the Club. The Club's application to summarily dismiss Ms
Walker's complaint on the basis
that it does not come within the terms of
is refused.
Exemption in
second basis on which the respondent applied for the complaints of sex
discrimination to be dismissed was that
provides an exemption in relation
to Ms Walker's complaints under both
three critical terms in
are "sporting activity", "participation in" and
"exclusion". There is no dispute that golf is a sporting activity and that many
competitions include the awarding of medals and prizes.
Participation
is defined in the Macquarie Dictionary, 6th edition at p 1217 relevantly
The act of fact of participating, a taking part, as in some action or
phrase "participation in any sporting activity" in this case means the
participation in a gendered golf competition. The Club
accepts that when playing
competition golf on a Saturday, Ms Walker is 'participating in' a sporting
third term is "exclusion" which is defined in the Macquarie Dictionary
relevantly as:
To shut or keep out; prevent the entrance of; to shut out from consideration,
privilege, etc; to expel and keep out; thrust out; eject.
parties agree that
authorises separate sporting competitions for men and
women. As Samuels JA stated in
Tullamore Bowling & Citizens Club v
[1984] 2 NSWLR 32
at 39, ". . . the existence of distinct
competitions at any level of organization does not represent a discriminatory
the exemption in
to apply, the discrimination must involve the exclusion of
men or women from participation in any sporting activity. The exemption
apply to the exclusion from a sporting activity which the other sex only is
participating in. It is not a blanket exemption
that allows the Club to
discriminate against members of one sex in relation to the benefits or services
it provides such as the scheduling,
hosting or running of golf games. It merely
allows the Club to exclude members of one sex from participating in the single
sex sporting
competition of the other sex.
ordinary meaning of
is consistent with the principle of statutory
construction that the interpretation of a provision must promote the purpose or
underlying the Act:
Interpretation Act
the AD Act as originally enacted. Since then, other sporting exemptions have
been added in relation to other grounds of discrimination
such as race,
transgender and disability. Each exemption is tailored to the particular
attribute concerned. That fact suggests that
the Club's broad interpretation of
s 38 is not correct.
Raper, representing Ms Walker, submitted that s 38 merely allows the Club to
have separate golfing competitions for men and women.
If the exemption was
intended to be wider than that, the legislature would have framed the exemption
more broadly. For example, s
22, which is the sporting exception for race
discrimination, states that:
Nothing in this Part applies to or in respect of anything done on the grounds
of a person's nationality or place of birth or length
of time for which the
person has been resident in a particular place or area:
(a) in selecting one or more persons to represent a place or an area in any
sport or game, or
(b) in pursuance of the rules of any competition in so far as they relate to
eligibility to compete in any sport or game.
Walker has not been excluded from participating in any sporting activity. Her
complaint is that she has not been given equal or
comparable access to the
competition or to the benefits associated with the competition. The Club's
application to summarily dismiss
Ms Walker's complaint on the basis that the
Club's conduct comes within s 38 of the AD Act is refused.
Raper applied for costs because the applicability of s 38 should have been
determined at the hearing, not by way of an interlocutory
application. If that had been done, significant costs would have been saved.
general rule is that each party pays their own costs:
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal Act
The Tribunal may make an award of
costs only if it is satisfied that it is fair to do so having regard to certain
matters listed
including any matter that it considers
am not satisfied that it is fair to award costs in this case. It is appropriate
for a respondent to apply for summary dismissal
after the applicant's Points of
Claim and evidence have been filed in cases where the respondent is submitting
that a complaint does
not disclose a contravention of the AD Act:
supra at [15].
1. The Respondent's application for the Applicant's complaints of sex
discrimination to be summarily dismissed is refused.
2. The Applicant's application for costs is refused.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (151 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter