URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMRP/2022/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Luo v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited [2022] NSWPICMRP 9; (22 December 2022)
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
Luo v QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
[2022] NSWPICMRP 9
QBE (Insurance) Australia Limited
MERIT REVIEW PANEL MEMBERS:
Merit Reviewer Terence O’Riain
Merit Reviewer Katherine
Merit Reviewer Elizabeth Medland
DATE OF DECISION:
22 December 2022
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS - Merit Review;
Motor Accidents Injuries Act 2017
dispute about the amount of weekly payments of statutory benefits that are
payable under Division 3.3; Schedule 2(1)(a); pre-accident
weekly earnings
(PAWE); regulated costs; panel review; PAWE calculation; earnings as an earner;
COVID-19; jobkeeper payments as business
subsidy; jobkeeper payments in PAWE
calculation; jobkeeper payments not earnings as an earner;
Allianz Insurance
Australia Limited v Shahmiri
discussed and applied; costs;
– Merit Reviewer decision affirmed.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
Certificate of Merit Review Panel
Issued in accordance with
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
to the merit review decision by a single Merit Reviewer, the
Merit Review Panel
confirms the decision of the single Merit
Panel directs the claimant’s costs are assessed in accordance with the
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation
at $1,980 inclusive of
President of the Personal Injury Commission (the Commission) has referred this
merit review decision to the Merit Review Panel
for determination.
of weekly payments (Review) under Schedule 2(1) (a) of the Motor Accidents
Injuries Act 2017 (MAI Act).
Panel members confirmed that they had no previous involvement with this matter,
or with the above claimant.
Introduction
is a dispute between Yan Luo (the claimant) and QBE (Insurance) Australia
Limited (the insurer) about statutory benefits, payable
as weekly payments
under Division 3.3 of the MAI Act.
claimant was injured in a motor accident on 5 March 2021 and applied to the
insurer for statutory benefits.
8 November 2021, the insurer advised the claimant that it had determined her
pre-accident weekly earnings (PAWE) at $507.64.
24 November 2021, the claimant applied to the insurer for an internal review of
the insurer’s decision.
9 December 2021, the insurer issued a Certificate of Determination with a
revised PAWE of $523.80.
claimant sought a merit review at the Commission about her PAWE. On 27 April
2022, Merit Reviewer Seeneevassen affirmed the insurer’s
although he varied the PAWE upward to $654.75.
claimant then applied to the Commission for a Review Panel to reconsider the
merit review.
7 July 2022, the President’s delegate decided there was reasonable cause
to suspect an error in the Merit Reviewer’s
decision. This is the
reviewable decision.
Commission's President constituted a Review Panel (the Panel) to review the
Merit Reviewer's decision.
claimant submits that the insurer should treat Jobkeeper payments as gross
business income. The claimant submits that the insurer
should treat the
Jobkeeper payments as a subsidy for the claimant operating her business
within the meaning of
cl 3(2)(c) of Schedule 1 of the MAI Act.
claimant submits that Jobkeeper payments form part of a person’s gross
income since it is taxable and assessable. The claimant
submits that the PAWE
calculation should include Jobkeeper payments at $12,328.48.
Reviewer Seeneevassen decided in the Certificate the Jobkeeper payments were not
gross earnings to include in the
. The MAI Act only allows for
income from personal exertion in calculating PAWE.
Panel must decide whether the MAI Act allows a decision maker to include
Jobkeeper payments in Ms Luo’s earnings as an earner
to calculate PAWE
under Schedule 1, cl
Review conduct
Merit Review Panel met on 12 August 2022 and issued these directions:
(a) by close of business on 19 August 2022, the claimant was to upload any
submission confirming the issues to the portal, and
(b) by close of business on 26 August 2022, the insurer was to upload any reply
submission.
parties supplied those submissions, and the Panel addresses them below.
Panel met again on 11 October 2022.
Panel has reviewed all the documents that the parties have made available.
Luo submits that the Panel should assess her PAWE as $1,372.19. Ms Luo has
several sources of income. She says that her PAWE should
include her gross
earnings from Jobkeeper, Acare salary and wages, Usana commissions, aged care
services supplied to Better Living,
and housekeeping services. She does not
include her earnings from rent, ride-sharing and the sale of masks and
sanitisers.
Documentation
part of the merit review, the Panel considered these documents:
(a) Merit Reviewer Seeneevassen Certificate dated 27 April 2022;
(b) claimant’s submissions marked A1 and AD7;
(c) Presidential delegate’s decision referring this matter to the Panel,
(d) final insurer’s Reply submissions marked AD2.
Objects of the relevant Acts
Luo’s applies for review of her PAWE under the MAI Act. The Panel will
decide the merit review under the
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
(the 2020 Act), the Commission's rules, and any relevant provisions of the MAI
MAI Act objects are found at s 1.3(2), which addresses “the early
resolution of motor accident claims and the quick, cost-effective
resolution of disputes” and “to provide early and ongoing financial
support for persons injured in motor
accidents”.
1.3(4) provides that when interpreting the provisions of the MAI Act, a decision
maker should promote the objects of the MAI
Section 1.3(5)
provides that when exercising an MAI Act discretion, the decision maker must act
in a way that promotes the objects
of the MAI Act. Part 5 of 2020 Act enables
the Commission to make rules on the Commission’s practice and procedure.
This includes
panel proceedings reviewing Merit Reviewers or Medical
Assessors’ decisions.
127 to 130 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (PIC Rules) are made
under Part 5 of the 2020 Act. A Review Panel decides
how it conducts and decides
the proceedings outcome. The Panel may decide the proceedings solely based on
the written application.
3 sets out the objects of the 2020 Act and include ensuring the
Commission’s decisions are timely, fair, consistent
and of a high quality.
It also enables the Commission to decide matters justly, quickly, cost
effectively and with as little formality
as possible.
4 of the 2020 Act echoes ss 1.3(4) and (5) of the MAI Act and requires
exercising the powers and discretions in a way that
promote the 2020 Act.
42(1) of the 2020 Act and the Commission rules expresses the Commission’s
‘guiding principle’. The section
requires the Commission to
facilitate “the just, quick and cost-effective resolution of the real
issues in the proceedings”.
42(2) requires the Panel, to give effect to the guiding principle when
exercising any power given to me under the 2020 Act
or the rules.
merit review on the amount of PAWE is a fresh decision.
Amount of weekly payments
deciding a merit review, according to s 7.13(1) of the MAI Act, the Panel must
decide what the “correct and preferable decision”
according to the material before the Panel.
Panel must step into the shoes of the insurer and decide the merits of the
dispute – s 7.13(2), based on the information
supplied rather than on
finding errors in the earlier decisions.
s 7.13(3), the Panel may decide to:
(a) affirm the reviewable decision, or
(b) vary the reviewable decision, or
(c) set aside the reviewable decision and make a
decision in substitution for the reviewable decision, or
(d) set aside the reviewable decision and remit the matter for reconsideration
by the insurer in accordance with any direction made
by the Merit Reviewer.
Panel is satisfied that sufficient information is available to the Commission to
decide these proceedings. It may decide this
merit review without holding a
conference or formal hearing (see s 52(3) of the 2020 Act) and can proceed
on the papers in accordance
with Procedural Direction PIC2.
accordance with s 43 of the 2020 Act the rules of evidence do not bind
the Panel. The Panel may inform itself on any matter in
the manner it thinks
appropriate and as the proper consideration of this matter permits.
The reviewable decision
insurer’s original decision is that the claimant cannot include Jobkeeper
payments to calculate PAWE.
Merit Reviewer affirmed the insurer’s finding. Ms Luo disagrees with the
decision and says the decision maker should include
the Jobkeeper
What is an earner?
1, cl 2 of the MAI Act states as follows:
“Meaning of ‘earner’
A person who is injured as a result of a motor
accident is an
if the person is at
least 15 years of age and who–
(a) was employed or self-employed (whether or not full-time)–
(i) at any time during the 8 weeks immediately
preceding the motor accident, or
(ii) during a period or periods equal to at least 13 weeks during the year
immediately preceding the motor accident, or
(iii) during a period or periods equal to at least 26 weeks during the 2 years
immediately preceding the motor accident,
and, at the date of the motor accident, had not retired permanently from
all employment,
(b) before the motor accident, had entered into an arrangement (whether or
not an enforceable contract)--
(i) with an employer or
other person to undertake employment,
(ii) to commence business as a self-employed person,
at a particular time and place, or
(c) was, immediately before the motor accident, receiving a weekly payment
or other payment in respect of loss of earnings under
this Act or
Workers Compensation Act 1987
1, cl 3 of the MAI Act states as follows:
“Meaning of ‘loss of earnings’
means a loss incurred or likely to be incurred in a
person's income from personal exertion.
(2) A person's
‘income from personal exertion’
(a) the amount that is the income of the person consisting of earnings,
salaries, wages, commissions, fees, bonuses, pensions, retiring
and retiring gratuities, allowances and gratuities received in the capacity of
employee or in relation to any services
rendered, and
(b) the proceeds of any business carried on by the person either alone or in
partnership with any other person, and
(c) any amount received as bounty or subsidy in carrying on a business.
(3) A person's
‘income from personal exertion’
not include--
(a) interest, unless the person's principal business consists of the lending of
money, or unless the interest is received in respect
of a debt due to the person
for goods supplied or services rendered by the person in the course of the
person's business, or
(b) rents or dividends, or
(c) any employer superannuation contributions, or
(d) the monetary amount of any annual, sick or other leave entitlement.”
1, cl 4 of the MAI Act states as follows:
“Meaning of
‘pre-accident weekly earnings’—general
‘Pre-accident weekly earnings’
, in relation to an
earner who is injured as a result of a motor accident, means the weekly average
of the gross earnings received
by the earner as an earner during the 12 months
immediately before the day on which the motor accident occurred, unless
(2) applies.
(2) In the following cases,
‘pre-accident weekly earnings’
, in relation to an earner who
as a result of a motor accident,
(a) if, on the day of the motor accident, the earner was earning continuously,
but had not been earning continuously for at least
12 months—the weekly
average of the gross earnings received by the earner as an earner during the
period from when the earner
started to earn continuously to immediately before
the day of the motor accident,
(a1) if the earner was employed or self-employed during a period or periods
equal to at least 26 weeks during the first year of the
pre-accident period, but
was not obtaining earnings from any source at any other time during the
pre-accident period—the average
weekly gross earnings received by the
earner as an earner during the first year of the pre-accident period,
(b) if subclause (3) applies—the weekly average of the gross earnings
received by the earner as an earner during the period
from when the change of
circumstance referred to in that subclause occurred to immediately before the
day of the motor accident,
(c) if the earner is an earner by reason of having entered into an arrangement
with an employer or other person to undertake employment
or to commence business
as a self-employed person—the average weekly gross earnings that the
earner could reasonably have been
expected to earn, but for the injury, in
employment under that arrangement.
‘pre-accident
, in relation to a motor accident, is the period of 2 years
immediately preceding the motor accident.
(3) This subclause applies if, during the 12 months immediately before the
day of the motor accident, there was, as a result of any
action taken by the
earner, a significant change in his or her earnings circumstances that resulted
in the earner regularly earning,
or becoming entitled to earn, more on a weekly
basis than he or she was earning before the change
[Note: Examples of a change of
circumstances to which this subclause would apply include a change of job, a
promotion, a move from
part-time to full-time employment, or a pay increase
arising from the achievement of performance standards.]
(4) For the purposes of this clause, an earner earns continuously if he or
she obtains earnings from permanent employment or from
a source that, on the day
of the motor accident, was likely to continue for a period of at least 6 months
to provide earnings to
the earner on the same, or a similar, basis to the basis
on which the earnings were being provided as at that day.”
REVIEWABLE DECISION
Merit Reviewer made his decision referring to the claimant’s
submissions.
insurer did not submit anything further, so the Merit Reviewer relied on the
insurer’s Certificate of Determination of 9
December 2021. The
insurer’s PAWE determination relied on earnings from Acare, Better Living,
and the claimant’s housekeeping
claimant’s PAWE is her average weekly earnings over the relevant period
determined under Schedule 1, cl (4) of the MAI Act.
The relevant period
claimant’s PAWE falls under Schedule 1, cl (4)(3) of the MAI Act because
she started employment with Acare on 5 October
Merit Reviewer found a significant change in Ms Luo’s earnings
circumstances resulted in her regularly earning more weekly
than she was earning
before she took up the employment.
Merit Reviewer determined the PAWE under Schedule 1, cl (2)(b). That is, it is
the weekly average of her gross earnings from 5
October 2020 to 4 March 2021.
This relevant period was 151 days or 21.57 weeks.
Gross earnings
to the claimant’s payslips, she earned $4,585.45 from Acare for the 154
days from 5 October 2020 to 7 March 2021.
The relevant period being 151 days.
The Merit Reviewer allowed $4,496.12 ($4,585.35 ÷ 154 x 151) as the
claimant’s Acare
earnings for the applicable period.
claimant referred to
Shqau v AAMI
[2022] NSWPICMR 6
submitting that an insurer or merit review should include her Jobkeeper payments
as earnings. In
the Merit Reviewer found the Jobkeeper scheme was
a wage subsidy program the Prime Minister announced on 30 March 2020. It was to
coronavirus. He found that Jobkeeper payments were earnings
because they are
business subsidies, within the meaning of
cl 3(2)(c) of Schedule 1 of the
is a matter of law that Merit Reviews and tribunal findings do not bind a
tribunal. Other decision makers may take note of their
colleagues’
decisions to help them make their own decisions.
3.3 of the Act provides for the weekly payments of statutory benefits to injured
persons as follows:
(a) an injured person needs to have incurred a loss of earnings to be eligible
for weekly payments of statutory benefits;
(b) the MAI Act defines loss of earnings in Schedule 1, clause 3 of the MAI Act
to include the loss of any amount received as bounty
or subsidy in carrying on a
business, and
(c) if a claimant has lost earnings, the insurer calculates the claimant’s
statutory weekly benefits based on the PAWE, among
other factors.
MAI Act says a person’s gross earnings are the basis of calculating
is a business subsidy and cannot be included to decide the claimant’s
statutory benefits entitlement. These payments
are only relevant considerations
for deciding PAWE if they are also gross earnings.
MAI Act does not define gross earnings. According to the Macquarie
dictionary:
“The ordinary meaning of ‘earning’ is
money earned, wages, and profits.
To earn is to gain by labour or service.”
Merit Reviewer found that Jobkeeper payments are not gross earnings to be
included in the claimant’s PAWE because Centrelink
is not paying them for
work or service.
Usana commissions
claimant claimed the insurer should have included $6,055 of Usana commissions in
her 2020/2021 tax return as earnings. She was
a self-employed online marketing
salesperson for Usana at the time of the accident.
insurer did not include any Usana earnings because of insufficient
information.
Merit Reviewer found that the claimant was deriving earnings from Usana during
the relevant period. He found Ms Luo’s NAB
statements showed credit
payments of $1,952.08 for the 143 days from 16 October 2020 to 4 March
Merit Reviewer allowed $2,061.28 ($1,952.08 ÷ 143 x 151) as the
claimant’s earnings from Usana.
Better Living
claimant submits that her NAB statements show that she earned $3,895 from Better
Living for 13 October 2020 to 4 March 2021. The
insurer says the
claimant’s bank statements verify that the claimant’s Better Living
earnings were $3,125.
claimant’s bank statements show total Better Living credit payments of
$3,895. They are for the 155 days from 16 October
2020 to 19 March 2021, not to
4 March as the claimant says.
Merit Reviewer allowed $3,794.48 ($3,895 ÷ 155 x 151) as the
claimant’s Better Living earnings.
Housekeeper
claimant submits that her earnings from housekeeping were $9,140 for the period
15 October 2020 to 5 March 2021. The insurer found
that Ms Luo’s bank
statements verified her earnings from housekeeping were $3,604.18.
Merit Reviewer used Ms Luo’s 2021 tax return to estimate the
claimant’s housekeeping earnings. He did this because
he could not discern
which credit transactions in Ms Luo’s bank statement related to her
housekeeping services.
claimant’s 2021 tax return shows that she derived income from her
housekeeping activities of $9,140 for that financial year.
It was a leap year
with 366 days. The Merit Reviewer allowed $3,770.87 ($9,140 ÷ 366 x 151) as
her gross earnings from housekeeping
for the relevant period.
Rental income
party included the claimant’s rental income as earnings. Rents are passive
income, where the recipient is not paid for
work or personal services.
Ridesharing and mask/sanitiser sales
claimant excluded these sources of earnings from her PAWE determination because
they fell outside the relevant period.
Merit Reviewer calculated the claimant’s PAWE
Better Living
Usana Commission
Housekeeper
Gross Earnings
PAWE ($14,123/21.57) =
Claimant’s submissions to the panel
claimant agrees with the Merit Reviewer’s calculations on all points, but
the Jobkeeper payments. Ms Luo calculates her
PAWE should be $717.44
greater than the Merit Reviewer’s PAWE estimate.
claimant submits that the Panel should treat Jobkeeper payments as gross
business income and should form part of a person’s
gross income since it
is taxable and assessable.
claimant submits that the PAWE should acknowledge Jobkeeper payments totalling
$12,328.48. She received those payments during
the relevant period as a business
subsidy, within cl 3(2)(c) of Schedule 1 of the MAI Act.
support of this submission, Ms Luo still relies upon the decision of
[2022] NSWPICMR 6.
Insurer’s submissions
insurer’s submissions largely duplicate the Merit Reviewer’s
insurer relies on the Supreme Court decision of
Allianz Insurance Australia
Limited v Shahmiri
[2022] NSWSC 481
Harrison AsJ noted at paragraph 63:
“The qualification that
only the gross earnings received by the earner as an earner are to be taken into
account to determine
a claimant’s pre-accident weekly earnings, is in my
opinion intended to exclude earnings earned by the earner that do not fall
within the ambit of cl 2(a) because they are
not earnings from
employment or self-employment
. For example, passive forms of income such as
payments received from a rented property, or income from shares.”
AsJ reviewed
Merit Review Panel’s differing
majority and minority opinions, noting at paragraph
“Further, as is pointed out by the dissenting member at
[25]-[28] of her reasons, ‘loss of earnings’ and
are not the same. Loss of earnings only becomes relevant
once a claimant has already been defined as an earner and has had their
pre-accident weekly earnings calculated. She relevantly states at [26] of her
reasons (CB, 211):
[26] Clearly, ‘earnings as an earner’
earnings from employment or self-
. The definition
of ‘loss of earnings’ particularises the types of payments that are
included in or excluded from actual
post-accident loss of earnings for the
purpose of calculating the extent to which weekly benefits become payable under
sections 3.6
and 3.7 which is distinct from the calculation to be carried out
under clause 4(1).”
insurer also relies upon the decision of
Conde v Insurance Australia Limited
t/as NRMA Insurance
[2022] NSWPICMR 28
), wherein Merit
Reviewer Katherine Ruschen—who dissented in
COVID-19 disaster payments received during the relevant period are excluded from
PAWE. Merit Reviewer Ruschen reasoned:
Shahmiri’s PAWE calculation fell under clause 4(1) and I have concluded
the claimant’s falls under clause
4(2)(b), the language of clauses 4(1)
and 4(2)(b) in so far as is relevant in the Shahmiri appeal is the same. The
findings of Harrison
AsJ turn on the wording in clause 4(1) that PAWE is to be
calculated based on the ‘weekly average of the gross earnings received
the earner as an earner during’ the relevant period, which is the same
wording in clause 4(2)(b).
It follows from the use of the language,
‘gross earnings received by the earner as an earner during ...’ in
both clause
4(1) and 4(2)(b) and the reasons in the Shahmiri appeal that the
decision of Harrison AsJ also applies to clause 4(2)(b).
[T]he claimant achieves earner status for the purpose of the MAI Act by
reason of being in receipt of earnings from employment or
self-employment as per
the definition of earner in Schedule 1, clause 2. Pursuant to clauses 4(3) and
only earnings received by the
claimant ‘as an earner’ can be included
in calculation of
The claimant did not receive Centrelink COVID-19 disaster payments “as
an earner”. She did not perform any work for those
payments. The claimant
is not in a relationship of employee and employer with Centrelink and did not
render services to Centrelink.
Accordingly, the claimant did not receive the
payments in the capacity of employee or for any services rendered.
Accordingly,
COVID-19 disaster payments are not earnings received by the claimant as an
earner and are therefore excluded from PAWE.
This conclusion is consistent with
the article ‘COVID-19 hub for injured workers and road users’
published by the State
Insurance Regulatory Authority which states
‘COVID-19 Disaster Payments are not considered earnings for the purpose of
Ms Luo did not receive the Jobkeeper payments for any services she rendered,
they cannot be included in PAWE as earnings she
received as an earner under the
insurer disputes the amount of housekeeping income, which the Merit Reviewer
include in the PAWE. It submits that business-related
expenses were not included
in the calculation of the claimant’s gross earnings as a self-employed
housekeeper.
insurer refers again to
, with Merit Reviewer Ruschen
“[27] The onus is on the claimant to provide
sufficient evidence of her pre-accident earnings. As a sole trader the claimant
ought to be able to provide reliable records of total sales of the business and
total business expenses...
As a self-employed
earner the gross earnings the claimant receives as an individual earner for the
purpose of the MAI Act are the
net profit of her business (before tax), after
accounting for all expenses incurred by the
Panel deliberations and
Panel concludes the claimant Ms Luo is an earner under Schedule 1, cl 2 of the
Luo falls under cl 4(2)(b).
confirms under cl 4(1), that a
decision maker must calculate PAWE based on the “weekly average of the
gross earnings received
by the earner as an earner during” the relevant
period. This reasoning also applies to
cl 4(2)(b) of the MAI Act.
the MAI Act, Ms Luo is an earner because she received earnings from employment
or self-employment per the definition of an earner
in Schedule 1, cl 2. So,
under cls 4(3) and 4(2)(b), the claimant’s income received “as
an earner” is all a decision
maker can include in the PAWE
calculation.
did not pay the claimant COVID-19 disaster payments for her services. The Panel
agrees with the Merit Reviewer that Ms
Luo was not an earner in that
MAI Act excludes COVID-19 disaster payments when calculating PAWE. This finding
is consistent with the guiding article “COVID-19
hub for injured workers
and road users”, published by the State Insurance Regulatory Authority. It
confirms the policy expressed
in the legislation that an insurer calculating
PAWE cannot include COVID-19 Disaster Payments.
Panel does not consider the insurer’s submissions on the housekeeping
income carries any weight. The Merit Reviewer used
a reasoned method to assess
that income. The Panel agrees with the Merit Reviewer’s findings about the
housekeeping income.
for merit reviews under Schedule 2(1) (a) of the MAI Act are not permitted under
Injuries Regulation 2017 (the
Regulation)
as required in section 8.10 (3) of the MAI Act.
legal representation costs may be awarded under Schedule 1, Part 1, (1)(3)(a) of
the Regulation if any application for panel
review is referred.
Luo’s representation have performed significant work including preparing
submissions and obtaining instructions, plus translating
Chinese to English. It
is appropriate to approve the maximum sixteen units at $112.53 per unit .
Panel directs the claimant’s costs are assessed in accordance with the
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation
at $1,980 inclusive of GST.
Legislation
and guidelines
Review Panel considered the following:
Motor Accident
Injuries Act 2017
Accident Guidelines (the Guidelines)
Motor Accident
Injuries Regulation 2017
Certification
Review Panel agrees with the Merit Reviewer’s treatment of the
COVID–19 payments for calculating gross earnings and
the method he used to
estimate how much housekeeping income Ms Luo made.
outcome is the same as the Merit Review certificate dated 27 April 2022.
Panel will affirm the outcome of that
certificate.
... (b) if subclause (3)
applies--the weekly average of the gross earnings received by the
the period from when the change of circumstance referred to in that subclause
occurred to immediately before the day of the
Section 41(2) of the 2020 Act.
Rule 128 of the PIC Rules.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.15 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter