URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/272.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Iris Hotels Sydney Airport Operations Pty Ltd v Independent Liquor & Gaming Authority [2025] NSWCATAD 272; (10 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Iris Hotels Sydney Airport Operations Pty Ltd v Independent Liquor &
Gaming Authority
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 272
Hearing Date(s):
4 April & 16 June 2025
Last submissions received 22 October
Date of Orders:
10 November 2025
Decision Date:
10 November 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
P Decle, Senior Member
(1) Pursuant to s 65(1)
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
matter is remitted to the Respondent for reconsideration.
(2) By 22 December
2025 the Respondent is to tell the Tribunal and the other party whether the
decision has been affirmed, varied
or set aside and if there is a new
(3) By 14 January 2026 the Applicant is to tell the Tribunal and
the other party whether they are continuing or withdrawing the application
(4) The proceeding is listed for directions on 20 January 2026 at
9:30 am at John Maddison Tower, Level 10, 86-90 Goulburn Street,
Sydney (unless
withdrawn prior).
(5) The parties are granted liberty to apply to relist the
matter for further directions on giving 3 days notice.
Catchwords:
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION – development consent – deferred
commencement condition – construction of
Environmental Planning and
Assessment Act 1979
(NSW) - construction of
Liquor Act 2007
(NSW) – when
is a development consent ‘in force’
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Administrative Decisions
Review Regulation 2024
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Gaming and Liquor
Administration Act 2007
Liquor Act 2007
Government Information
(Public Access) Act 2009
Cases Cited:
Auld v Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority
[2018] NSWCATAD 25
Australand Holdings v Hornsby Shire Council
[1998] 98 LGERA 312
[2000] FCA 359
Cameron v Nambucca Shire Council
(1997) 95 LGERA
Certain Lloyd's Underwriters v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
Coalcliff Community
Association Inc v Minister for Urban Affairs and Planning
[1999] NSWCA 317
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force v Davies
[2025] NSWCATAP
Commissioner of Stamp Duties v Permanent Trustee Co Ltd
(1987) 9 NSWLR 719
Fong v Secretary, Department of Customer Service (No 2)
[2025] NSWCATOD
Henadeck Pty Ltd v Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority; Niraula v
Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority
[2020] NSWCATAP 200
Holroyd City
Council v Abouantoun
[2003] NSWLEC 379
Independent Liquor and Gaming
Authority v Auld
[2018] NSWCATAP 184
Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority
[2019] NSWCA 88
Kiama Municipal Council v Gerroa Boat Fisherman's Club
[2010] NSWLEC 72
Lygon Nominees Pty Ltd v Commissioner of State Revenue
[2007] VSCA 140
Patrick v Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice
[2025] NSWCATAP 206
Prodanovski Pty Ltd v Wollongong City Council
R & R Gazzolari Pty Ltd v Parramatta City Council
Roberts v Blue Mountains City Council
[2012] NSWLEC 2
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services & Multicultural
[2020] FCAFC 196
Weal v Bathurst City Council
[2000] NSWCA 88
v Port Stephens Council
[2020] NSWCATAP 152
Wojciechowska v Secretary,
Department of Communities and Justice; Secretary, Department of Communities and
Justice v Wojciechowska
[2025] NSWCATAP 248
Texts Cited:
Blacks Law Dictionary, 12th ed (2024)
New South Wales Legislative
Assembly, Parliamentary Debates (Hansard), 28 November 2007
Principal judgment
Iris Hotels Sydney Airport Operations Pty Ltd (Applicant)
Independent
Liquor & Gaming Authority (Respondent)
Representation:
C Ireland (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Hatzis Cusack (Applicant)
Crown Solicitor
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00457737
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Independent Liquor & Gaming Authority (ILGA / the Respondent) has
responsibility for determining applications for licences
pursuant to the
Liquor Act 2007
provides that the ILGA "must not" grant a licence
unless satisfied that, where a development consent is required under the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
(NSW) (EPA Act) in respect
of the proposed licence activity,
"that development consent or approval is in force".
2 May 2024, Iris Hotels Sydney Airport Operations Pty Ltd (the Applicant)
applied for a new hotel licence. At the time, they had
been granted development
consent from Bayside Local Planning Panel (the Bayside Panel) however it was
subject to a ‘deferred
commencement’ condition. The deferred
commencement condition would be met once the Bayside Panel was satisfied with an
approval/certification
obtained by the Applicant from Sydney Trains with respect
to certain matters.
20 November 2024, ILGA refused to grant the Applicant a licence on the ground
that it did not have power to do so because the existence
of the deferred
commencement condition meant that the Applicant did not have a development
consent that was "in force" as required
case concerns whether that decision was correct.
& Role of the Tribunal
person aggrieved by a decision of the ILGA concerning a prescribed application
may apply to the Tribunal for administrative review:
Liquor Administration Act 2007
(NSW) (GLA Act). A prescribed application
includes an application for a hotel licence:
Gaming and Liquor
Administration Regulation 2024
(NSW) (GLA Regulation).
decision to refuse to grant a hotel licence on the ground that it did not have
power to do so is taken to be a decision
under the GLA Act to refuse to grant a
hotel licence: s 6(4)
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Act). Consequently,
ADR Act give the Tribunal jurisdiction to
hear and determine this application.
is no requirement to seek an internal review of a decision of the ILGA
concerning a prescribed application prior to the Applicant
applying for
administrative review: reg 4
Administrative Decisions Review Regulation 2024
application for administrative review was made 19 days after receiving notice of
ILGA's decision. I am satisfied the application
complies with the requirements
of s 13A GLA Act and therefore that the Tribunal can determine the application.
Tribunal's role is to decide what is the correct and preferrable decision (s
63(1) ADR Act).
Procedural History
ILGA initially applied for summary dismissal of the application for
administrative review. During the hearing of that application,
agreement of the parties, the Tribunal determined that it was appropriate to
hold a hearing instead. I am satisfied that
this approach met the guiding
principle in s36
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Act) as the real issue in dispute between the parties was whether the
construction of
by ILGA is correct.
has been no substantive consideration by ILGA of the Applicant's application for
a hotel licence. If the Tribunal determines
that the ILGA has power to decide
the application for a hotel licence because the Applicant has a development
consent that is ‘in
force’, then the parties proposed that the
matter should be remitted pursuant to
ADR Act for reconsideration by
ILGA. While this decision was reserved, the Tribunal invited further
submissions in respect of whether
this application should be dealt with pursuant
to s 63 or s 65 ADR Act.
Material relied upon
Applicant relied upon:
(1) Administrative Review Application filed on 9 December 2024.
(2) Affidavit of Warren Duarte sworn 4 March 2025.
(3) Submissions filed on 4 March 2025 in respect of summary dismissal.
(4) Further submissions filed on 19 May 2025.
(5) Final submissions filed on 2 October 2025.
Respondent relied upon:
(1) Bundle of documents lodged with the Tribunal pursuant to s 58 ADR Act.
(2) Submissions filed on 17 February 2025 in respect of summary dismissal.
(3) Submissions filed on 14 March 2025 in respect of summary dismissal.
(4) Further submissions filed on 19 May 2025.
(5) Final submissions filed on 22 October 2025.
party advised that generative AI had been used in the preparation of their
written submissions.
Relevant background facts - Application for
a Hotel Licence
facts are not in dispute in this matter.
Applicant is intending to develop an existing accommodation hotel in Mascot into
a hotel which offers accommodation, food, gaming
and alcohol.
Respondent included in its submissions a summary of the relevant Local
Environmental Plan and land zoning map for the location
of the proposed licenced
premises, 205 O'Riordan Street in Mascot, showing that development consent is
required to operate a hotel
there. That is not controversial.
Applicant applied to the Bayside Panel for consent to engage in specified
activities at the property identified as 205 O'Riordan
Street in Mascot (the
property). Those activities included:
"[a]lterations and additions to the existing hotel, demolition of part of the
existing building and construction of a part five storey
building to include
hotel lobby, new pub including bistro, lounge room (gaming), ancillary hotel
facilities and associated signage"
(the proposed activities).
These are all activities falling within the definition of 'development' in
the EPA Act.
21 December 2023, the Applicant received a Notice of Determination from the
Bayside Panel in respect of the proposed activities
at the property (the
Notice). The Notice refers to the 'Determination' as "Deferred Commencement".
The Notice states:
“This Development Application has been determined under
section 4.16(3)
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
as a Deferred
Commencement consent.
Evidence of compliance with the below conditions, sufficient to satisfy the
Council as to those matters, must be provided within
twenty-four (24) months of
this notice. If satisfactory evidence is produced in accordance with this
requirement, the Council shall
give notice to the applicant of the date from
which this consent operates.”
first page of the Notice listed the date of determination as 14 December 2023
but "Date consent commences:" was blank.
Notice included one deferred commencement condition "DC1 Sydney Trains"
(condition DC1) which included the following statement:
"[t]his consent is not to operate until the Applicant/Developer satisfies the
Council, within 24 months of the date of this consent,
that it has obtained
approval/certification has been forwarded to the Council".
third page of the Notice titled 'Additional Information' stated:
"To confirm the date upon which this consent becomes effective, refer to
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
. Generally, the
consent becomes effective from the determination date shown on the front of this
notice. However, if unsure applicants
should rely on their own enquiries.
To confirm the likelihood of consent lapsing, refer to
section 4.53
of the Act.
Generally, consent lapses if the development is not commenced within five years
of the date of approval. However, if
a lesser period is stated in the conditions
of consent, the lesser period applies...".
was not disputed that the Notice is a development consent granted to the
Applicant subject to the deferred commencement condition
pursuant to
EPA Act (the development consent).
development consent imposed other development conditions which were not
'deferred commencement' conditions. These included, for
example, requirements
such as the Applicant submitting an amended plan of management for the premises
prior to an occupation certificate
being issued (condition 102) and the
Applicant obtaining an occupation certificate prior to any use or occupation of
the building/development
or part thereof (condition 134).
26 December 2024, the development consent was registered on the NSW planning
2 May 2024, the Applicant applied to the ILGA for a New Hotel (full) licence
with minors' area authorisation. The 'proposed premises'
were listed as 205
O'Riordan Street in Mascot.
refused the licence application on 20 November 2024. The letter of refusal
stated that there was a deferred commencement issued
for the premises which
noted the consent shall not operate until the conditions therein described have
been satisfied, that condition
had not been satisfied and
consequently:
"we do not have the power under
section 45(3)(c)
to grant the licence as the development consent or approval is not in force".
Issues for Determination
primary issue in this case is the correct construction of
parties agree that
imposes a mandatory condition on the exercise of
power to grant a licence. It was conceded by ILGA that, once the Applicant
condition DC1, then the Applicant would have a development consent
that is 'in force' for the purpose of
would not be prohibited from granting a licence.
dispute between the parties lies in whether the Applicant has a development
consent that is 'in force' while it remains subject
to condition DC1 which has
not yet been fulfilled. The Applicant says it does. The ILGA says it does not
and therefore it is prohibited
from granting a liquor licence.
Determination
of the dispute requires consideration of the liquor licensing scheme set up by
as well as the relevant parts of the EPA
Liquor Act 2007
Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority v Auld
[2018] NSWCATAP 184
ILGA v Auld (AP)
), the Appeal Panel described the licensing scheme of
as follows:
establishes a regime of liquor licensing that operates by
authorising:
1. a licensee;
2. to sell, by retail or wholesale or both, or supply liquor;
3. on specified premises;
4. at certain times;
5. subject to any conditions contained in the
, any conditions
imposed by the Authority or the Secretary and any other conditions authorised to
be imposed under the
gives power to ILGA to investigate and
receive information and submissions about applications for any of the 8 types of
specified in
of the licences capable of being granted by ILGA are corporeally linked to a
‘licenced premises’. For example, a
hotel licence:
"authorises the licensee to sell liquor by retail on the licensed premises for
consumption on or away from the licensed premises"
premises is defined in
the premises to which a licence relates
It appears to be for that reason that the boundaries of licensed premises must
be specified when the licence is granted
), and that
there are processes for temporarily or permanently changing those boundaries
sets out scope of ILGA's power with respect to the grant or
refusal of liquor licences and relevantly provides:
Decision of Authority in relation to licence
applications
(1) The Authority may, after considering an application for a licence and
any submissions received by the Authority in relation
to the application, grant
the licence or refuse to grant the licence. The Authority may determine the
application whether or not
the Secretary has provided a report in relation to
the application.
(2) The Authority may, in such circumstances as the Authority considers
appropriate, treat an application for a licence as having
been withdrawn.
(3) The Authority must not grant a licence unless the Authority is
satisfied that—
(a) the applicant is a fit and proper person to carry on the business
or activity to which the proposed licence relates, and
(b) practices will be in place at the licensed premises as soon as
the licence is granted that ensure, as far as reasonably practicable,
liquor is sold, supplied or served responsibly on the premises and that all
reasonable steps are taken to prevent intoxication
on the premises, and that
those practices will remain in place, and
(c) if development consent is required under
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
(or approval
under Part 3A or Part 5.1 of that Act is required) to use the premises for the
purposes of the business or activity
to which the proposed licence
relates—that development consent or approval is in force.
. Subject to procedural fairness requirements,
the ILGA also has a very broad power to impose, vary and revoke conditions upon
on its own initiative
2 of Part 4
gives the Authority the power to grant additional
authorisations to licensees who are granted a hotel licence (as well as other
of licences).
relevantly provides that this
power is in the same terms as for the grant of a licence in
and that ILGA also has a broad power to impose conditions on
authorisations.
licence is granted, the licensee is authorised to sell or supply liquor in
accordance with the
and the conditions of the licence
It is an offense for a licensee to not comply with any condition which
is imposed by ILGA, as well as such other conditions imposed
or regulations (s 11
provides that licences continue to be 'in force', unless
suspended, until they expire, are surrendered, cancelled or otherwise cease
be in force.
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act
EPA Act contains a statutory code with respect to the use and development of
real property in NSW. Several key features are relevant
to this case.
Development
is broadly defined in s 1.5 EPA Act as including a broad range of acts, matters
or things concerning (a) the use of land,
(b) the subdivision of land, (c) the
erection of a building, (d) the carrying out of a work and (e) the demolition of
1.4 EPA Act defines "development consent" as:
"consent under Part 4 to carry out development and includes, unless expressly
excluded, a complying development certificate".
an offence to carry out development without consent where consent is required or
otherwise not in accordance with the consent (s
4.2(1) EPA Act). Development in
accordance with a consent requires compliance with any conditions
Prodanovski Pty Ltd v Wollongong City Council
[2013] NSWCA 202
4.3 of Part 4 EPA Act sets out the process for making and determining
applications for development that needs consent. Section
4.16 EPA Act stipulates
the scope of the power of the consent authority to determine development
applications:
Determination
(cf previous s 80)
A consent authority is to determine a development
application by—
(a) granting consent to the application, either unconditionally or
subject to conditions, or
(b) refusing consent to the application.
development consent may be granted pursuant to s 4.16 subject to a 'deferred
commencement’ condition:
“Deferred commencement” consent
A development
consent may be granted subject to a condition that the consent is not to operate
until the applicant satisfies the
consent authority, in accordance with the
regulations, as to any matter specified in the condition. Nothing in this Act
a person from doing such things as may be necessary to comply with the
76 Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation 2021 (EPA Regulation) makes
it clear that development consents with
deferred commencement conditions
(deferred commencement consents) are to be clearly distinguished from other
conditions:
Deferred commencement consent
(1) A development consent with a deferred commencement, as referred to in
the Act, section 4.16(3), must be clearly identified as
a “deferred
commencement” consent, whether by using the expression, referring to that
section or otherwise.
(2) A deferred commencement consent must clearly distinguish
(a) conditions that relate to matters about which the consent
authority must be satisfied before the consent can operate
relevant matters
(b) other conditions.
(3) A consent authority may specify the period within which the applicant
must produce sufficient evidence to the consent authority
to enable it to be
satisfied about the relevant matters.
(4) If the applicant produces evidence in accordance with this section,
the consent authority must notify the applicant whether
it is satisfied about
the relevant matters.
(5) If the consent authority does not notify the applicant within 28 days
after the applicant produces the evidence, the consent
authority is taken to
have notified the applicant, on the day on which the period expires, that it is
not satisfied about the relevant
(6) Subsection (5) applies for the purposes of the Act, section 8.7 only.
is broad power to grant a development consent subject to other conditions
relating to acts and things the holder must satisfy
during development work,
prior to occupation of any relevant premises or property, the use of buildings
and premises and during the
ongoing use that is authorised by the development
consent (s 4.17 EPA Act). Conditions can be imposed which have the effect of
limits on the holder's ability to engage in the authorised development
until specified matters have been attended to (eg ss 4.17(1)(d),
(4), (7), (4B),
(6) and (9) EPA Act).
EPA Act stipulates that a development consent has effect on and from the date it
is registered on the NSW planning portal (s 4.20).
No distinction is made in
respect of deferred commencement consents.
EPA Act allows a development consent to be modified or revoked (s 4.55-4.57). It
also provides the circumstances by which a development
consent lapses (s 4.53
Statutory Construction
Principles of Statutory Construction
Interpreting
requires the application of well-settled principles
of statutory construction.
principles were recently summarised by the Appeal Panel in
Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice
[2025] NSWCATAP 206
(1) The starting point for statutory construction is the text; but
context and purpose must be considered at the first stage, to
assist in fixing the text with its meaning.
(2) To that end, we note the following statements. First, by
the plurality (Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordon
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border
(2017) 262 CLR 362
[2017] HCA 34
[14], that:
“The starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory
provision is the text of the statute whilst, at the
same time, regard
is had to its context and purpose. Context should be regarded at this
first stage and not at some later stage and
it should be regarded in
its widest sense. This is not to deny the importance of the natural and ordinary
meaning of a word, namely
how it is ordinarily understood in discourse, to the
process of construction. Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise
that, understood in its statutory, historical or other
context, some other meaning of a word may be suggested, and so too, if
ordinary meaning is not consistent with the statutory purpose, that meaning
must be rejected.”
(3) And also in
[37], by Gageler J:
“... The task of construction begins, as it ends, with the statutory text.
But the statutory text from beginning to end is
construed in context, and an
understanding of context has utility ‘if, and in so far as, it assists in
fixing the meaning of
the statutory text’.”
(4) Context includes the surrounding text of
the relevant provision
and indeed the whole of the relevant Act:
Holdings Pty Ltd v Gowans
(2005) 221 CLR 249
[2005] HCA 28
(5) Context includes the objects, as expressly stated:
SAS Trustee
Corporation v Miles
(2018) 265 CLR 137
[2018] HCA 55
(6) The mischief and purpose of an Act is also a relevant
consideration:
K-Generation Pty Ltd v Liquor Licensing
(2009) 237 CLR 501
[2009] HCA 4
Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384
[1997] HCA 2.
(7) A construction that promotes the purpose or objects of an Act is to be
Interpretation Act 1987
(8) Where possible, every word is to be ascribed some work to do; the
construer of a statutory provision must “strive to give
every word of the provision”:
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[1998] HCA 28
(9) Words should not be read into a statute lightly:
Owners - Strata Plan No 11564
(2014) 253 CLR 531
[2014] HCA 9
(10) Where different words are used in the same provision or Act,
this may (but not must), depending on the context, suggest they
are intended to have different meanings:
Kvelde v New South
[2023] NSWSC 1560
) at [210].
(11) When construing legislation, care must be taken not to be overly
influenced by generalisations. As the High Court has
“fixing upon the general legislative purpose” of
a statute carries with it the risk that the text does not “receive
the attention it deserves”:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Territory Revenue
(2009) 239 CLR 27
[2009] HCA 41
Tribunal is required to interpret s 45(3)(c)
by reference to
its text, having regard to the overall context and purpose of the
with the specific text of
, ILGA must be satisfied
if development consent is required under the Environmental Planning and
Assessment Act 1979 (or approval under Part 3A or Part 5.1
of that Act is
required) to use the premises for the purposes of the business or activity to
which the proposed licence relates -
that development consent or approval is in
words following "if" up to the em dash are a condition which involves concepts
in both the EPA Act (development consent is required
under) and the
(the business or activity to which the proposed licence relates). The
words following the em dash refer to the specific development
consent under
consideration.
parties agree that the EPA Act has an important role in interpreting the meaning
of this section, although the Respondent submits
that the reference to
business or activity to which the proposed licence relates
consideration of the statutory context of the
to also inform
what is meant by 'in force'. That, according to the Respondent, results in a
requirement that the holder of a development
consent is presently able to engage
in the proposed use of the relevant premises in the manner proposed in their
application for
a liquor licence.
only sensible interpretation of
is that the EPA Act
is the source of the meaning of 'development consent'. It follows that it is
necessary to have regard to the
provisions and context of the EPA Act to
understand the scope of the definition (
Certain Lloyd's Underwriters v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
per French CJ and Hayne J, Keifel J
does not mean that the entirety of the EPA Act is to be read alongside the
as they might if both statutes formed part of a scheme like
the gaming and liquor legislation scheme (cf
Henadeck Pty Ltd v Independent
Liquor and Gaming Authority; Niraula v Independent Liquor and Gaming
[2020] NSWCATAP 200
). There is nothing in the
which suggests that intention.
Construction of the EPA
to the EPA Act, the definition of 'development consent' clearly includes
deferred commencement consents.
(1) As a starting point, development consent is defined in s 1.4 EPA Act as:
"consent under Part 4 to carry out development and includes, unless expressly
excluded, a complying development certificate".
Looking to Part 4, s 4.2(2) EPA Act provides that a development consent is
obtained by the making of a 'determination' to 'grant'
a development
(2) At the point of determination, an application for a development consent
is either 'granted' or 'refused' (s 4.16(1) EPA Act).
A development consent is
'granted' even if it is subject to conditions (ss 4.16(1)(a) EPA Act), including
a deferred commencement
condition (s 4.16(3) EPA Act) and even if it excludes a
specified part or aspect of the proposed development (s 4.16(4) EPA Act).
review of both the EPA Act and the EPA Regulation show that 'development
consent' is referred to throughout without qualification.
There are, however,
specific provisions concerning deferred commencement consents. These specific
provisions modify the rules that
would otherwise apply to development consents
in respect of lapsing (s 4.53 EPA Act), subdivisions (s 6.15 EPA Act) and
8.7 EPA Act), where situations require a unique approach to deal with
deferred commencement consents.
example, s 4.53 EPA Act concerning lapsing of consents, provides:
Lapsing of consent
(cf previous s 95)
(1) A development consent lapses—
(a) 5 years after the date from which it operates if the development
consent commences operation after the prescribed period, or
(b) 5 years after the date from which it operates if the development
consent commences operation during the prescribed period, or
(c) 2 years after the date on which the development consent would
otherwise have lapsed if the development consent commenced operation
before, and
has not lapsed at, the commencement of the prescribed period.
(2) A consent authority may reduce a period specified in subsection (1)(a)
or (b) in granting development consent.
(6) Despite any other provision of this section, a development consent
that is subject to a deferred commencement condition under
section 4.16(3)
lapses if the applicant fails to satisfy the consent authority as to the matter
specified in the condition within—
(a) 5 years after the grant of consent if the consent is granted
after the prescribed period, or
(b) 5 years after the grant of consent if the consent is granted
during the prescribed period, or
(c) 2 years after the date on which the development consent would
otherwise have lapsed if—
(i) the grant of consent was before the commencement of the
prescribed period, and
(ii) the development consent has not lapsed at that commencement.
text of this section is consistent with the view that that references to
'development consent' throughout the EPA Act and EPA
Regulations is intended to
include those with deferred commencement conditions. In s 4.53(1) EPA Act,
'development consent' must
necessarily include both development consents without
any deferred commencement conditions (which operate from the time of
registration)
and development consents where the deferred commencement condition
has been satisfied (which operate from the date of satisfaction).
This section
puts those development consents on an even time footing as far as lapsing is
concerned; they each lapse the same period
after the consent becomes
operational. Conversely, s 4.53(6) EPA Act concerns development consents where
the deferred commencement
condition has not been satisfied (meaning it has legal
effect but is not operational pursuant to s 4.16(3)). Those consents lapse
specified period after the 'grant of consent'.
interpretation is consistent with authority which, considering substantially
similar historical provisions of the EPA Act, confirmed
that a deferred
commencement consent is a final development consent even though it does not
operate until the condition has been
Australand Holdings v Hornsby
Shire Council
[1998] 98 LGERA 312
at page 317 (
Cameron v Nambucca Shire Council
(1997) 95 LGERA 268
at [275]-[256]
approved in
Weal v Bathurst City Council
[2000] NSWCA 88
it is accepted that, for the purpose of the EPA Act, a development consent
includes those that are subject to a deferred commencement
condition, the proper
inquiry is what does the EPA Act have to say about when a development consent is
'in force' and when it is
not 'in force'.
grammatical context of 'in force' must be considered. The words 'in force'
appear in various contexts within the EPA Act including,
for example:
(1) References to government policies, plans, the Building Code of Australia,
planning agreements and planning instruments that are
'in force' (ss 3.3, 3.4,
6.28, 10.12 EPA Act);
(2) References to sections of the EPA Act and EPA Regulation that were
previously 'in force' (ss 4.60, 4.63 EPA Act); and
(3) References to development consents being 'in force' (ss 4.2, 4.57, 4.66,
4.67, 4.68, 4.70, 6.10, 6.15, 6.18 EPA Act).
use of the same word across various contexts indicates that 'in force' has a
broad and universal meaning rather than specific
or technical meaning in the EPA
EPA Act also uses two distinct words to describe the legal consequence of a
grant of a development consent.
(1) Development consents are described as being 'in effect' (s 4.20 EPA Act) as
'taking effect' (s 4.57, 4.62 EPA Act); as ceasing/being
taken to have effect (s
8.13, 8.23 EPA Act).
(2) Development consents are also described by reference to when they are 'in
force' (ss 4.2, 4.57, 4.66, 4.67, 4.68, 4.70, 6.10,
6.15, 6.18 EPA Act).
commencement consents are specifically described as having a point at which they
'operate' (ss 4.16, 4.16 and 8.7 EPA Act).
of the terms 'in effect', 'in force' or 'operate' are defined in the EPA Act or
any relevant legislative instruments. The Tribunal
was not referred to any
extrinsic materials which shed light on the intended meaning of these terms in
the EPA Act.
to Black's Law Dictionary, 'in force' is defined as "
in effect, operative,
". If that definition were applied to the EPA Act, it would suggest
that the terms 'in effect', 'in force' and 'operate' are interchangeable.
finding would be inconsistent with the presumption that Parliament intended that
different words are intended to have different
Stewart v Minister
for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services & Multicultural Affairs
[2020] FCAFC 196).
That presumption must yield however to the requirements of
the context in which the words are used (
Lygon Nominees Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2007] VSCA 140
parties did not refer the Tribunal to any specific judicial consideration of the
meaning of 'in force', nor has the Tribunal been
able to find any direct
authority on point by reference to the EPA Act or the
Tribunal's review suggests there has been limited judicial consideration of the
meaning of 'in force' and, where it has been
considered the meaning is very
specific to the legal context in which it arises giving those cases limited
precedential value. The
Tribunal agrees with the view expressed by Kenny J in
Bertran v Vanstone
[2000] FCA 359
when her Honour considered the
meaning of a 'warrant in force' for the purpose of extradition legislation
"[p]lainly enough, the sense of phrases such as "in force", "of force and
effect", "put in force" etcetera depends very much on the
context in which they
roads lead to Rome. The meaning of 'in force' and its concurrence or
contradistinction from 'in effect' or 'operate' must be derived
from the context
in which they are used in the EPA Act.
Respondent argued in oral submissions that 'in force' is used in two senses in
the EPA Act. The first sense is minimal, meaning
that a development consent is
extant, not having lapsed or been revoked. The second is substantial, meaning it
has its intended legal
effect of giving authority to the holder to conduct the
development in question (which is akin to meaning it 'operates'). The Respondent
argued that a development consent is described in the EPA Act as being 'in
force' when it intended to exclude deferred commencement
consents as they were
not operational. It was said that the distinction in s 4.2(1) EPA Act between
consent being granted and being
'in force' demonstrated this proposition. That
section relevantly provides:
Development that needs consent
(cf previous s 76A)
If an environmental planning instrument provides
that specified development may not be carried out except with development
a person must not carry the development out on land to which the
provision applies unless—
(a) such a consent has been obtained and is in force, and
(b) the development is carried out in accordance with the consent and
the instrument.
Maximum penalty—Tier 1 monetary penalty.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), development consent may be
(a) by the making of a determination by a consent authority to grant
development consent, or...
Respondent also relied upon several sentencing cases arising from criminal
prosecutions where the defendant was convicted of carrying
out development in
contravention of s 4.2(1)(a) EPA Act. In these cases, there was a deferred
commencement consent, the relevant
condition had not yet been satisfied and s
4.2(1)(a) EPA Act was said to have been contravened because there was no
development consent
'in force' (eg
Holroyd City Council v Abouantoun
[2003] NSWLEC 379
Kiama Municipal Council v Gerroa Boat Fisherman's Clu
[2010] NSWLEC 72).
the Applicant pointed out, these cases involved pleas of guilt and there was no
dispute that there was a breach of s 4.2 EPA Act.
While the participants in
those cases obviously shared the opinion that s 4.2(1)(a) EPA Act required the
deferred commencement condition
to be satisfied before the development consent
was 'in force', it was not an issue in dispute so there was no consideration of
on the point by the Land and Environment Court. This means the cases
have no precedential value. In any event, it is difficult to
draw any inferences
from these cases because s 4.2(1) (a) and (b) EPA Act are cumulative
requirements and that section can be breached
because the development consent is
not 'in force' or because the development has not been carried out in accordance
with the terms
of a deferred commencement condition.
Applicant contends that s 4.2(1) EPA Act demonstrates that the EPA Act uses 'in
force' in the minimal sense. It is argued that
subparagraph (a) only requires a
development consent to have been granted and registered for it to have 'force
and effect' and that
subparagraph (b) requires that the recipient of the consent
has complied with the conditions attaching to the development consent,
any deferred commencement condition. On this reading, 'in force' is taken to be
a reference to the legal effect of granting
a development consent; an effect
which continues until a development consent lapses or is revoked. For the
reasons that follow, the
Tribunal agrees with the Applicant's construction.
s 4.2(1)(a) and s 4.20 EPA Act show a clear legislative distinction between the
consequence of granting of a development
consent, captured by s 4.2(2) EPA Act,
and when the development consent no longer has any legal effect. This
distinction is clear
in s 4.2(1)(a) from the juxtaposition of 'has been
obtained' and 'is in force'. It is also consistent with s 4.20 which stipulates
that a development consent 'has effect' from the date it is registered on the
NSW planning portal. This is an administrative process
which must be done within
14 days of determining the development application (reg 87 EPA Regulation). No
distinction is made in any
of these provisions between development consents that
do or do not have conditions. Plainly, a development consent has legal effect
from the date of being granted (
Roberts v Blue Mountains City Council
[2012] NSWLEC 2
to an event occurring which makes a development consent unenforceable (which
must include revocation, statutory lapsing or
a declaration that the consent is
invalid), the holder of a development consent is entitled to rely upon it and
exercise and enforce
the rights embodied in it by reference to its terms and
relevant planning laws (
Coalcliff Community Association Inc v Minister for
Urban Affairs and Planning
[1999] NSWCA 317
). There is no
legislative reason apparent from the structure or text of the EPA Act for
inferring, as the Respondent seeks, that
deferred commencement consents should
be treated differently to other development consents in this respect. Nor should
such an inference
be lightly drawn if it results in the reading down of valuable
property rights (
R & R Gazzolari Pty Ltd v Parramatta City Council
[2009] HCA 12).
EPA Act addresses when a development consent no longer has any legal
(1) Revocation takes effect from the date that the holder of the development
consent is served with the relevant instrument (s 4.57(4)
(2) Lapsing results from the automatic expiry of set periods in s 4.57 EPA Act.
Once a development consent has lapsed, it is no longer
amenable to review or
appeal (ss 8.2, 8.6 EPA Act) and it logically follows that it no longer has any
force or effect under the EPA
EPA Act also addresses the legal effect of appeals on a development consent. For
example, a development consent is temporarily
suspended while the appeal is on
foot (s 8.13(1)(2)), a decision to refuse a development consent results in the
development consent
ceasing to have effect (s 8.13(4) and a decision that a
development consent is valid/invalid takes effect from the date set by the
relevant court (s 8.13(5)).
Tribunal does not accept the Respondent's contention that the stipulation in s
4.16(3) EPA Act that a deferred commencement consent
does not 'operate' until
the condition is satisfied makes those consents unique and, as the holder cannot
undertake the relevant
development activity, that must mean that they are not
'in force'. Not only is that argument inconsistent with the scheme of the
Act referred to at pars 60-4 above, but the Court in
rejected a similar argument that provisions concerning deferred development
consents are a statutory code and general provisions
in the EPA Act do not apply
the contrary, interpreting a deferred commencement consent as being both 'in
force' (by grant/registration) and not 'operational'
(by s 4.16(3) EPA Act) is
consistent with the scheme of the EPA Act according to the decision of
. The Applicant relied upon
authority for the proposition that, once granted, a deferred commencement
consent is 'in force' even though it is not
operational. Although the ruling of
the Court uses the words 'in force', the reasons of Bignold J shows that there
was no specific
consideration of the meaning of 'in force' in the EPA Act.
Regardless, the Tribunal considers that this decision provides support
interpreting all development consents that have legal existence and effect as
being 'in force' until they are revoked, lapse
or are otherwise found to be
was whether a deferred commencement consent was
capable of being modified and appealed where the applicant had not provided
to satisfy the condition within the time specified in the EPA Act (now
covered by r 76 EPA Regulations). The Council in that case
contended that
failure to comply with the time stipulation should result in the consent being
treated as having lapsed and therefore
being incapable of modification or
appeal. In that context, Bignold J's judgment carefully traversed the relevant
provisions of the
EPA Act and caselaw focused on the question as to whether in
the relevant circumstances development consent ceased to have any effect.
Bignold J found no reason to infer that the deferred commencement consent had
lapsed and, consistent with authority, it:
"remained in force as a development consent, although not operative" [page 327].
Tribunal accepts the Applicant's submission that s 6.15 EPA Act, concerning
subdivisions, demonstrates the point that "
'in force' and 'operational' are
used as cumulative requirements
" in the EPA Act rather than being terms that
are used in contradistinction. That section provides:
Restrictions on issue of subdivision
certificates
(cf previous s 109J)
(1) A subdivision certificate must not be issued for a subdivision
(b) in the case of subdivision that cannot be carried out except with
development consent, a development consent is in force with
respect to the
subdivision,
(e) in the case of subdivision for which the operation of the
development consent has been deferred under Part 4, the applicant
has satisfied
the consent authority concerning all matters as to which the consent authority
must be satisfied before the development
consent can operate, and
(Emphasis added)
a development consent that is 'in force' excludes deferred commencement
consents, the effect would be that s 6.15 EPA Act could
never apply because of
the inability to satisfy subparagraph (1)(b). That would make subparagraph 1(e)
otiose. Conversely, no such
problem arises if 'in force' applies to all
development consents including deferred commencement consents because
subparagraphs (b)
and (e) are not mutually exclusive and both are capable of
being satisfied. This strongly points against the Respondent's construction
'in force' as meaning 'operational' in the EPA Act.
the Respondent's construction of 'in force' being read as 'operational' were
correct, there should be a consistent and rational
outcome wherever it is used
across the EPA Act. In some sections of the EPA Act an argument could be made
that 'in force' is used
in the minimal sense and also that it is being used in
the substantial sense such that it is intended to apply only to development
consents that are operational and therefore to exclude unsatisfied deferred
commencement consents (ss 4.66, 4.68, 4.70 and 6.10 EPA
Act). One section,
however, produces an illogical outcome from the Respondent's construction which
suggests it is incorrect.
to s 4.57(1) EPA Act, the Planning Secretary or a Council is entitled to
"any development for which consent under this Division is in force".
No submissions were made which pointed to any legislative intention or reason
why this power would not be available to deferred commencement
consents. It
might be argued that this power is not needed prior to the deferred commencement
condition being satisfied because it
would not be operational. The effect of
that construction would be that a council wishing to revoke a deferred
commencement consent
could not do so until the condition was satisfied. That
outcome seems to produce an irrational effect. If the consent could not be
revoked until the holder of the consent had taken further steps to comply with
the condition, they are likely to incur further expenses
in doing so. Once
revoked, however, the holder would be entitled to compensation from the date
that the consent became effective,
which according to s 4.20 EPA Act is from the
date of grant/registration. By contrast, if 'in force' is interpreted its
minimal sense,
then the council could revoke a deferred commencement consent at
the earliest appropriate time, minimising the costs incurred by
both the holder
and the council.
above review of relevant provisions of the EPA Act and decisions such as
leads to the result that the Tribunal
prefers a construction that a deferred commencement consent is to be treated in
the same way
as all development consents are under the EPA Act in the absence of
any specific provisions to the contrary. Like all development
consents, once
granted, a deferred commencement consent has ongoing legal effect; it is 'in
force' and it continues to have force
until some event happens to remove its
legal effect, such as revocation, statutory lapsing or a finding of
invalidity.
is drawn in the above construction having regard to the actual terms of the
Notice granting the development consent with a
deferred commencement condition
in issue in the present case. In addition to the Applicant's review and appeal
rights, the Notice
draws attention to two matters. First, the date that the
consent becomes effective by reference to s 4.20 EPA Act and, second, the
statutory lapsing provisions by reference to s 4.53 EPA Act. That suggests both
of those concepts are viewed by the consent authority,
the Bayside Panel, as
governing the boundaries of when that type of development consent is in
next question is whether the construction of 'in force' in s 45(3)(c)
is the same as that in the EPA Act.
Construction of
Respondent argued that the reason that
development consent to be 'in force' before ILGA can grant a liquor licence is
to avoid a disjunction whereby a liquor
licence is granted to a person who does
not hold planning permission to use and develop land/premises in the manner
authorised by
the liquor licence. This purpose is said to derive from the
present text of the
and its legislative history. It was
submitted that, to fulfil this purpose,
the applicant to have a development consent which can presently be acted upon.
Accordingly, it should be read as requiring
the applicant for a liquor licence
to have a development consent that is 'operational' for the purpose of the EPA
the reasons that follow, the Tribunal does not agree with the Respondent's
construction of s 45(3)(c)
. The Tribunal accepts the
Applicant's contention that
only mandates that an
applicant for a liquor licence to have a development consent that is 'in force'
in the manner governed by the
the EPA Act, the words 'in force' in the
are not defined and
are used in a wide variety of contexts; therefore, the phrase has its ordinary
and not technical sense.
are no explanatory materials which give any specific assistance in determining
the legislative intention behind
. There can be no
value in the present case in traversing the history and purpose of past
amendments to the
. As the Respondent notes in its submissions,
the enactment of the
in 2007 (which included
present form) was the result of a:
"complete rewriting of the New South Wales liquor licensing laws"
New South Wales Legislative Assembly, Parliamentary Debates
28 November 2007 at 4632].
Furthermore,
"[d]etermination of a statutory purpose neither permits nor requires some search
for what those who promoted or passed the legislation
may have had in mind when
it was enacted. It is important in this respect, as in others, to recognise that
to speak of legislative
"intention" is to use a metaphor. Use of that metaphor
must not mislead. "[T]he duty of a court is to give the words of a statutory
provision the meaning that the legislature is taken to have intended them to
have" (emphasis added) [footnotes removed]
Certain Lloyd's Underwriters v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
per French CJ
and Hayne J, Keifel J agreeing).
interpretation of
must come from the text and the
statutory purpose as derived from the scheme of the legislation.
Auld v Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority
[2018] NSWCATAD 25
Auld v ILGA - AEOD
), the Tribunal considered the scope and purpose of
in the context of an application to remove
an existing hotel licence from existing premises and grant a different type of
on new premises; holding as follows [27]:
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act
is primarily concerned
with the use of land in NSW and, among other things, requires approvals be given
for certain uses of land.
The purpose of
is to prevent a licence
being granted (or in this case removed) by the Authority in relation to
particular premises unless development
consent (if required under the relevant
environmental planning instrument) has been granted for the use of the premises
for a particular business or activity proposed to be carried on at
those premises. That is, the provision is concerned to ensure
approval, if required, for the use of the premises for a particular business or
activity is in place before a liquor licence
is granted. The provision thus
ensures the integrity of both the planning and liquor licencing regimes.
this decision was subsequently appealed and ultimately set aside by the Court of
Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority v Auld
[2019] NSWCA 88)
the Tribunal's construction of
was approved by the Appeal Panel
ILGA v Auld - AP
) and these findings were not overturned or the subject
of any disapproval as the Court of Appeal did not find it necessary to decide
those grounds. Specifically, the Appeal Panel found:
can be seen as designed, at least in part, to ensure
that the actual business or activity
conducted on the proposed
premises is lawful under the applicable planning regime
" (par 190) (Emphasis
added); and
(2) That the proper construction of
required ILGA to consider "
nature of the actual activity or business
carried out at the
premises on the basis of what is permitted under the authority conferred by the
proposed licence
" (par 193)(Emphasis added) including any conditions
attaching the liquor licence.
construction of
by the Tribunal in
Auld v ILGA -
and the Appeal Panel in
ILGA v Auld - AP
is consistent with this
Tribunal's view that 'in force' means only that the applicant has been granted a
development consent that
has not been revoked or lapsed pursuant to the EPA Act
or otherwise declared to be invalid. The focus of the section is to ensure
the proposed use of the intended licenced premises has been authorised under
planning legislation by the grant of a development
Respondent's construction of s 45(3)(c)
to the effect that the
applicant must be presently entitled to engage in the activity authorised by a
development consent would potentially
result in ILGA needing to assess matters
of planning law for every development application. That is because a deferred
commencement
condition it is not the only condition that prevents its holder
from presently being entitled to undertake the approved development,
engaging in the proposed use of the premises. As averred to in par 49 above,
conditions may be imposed on a development
consent that, for example:
(1) Limit the period during which development may be carried out in accordance
with the consent so granted (s 4.17(1)(d) EPA Act).
(2) Require that development that is ancillary to the core purpose of the
development is carried out to the satisfaction of the consent
authority (s
4.17(2) EPA Act).
(3) Require a development (or aspect of the development) achieve specified
outcomes or objectives (s 4.17(4) EPA Act).
(4) Require the holder of a development consent to provide financial assurance
in respect of the approved development, for example,
by way of a bank guarantee
(s 4.17(4B) EPA Act).
(5) Require the holder give security for the payment of specified costs prior to
undertaking any development authorised by the consent
(s 4.17(6)(9) EPA Act).
the Respondent's logic, a development consent which is granted and subject to
any of the above conditions (which they accept would
be 'in force' pursuant to
the EPA Act) would not be 'in force' for the purpose of the
because further actions must be taken by the applicant, in some cases subject to
the further satisfaction of the consent authority,
before they can engage in the
proposed activity/use of the premises. This construction would require the ILGA
to look in detail at
the relevant conditions of each development consent to
assess whether
is complied with. There is nothing
, including the objects, which gives any support for the
notion that ILGA should concern itself with the terms of a development consent
beyond whether it has been granted and has not been revoked or lapsed or found
to be invalid.
Respondent's construction of 'in force' as having different meanings in the EPA
Act and the
also creates an unhelpful and unwarranted
disjunction in circumstances where it is to be presumed from the interconnection
s 45(3)(c):
"that Parliament intended its legislation to operate rationally, efficiently and
justly, together."
Commissioner of Stamp Duties v Permanent Trustee Co Ltd
(1987) 9 NSWLR
at [723]-[724]).
Respondent could not point to any mischief caused in the
deferred commencement consent was taken, consistently with the EPA Act, to be
'in force' for the purpose of s 45(3)(c)
. The policy
justification for not interpreting deferred commencement consents as being 'in
force' was said to be that it avoids uncertainty
as to whether the applicant
would ever fulfil the condition and be entitled to engage in the use of the
premises which is authorised
by the liquor licence. The Tribunal does not accept
this submission.
the Appeal Panel noted in
ILGA v Auld - AP
at [76], liquor licences give
authority to licensees to conduct regulated activity, they do not mandate that
they engage in that
activity. This applies equally in respect of a development
consent. The holder may engage in the regulated development consistent
terms of the consent, but there is nothing in the EPA Act which requires them to
do so if they choose not to (for any reason).
There is nothing about the scheme
or the EPA Act that suggests that this certainty is
desirable let alone of such significance that it requires a construction of s
45(3)(c) as excluding deferred commencement
Disposition
Tribunal is required to determine what is the correct and preferrable outcome.
Tribunal is of the view that, when determining an application for a liquor
licence, s 45(3)(c)
requires ILGA to be satisfied
(1) the applicant has been granted a development consent or approval pursuant to
the EPA Act which is in force meaning it has not
been revoked and has not lapsed
in the manner governed by the EPA Act or otherwise declared to be invalid;
(2) the type of development permitted by the development consent or approval
includes use of the proposed licenced premises for the
purposes of the business
or activity to which the proposed liquor licence relates.
the present case, the Respondent refused to grant a hotel liquor licence to the
Applicant because of its view that because the
development consent granted to
the Applicant is subject to condition DC1 it did not satisfy (1) above. That
decision was based on
a flawed construction of s 45(3)(c)
Applicant has been granted a development consent (subject to condition DC1)
which has not been revoked, has not lapsed and which
the law presumes is valid.
It is in force and therefore (1) above has been satisfied.
case has focused almost exclusively on the legal construction as to whether the
Applicant held a development consent that was
'in force' and there was no direct
argument about whether the type of development permitted by the consent
satisfies (2) above. On
the face of the material before the Tribunal, this
requirement appears to be satisfied but as it was not the subject of argument
and it is not central to this decision it is not necessary to express a
concluded view.
Respondent's decision to refuse to grant a hotel liquor licence to the Applicant
on the ground that the Applicant did not have
a development consent that is in
force is not legally correct. The next question is what should follow from this
determination.
Tribunal invited the parties to make submissions on the question as to whether
the application for review should be determined
pursuant to
whether an order for remitter should be made pursuant to s 65 ADR Act if the
Tribunal found that the Respondent’s
decision to refuse to grant a hotel
liquor licence was legally incorrect. Both parties urged the Tribunal to remit
the matter to
ILGA pursuant to s 65(1) ADR Act. For the reasons that follow, the
Tribunal accepts this approach is to be preferred.
Respondent’s decision that it did not have power to grant a hotel liquor
licence to the Applicant meant that there was no
consideration of the
application on its merits by ILGA and, it would appear, no investigations,
inquiries or referrals were undertaken
as permitted by s 42
The Respondent has not indicated any view on the merits of the application and
has informed the Tribunal that it wishes to reconsider
its decision if the
Tribunal finds that it is not precluded from granting the Applicant a hotel
. It is plainly appropriate that ILGA, as
the body with authority for investigating and assessing licence applications,
should initially
consider the merits of whether the Applicant should be granted
a hotel licence. There is no utility in the Tribunal proceeding to
determine the
correct and preferrable decision until that has occurred. It may be that the
Respondent determines to grant a hotel
licence to the Applicant, in which case
there will be no dispute requiring resolution by the Tribunal.
to the power of the Tribunal, the following options are available that will give
the Respondent the opportunity to reconsider
its decision:
(1) The Tribunal could make orders pursuant to
ADR Act to set aside
ILGA’s decision and remit the matter to ILGA for reconsideration in
accordance with these reasons.
(2) The Tribunal could remit the decision now to ILGA for reconsideration of the
decision pursuant to s 65(1) ADR Act.
power to remit in s 63(3)(d) ADR Act has attraction in this case. ILGA’s
decision was plainly legally wrong and should be
set aside. The exercise of this
power is constrained, however, pursuant to
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
Force v Davies
[2025] NSWCATAP 36
to circumstances where:
1 ... the Tribunal ... is “unable to make” or is
“not in a position to formulate” a decision in substitution
decision set aside.
Neither party addressed this issue in their submissions, but it is
unnecessary to determine whether this power is available in the
present case as,
for the reasons that follow, the Tribunal considers that remitter under s
63(3)(d) ADR Act in the present case would
result in a significant disadvantage
for the Applicant and that remitter under s 65(1) ADR Act better achieves
justice between the
parties in this case.
the Tribunal were to remit the proceedings pursuant to s 63(3)(d) ADR Act, the
decision is final and the new decision by ILGA would
exhaust the
Tribunal’s administrative review jurisdiction:
Webb v Port Stephens
[2020] NSWCATAP 152
The Appeal Panel
found at [25] to [38] that a decision of an administrator flowing
from a direction by the Tribunal to reconsider the decision under
pursuant to s 63(3)(d) ADR Act is not an administratively reviewable decision.
applies to the present case, the result would be that if, after
considering the merits, ILGA refuses to grant the Applicant a hotel
licence, the
Applicant would have no right to seek administrative review of that refusal
a relevant factor for the Appeal Panel was that the enabling
legislation, the
Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009
), provided that reviewable decisions include a decision that is
in response to an access application
[emphasis added]”. It
was held that a decision made at the direction of the Tribunal following
remitter pursuant to
ADR Act could not be “in response
to” an access application.
definition of reviewable decision in
is substantively different to
the power of review under the GLA Act which arises in respect of a decision
in relation to an application
[emphasis added]” (s 13A GLA
Act) for a hotel licence (s 4(a)(i) GLA Regulation). On its face, “in
relation to”
is arguably so broad as to encompass a decision of an
administrator made following remitter.
one exception, the only decisions applying
appear to relate to
administrative review under
Fong v Secretary, Department of
Customer Service (No 2)
[2025] NSWCATOD 84
following a
thorough consideration of the law, Senior Member Ledda found that
was applicable to administrative review under the
(NSW) (HB Act). Relevantly, the HB Act provides for administrative
review by the Tribunal of “
any decision... relating to the application
[Emphasis added]” in question (s 83B(1) HB Act). Senior Member Ledda
persuasively reasoned that, while the words “relating
to” in the HB
Act would include a decision made in response to a remitter from the Tribunal,
having regard to the history of
the remitter powers in s 63 and s 65 ADR Act and
proper construction of the ADR Act, an order under s 63(3)(d) ADR Act exhausted
the Tribunal’s administrative review jurisdiction over the decision made
in response to that order.
is no material difference between a decision that is amenable to review pursuant
to the gaming and liquor legislation and the
HB Act, and for the reasons in
Fong (No 2)
, the Tribunal is satisfied that
applies in the
present case such that, if an order was made remitting the matter pursuant to s
63(3)(d) ADR Act, the Applicant would
be precluded from further administrative
review of the decision following remitter. While nothing about either
Fong (No 2)
affects any right the Applicant might have to seek
judicial review, lack of merits review would remove from the Applicant a
substantial
right of access to justice.
the Tribunal remits the matter to ILGA pursuant to s 65(1) ADR Act, that
decision is interlocutory but there is a clear pathway
forward which protects
the interests of all parties. The effect of this section was explained by the
Appeal Panel in
Wojciechowska v Secretary, Department of Communities and
Justice; Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice v Wojciechowska
[2025] NSWCATAP 248:
34. In the usual course of a remittal under s 65 of the ADR Act, a decision
maker may, on reconsidering the decision, do one of several
things: affirm, vary
or set aside the original decision and in substitution make a new decision.
Correlatively, the access applicant
1. if the decision is not varied or substituted, proceed on the application for
review, as it was, or
2. if the decision is varied or substituted, proceed on the application for
review on that varied or substituted decision; or
3. withdraw the application.
parties seek that the Tribunal remit the matter pursuant to s 65(1) rather than
s 63(3)(d) ADR Act. That approach is within the
Tribunal’s power and, in
the circumstances of this case, the Tribunal is satisfied it accords with the
object of resolving
the real issues justly, quickly and cheaply.
these reasons, the decision under review will be remitted to the Respondent for
reconsideration. The proceedings will be listed
for directions as to the future
conduct of the matter unless, following the outcome of the reconsideration by
the Respondent, the
Applicant withdraws their application for review.
(1) Pursuant to s 65(1)
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
matter is remitted to the Respondent for reconsideration.
(2) By 22 December 2025 the Respondent is to tell the Tribunal and the other
party whether the decision has been affirmed, varied
or set aside and if there
is a new decision.
(3) By 14 January 2026 the Applicant is to tell the Tribunal and the other party
whether they are continuing or withdrawing the application
for review.
(4) The proceeding is listed for directions on 20 January 2026 at 9:30 am at
John Maddison Tower, Level 10, 86-90 Goulburn Street,
Sydney (unless withdrawn
(5) The parties are granted liberty to apply to relist the matter for further
directions on giving 3 days notice.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (392 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter