URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2021/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice v Galea [2021] NSWWCCPD 1 (13 January 2021)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice v
[2021] NSWWCCPD 1
Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice
RESPONDENT:
Marlene Galea
FILE NUMBER:
ARBITRATOR:
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
27 July 2020
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
13 January 2021
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Extension of time to appeal pursuant to r 16.2(5) of the
Compensation Commission Rules 2011
; injury arising out of employment –
application of
Badawi v Nexon Asia Pacific Pty Limited trading as Commander
Australia Pty Limited
[2009] NSWCA 324; 7 DDCR 75;
section 9A(2)
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Workers Compensation
– application of
Renew God’s Program Pty Ltd v
[2019] NSWWCCPD 45
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Michael Snell
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Ms L Goodman, counsel
Bartier Perry
Respondent:
Mr D Adhikary, counsel
Santone Lawyers
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
employer’s application to extend time for the bringing of this appeal
pursuant to
rule 16.2(5)
Workers Compensation Commission Rules 2011
is refused.
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Galea (the worker) was employed by the Department of Communities and Justice
(the employer) from 2004 as a disability care
worker. She worked part-time, in
the vicinity of 120 hours per
was an incident in early 2013, when the worker had made a pudding and put it in
the staff refrigerator. A co-worker took a sample
of saliva from the mouth of a
disabled boy and spread it over the pudding, unbeknown to the worker, who
subsequently ate the pudding.
A few months later, on 21 June 2013, another
co-worker asked the worker if she had hepatitis yet and told her what had
The worker was upset, reported the matter and saw her general
practitioner to have a blood test performed. She said she was very
stressed and
was a further incident on 23 June 2013. The worker was driving a work bus, she
was the only staff member present, and she saw
that a teenaged boy in the back,
who was about six feet tall, had removed his seatbelt. She stopped and went to
assaulted her. The worker could not use her remote control to
open the back door of the bus and was trapped with the boy. She said
“trapped and very afraid”, and the assault continued for
“about an hour”. She said she used tape
to make the word
“Help” on the bus window and eventually another departmental vehicle
pulled over and freed her.
was antipathy between the worker and the co-worker who had told her about the
pudding. He accused the worker of “dobbing”
and said he did not wish
to work with her. The worker said she felt “threatened and abused”
by him and did not wish to
come in contact with him under any circumstances. The
worker developed psychological symptoms and the employer accepted liability
pay compensation on a voluntary basis. She resumed on a return to work program
in about November 2013. She suffered a significant
stroke in June 2014 and has
not worked since.
worker was at a shopping centre when she saw Roberta,
a person she had worked
with, who had been “mean” to her and had been involved in the
incident involving the pudding.
The worker said she was “very shocked and
surprised”, became distressed, found breathing difficult and her chest
She experienced chest
pain. She attended Gosford Hospital on 24 December 2015 and was diagnosed
with Takotsubo Cardiomyopathy
worker’s claim is for lump sum compensation. She alleges psychological
injury with a deemed date of 26 July 2013. She alleges
injury to the
cardiovascular system in the incident on about 24 December 2015. In the
alternative she alleges that the TCM is a consequential
condition that results
from the psychological injury.
employer accepts the occurrence of a psychological injury on or about 23 June
2013. It denies that the stroke in 2015 was an ‘injury’
was a consequential condition that resulted from the psychological injury. (This
may have been raised previously but is
not alleged in the current proceedings).
The employer denies that the worker has sustained at least 15 per cent permanent
in respect of the psychological
The employer denies that
the heart condition resulted from the psychological injury. It relies on
Workers Compensation Act 1987
The employer denies that the
worker suffered “injury” involving TCM, it denies that employment
was the main contributing
factor to the condition (referring to s 4(b) of the
1987 Act). It denies that the incident on about 24 December 2015 was in the
of the worker’s employment or “connected with your employment
in any way”. It denies that ss 9A and 9B of the 1987
matter was listed for an arbitration hearing on 10 June 2020. The worker was
represented by Mr Adhikary and the employer by Ms
Goodman. Counsel for the
parties addressed and the Arbitrator reserved his decision. The Commission
issued a Certificate of Determination
dated 27 July 2020. The Arbitrator found
that the alleged injuries (both psychological and to the cardiovascular system)
out. The finding was of two separate injuries within the meaning of s
4 of the 1987 Act, rather than a finding that the cardiac complaints
represented
a consequential condition. Thus s 65A(4) of the 1987 Act did not apply. The
Arbitrator made an award on the basis of
20 per cent permanent impairment in
respect of the cardiac injury (the identical assessment made by each of the
medicolegal cardiologists,
one on each side of the record, was 20 per cent). He
referred permanent impairment in respect of the psychological injury to an
Medical Specialist (AMS) for assessment.
THE ARBITRATOR’S REASONS
Arbitrator said the parties agreed that TCM was a ‘heart attack
injury’ within the meaning of s 9B of the 1987 Act.
He said the parties
agreed that the following matters (all of which related to the condition of TCM)
were the issues in dispute:
(a) whether it was a work-related injury
(s 4 of the 1987 Act);
(b) whether employment was a substantial contributing factor (s 9A of the
(c) whether s 9B of the 1987 Act was satisfied, and
(d) whether, if TCM was not an injury within the meaning of s 4, it was a
consequential condition resulting from the accepted psychological
Arbitrator said it was agreed that, if there was a finding in the worker’s
favour on the issue of the TCM injury, her level
of permanent impairment in
respect of that injury was 20 per cent, the figure assessed by each of the
Independent Medical Examiners.
The Arbitrator noted that counsel put on written submissions dealing with the
issue of whether TCM was a consequential
Arbitrator referred to
Castro v State Transit Authority
as authority for the
proposition that ‘injury’ within the meaning of s 4 of the 1987 Act
involves a “sudden or
identifiable pathological change”. He referred
Zickar v MGH Plastic Industries Pty
saying that the
presence of a ‘disease’ does not preclude reliance upon an event as
a personal injury, and that ‘personal
injury’ and
‘disease’ are not mutually
Arbitrator said the medical evidence established that the TCM was “brought
on by emotional/psychological stressors ... There
is no medical evidence which
contradicts that opinion.”
He said the worker had ceased employment some time before the incident in
December 2015. He said the employer’s counsel conceded
nevertheless still possible for the injury to
arise out of
[worker’s] employment, even after that employment had ceased”
(emphasis in original). The Arbitrator accepted that,
to be an injury arising
out of the employment, there must be a causal connection between the employment
and the injury. He quoted
from the passage in
Kooragang Cement Pty Ltd v
in which Kirby P spoke
of the requirement for a “commonsense evaluation of the causal
Arbitrator referred to the events of 21 and 23 June 2013 and to the subsequent
antagonism between the worker and her co-worker
who had made the remark about
hepatitis (see [2] to [4] above). The Arbitrator said the worker stated she felt
threatened by her
co-workers and told the employer that she did not wish to see
any of the people involved in the hepatitis incident. The Arbitrator
referred to
the worker’s reaction, on about 24 December 2015, when she saw Roberta in
a shopping centre (see [5] above). He
referred to the reports of Dr Robinson,
the treating psychiatrist. Dr Robinson recorded the worker became “upset,
shaking” when discussing her former co-workers and her reaction
to seeing Roberta in December
Arbitrator quoted from the opinion of Dr Herman, the cardiologist qualified by
the employer:
“In the setting of a significant psychological
injury, the chance meeting with a work colleague provoked significant
psychological
Emotional stress is [a] well known trigger for the provocation of a
Takotsubo’s (stress induced) cardiomyopathy in middle-aged
ladies who are
predisposed”.
“In my opinion, her pre-existing psychological condition
(post-traumatic stress disorder in relation to bullying and harassment
was a key factor in provoking anxiety which subsequently led to her
Takotsubo’s cardiomyopathy.”
Arbitrator also quoted from the report of Dr Haber, qualified in the
worker’s case, who was supportive of this causal
connection.
Arbitrator said he accepted the worker’s submission that “the TCM
was a frank injury, in that there was a pathological
change brought about when
the [worker] saw her former colleague”. He said that, on the lay and
medical evidence, the worker
“has clearly established on the balance of
probabilities that her cardiac injury arose out of her employment with the
respondent”.
The Arbitrator described the worker’s development of
TCM as constituting “a sudden identifiable pathological change to
brought about by the work-related external event of seeing her former
colleague”. He said “it is a personal
injury within the meaning of s
4 of the 1987 Act”.
Arbitrator dealt with whether s 9A of the 1987 Act was satisfied. He said this
was “a question of fact and is a matter of
impression and degree”,
Dayton v Coles Supermarkets Pty
He said that employment
must be “a substantial contributing factor”, not “
substantial contributing factor” (emphasis in original). He said
“[t]here may be more than one substantial contributing
factor to a single
injury”, citing
Mercer v ANZ Banking
He referred to a
submission on the employer’s part that there were “no work-related
factors” in the encounter with
a former colleague at the shopping centre.
The Arbitrator rejected this, saying that were it not for the worker’s
she would not have suffered the TCM injury. This was the opinion of
every doctor in the proceedings. The Arbitrator accepted that
s 9A required a
causal relationship between the employment and the injury, making reference to
Badawi v Nexon Asia Pacific Pty Limited trading as Commander Australia Pty
The worker’s
statement and the medical evidence established “such a causal
connection”. The Arbitrator said that
Arbitrator then dealt with s 9B of the 1987 Act. He said the condition of TCM
fell within the definition of a ‘heart attack
injury’. The
employment caused psychological issues which in turn caused the condition of
TCM. Dr Herman said that unexpectedly
meeting a former work colleague would
probably not have provoked emotion, which triggered cardiomyopathy, if not for
the prior work-related
psychological injury. This is supported also by Dr
Haber’s opinion. The Arbitrator said he accepted a submission by the
that, in looking at the worker’s employment, it was insufficient to
simply examine the duties. It was necessary also to examine
the interactions
with patients and co-workers which the employment
Arbitrator said he accepted that the worker’s employment gave rise to a
significantly greater risk of a heart attack injury.
It put the worker in a
position where she was assaulted and where she was exposed to the
“appalling conduct regarding the attempted
hepatitis infection”. The
Arbitrator continued:
“Had those aspects of her employment not
happened, the [worker] in turn would not have sought to dissociate herself from
co-workers and the TCM would not have occurred. All of the relevant medical
evidence supports a finding that were it not for the
prior psychological
stressors brought about at work, the [worker] would not have suffered from TCM.
Such evidence is, in my opinion,
strongly suggestive of a significantly
increased risk of injury as a result of the employment than had the [worker] not
[employer].”
Arbitrator referred to earlier decisions of mine in
De Silva v Secretary,
Department of Finance, Services and
God’s Program Pty Ltd v
He said it is settled
law that s 9B involves an evaluative task, comparing the risks to which the
employment concerned gives rise,
with the risks if the worker was not employed
in employment of that nature. It is an assessment of comparative risk, not a
true causation.
Arbitrator said the employment exposed the worker to psychological stressors
which gave rise to the TCM injury. If she was not
exposed to that heightened
risk there would have been significantly less risk of the heart attack injury
occurring. The Arbitrator
said that if the worker had not been exposed to the
factors that caused her psychological injury, she would not have suffered her
cardiac injury. He concluded the requirements of s 9B were
Arbitrator said the correct date of the cardiac injury was 24 December 2015,
when the worker had an encounter with her former
work colleague. Consistent with
the assessments by both parties’ qualified cardiologists and the
parties’ agreement,
the Arbitrator found the worker suffered 20 per cent
whole person impairment as a result of the cardiac
Arbitrator said that the accepted psychological injury occurred on 26 July 2013,
and he had found the TCM was a separate frank
injury on 24 December 2015. There
were two discrete injuries. Section 65A(4) did not apply. The worker was
entitled to claim lump
sum compensation in respect of both the psychological
injury and the TCM
THE NATURE OF AN APPEAL PURSUANT TO SECTION 352(5)
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act), pursuant to which this appeal is brought,
“An appeal under this section is limited to a
determination of whether the decision appealed against was or was not affected
by any error of fact, law or discretion, and to the correction of any such
error. The appeal is not a review or new hearing.”
Raulston v Toll Pty Ltd
Roche DP applied
Whiteley Muir & Zwanenberg Ltd v
(cited with
approval by Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ in
v Cosmarnan Concrete Pty
) to the nature of the
appeal process pursuant to s 352 of the 1998 Act:
Arbitrator, though not basing his or her findings on credit, may have preferred
one view of the primary facts to another
as being more probable. Such a finding
may only be disturbed by a Presidential member if ‘other probabilities so
outweigh that
chosen by the [Arbitrator] that it can be said that his [or her]
conclusion was wrong’.
(b) Having found the primary facts, the Arbitrator may draw a particular
inference from them. Even here the ‘fact of the [Arbitrator’s]
decision must be displaced’. It is not enough that the Presidential
member would have drawn a different inference. It must
be shown that the
Arbitrator was wrong.
(c) It may be shown that an Arbitrator was wrong ‘by showing that
material facts have been overlooked, or given undue or too
little weight in
deciding the inference to be drawn: or the available inference in the opposite
sense to that chosen by the [Arbitrator]
is so preponderant in the opinion of
the appellate court that the [Arbitrator’s] decision is
Davis v Ryco Hydraulics Pty Ltd
, Keating P observed that these principles
“have been consistently applied in the
Commission”.
President in
also cited the following passage from
Ltd v Owston Nominees (No 2) Pty
in that process of considering the facts for itself and giving weight to the
views of, and advantages held by, the trial
judge, if a choice arises between
conclusions equally open and finely balanced and where there is, or can be, no
preponderance of
view, the conclusion of error is not necessarily arrived at
merely because of a preference of view of the appeal court for some fact
facts contrary to the view reached by the trial
Northern NSW Local Health Network v
Sackville AJA
, if a statutory right of appeal
requires a demonstration that the decision appealed against was affected by
error, the appellate
tribunal is not entitled to interfere with the decision on
the ground that it thinks that a different outcome is preferable: see
[1986] HCA 17
161 CLR 513
principles applicable to appeals pursuant to s 352(5) of the 1998 Act were
recently considered by the Court of Appeal in
Workers Compensation Nominal
Insurer v Hill.
Honours said there was no error in a Presidential member, dealing with an appeal
pursuant to s 352(5), applying the description
of a judge’s function on
appeal as explained by Barwick CJ in
Whiteley Muir.
“With respect to errors of fact finding, the line
between preferring a different result and identifying error is by no means
to draw, but that is clearly what the Deputy President sought to do by adopting
the language complained of. It was also what
Barwick CJ sought to do in
Whiteley Muir
in using such language to identify the difference between
an appeal based on a finding of error and a hearing de novo (and, one must
add, a rehearing). If, on an appeal by way of rehearing, the court asked whether
the findings of fact were ‘open’
to the trial judge, that might
demonstrate an unduly limited understanding of the court’s function;
however, that language
is not out of place in determining an appeal from factual
findings under
LEGISLATION
4 of the 1987 Act provides:
4 Definition of
(cf former s 6 (1))
In this Act—
(a) means personal injury arising out of or in the course of
employment,
(b) includes a
disease injury
(i) a disease that is contracted by a worker in the course of
employment but only if the employment was the main contributing factor
contracting the disease, and
(ii) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration in
the course of employment of any disease, but only if the employment
was the main
contributing factor to the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of the disease, and
(c) does not include (except in the case of a worker employed in or
Compensation (Dust Diseases) Act 1942
, or the aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation or deterioration of a dust disease, as so defined.”
9 of the 1987 Act provides:
9 Liability of employers for
injuries received by workers—general
(cf former s 7(1)(a))
(1) A worker who has received an injury (and, in the case of the death
of the worker, his or her dependants) shall receive compensation
worker’s employer in accordance with this Act.
(2) Compensation is payable whether the injury was received by the
worker at or away from the worker’s place of employment.”
9A of the 1987 Act provides:
9A No compensation
payable unless employment substantial contributing factor to injury
(1) No compensation is payable under this Act in respect of an injury
(other than a disease injury) unless the employment concerned
was a substantial
contributing factor to the injury.
In the case of a disease injury, the worker’s employment must be the
main contributing factor. See section 4.
(2) The following are examples of matters to be taken into account for
the purposes of determining whether a worker’s employment
substantial contributing factor to an injury (but this subsection does not limit
the kinds of matters that can be taken into
account for the purposes of such a
determination)—
(a) the time and place of the injury,
(b) the nature of the work performed and the particular tasks of that
(c) the duration of the employment,
(d) the probability that the injury or a similar injury would have
happened anyway, at about the same time or at the same stage of
worker’s life, if he or she had not been at work or had not worked in that
employment,
(e) the worker’s state of health before the injury and the
existence of any hereditary risks,
(f) the worker’s lifestyle and his or her activities outside the
(3) A worker’s employment is not to be regarded as a substantial
contributing factor to a worker’s injury merely because
of either or both
of the following—
(a) the injury arose out of or in the course of, or arose both out of
and in the course of, the worker’s employment,
(b) the worker’s incapacity for work, loss as referred to in
Division 4 of Part 3, need for medical or related treatment, hospital
ambulance service or workplace rehabilitation service as referred to in Division
3 of Part 3, or the worker’s death,
resulted from the injury.
(4) This section does not apply in respect of an injury to which
section 10, 11 or 12 applies.”
9B of the 1987 Act relevantly provides:
compensation for heart attack or stroke unless nature of employment results in
significantly greater risk
(1) No compensation is payable under this Act in respect of an injury
that consists of, is caused by, results in or is associated
with a heart attack
injury or stroke injury unless the nature of the employment concerned gave rise
to a significantly greater risk
of the worker suffering the injury than had the
worker not been employed in employment of that nature.
(2) In this section—
heart attack injury
means an injury to the heart, or any
blood vessel supplying or associated with the heart, that consists of, is caused
by, results
in or is associated with—
(a) any heart attack, or
(b) any myocardial infarction, or
(c) any myocardial ischaemia, or
(d) any angina, whether unstable or otherwise, or
(e) any fibrillation, whether atrial or ventricular or otherwise,
(f) any arrhythmia of the heart, or
(g) any tachycardia, whether ventricular, supra ventricular or
otherwise, or
(h) any harm or damage to such a blood vessel or to any associated
(i) any impairment, disturbance or alteration of blood, or blood
circulation, within such a blood vessel, or
(j) any occlusion of such a blood vessel, whether the occlusion is
total or partial, or
(k) any rupture of such a blood vessel, including any rupture of an
aneurism of such a blood vessel, or
(l) any haemorrhage from such a blood vessel, or
(m) any aortic dissection, or
(n) any consequential physical harm or damage, including harm or damage
to the brain, or
(o) any consequential mental harm or damage.”
65A(4) of the 1987 Act provides:
“(4) If a worker
receives a primary psychological injury and a physical injury, arising out of
the same incident, the worker
is only entitled to receive compensation under
this Division in respect of impairment resulting from one of those injuries, and
that purpose the following provisions apply—
(a) the degree of permanent impairment that results from the primary
psychological injury is to be assessed separately from the degree
of permanent
impairment that results from the physical injury (despite section 65 (2)),
(b) the worker is entitled to receive compensation under this Division
for impairment resulting from whichever injury results in
the greater amount of
compensation being payable to the worker under this Division (and is not
entitled to receive compensation under
this Division for impairment resulting
from the other injury),
(c) the question of which injury results in the greater amount of
compensation is, in default of agreement, to be determined by the
Commission.
If there is more than one physical injury those injuries will still be
assessed together as one injury under section 322 of the 1998
separately from any psychological injury. Similarly, if there is more than one
psychological injury those psychological
injures will be assessed together as
one injury, but separately from any physical injury.”
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the 1998 Act provides:
“(6) If the Commission
is satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection
with proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
regard to Practice Directions Nos 1 and 6; the documents that are before me, and
the submissions by both parties that the appeal
can proceed to be determined on
the basis of these documents, I am satisfied that I have sufficient information
to proceed ‘on
the papers’ without holding any conference or formal
hearing and that this is the appropriate course in the circumstances.
THRESHOLD MATTERS REGARDING QUANTUM
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
pursuant to ss 352(3) of the 1998 Act have been
THRESHOLD MATTERS REGARDING TIME
appeal was not made within the period of 28 days stipulated in s 352(4) of the
1998 Act. The employer requires an extension of
time if the appeal is to
(5) and (6) of r 16.2 of the
Workers Compensation Commission Rules 2011
Rules) provide:
“(5) The Commission constituted by a
Presidential member may, if a party satisfies the Presidential member, in
exceptional
circumstances, that to lose the right to appeal would work
demonstrable and substantial injustice, by order extend the time for making
(6) A party who seeks an extension of time as referred to in subrule
(a) as soon as practicable give notice to the other parties of the
intention to seek the extension, and
(b) lodge and serve with the application to appeal an application for
the extension of time, including full details of the arguments
to be put in
favour of granting the extension.”
THE APPLICATION TO EXTEND TIME
The employer’s submissions on the extension of
employer submits that it originally lodged its appeal on 24 August 2020, within
time. The appeal was rejected by the Registrar
on 25 August 2020 due to
procedural requirements that were not met. It was relodged on 26 August 2020
with those matters having been
rectified, but by then it was out of time. The
employer submits that it provided instructions to its solicitors to appeal on
21 August 2020. Its solicitors and counsel worked on the appeal over the
weekend on the basis it would be lodged on 24 August 2020.
It was believed at
that stage that the appeal would be compliant. The appeal was served on 24
August 2020. It submits the period
of delay is minimal and would not have caused
prejudice. It submits the appeal has reasonable prospects of success and failure
grant the extension would cause demonstrable and substantial injustice. The
employer submits it would have been open to the Registrar
to accept the
deficient appeal when it was initially lodged and to issue a direction to
rectify the relatively minor procedural deficiencies.
It refers to the approach
taken in a similar application in
Duck v EB and DE Bunt Pty
The worker’s submissions on the extension of time
worker refers to the decision in
dealing with exercise
of the discretion to extend time to appeal. She refers to the need for a
Presidential member to consider the
presence of ‘exceptional
circumstances’ when dealing with such an application, although the
presence of ‘exceptional
circumstances’ is not a precondition to the
exercise of the discretion.
worker submits delay is not adequately explained. The period from 28 July 2020
(the decision was issued on 27 July 2020) to 3
August 2020 is not explained. The
explanation does not indicate when advice was sought or received from counsel
following issue of
the arbitral decision. The worker submits that the employer
does not state whether ‘exceptional circumstances’ exist.
the appeal does not have reasonable prospects of
worker submits that
, on which the employer relies, can be
distinguished. In
it was found that ‘exceptional
circumstances’ existed. Delay in the lodgement of an appeal due to
procedural non-compliance
does not constitute ‘exceptional
circumstances’. Additionally, it was found in
that the appeal
had prospects of success. It is submitted the current appeal does not have
prospects of success.
Consideration
judgment of McHugh J in
has been regularly applied in the
Commission in dealing with extension applications. I accept that this is
appropriate. Those principles
were summarised by Roche DP in
Allen v Roads
and Maritime Services
as involving the need to have regard to the
“(a) the history of the proceedings;
(b) the conduct of the parties;
(c) the nature of the litigation;
(d) the consequences for the parties of the grant or refusal of the
application for the extension of time;
(e) the prospects of the applicant succeeding in the appeal, and
(f) upon expiry of the time for appealing, the respondent has a vested right
to retain the judgment unless the application for extension
additionally note what was said in the Court of Appeal in
Land Enviro
Pty Ltd v HTT Huntley Heritage Pty Ltd
primary considerations on an application for leave to extend time within which
to appeal are:
(a) the extent of the delay and the reasons therefor;
(b) the prejudice to the applicant if the application were to be
(c) the prejudice to the defendant from the delay if the application were to
be granted;
(d) the prospects of success on the proposed
Exceptional circumstances
Allsop P (as his Honour then was) (Beazley and Giles JJA agreeing),
dealing with the extension of time provisions in the Rules,
“In my view, the phrase ‘in exceptional
circumstances’ finding its place in the middle of the rule is to be dealt
with as a matter to be considered by the Presidential member as a matter within
operation of
Yacoub v Pilkington (Australia) Ltd
Campbell JA dealt with the phrase
‘exceptional circumstances’ in the context of the
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
“(a) Exceptional circumstances
are out of the ordinary course or unusual, or special, or uncommon. They need
not be unique,
or unprecedented, or very rare, but they cannot be circumstances
that are regularly, routinely or normally encountered:
[1999] UKHL 4
[2000] 1 QB 198
(b) Exceptional circumstances can exist not only by reference to
quantitative matters concerning relative frequency of occurrence,
but also by
reference to qualitative factors:
R v Buckland
[2000] EWCA Crim 1
[2000] 1 WLR 1262
[2000] 1 All ER 907
(at 1268; 912–913).
(c) Exceptional circumstances can include a single exceptional matter, a
combination of exceptional factors, or a combination of
ordinary factors which,
although individually of no particular significance, when taken together are
seen as exceptional:
Ho v Professional Services Review Committee No 295
[2007] FCA 388
(d) In deciding whether circumstances are exceptional within the meaning of
a particular statutory provision, one must keep in mind
the rationale of that
particular statutory provision:
R v Buckland
(e) Beyond these general guidelines, whether exceptional circumstances exist
depends upon a careful consideration of the facts of
the individual case:
v Independent News Auckland
[1996] 2 NZLR 184
the phrase appears in the extension of time provisions of the Rules, it is
appropriate to consider the phrase in the context
of the ‘System
objectives’ and ‘Procedure before the Commission’, described
in ss 3 and
respectively, of the 1998 Act.
current appeal is out of time because it was rejected, when initially lodged,
due to non-compliance with the relevant procedural
requirements. It has been
regularly held that where an appeal is out of time, due to inadvertence or legal
error, this does not constitute
‘exceptional
circumstances’.
circumstances are not “out of the ordinary course or unusual, or special,
or uncommon”. The employer’s submissions
do not specifically address
the presence of ‘exceptional circumstances’. There is nothing out of
the ordinary course,
unusual, special or uncommon about an appeal becoming out
of time in such circumstances. ‘Exceptional circumstances’
made out. The absence of ‘exceptional circumstances’ does not
constitute the absence of a precondition to an
extension. It is a matter I am
required to consider in dealing with whether my discretion should be exercised
in the circumstances.
The absence of ‘exceptional circumstances’ is
a factor that militates against the extension of time.
extent of the delay is short. The appeal would have been lodged in time if not
for the procedural difficulties, it was successfully
lodged shortly out of time.
The worker is critical of the absence of an explanation of delay between 28 July
2020 (the date the decision
was forwarded to the parties) and 3 August
The employer’s
explanation states that its solicitor (I infer the solicitor with conduct) was
on leave from 28 July 2020 to
3 August 2020 (a Monday). It states the solicitor
then referred the decision to counsel for advice, and on 13 August 2020
instructions from the employer regarding whether it wished to appeal. It
states those instructions were not forthcoming until Friday
21 August 2020, when
the employer indicated it wished to
The explanation could
have been more precise regarding when specific events took place. The period
from 28 July 2020 to 3 August
2020 (which included a weekend) is adequately
explained by the solicitor being away on leave.
worker’s submissions are critical of the employer for not explaining
precisely when counsel was briefed or counsel’s
advice was received. It
could be reasonably inferred that counsel was briefed on or shortly after 3
August 2020 and furnished an
advice on or shortly prior to 13 August
I appreciate this period
is not precise. At its longest, it is consistent with a period not exceeding ten
days between when a brief
was delivered to counsel and when advice was received
by the employer’s solicitors and furnished to their client, with a request
for instructions. Such a period is not excessive and explains the expiration of
next period is from Thursday 13 August 2020 to Friday 21 August 2020. The
explanation states that on the morning of 21 August
2020 the employer (or its
insurer) gave instructions to pursue a Presidential appeal, the last day for the
lodgment of which was
the following Monday, 24 August
It is unfortunate that
these instructions were furnished to the solicitors at such a late stage,
leaving very little time for the
preparation, collation and lodgment of the
appeal and accompanying documentation. There is nothing from the employer or its
to explain why it took a little in excess of a week for advice from the
solicitor and counsel to be considered and a decision made
on the point.
explanation states that thereafter the employer’s counsel and solicitor
worked jointly preparing the appeal and accompanying
documentation so it could
be lodged on 24 August 2020. This period is adequately explained.
the explanation is considered as a whole, I regard it as adequate,
notwithstanding the difficulty referred to above regarding
the period from 13 to
21 August 2020.
is not suggested that the worker is prejudiced by the delay. If the application
is refused the employer will lose any right it
had to appeal.
History of the proceedings/Conduct of the parties/Nature of
the litigation
is nothing in the history of the proceedings that is relevant to the exercise of
the discretion. The conduct of the employer
or its insurer, in not providing
timely instructions regarding whether it wished to appeal, is a factor, although
a relatively minor
one, that would militate against exercise of the discretion
in the employer’s favour. The nature of the litigation does not
the application to extend time.
The prospects of success
worker submits the appeal does not have any prospects of success and this is a
further reason why an extension of time should
not be granted. This requires a
consideration of the grounds of appeal and their prospects.
CONCLUSION ON THE EXTENSION OF TIME
reasons that follow, I have formed the view, after a full consideration of the
grounds, that the appeal, if time were extended,
would fail. It follows that the
appeal does not have reasonable prospects of success. I note that
‘exceptional circumstances’
are not established. It follows that
there is no prejudice to the employer if the application to extend time is
refused. The interests
of justice do not favour granting the extension which is
application of the employer, to extend time for the making of the appeal
pursuant to r 16.2(5) of the Rules, is refused.
THE GROUNDS OF APPEAL
employer raises the following grounds of appeal:
(a) The Arbitrator
erred in law in finding that the TCM injury arose out of the worker’s
employment in that he:
(i) applied the wrong legal test, and
(ii) failed to take account of the fact that that the worker was no longer
employed by the employer. (Ground No. 1)
(b) The Arbitrator erred in law in finding that the worker’s employment
was a substantial contributing factor to the TCM injury
in accordance with s 9A
of the 1987 Act. (Ground No. 2)
(c) The Arbitrator erred in law and applied the wrong legal test in finding
that the worker’s employment gave rise to a significantly
greater risk of
a ‘heart attack injury’ in accordance with s 9B of the 1987 Act.
(Ground No. 3)
GROUND NO. 1
Employer’s submissions – first limb of Ground No.
employer deals initially with the first limb of Ground No. 1. It refers to the
reasons at [17] where the Arbitrator quoted the
following passage from
“The result of the cases is that each case
where causation is in issue in a workers’ compensation claim, must be
on its own facts. Whether death or incapacity results from a relevant
work injury is a question of fact. The importation of notions
of proximate cause
by the use of the phrase ‘results from’, is not now accepted. By the
same token, the mere proof that
certain events occurred which predisposed a
worker to subsequent injury or death, will not, of itself, be sufficient to
that such incapacity or death ‘results from’ a work
injury. What is required is a commonsense evaluation of the causal
chain. As the
early cases demonstrate, the mere passage of time between a work incident and
subsequent incapacity or death, is not
determinative of the entitlement to
compensation.”
employer noted the accepted psychological injury resulted from becoming aware,
on 21 June 2013, of certain actions of her co-workers,
and on 23 June 2013
being assaulted in a minibus. She then saw a former colleague on about 24
December 2015 in a shopping centre
and got extremely upset, being admitted to
Gosford/Wyong Hospital on the following morning. She was there diagnosed with
TCM, a ‘heart
It submits that
sets out the appropriate causation test for determining whether
death or incapacity results from an injury that is already “defined
created by s 4” of the 1987 Act.
does not represent the
appropriate test for determining whether an injury arises out of the employment.
It was the Arbitrator’s
view that, on the medical evidence, the worker
would not have suffered the episode of TCM if she had not been subjected to the
circumstances that caused her psychological
employer submits that injury arising out of the employment “requires a
causative element which is not satisfied by the mere
fact of being
employed”. It is necessary that employment in the particular job
“must have caused, or to some material
extent contributed to the
insufficient that “but for” the employment the worker would not have
been at the scene of the accident. The employer
The Star Pty Ltd v
v Metropolitan Water Sewerage and Drainage
The employer submits
that the Arbitrator’s reasoning was that the TCM injury arose out of
employment because “but for
her employment and the psychological injury
suffered by her, she would not have suffered the TCM injury”. It submits
not the correct legal
Worker’s submissions – first limb of Ground No.
worker refers to
Nunan v Cockatoo Docks and Engineering Co Pty Ltd
which Jordan CJ referred to the test to demonstrate injury arising out of
employment, saying it involved injury where “the
fact of his [the
worker’s] being employed in the particular job caused, or to some material
extent contributed to, the
The worker quotes
from the judgment of Glass JA in
Tarry v Warringah Shire Council
his Honour said:
“... the injury may arise out of the
employment, even though at the time it is sustained the deceased or the [worker]
longer in the course of his employment ... the proper test for determining
whether the injury arose out of employment has been stated
by Jordan CJ in
], when he describes the employment as causing or contributing to
the injury; by Fullagar J ... when he states the need for a causal
between the employment and the injury and by Starke J in
South Maitland
Railways Pty Ltd v James
[1943] HCA 5
(1943) 67 CLR 496
at 502, when he says
‘the words ‘out of’ require that the injury had its origin in
employment.’”
worker also refers to the passage from
Zinc Corporation Ltd v
quoted at [73]
is also made to
Ryan v Regional Imaging Pty Ltd
in which Keating P,
“A worker will have established
that an injury arose out of the employment if it appears that ‘the fact of
his [or her]
being employed in the particular job caused, or to some material
extent contributed to, the injury
worker submits the employer’s submissions on the topic are
misconceived.
The worker submits
the passage from
relied on by the Arbitrator is not
inconsistent with the above authorities. The employer accepted the psychological
injury was related
to employment. The reasons at [15] to [25] set out the
factors that supported the causal connection. The reasons at [26] to [29]
discussed the medical evidence.
The employer conceded it was possible for an injury to arise out of employment
even after the employment had ceased. The Arbitrator
found injury on the basis
that the worker’s employment caused, or to some material extent
contributed, to the TCM
worker submits it was not the case made by her, or the Arbitrator’s
finding, that causation was satisfied simply on the
basis that she once worked
for the employer and saw an ex-colleague at a shopping centre. The worker did
not allege that, but for
her employment, she would not have been present at the
shopping centre.
Employer’s submissions –‑ second limb of
Ground No. 1
employer submits that the current matter can be distinguished from
the worker was in the course of her
employment when injured. In the current matter the worker had not been employed
by the employer
since June 2014. It submits that “[t]herefore it cannot be
said that anything in the [worker’s] employment had caused
material extent contributed to the TCM injury”. Nothing in the
worker’s employment caused her to attend the
shopping centre in December
2015, it was purely coincidental that “someone she thought she knew”
was there. Nothing about
her work took her to the shopping centre. She was not
certain the person she saw was a former work
The employer refers
to the test stated in
as “what (if anything) the [worker]
was in fact doing in his or her employment that caused or contributed to the
The employer submits that, in
, the worker failed
as “there was nothing [the worker] did as part of his employment that
caused the injury”. The employer
submits that, similarly, there was
nothing the worker in the current case did “in her employment that caused
her to be at the
shopping centre on the day and time of her
Worker’s submissions – second limb of Ground No.
worker refers to the employer’s argument that the Arbitrator failed to
take account of the fact the worker was no longer
in the employer’s employ
at the time of the TCM injury. The worker refers to
Smith v Australian
Woollen Mills Ltd
, in which the majority said:
precise question is not whether the fall arose out of the employment, but
rather, whether the injury sustained in falling
arose out of the
employment.”
employer submits that nothing in the worker’s employment caused her to
attend at the shopping centre on about 24 December
2015, her presence there was
coincidental. The worker submits this involves looking at the shopping centre
attendance in isolation.
It was not the worker’s case that she attended
the shopping centre because of her employment. The employer’s submissions
suggest it was the mere chance meeting with her previous work colleague that
caused the injury and nothing
The worker submits an
injury could arise out of employment even if a worker was not in the course of
his or her employment. The essential
question was whether the employment
“caused, or to some material extent, contributed, to the injury”,
applying what Glass
. The worker submits the employer has
not sought to cavil with the Arbitrator’s factual findings that supported
his conclusion.
worker refers to the employer’s reliance on
. She submits
there are substantial factual differences between the current case and
was an ‘interval’ case. The TCM
injury was not caused simply because the worker attended a shopping centre and
ex-colleague. It was caused by a psychological reaction which had its
genesis in the worker’s employment with the
Consideration
Court of Appeal dealt with the test, to establish the occurrence of injury
‘arising out of’ employment, in
, where it was
“73. The meaning of ‘
arising out of ...
employment’
is settled. In
Nunan v Cockatoo Island Docks &
Engineering Co Ltd
[1941] NSWStRp 23
(1941) 41 SR (NSW)
in what is sometimes still referred to as the authoritative decision on
the phrase the Court (Jordan CJ and Roper J, Nicholas CJ
in Eq agreeing) adopted
a common sense approach to the application of the phrase, noting that it
involved a causative element. In
doing so, their Honours, at 123, endorsed the
comments of Lord Wright in
Dover Navigation Co v Craig
at 199 that the Act was a remedial Act intended to give rights to
workers that were more extensive than common law rights and which
non-technical language in doing so. As Lord Wright said:
‘Nothing could be simpler than the words ‘arising out of and in
the course of employment.’ It is clear that there
are two conditions to be
fulfilled. What arises ‘in the course’ of the employment is to be
distinguished from what arises
‘out of the employment’. The former
words relate to time conditioned by reference to the man’s service, the
to causality. Not every accident which occurs to a man during the time
when he is on his employment, that is directly or indirectly
engaged on what he
is employed to do, gives a claim to compensation unless it also arises out of
the employment. Hence the section
imports a distinction which it does not
define. The language is simple and unqualified.’
Honours also endorsed the comments of Lord Maugham at 193 in the same case in
considering whether the death in that case arose
out of applicant’s
employment:
‘The authorities show, if authorities are needed
on that point, that the words connote a certain degree of causal relation
the accident and the employment. It is impossible to define in positive
terms the degree of that causal connection ...’
Honours concluded, at 124, that a worker would have established that an injury
arose out of employment:
‘... if it appears ... that the fact
of his being employed in the particular job caused, or to some material extent
contributed
to, the injury ...’
the applicant employee was assaulted by a fellow employee in circumstances where
he had ignored a request by the fellow employee
to clean some paint brushes in
another area after the applicant had inadvertently splashed paint on to the
enamel work that the fellow
employee was undertaking. There was no dispute that
the injury thus sustained was sustained in the course of the employment. Jordan
CJ and Roper J held that the applicant’s injury arose out of the
employment. In doing so, they noted that the question whether
a particular
injury arose out of the employment was a matter to be inferred from the facts as
a matter of common
, the Court of Appeal said:
“It would be
inconsistent with High Court authority, including
conclude that it would be sufficient to show that an injury was one
‘arising out of’ employment merely to show that
but for the
employment, the worker would not have been at the scene of the
, Clarke JA said:
“It is now well established at
common law that the test of causation is a common sense one. Any controversy on
the question
has been laid to rest by the decision of the High Court in
v E and M H Stramare Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR 506
]. What needs
to be established is that the event which is sought to be linked with injury
'was so connected with the loss or injury
that, as a matter of ordinary common
sense and experience, it should be regarded as a cause of it’. (see
Halverson Boats Pty Ltd v Robinson
, [1993] 31 NSWLR at 7). The
question is, of course, a question of fact which ‘must be determined by
applying common sense to
the facts of each particular case’ (see,
at 15). In my opinion there is no reason to adopt a different
approach in relation to the test of causation posed by the words ‘arising
out of’. The question of fact is whether there is such a connection
between the worker’s personal injury and his employment
that, as a matter
of ordinary common sense and experience, the injury should be regarded as having
arisen out of that employment.
In deciding that question my preferred view is
that the test laid down by Jordan CJ in
Nunan v Cockatoo Docks and
Engineering Co Ltd
[1941] NSWStRp 23
41 SR (NSW) 119
at 124 - that the fact of his being
employed in the particular job caused, or to some material extent contributed to
the injury -
should be applied. At the very least the test requires that the
employment was a contributing factor to the
employer submits that
sets out the appropriate causation test
for determining whether death or incapacity results from an injury that is
already “defined
and created by s 4” of the 1987 Act.
does not represent the appropriate test for determining whether an injury
arises out of the employment. It submits the Arbitrator’s
reliance on
involved him applying an incorrect test to the issue of whether
the TCM injury was one arising out of the employment.
is necessary that the Arbitrator’s reasons be read as a
The Arbitrator referred
to a number of authorities dealing with the nature of ‘injury’ in
the legislation. He referred
to uncontradicted medical evidence that TCM was
“a cardiac condition, which is brought on by emotional/psychological
stressors”.
He referred to a concession by the employer that it is
possible for injury to arise out of the employment after the employment had
ceased. He accepted that there must be a causal connection between the
employment and the injury at
After quoting from
the Arbitrator said that the “factual background
to the [worker’s] accepted psychological injury is relevant in examining
whether there is any causal link between that accepted injury and the
The Arbitrator then
set out that background at some length, including the incident on about 24
December 2015, when the worker saw
Roberta at a shopping
The Arbitrator discussed
the opinion evidence from the medicolegal reports of the
cardiologists.
“I accept Mr Adhikary’s submission that the
TCM was a frank injury, in that there was a pathological change brought about
when the [worker] saw her former colleague. Given the state of the medical and
lay evidence, in my view, the [worker] has clearly
established on the balance of
probabilities that her cardiac injury arose out of her employment with the
respondent. This is not,
in my view, an aggravation of a psychological disease
process. Rather, it is a physical condition which has come about as a result
the [worker] encountering her former colleague. The psychological work injury is
a precipitating factor to the TCM (indeed, the
medical evidence clearly
establishes it is the main contributing factor to it), but the TCM is a separate
condition to the accepted
injury rather than an aggravation of
is plain, from the above brief summary, that the Arbitrator’s reasoning
did not proceed on the simple basis that
provided an
appropriate test for determining whether injury arising out of the employment
was established. The reasons do not suggest
that the Arbitrator dealt with the
passage from
in this way. Immediately before quoting it, the
Arbitrator referred to the passage as being relevant when “assessing
of causation in the workers compensation
I do not accept
the employer’s submission that the Arbitrator applied a wrong test to the
principles governing the establishment
of injury ‘arising out of’
employment, on the basis of his reference to the test in
test on causation.
employer submits that “‘arising out of the employment’
requires a causative element which is not satisfied by
the mere fact of being
Arbitrator’s acceptance of that requirement is apparent from the passages
of the reasons referred to and quoted above.
The Arbitrator specifically
referred to the need to examine any causal link between the accepted
psychological injury and the condition
of TCM. The psychological injury was, of
course, one that was accepted as resulting from events to which the worker was
part of her employment duties with the employer. The Arbitrator found
that the psychological work injury was “the main contributing
factor” to the TCM injury. It is inherent in this finding that the work
duties which caused the psychological injury were,
in the unusual factual
circumstances of this case, also causative of the TCM injury.
employer argues that the Arbitrator’s finding is analogous to one that
“‘but for’ the employment, the
worker would not have been at
the scene of the accident” (which would not satisfy the relevant test, see
[61] above).
In rejecting the
employer’s submission on causation the Arbitrator made a factual
“In my view, the medical evidence clearly supports a
finding that had the [worker] not been subjected to the factors which caused
accepted psychological injury, then she would not have suffered the episode of
TCM which has left her with impaired cardiac
is not a finding that the causal connection is nothing more than one that puts a
worker at the scene of an accident that then
befalls him or her. It is a finding
that the pleaded employment duties resulted in the psychological injury (which
the employer accepted)
and that the common sense causal chain extended to the
condition of TCM, which on the medical evidence resulted from the psychological
passage from
quoted at [73] above refers to the “ordinary
common sense and experience” causation test in
quoted by the Arbitrator was the “commonsense” test in
, which is regularly applied in the Commission. The worker, in
her submissions on this appeal, quoted and relied on the above passage
. The employer did not lodge submissions in reply to suggest there
was inconsistency between the two tests, of such a nature that
it would affect
the appropriateness of the causation test applied by the Arbitrator. There is
not, in my view, relevant inconsistency
between the two.
Arbitrator approached the issue of whether the worker suffered injury
‘arising out of’ her employment in a fashion
consistent with the
authorities quoted above. I do not accept that he applied a wrong legal
employer seeks to distinguish the current matter from
. This does
not assist the employer’s position. The passage from
above sets out the relevant test, by reference to settled authority, in a way
that is not specific to the factual position
. The employer
submits that nothing in the worker’s employment caused her to attend the
shopping centre in December 2015. The
worker’s case was never presented on
such a basis. It was the worker’s case that the necessary causal element
was established,
because a chain of causation existed between the worker’s
employment duties which caused the accepted psychological injury,
and the TCM
injury. The Arbitrator found the existence of that causal
It is not argued on this
appeal that the chain was broken by a
novus actus interveniens
employer’s submissions refer to the incident in December 2015 as involving
“someone she [the worker] thought she
This appears to be
a reference to the worker’s statement where she said “I suddenly saw
an ex-work colleague who I think
There are a
number of medical histories which unequivocally record the worker seeing an
ex-work colleague on that
In the Commission
matters in a medical history may comprise evidence of the facts on which the
Commission may Act.
Arbitrator made a positive finding that the worker saw an
“ex-colleague”.
was open to the Arbitrator to make that finding on the evidence (see
[13]–[16] above). The availability of the finding is
not specifically
challenged on this appeal. It is unclear what the employer seeks to draw from
the reference to “someone she
thought she knew”, it does not assist
the employer’s position.
the above reasons Ground No. 1 would not succeed.
GROUND NO. 2
Employer’s submissions
employer submits the finding that s 9A was satisfied was erroneous. It refers to
. It refers to s 9A(2)(b) of the 1987 Act. The employer submits
that the section directs attention to the nature of the work performed
particular tasks of that work, not to what the worker was actually doing at the
time of injury. In
the focus was not on the fact that the worker
was skiing when she was injured, but rather on the fact that she was going to
supervisor at his request to discuss business
employer submits the Arbitrator applied a ‘but for’ test, finding
that if not for her employment as a disability support
worker, the
worker’s encounter with an ex-colleague would not have mattered and the
worker’s TCM injury would not have
occurred. It submits the
Arbitrator’s reasoning was that as the causal chain was established on the
medical evidence, s 9A
was satisfied. It submits he failed to consider whether
there was a causal connection which was “real and of
substance”.
employer submits that, as the worker no longer worked for the employer in
December 2015, “there can be no aspects of her
‘employment’
which would be relevant”. There was no aspect of the worker’s
employment that required her to
be at the shopping centre on the day and time of
the encounter.
Worker’s submissions
worker submits the causal link required by s 9A is a ‘substantial
contributing factor’, meaning a link that is “real
substance” (referring to
at [82]). Causation is a
“fact-laden conclusion which the courts have been told must be based on
common sense”.
worker submits the plurality acknowledged there would be circumstances where
“the factors considered necessary and sufficient
to satisfy the
‘arising out of employment’ test would be sufficient to satisfy s
9A”. Section 9A needs to be considered
separately to s 4 of the 1987
worker refers to the employer’s submission that as the worker no longer
worked for the employer in December 2015, there
was nothing in the employment
that required her to be in the shopping centre. The worker submits s 9A is not
determined solely by
looking at where a worker was at the time of injury. The
term ‘employment’ in s 9A has been repeatedly held to mean the
as where it appears in s 4.
The worker submits the phrase ‘employment concerned’ is not
restricted to the worker’s actual
employment.
worker submits that, in the current case, the sole cause of her sustaining the
TCM injury was the circumstances she was exposed
to in the course of her
employment duties. The TCM injury arose out of the employment. There were
“no other contributing factors,
let alone substantially contributing
factors”. There were only the circumstances to which she was exposed in
her employment
with the employer. The employer does not suggest other
alternatives. The worker refers to
is evident the Arbitrator was aware that the worker was not employed by the
employer at the time of the TCM injury, and that she
did not attend the shopping
centre for any reason connected to her employment. Notwithstanding this, the
Arbitrator found that the
TCM injury would not have been sustained if not for
her employment duties. The worker submits the Arbitrator clearly examined any
causal connection to consider whether it was real and of substance, in the
reasons at [33] to [39]. The reasons at these paragraphs
demonstrate the
Arbitrator considered the lay and medical evidence and determined the only
reason for the TCM injury was the worker’s
employment duties with the
employer. This clearly meant there was “a causal connection which was real
and of substance”.
The worker refers to the reasons at
worker submits the employer’s reliance on the facts in
“not instructive”. The two cases involve facts that are
“completely different”. The matters listed in subs
(2) of s 9A are
not relevant in the same way as they were in
. The factors listed
in subs (2) are only to be taken into account to the extent that they are
relevant. A decision maker can take
account of other matters that are
Consideration
plurality in
, discussing the application of s 9A of the 1987 Act,
“... the President was required to take into account the
matters specified in s 9A(2). Those factors are matters that the
legislature
has determined are relevant to the question whether the employment
concerned is a substantial contributing factor to the injury.
To the extent that
the matters specified in paras (a)-(f) are relevant to the case under decision,
they must be taken into account
and applied according to their terms. A decision
maker is not confined to the matters specified in s 9A(2)
“The starting point for the President’s determination was that
the appellant had sustained injury in the course of her
employment. That was a
matter that had been conceded, but its relevance remained fundamental to the
task that the President was required
to undertake under s 9A. It
remained fundamental because, as we have already explained,
employment’
for the purposes of s 4 and s 9 is the
same employment that is under consideration in s 9A. By that, we are
not saying that the tests
under the two sets of provisions, that is, s 9
and s 4 on the one hand and s 9A on the other, are the same.
We have already explained
that s 9A involves a different test than
that which arises under the earlier
provisions.”
“We would endorse the separate comments of Meagher JA and Davies AJA
Dayton v Coles Supermarket.
As Meagher JA said, something
which is minor is not substantial, or, as Davies AJA said,
substantial’
as it appears in s 9A means ‘
manner that is real and of substance’
and does not apply where, as a
matter of practical reality, the contribution of the employment to the injury
was of, or had, ‘
(emphasis in original)
“It should be said, however, that there may be circumstances where the
factors considered necessary and sufficient to satisfy
arising out of employment’
for the purposes of s 9, are
sufficient to satisfy the test in s 9A. Whether that is so will depend on the
facts. Both are factual
questions. The question under each section is
differently expressed and must be considered separately. It is not sufficient to
that injury arose out of ‘
employment’
and to thereby be
able to conclude that the employment concerned was a ‘
substantial
contributing factor’
. Such a reasoning process is expressly proscribed
by s 9A(3).”
Arbitrator, dealing with s 9A, noted this issue was “a separate one to
whether that injury arose out of employment”,
and one where “the
fact-finding exercise is
different”.
the issue was “a question of fact and is a matter of impression and degree
... to be decided after a consideration
He accepted
that what was required was “a causative
relationship”.
Arbitrator, referred to the specialist medical evidence and concluded there was
“a causal link between the accepted workplace
psychological injury and the
advent of the cardiac
Arbitrator noted a concession by the employer that it was possible for the TCM
injury to arise out of the worker’s employment,
“even after that
employment had ceased”, if there was an appropriate causal
connection.
The Arbitrator
clearly recognised that s 9A was a different test, and required satisfaction
that was separate from, the causal test
governing whether injury ‘arose
out of’ employment.
have concluded above that the Arbitrator did not err in finding injury
‘arising out of’ the employment, on the basis
of the established
causal link between the work caused psychological injury and the condition of
TCM. The employer submits that the
Arbitrator, in then dealing with s 9A, failed
to consider other factors, such as the fact that the worker (as at December
longer worked for the employer, and that the worker’s attendance
at the shopping centre at that time was unconnected with her
employment duties.
It remained necessary for the Arbitrator to consider the factors in s 9A(2) to
the extent to which they were relevant,
in dealing with whether s 9A was
satisfied. It is possible that the same causal connection that supported a
finding of injury ‘arising
out of’ the employment could also support
a conclusion that s 9A was satisfied (see [88] above).
Submissions
on this issue on the appeal were confused to an extent by the fact that the
found date of the TCM injury post-dated the
worker’s employment with the
employer. The employer’s submissions on s 9A included the
“As the [worker] was no longer employed by the
[employer], it is submitted that there can be no aspects of her
‘employment’
which would be relevant. As she was no longer employed,
there was nothing about her employment that required her to be in the shopping
centre on that day and at that
the Arbitrator should have considered subcll (a) of s 9A(2), being “the
time and place of the injury”. The injury
occurred at a shopping centre at
a point in time after the worker’s employment had come to an end.
9A(1) requires that “the employment concerned” be a
‘substantial contributing factor’ to the injury.
The plurality in
said that “‘employment’ for the purposes of s 4
and s 9 is the same employment that is under consideration in s
Their Honours
“... a decision maker, in determining under s 9A whether
the employment concerned is a substantial contributing factor, is
required to
consider the employment concerned
and the circumstances surrounding the
occurrence of the injury, including activities that might be undertaken during
an interval
in the employment. Those circumstances may be fully encompassed by
the factors specified in s 9A(2), or there may be other factors
relevant to take into
the current matter, the ‘employment concerned’ was the
worker’s employment as a disability care worker. This
‘employment’ for the purposes of s 4 and was also the
‘employment’ “under consideration in
s 9A”. Whether s 9A
was satisfied, in respect of the found ‘heart attack injury’, could
not be ascertained by reference
to the worker’s employment in December
2015, at a point in time after her employment had come to an end. The fact that
worker was not employed in December 2015 could not constitute ‘the
employment concerned’ in considering whether s 9A
was satisfied. This was
made clear in
where the plurality said:
approach the question in s 9A from the perspective of the non-employment
activity undertaken during an interval in the employment
[in that instance
skiing], rather than from the perspective of the employment concerned, was to
misunderstand the statutory
Arbitrator noted that s 9A was a separate question to whether injury arising out
of employment was established. He said that “[o]ften,
the facts relevant
to both enquiries are identical, however, the fact-finding exercise is
different”. He referred to a number
of authorities relevant to s 9A. He
noted the satisfaction of s 9A “is a question of fact and is a matter of
impression and
degree”, referring to
. He noted it was
necessary that employment be a substantial contributing factor, not the
substantial contributing
Arbitrator accepted that if not for the worker’s employment as a
disability support worker, the encounter with Roberta would
not have resulted in
the injury of TCM. He described the employment as “a causal link between
the accepted workplace psychological
injury and the advent of the cardiac
injury”. He said this view was held by “every doctor qualified in
these proceedings”.
This was a reference to the medical evidence dealing
with the onset of the condition of TCM (see the evidence referred to at [104]
[105] below). The Arbitrator referred to a submission on the employer’s
part that “what is required is a causative
relationship”. He said
that the medical opinions “establish the presence of such a causal
connection”. He found
that s 9A was
Arbitrator briefly but accurately described the essential nature of the test.
The reason he gave for concluding that s 9A was
satisfied was the presence of
the causal relationship. This is consistent with the need for a causal
relationship that is “real
and of substance”. On the
Arbitrator’s findings, which are supported by the medical evidence, the
cause of the TCM injury
was the worker’s accepted psychological injury
(which resulted from events in her employment) and her subsequent reaction to
seeing Roberta (who she knew from her employment at the time the psychological
injury was suffered). The worker submits:
“... there were no
other contributing factors, let alone substantially contributing factors, to the
[worker] sustaining her
injury other than those encountered by her in her employ
with the [employer]. The [employer] has not sought to allege such an
alternative”.
time and place were of limited importance to the TCM injury. The causal link was
not predicated on the fact that the worker was
in a shopping centre, nor the
fact that it occurred at a time after the worker’s employment with the
employer had come to an
end. It was predicated on the worker’s sighting of
Roberta, a person who had been “mean” to the worker when she
suffered the accepted psychological injury. Dr Robinson (the treating
psychiatrist) recorded a history of the event:
“... she had
seen one of the workers from Disability Service whilst she was out shopping.
This made her very upset. She explained
that she does not want to see any of the
workers, or even to remember them at all. That night she ‘did not feel
and the next morning she felt worse, and did not know what was
wrong. She called her friend to take her to the hospital, where the
Herman described the event as “encountering (unexpectedly) a work
colleague”.
The passage
from Dr Herman’s report, quoted at [14] above, suggests the fact that the
encounter was unexpected was a factor
in its impact on the worker. Accepting
this, the ‘employment concerned’ would remain a substantial
contributing factor.
Dr Herman said:
“In my opinion her
pre-existing psychological condition (post-traumatic stress disorder in relation
to bullying and harassment
at work) was a key factor in provoking anxiety which
subsequently led to her Takotsubo’s cardiomyopathy.”
is specifically noted in
that there will be circumstances where
the causal relationship, which supports a conclusion that there was injury
arising from employment,
will also be sufficient to satisfy s 9A. Given the
strong causal relationship between the worker’s relevant employment duties
and the TCM injury, this in my view is such a case. It follows that the basis on
which the Arbitrator concluded that s 9A was satisfied,
in the particular
factual circumstances, did not involve error. If the Arbitrator had engaged in a
consideration of “the time
and place of the injury” in accordance
with cl (a) of s 9A(2) this would not have changed the result.
No. 2 would not succeed.
GROUND NO. 3
Employer’s submissions
employer submits the Arbitrator correctly described the test in s 9B of the 1987
Act as an evaluative task, comparing the risk
to which the nature of the
worker’s employment gave rise with the risk if he or she was not employed
in employment of that
nature. It was not a true test of causation. The employer
submits that the Arbitrator then approached the test as if he was applying
conventional principles of true causation, asking whether the condition of TCM
resulted from the worker’s employment duties.
The employer refers to
. The employer submits that, to address s 9B, the Arbitrator was
required to determine what it was about the nature of the employment
at the date of injury, 24 December 2015, “that gave rise to a
significantly greater risk than had the worker not
been employed in employment
of that nature”. It submits this was not addressed, which amounted to an
error of law.
Worker’s submissions
worker submits the Arbitrator was “cognisant of the current legal test,
including the terms of the legislation” and
the decisions in
. This is submitted to be apparent from the reasons at
[40] to [41] and at [45].
worker submits the Arbitrator dealt with the expert evidence relied on by both
parties. In considering the satisfaction of s
9B it was necessary to have regard
not only to the worker’s duties, but also to the “interactions with
both patients
and co-workers which that employment entailed”. At [44] the
Arbitrator accepted there was “a significantly greater risk
attack injury” in the worker’s employment, as it included
“being placed in circumstances which gave rise
to the assault” and
to the incident regarding hepatitis infection and the interaction with the
co-worker who told her about
the pudding. If not for these aspects of her
employment the worker would “not have sought to dissociate herself from
her co-workers
and the TCM would not have occurred”. It is submitted the
reasons at [43] to [44] and [47] make it clear the correct legal
principles were identified and
Arbitrator stated that he was required to undertake “an evaluative task
comparing the risks associated with the [worker’s]
employment and those
had she not been so employed”. The worker submits the Arbitrator relied on
the medical evidence to determine
that the TCM condition would not otherwise
have been sustained, and for this reason s 9B was satisfied. This did not
involve error.
submits the employer’s submissions suggest ignoring “all of the
relevant factors that gave rise to the injury”
and focussing only on the
day when she attended the shopping centre. She submits s 9B “is focused on
the injury and not the
incident”. It is submitted the legislation and
cases do not support a requirement that the focus is to be on the date of
Consideration
parties accept that s 9B has application in the circumstances. Neither party
argues that
are wrongly decided. The following
may be taken from those decisions:
(a) the worker carries the onus
of establishing that the test in s 9B is
(b) where the words ‘an injury’ first appear in s 9B(1), this
refers to an injury asserted by a worker, in respect of
which compensation is
otherwise payable, subject to satisfaction of the test in s
(c) where s 9B(1) refers to ‘the nature of the employment
concerned’, it refers to “what the worker in fact does
employment that caused or contributed to the
(d) s 9B(1) requires that the relevant risk of suffering the injury in the
employment concerned be significantly greater than the
risk had the worker not
been employed in employment of that nature. ‘Significant’ in this
context means ‘important;
of consequence’. The comparison involves
an assessment of comparative risks and is not a true test of
The test involves an evaluative
(e) the test requires satisfaction on all of the evidence. It does not
necessarily “require that there be medical evidence to
some particular
effect”. In cases raising s 9B it is desirable that there be medical
evidence addressing the requirements of
with the above, the ‘heart attack injury’ suffered by the worker was
Takotsubo Cardiomyopathy. The ‘employment
concerned’ was the
worker’s employment that caused or contributed to the injury. This was her
employment with the employer
as a disability care worker. For the worker to
establish that s 9B was satisfied, it was necessary that she establish her risk
suffering Takotsubo Cardiomyopathy was significantly greater than had she not
been employed in that employment.
Herman, qualified by the employer, said:
“In my opinion the
worker’s employment (as a disability support worker) did give rise to her
current heart condition than
had she not been employed in employment of that
nature [sic].
In the setting of a significant psychological injury, the chance meeting with
a work colleague provoked significant psychological
Emotional stress is [a] well known trigger for the provocation of a
Takotsubo’s (stress induced) cardiomyopathy in middle-aged
ladies who are
predisposed.
30–40% of stress induced cardiomyopathy follows exposure to emotionally
stressful events.
Had she not experienced prior work-related psychological trauma, meeting a
work colleague unexpectedly would probably not have provoked
the emotion
triggering the
cardiomyopathy.”
Haber, in the worker’s case, said:
“She has a condition
called Tako Tsubo cardiomyopathy which is well known to be emotionally brought
on and it does not occur
spontaneously. Therefore she had a significantly
greater risk of suffering this cardiac condition [than] had she not been
in employment of that
Arbitrator quoted at some length from Dr Herman’s report, and noted the
causal connection was supported also by Dr Haber
in the worker’s case. The
Arbitrator said that “the medical evidence clearly supports a finding that
had the [worker]
not been subjected to the factors which caused her accepted
psychological injury, then she would not have suffered the episode of
has left her with impaired cardiac
assessment of comparative risks, called for by the section, involves comparing
the risk in the employment that caused the heart
attack injury, with the risk if
the worker was not employed in that employment. Although it is not a true test
of causation, it does
require assessment of the risk in the actual employment in
which injury was suffered. This is then compared with the risk if the
not so employed. It is necessary that the first of these risks be
‘significantly greater’ than the second.
On the medical evidence,
the significantly greater risk of the heart attack injury (Takotsubo
Cardiomyopathy) given rise to by the
actual employment, was associated with the
risk of psychological injury in the actual employment. On the evidence this
included both
bullying and harassment by fellow workers and the risk of being
assaulted. A comparison between those levels of risk was what the
required. The risk associated with the actual employment was significantly
greater than if the worker was not so employed.
This was because only the first
of the scenarios (the actual employment) carried the risk of psychological
injury, which had been
causative of the heart attack injury which the worker
follows that Ground No. 3 would fail.
DISPOSITION OF THE APPEAL
have concluded, after a full consideration of the Grounds of Appeal on their
merits, that each of them would fail. For reasons given
above, the interests of
justice do not require that the employer’s application to extend time be
employer’s application to extend time pursuant to r 16.2(5) of the Rules
is dismissed.
Michael Snell
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
13 January 2021
Worker’s statement
18/9/15, [4]–[6], Application to Resolve a Dispute (ARD), p
Worker’s statement
18/9/15, [9]–[15], ARD, p
Worker’s statement
18/9/15, [16]–[26], ARD, pp
statement 18/9/15, [27]–[65], ARD, pp
Worker’s statement 31/10/19, [12]–[15], ARD, p
Gosford Hospital Discharge
Referral Notes, Reply, pp
Section 74 notice
9/9/16, Reply pp 1–6.
Section 78 notice 8/5/19, Reply pp 7–12, s 287A review notice 22/5/19,
Reply, pp 13–18.
78 notice 26/2/20, Reply, pp
[2000] NSWCC 12
NSWCCR 496.
[1996] HCA 31
187 CLR 310
140 ALR 156
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
22 NSWCCR 46
[2000] NSWCA 138.
[2009] NSWCA 324
[40]–‑[43].
Reasons, [44].
[2015] NSWWCC
[2019] NSWWCCPD 45
NSWWCCPD 25
10 DDCR 156
Whiteley Muir
[1996] HCA 140
[2017] NSWWCCPD
[2001] FCA 1833
[2013] NSWCA
NSWWCCPD 11
[1990] HCA 30
64 ALJR 458
v Department of Corrective Services
[2009] NSWCA 188
submissions, [9].
Worker’s submissions,
NSWWCCPD 39
(per Basten JA, Beazley P and Leeming JA agreeing),
[2007] NSWCA 290
Department of
Education & Training v Mekhail
[2006] NSWWCCPD 1
Department of
Corrective Services v Buxton
[2007] NSWWCCPD 55
Lawrence-Plant v J
& S Plant Pty Ltd t/as Bluey’s Hire (now deregistered)
NSWWCCPD 64
Vaughan v Secretary, Department of Education
Worker’s submissions,
submissions, [8].
Employer’s submissions,
submissions, [8].
Employer’s submissions,
Employer’s submissions,
[2017] NSWCA
[1932] HCA 45
(1932) 48 CLR 216
Employer’s submissions,
[1941] NSWStRp 23
SR (NSW) 119
(1995) 12 NSWCCR 566
NSWWCCPD 48
Worker’s submissions,
Worker’s submissions,
Worker’s submissions,
Worker’s submissions,
Employer’s submissions,
Employer’s submissions, [55]–[56].
[1933] HCA 60
Worker’s submissions,
Worker’s submissions,
Worker’s submissions,
, (per Allsop P, Beazley and McColl JJA),
Government Insurance Office of NSW
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
Reasons, [17].
submissions, [43].
Employer’s submissions,
Reasons, [31].
submissions, [50].
Worker’s statement 31/10/19, [12], ARD, p 30.
Dr Robinson’s report
4/2/16, ARD, p 46, Dr Robinson’s report 7/11/19, ARD, p 51, Dr
Herman’s report 22/1/19, ARD
p 52, Dr Haber’s report 22/3/17, ARD, p
Onesteel Reinforcing
Pty Ltd v Sutton
[2012] NSWCA 282
13 DDCR 351
Metropolitan Distributors Pty Ltd v Kitanoski
NSWWCCPD 17
, [98], applying
Guthrie v Spence
[2009] NSWCA 369
Reasons, [25],
submissions,
Employer’s submissions,
Employer’s submissions,
Referring to
Worker’s submissions,
Da Ros v Qantas Airways Ltd
[2010] NSWCA 89
Worker’s submissions,
Worker’s submissions,
Worker’s submissions,
Worker’s submissions,
Reasons, [33].
[34], referring inter alia to
Dayton v Coles Supermarkets Pty Ltd
submissions, [65].
Reasons, [33]–[36].
Reasons, [37]–[39].
Worker’s submissions,
Dr Robinson’s
report 4/2/16, ARD, p 46.
Dr Herman’s report 22/1/19, ARD, p
submissions,
Worker’s submissions,
submissions,
[105]–[106].
Worker’s submissions,
[106]–[108].
Worker’s submissions,
[109]–[113].
, [54]–[55],
[105]–[106],
Dr Herman’s
report 22/1/19, ARD, p
report 4/10/19, ARD, p
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.95 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter