URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2017/149.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Prestige Auto Traders Australia Pty Ltd v Bonnefin [2017] NSWSC 149 (1 March 2017)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Prestige Auto Traders Australia Pty Ltd v Bonnefin
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2017] NSWSC 149
Hearing Date(s):
10 November 2016
Decision Date:
1 March 2017
(1) The appeal is dismissed.
(2) The appellant is to pay the
respondent’s costs of the appeal.
Catchwords:
LOCAL COURT APPEAL – appeal under
Local Court Act
– whether Local Court erred by not addressing in its reasons that
respondent was precluded from relying on inability to remedy
goods as grounds
for rejecting goods because of failure to plead that ground - whether Local
Court erred in directing itself as to
the test for “major failure”
– whether no evidence to make certain findings – appeal
Legislation Cited:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth), Schedule 2 (the Australian
Consumer Law),
, 54, 259, 260, 262
Fair Trading Act 1987
Local Court Act 2007
Motor Dealers and Repairers Act
Cases Cited:
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
(1990) 170 CLR 321
Beale v GIO
(1997) 48 NSWLR 430
Kirk v Industrial Court of New South
(2010) 239 CLR 531
[2010] HCA 1
Kostas v HIA Insurance Services Pty
(2010) 241 CLR 390
[2010] HCA 32
Medtel v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
(2003) 198 ALR
Pollard v RRR Corp Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWCA 110
Re Refugee Review
Tribunal; Ex parte Aala
(2000) 204 CLR 82
[2000] HCA 57
Seltsam Pty Limited
[2005] NSWCA 208
Warkworth Mining Limited v Bulga Milbrodale
Progress Association Inc
[2014] NSWCA 105
Principal judgment
Prestige Auto Traders Australia Pty Ltd (Appellant)
Nicole Bonnefin
(Respondent)
Representation:
Mr G P Gee (Appellant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
LAS Lawyers & Consultants
(Appellant)
Clear Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2016/00178399
Introduction
13 May 2016, Magistrate Wahlquist determined that Nicole Bonnefin was entitled
to reject a second-hand BMW motor vehicle she had
purchased from Prestige Auto
Traders Australia Pty Limited (“Prestige”). Prestige now appeals
that decision.
appeal concerns the application of the Australian Consumer Law (“the
ACL”) contained in Schedule 2 to the
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth) and in particular s 259(3) of the ACL.
statutory basis for this appeal is to be found in
Local Court
(NSW) which provides as follows:
“A party to proceedings before the Court
sitting in its General Division who is dissatisfied with a judgment or order of
may appeal to the Supreme Court,
but only on a question of law.”
limited to errors which involve a question of law.
The grounds of appeal relied
upon by Prestige are set out below at [68]. They assert a misdirection regarding
the law, a failure
to provide adequate reasons, a denial of procedural fairness
and a contention that there was no evidence to make certain factual
There is no issue in this appeal that such grounds involve questions of law
alone. In circumstances where the grounds include
assertions of there being
“no evidence” to make certain findings and of a denial of procedural
fairness, it is necessary
to set out both the evidence and procedural history in
some detail.
or about 13 October 2014, Ms Bonnefin entered into a contract with Prestige for
the purchase of a 2007 BMW X5 V8 four-wheel drive
vehicle for $37,750. Ms
Bonnefin transferred the registration of the vehicle, comprehensively insured it
and took possession of it
on 1 November 2014. An inspection report was obtained
from the NRMA prior to Ms Bonnefin’s taking possession of the car. At
time of purchase, the vehicle had driven over 91,000km.
statutory dealer guarantee for defective vehicles applied to the sale of the
vehicle by virtue of
Motor Dealers and Repairers Act 2013
(NSW) (“the MDR Act”)
The dealer guarantee for this
vehicle was subject to a time limit of three months after sale and a distance
limit of 5,000km after
sale: s 69(5) of the MDR Act.
Bonnefin’s evidence was that she purchased the vehicle primarily for its
four-wheel drive function so that her Jet Ski trailer
could be towed and
reversed down boat ramps. Although it was purchased in her name, her husband,
Heath Bonnefin, drove the vehicle
as well. It was Mr Bonnefin who dealt with
Prestige at all relevant times.
after Ms Bonnefin purchased the vehicle, she and her husband detected a number
of mechanical failures and defects in relation
to its operation. On or about 20
November 2014, the coolant in the coolant reservoir was observed to be low and
replacement coolant
had to be purchased by Mr Bonnefin.
16 December 2014, an error message reading “4x4 and DSC have failed”
appeared on the dashboard. Mr Bonnefin’s
evidence was that when the
“4x4 and DSC have failed” error message was displayed, the cruise
control function could not
be turned on. Nor could the Dynamic Stability Control
(“DSC”) (traction control at a more advanced level) and four-wheel
drive functions operate. This led to the vehicle slowing down and speeding up at
irregular intervals.
16 December 2015, Mr Bonnefin returned the vehicle to Prestige to be fixed.
22 December 2014, the vehicle was returned to Mr Bonnefin. Prestige had replaced
the coolant expansion tank under warranty. Prestige’s
mechanic, Warren
Phan, told Mr Bonnefin that day that the leaking coolant was fixed, but that as
he didn’t know why the “4x4
and DSC have failed” message
appeared he was not able to fix it.
3 January 2015, Mr Bonnefin drove the vehicle to Byron Bay. Ms Bonnefin and Tim
and Rachel Richardson were also in the vehicle.
Mr Richardson drove the vehicle
part of the way. The vehicle slowed and stopped autonomously at irregular
intervals near Port Macquarie
and the error message “4x4 and DSC have
failed” appeared on the dashboard. Once the vehicle was stopped at Port
it would not restart. The NRMA was called but after some time the
vehicle started again and the request for help was cancelled. Shortly
thereafter, when the vehicle was near Coffs Harbour, a warning light appeared on
the dashboard. The vehicle was stopped and again
it would not restart. The NRMA
was called again but, as before, the vehicle eventually started and the NRMA was
4 January 2015 in Byron Bay, the vehicle once again did not start. The error
message “4x4 and DSC have failed” appeared.
The vehicle had to be
towed to a third-party mechanic in Byron Bay, namely Banksia Motors.
7 January 2015, Mr Bonnefin had a telephone conversation with a mechanic at
Prestige, Phillip Parrin, who told him that the problem
may be with the
alternator.
8 January 2015, Mr Bonnefin collected the vehicle from Banksia Motors. The
mechanic employed at Banksia Motors, Paul Julier, had
run a diagnostic test. The
diagnostic test identified various errors. Mr Julier refitted the main engine
intake pipe and reset the
computers and adaptations. He then drove the vehicle
for 100km and was satisfied that it was working. Mr Julier told Mr Bonnefin
he did not know why the error message was appearing. He also told him that the
front caster mounts were weak and should be replaced
and that such a replacement
would be covered by the statutory guarantee.
10 January 2015, Mr Bonnefin returned the vehicle to Prestige and sent an email
to Mr Phan with a request that the warning light
and the deactivation of the
cruise control, which had continued to occur intermittently, be fixed. Mr
Bonnefin also requested a replacement
of the caster mounts as recommended by Mr
Julier of Banksia Motors. Mr Bonnefin reported that a friend had told him that
necessary to diagnose the problem with the DSC and four-wheel drive
while the error message was being displayed.
Pham responded by email on 16 January 2015. He stated:
“Regarding your friend’s mechanic scanner, we have the same
capability. The issue is not about getting the fault codes,
but how you
interpret the information and create a test plan and carry out diagnose [sic].
If any one [sic] was just to order parts
and fit them to the car by just reading
the fault codes from the scanner, the chance [sic] are they will get it wrong
lot of money.”
24 January 2015, Mr Bonnefin collected the vehicle from Prestige. The castor
mounts were not replaced and he was informed that
Prestige had been unable to
detect any problem with the DSC or four-wheel drive functions.
following day a warning sign appeared indicating that the coolant was low and
needed to be refilled.
30 January 2015, Ms Bonnefin took the vehicle to another mechanic, City West
Automotive, in the hope that the fault could be identified.
The fault was not
able to be identified. The mechanic told Ms Bonnefin that the battery should be
replaced as the “4x4 and
DSC have failed” warning usually appears
when the batteries have low voltage. Ms Bonnefin was also told to replace the
caster bushes.
Bonnefin sent another email Mr Phan at Prestige setting out the problems with
the vehicle the following day, 31 January 2015. It
was, relevantly, in these
“I took the car to a local BMW dealer before the warranty expired to see
if they could diagnose why the 4x4 and DTS [sic] have
failed” light has
showed up on the car
every few days since we bought it.
The dealer said that this fault code comes up when the voltage drops too low
from the battery. He advised that the battery needs
to be replaced. But the
problem could be the alternator not working properly to charge the battery.
Also he advised that the caster brushes [sic] need to be replaced.
And there is still the outstanding issue of the coolant leaking from the car
When I bring the car in this time could you please get your staff to properly
fix the “4x4” warning light issue. I don’t
want to keep taking
the car in to get this problem fixed only to be sent away with the issue still
occurring. Other BMW mechanics
seem to know about this issue and have been able
to solve it so I hope your garage will be able to also.”
[emphasis added]
13 February 2015, Mr Bonnefin returned the vehicle to Prestige again for the
problems listed in the email of 31 January 2015 to
be fixed. He left the vehicle
on the premises of Prestige.
16 February 2015, Mr Phan advised Mr Bonnefin that Prestige would not fix the
leaking coolant because the vehicle was out of warranty,
having driven more than
5,000km since purchase. He advised that Prestige could not do anything about the
failure of the four-wheel
drive as no problem could be detected. Nor could he do
anything about the caster bushes as they were not covered by the statutory
Bonnefin did not collect the vehicle from Prestige. Instead, on or about 24
February 2015, he sent an email to Joseph Patrick at
Prestige rejecting the
vehicle and requesting a refund of the purchase price on behalf of his wife. Mr
Bonnefin deposes that on the
same day he had a telephone conversation with Paul
Young, the general manager of Prestige, as follows:
“Mr Young: We will not issue a refund because the car has done too many
kilometres since purchase.
[Mr Bonnefin]: The 4x4 failure happened very early on after not many kilometres.
Also, your service department either could not or
would not rectify the problem
on three separate occasions. So we have had to put up with a faulty, unreliable
car for the whole of
the 3 month warranty period, and for us the cruise control
is a significant problem.
Mr Young: The cruise control ceasing to work is not a warranty item, so
it’s not my problem if that stops working. There is
nothing further I am
willing to do other than get my service team to take a look at the car.
[Mr Bonnefin]: The car has already been to your service department three times,
including one time for two weeks, and they couldn’t
or wouldn’t fix
Mr Young: We aren’t finding any fault codes related to the 4x4 coming up
on the computer so we can’t fix it. You can
complain to Fair Trading if
13 March 2015, Ms Bonnefin’s solicitor wrote to Prestige asserting that Ms
Bonnefin had given notice of the rejection of
the vehicle on 24 February 2015.
The solicitor described the faults as follows:
“12. Between 1 November 2014 to 13 February 2015, and through no fault of
Ms Bonnefin, the BMW X5 has had the following problems
deficiencies:
(a) leaks in the coolant reservoir;
(b) the disablement of the 4x4 function;
(c) the disablement of the cruise control function;
(d) loosening of the front caster mounts; and
(e) constant error messages on the onboard computer
13. These problems have not been repaired to date, despite Ms Bonnefin’s
repeated efforts to notify and return the vehicle
to you for service during this
8 April 2015 Ms Bonnefin commenced proceedings in the Local Court against
Evidence concerning the defects
was a significant factual dispute before Magistrate Wahlquist regarding the
relevance and significance of the various defects.
was no dispute that the defect concerning the caster mounts existed. Prestige
argued that it was due to wear and tear and not
covered by the statutory
warranty. It was submitted that there was no breach of the guarantee in relation
to this defect as a reasonable
consumer would have expected such a defect in a
second-hand vehicle.
was there any dispute that the defect that caused the coolant to leak on 25
January 2015 existed. Prestige argued that, although
the coolant was under
warranty when it leaked and was replaced for the first time in December 2014,
the second time the coolant leaked
it was due to wear and tear and not covered
by the statutory warranty. Accordingly, Prestige refused to repair the defect.
submitted that there was no breach of the guarantee in relation to this
defect as a reasonable consumer would have expected such
a defect in a
second-hand vehicle.
was a significant factual dispute in the Local Court proceedings as to whether
the defects concerning the four-wheel drive,
DSC and cruise control functions
were in fact ongoing as at the time of the rejection of the vehicle. The
evidence of Ms Bonnefin
and Mr Bonnefin was that the “4x4 and DSC have
failed” error message and failure of the cruise control function were
continuing problems that remained unfixed. On the other hand, the evidence
adduced by Prestige was that their mechanics were unable
to detect any problem
despite repeated testing.
Bonnefin and Mr Bonnefin provided affidavits and were cross-examined. An
affidavit of Mr Richardson and a statement from Mr Julier
were also relied upon
as part of Ms Bonnefin’s case, but neither of those witnesses gave
Bonnefin annexed a number of emails to his affidavit setting out the history of
complaints made to Prestige concerning the vehicle.
Not all of the complaints in
the emails were repeated in the body of his affidavit. It was never put to Mr
Bonnefin in cross-examination
that the failure of the four-wheel drive, DSC and
cruise control functions did not persist after the vehicle was fixed in Byron
Mr Bonnefin’s reason for rejecting the vehicle on behalf of his wife
was set out in his affidavit as follows:
“Because it had been more than 10 weeks since I notified the defendant
the defendant was not able
to fix the problems on any of the 3 occasions that I returned the Vehicle to
them, and because the vehicle
had also been inspected by two different mechanics
during this time without the problems being fixed, I formed the view that the
4x4 failure problem
was not one that could be fixed
, or fixed in a
reasonable time, which to me meant that the plaintiff and I could not use the
car for the main purpose for which it
was purchased.”
[emphasis added]
was put to Ms Bonnefin in cross-examination that the error codes did not
reappear after the vehicle was collected from Banksia
Motors. She denied this.
Although she gave no details of any recurrence of the problem after Byron Bay in
her affidavit, she gave
evidence in cross-examination that “...like I
stated to you earlier I regularly saw it [the DSC/4X4 light] but because I
have exact dates I didn’t put it in my affidavit.”
affidavit evidence of Mr Richardson described what occurred on the trip to Byron
Bay, which was not disputed. Mr Richardson also
stated in his affidavit that,
“Between late December 2014 and mid-February 2015 the plaintiff told me on
a number of occasions
with reference to the Vehicle, words to the effect of
‘the car is not working properly and displaying error messages
No objection was made to that evidence nor was Mr
Richardson required for cross-examination.
evidence of Mr Julier was that when he received the vehicle in Byron Bay on or
mode. The engine and the
DSC/4x4 lights were all on. Mr Julier carried out a complete scan of the
vehicle. He further inspected the
vehicle and found that the main engine intake
pipe had come adrift. He refitted the pipe and reset the car’s computers
adaptations. His statement then is in these terms:
“[7] I then test drove the vehicle for about 100KM, during this testing no
faults reoccurred.
[8] The DSC and 4x4 modules are on the same networking system so when there is a
problem with one of the modules they are all effected
[sic], which will cause
the DSC/4x4 light to come on. Usually reduced power/limp mode will activate to
protect the vehicle and for
safety reasons.
[9] When the Vehicle left my shop the Vehicle appeared to be working
[10] The DSC/4x4 issue may have reoccurred after leaving my shop, but I have no
way of knowing if it did. There are many reasons/faults
that can develop that
will cause this DSC/4x4 failure and only proper interpretation of the software
will reveal the causes.”
relied upon affidavits from Paul Young, the general manager of Prestige, Mr
Phan, who was a service advisor for Prestige,
and Mr Parrin, the service manager
for Prestige. Only Mr Parrin gave oral evidence at the hearing.
Young’s affidavit set out that the service team was unable to identify any
faults with the four-wheel drive or cruise control
when the car was first
brought back in December 2014. When the vehicle was returned on 11 January 2015,
the service team subjected
the vehicle to numerous road tests until 24 January
2015 and was still unable to identify any faults. Nor were they able to detect
any problem with the car slowing or speeding autonomously or the ignition
failing to start. When the vehicle was returned on 16 February
technicians were again unable to identify the cause of the “4x4 and DSC
have failed” warning light of which
Mr Bonnefin and Ms Bonnefin
complained. A diagnostic test was performed on 16 February 2015 and no faults
were detected with the
four-wheel drive or cruise control functions. When Mr
Young spoke with Mr Bonnefin on 24 February 2015, he told Mr
“We have received your email, but we are not going to give you a refund.
There is no major defect with the vehicle. The service
department have checked
the vehicle previously with no fault codes. The car performed perfectly
previously with us”
evidence of Mr Phan was that when he spoke to Mr Bonnefin on 16 February 2015 he
“The car did not fault on our end and there is no fault code in our
system. We are more than happy to send you a copy of the
fault code report which
displays no fault codes within the 4x4 system.”
Parrin gave evidence that when the vehicle was tested on 16 February 2015 no
fault codes were detected. He tested the vehicle by
connecting it to a computer.
He stated that he was never able to verify the fault. If the warning light
stayed on for any period
of time it would have registered a fault code, but one
was never detected.
Parrin explained the diagnostic testing reports tendered by Ms Bonnefin (which
had been conducted by Mr Julier) and Prestige. Mr
Parrin had spoken with Mr
Julier about the fault codes detected when the vehicle was tested by Mr Julier
in Byron Bay in early January.
He stated that there may have been a problem with
the battery that caused the problem initially, but that it had been resolved by
the time he looked at the vehicle on 16 February 2015. The Banksia Motors report
shows that the problem could have been caused by
sporadic under voltage of the
battery. Mr Parrin agreed that sporadic under voltage detected in the DSC would
mean that the car was
not operating properly. He further stated that, if the
battery voltage were depleted, the faults of which Mr Bonnefin and Ms Bonnefin
complained may appear on the dashboard. A low battery voltage would cause
several lights, including the DSC warning light, to come
on. He explained that
the voltage is the relationship between the car battery and the alternator. If
the alternator is not working
properly, then the battery is not going to remain
Parrin agreed that he told Mr Bonnefin on 7 January 2015 that the problem may
have been a voltage or battery issue, which could
be caused by a problem with
the alternator. The battery was tested after the vehicle was returned again in
early February 2015 and
it was functioning normally. He stated that it can be
assumed that if the battery was working properly so too was the alternator.
agreed that the cruise control, four-wheel drive and DSC functions can fail if
the vehicle’s alternator is not functioning
properly. At no time did any
mechanic at Prestige test the alternator. Mr Parrin agreed that
light came on and stayed on there would be no traction control and the
four-wheel drive function would not be working.
evidence was that the vehicle was in “good working order” on 16
February 2015, but Mr Bonnefin refused to collect
legislation
was no issue in the Local Court proceedings that the supply of the vehicle was
made in the course of trade or commerce and that
Ms Bonnefin was a consumer
within the meaning of s 3 of the ACL. Nor was there any issue taken that
Prestige guaranteed to Ms Bonnefin
that the vehicle would be of acceptable
quality within the meaning of s 54(2) of the ACL. Section 54
Guarantee as to acceptable quality
(a) a person supplies, in trade or commerce, goods
to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by auction;
there is a guarantee that the goods are of acceptable
(2) Goods are of
acceptable quality
if they are
(a) fit for all the purposes for which goods of
that kind are commonly supplied; and
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from defects; and
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods (including any hidden defects of the goods), would
regard as acceptable
having regard to the matters in subsection (3).
(3) The matters for the purposes of subsection (2) are:
(a) the nature of the goods; and
(b) the price of the goods (if relevant); and
(c) any statements made about the goods on any packaging or label on the
(d) any representation made about the goods by the supplier or
manufacturer of the goods; and
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the
[emphasis added]
denied that it had breached the guarantee in s 54(2). The Magistrate found in
favour of Ms Bonnefin. No ground of appeal
addresses any complaint with that
finding by her Honour.
Bonnefin contended that the breach of the guarantee in s 54 by Prestige entitled
her to reject the vehicle under s 259(3) of the
ACL. Section 259 of the ACL
“259 Action against suppliers of goods
(1) A consumer may take action under this section if:
(a) a person (the supplier ) supplies, in trade or
commerce, goods to the consumer; and
(b) a guarantee that applies to the supply under Subdivision A of Division 1 of
Part 3-2 (other than sections 58 and 59(1)) is not
(2) If the failure to comply with the guarantee can be remedied and is not a
major failure:
(a) the consumer may require the supplier to remedy the
failure within a reasonable time; or
(b) if such a requirement is made of the supplier but the supplier refuses or
fails to comply with the requirement, or fails to comply
with the requirement
within a reasonable time--the consumer may:
(i) otherwise have the failure remedied and,
by action against the supplier, recover all reasonable costs incurred by the
in having the failure so remedied; or
(ii) subject to section 262, notify the supplier that the consumer rejects the
goods and of the ground or grounds for the
(3) If the failure to comply with the guarantee cannot be remedied or is a
major failure, the consumer may:
(a) subject to section 262, notify the supplier that the
consumer rejects the goods and of the ground or grounds for the rejection;
(b) by action against the supplier, recover compensation for any reduction in
the value of the goods below the price paid or payable
by the consumer for the
(4) The consumer may, by action against the supplier, recover damages for any
loss or damage suffered by the consumer because of
the failure to comply with
the guarantee if it was reasonably foreseeable that the consumer would suffer
such loss or damage as a
result of such a failure.
(5) Subsection (4) does not apply if the failure to comply with the guarantee
occurred only because of a cause independent of human
control that occurred
after the goods left the control of the supplier.
(6) To avoid doubt, subsection (4) applies in addition to subsections (2) and
(7) The consumer may take action under this section whether or not the goods are
in their original packaging.”
[emphasis added]
260 of the ACL defines “major failure” for the purposes of s 259 as
260 When a failure to comply with a guarantee is a major
A failure to comply with a guarantee referred to in section 259(1)(b) that
applies to a supply of goods is a
major failure
(a) the goods would not have been acquired by a
reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the nature and extent of the failure;
(b) the goods depart in one or more significant
(i) if they were supplied by
description--from that description; or
(ii) if they were supplied by reference to a sample or demonstration
model--from that sample or demonstration model;
(c) the goods are substantially unfit for a
purpose for which goods of the same kind are commonly supplied and they cannot,
and within a reasonable time, be remedied to make them fit for such a
purpose; or
(d) the goods are unfit for a disclosed purpose that was made known
(i) the supplier of the goods; or
(ii) a person by whom any prior negotiations or arrangements in relation
to the acquisition of the goods were conducted or made;
and they cannot, easily and within a reasonable time, be remedied to make them
fit for such a purpose; or
(e) the goods are not of acceptable quality
because they are unsafe.”
[emphasis added]
s 262 of the ACL provides:
“262 When consumers are not entitled to reject goods
(1) A consumer is not entitled, under section 259, to notify a
supplier of goods that the consumer rejects the goods if:
(a) the rejection period for the goods has ended;
(b) the goods have been lost, destroyed or disposed of by the consumer;
(c) the goods were damaged after being delivered to the consumer for
reasons not related to their state or condition at the time
of supply; or
(d) the goods have been attached to, or incorporated in, any real or
personal property and they cannot be detached or isolated without
rejection period
for goods is the period from the
time of the supply of the goods to the consumer within which it would be
reasonable to expect the
relevant failure to comply with a guarantee referred to
in section 259(1)(b) to become apparent having regard to:
(a) the type of goods; and
(b) the use to which a consumer is likely to put them; and
(c) the length of time for which it is reasonable for them to be used;
(d) the amount of use to which it is reasonable for them to be put before
such a failure becomes apparent.”
262 does not specify a “rejection period” for particular goods. The
rejection period is a matter of fact in each
matter to be decided having regard
to the matters listed in s 262(2). Her Honour was satisfied that the vehicle was
rejected within
the relevant period because complaint was made within the period
of the three-month statutory warranty under the MDR Act. Although
the rejection
period under the ACL does not necessarily correlate with the statutory warranty
period, no ground of appeal pertains
to that finding. I am not satisfied of any
error with respect to that factual finding in any event.
in the Local Court
Local Court proceedings were heard on 11 November 2015 and 8 April 2016. Her
Honour reserved her decision and delivered reasons
for judgment on 13 May
describing the nature of the claim, her Honour identified the problems with the
vehicle, as described by Ms Bonnefin and Mr
Bonnefin, as being:
(1) Leaks to
the coolant reserve. These first occurred in or around 20 November 2014. This
problem was fixed by the defendant on 22
December 2014. It re-occurred on 27
January 2015 and was not fixed on 31 January 2015 when the vehicle was returned
to Prestige.
deactivation of the four-wheel drive function. This first occurred on 15
December 2014 and continued on and off until the
vehicle was returned to
Prestige for the last time on 13 February 2015.
deactivation of the cruise control function. This first occurred on 15 December
2014 and continued on and off until the vehicle
was returned.
loosening of the front caster mounts. This was first identified by the mechanic
at Banksia Motors in Byron Bay on 8 January
2015. Further complaint was made
messages appeared on the on-board computer system. This first occurred on 15
December 2014 and continued on and off until
the vehicle was returned.
(6) The rear
right speaker malfunctioned by omitting a high-pitched static noise at full
volume. This was never fixed.
Honour then set out the terms of s 54 of the ACL and noted the plaintiff’s
submission that the test in s 54(2) requires
the court to consider what the
reasonable consumer who purchased the vehicle, having paid the price that he or
she had, would regard
as being “acceptable quality” if he or she had
known at the time of the supply of the vehicle of the defects that are
known. Her Honour held that the relevant test is not what the consumer knew at
the time of supply. This was said to be supported
by the decision of the Full
Court of the Federal Court in
Medtel v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
(2003) 198 ALR 630.
Honour cited in particular the judgment of Branson J, where her Honour observed
“Section 74D [of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
predecessor to the ACL], as is mentioned above, calls for the quality, or
fitness for purpose, of the goods to be measured
against what it was reasonable
to expect in that regard at the time of the supply of the goods to the consumer.
That measurement
must be undertaken, in my view, in the light of information
concerning the goods available at the time of trial. However, the issue
whether the goods were as fit for the relevant purpose as it was reasonable to
expect at the time of their supply to the
Honour went on to identify the factual dispute regarding whether each of the
matters of which Ms Bonnefin complained in fact occurred.
She set out the
respective positions of each party on the factual matters in dispute. Her Honour
referred to Mr Bonnefin’s
affidavit and noted that his evidence was
supported by the evidence of Ms Bonnefin and that of Timothy Richardson. She
noted that,
although Mr Bonnefin did not set out all of the alleged failures in
his affidavit, attached to it were emails to Prestige where problems
warning light were identified on 10 January 2015 and 31 January 2015. On that,
basis her Honour was satisfied that Prestige
was made aware of the ongoing
Honour noted Prestige relied upon the evidence of Mr Parrin and Mr Phan that the
problems had been fixed. In relation to the error
messages, her Honour referred
to the evidence that when mechanics at Prestige performed full diagnostic
testing on 16 February 2015
they could not identify any problem, nor did the
car’s computer have any log messages. In relation to the caster mounts,
asserted that the damage was the normal “wear and tear”
that would reasonably be expected in a vehicle that had travelled
a distance of
91,000km. Prestige was not advised of the fault with the right rear
relation to the leaking coolant, her Honour referred to the evidence that
Prestige had asserted that the fault had been repaired
and that further testing
did not reveal a problem. Alternatively, if the defects did exist they were of a
nature that a reasonable
consumer, fully acquainted with the state and condition
of the vehicle, would regard as acceptable. Prestige relied upon the fact
the vehicle was second-hand and had travelled more than 91,000km at the time of
purchase. Prestige also relied upon the fact
that the purchaser had obtained an
NRMA inspection report and tested the vehicle prior to purchase.
Honour referred again to the evidence of Ms Bonnefin and Mr Bonnefin, as well as
the emails and the statement of Mr Julier. She
then made the following factual
“I am satisfied that the four by four DSC light was coming on
intermittently after 1 January 2015 and that when this occurred,
control was disabled. I am also satisfied that the front caster mounts were
loose and complained of during the warranty
period. I am satisfied that there
was a coolant leak, which was initially fixed by the defendant, but that it
re-occurred during
the warranty period and was not fixed. I am satisfied that
the rear speaker malfunctioning was not complained about to the defendant
although it may have occurred, there is no evidence that the defendant was given
the opportunity to fix it. In any event, I do
not think that the fault can be
considered sufficiently serious to go to whether the goods were of acceptable
Honour then referred to the reliance by Prestige on
of the ACL and noted
that none of the defects of which Ms Bonnefin complained are mentioned in the
NRMA report. Her Honour referred
again to the decision of Branson J in
and noted that the relevant time with respect to whether the
goods are of acceptable quality is “at the time of the trial”.
then went on to note:
“There is no evidence to indicate that the defects ought reasonably have
been revealed at the time of purchase upon inspection.
I do not think that the
fact that the NRMA inspected the vehicle and did not find the faults complained
of results in them being
unable to argue that the goods are not of acceptable
Honour then considered the submissions made by Prestige that the vehicle was
second-hand and had travelled 91,000 km at the time
of purchase and that the
price paid by Ms Bonnefin was approximately a third of the purchase price for a
new, similar vehicle. She
observed that the purchase price of the vehicle, being
$37,750, was “still a significant amount for a motor vehicle”.
Honour found that, “Taking into account the matters to be considered under
, a reasonable consumer would expect that the “four by four, DSC
[and] cruise control would work without repeated failure.”
Honour went on to find:
“I am satisfied that the light on the dashboard coming on, with the
message four by four DSC have failed, together with, at
the same time, the
obvious failure of one of the features of the car, being the cruise control,
that it was more than just a failure
of the dash light system, but a real
unexplained defect. The vehicle was sold as a four-wheel drive with cruise
control, and there
was a defect in relation to these two features. This problem
with the vehicle fails the test under
(a) and (c).
The repeated leaking of the coolant can also be regarded as a defect pursuant to
s 54(2)(c).
The vehicle was not of an acceptable
found that the goods were not of acceptable quality, her Honour went on to
consider the appropriate remedy. She then set out
sub-ss 259(3) and (4) of the
ACL, extracted above at [45].
Honour first considered Ms Bonnefin’s claim that the failure to comply
with the statutory guarantee has not been remedied
and “cannot be
remedied” for the purposes of s 259(3). Ms Bonnefin relied upon the
evidence of Mr Young and Mr Parrin
concerning the inability of Prestige to
detect the problem and thus to fix it and upon Mr Parrin's evidence that the
problem was
“unable to be remedied”. Her Honour noted that Prestige
agreed that the radiator hose was leaking badly on 16 February
2015 but, on the
basis that it was not a “warranty item”, Prestige had refused to
repair it. Prestige fixed the radiator
hose on 24 March 2015 after Mr Bonnefin
advised that Ms Bonnefin had rejected the vehicle.
Honour then stated:
“Without going on to consider if the failure is major in regard to the
four by four DSC warning light coming on and the cruise
control being activated
[sic], the evidence is that there was a defect and I am satisfied that this was
a defect which was unacceptable
and that it has not been fixed. The plaintiff
took the vehicle three times to have this remedied. They say they could not fix
because it could not be detected. Regardless of this, I am satisfied that the
defect exists and it has not been fixed. I do not have
to go on to consider
whether the failure can be characterised as a major failure, however I am
satisfied that the defects are a major
failure, in view of the test set out in s
Honour then set out the terms of s 260 of the ACL and noted that the test for
“major failure” was not dissimilar to
the test as to what is
“acceptable quality” as set out in
of the ACL. Her Honour
then stated:
“The court has already come to the determination a reasonable consumer,
fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods, would not, being
aware of the condition of the goods at trial, have regarded them as acceptable.
I am satisfied that the four
by four DSC warning light failure can be classified
as a major failure. The failure to repair the coolant leak, according to the
defendant, was not required to be repaired under the warranty because it was
caused by wear and tear.”
Honour went on to find that she was not satisfied that the coolant leak was
caused by wear and tear. Her Honour noted that the
same problem was identified
shortly after purchase and fixed by the defendant. It then re-emerged a month
later. Prestige suggested
that the cause of the problem was different at that
time. Her Honour referred to this evidence, stating:
“According to the evidence of Mr Paul Young, the problem on 22 December
2014 required the replacement of the coolant expansion
tank and the problem
identified on 16 February 2015 was a leaking radiator hose caused by wear and
I am not satisfied that this is a reasonable distinction to make.
Mr Bonnefin advised the defendant of this problem re-occurring by email at 27
January 2015, within the warranty period. I am satisfied
that this comes under
the definition of a major failure as per s 260A [sic, 260(a)].”
[emphasis added]
Honour next considered the relevant rejection period within the terms of s
262(2) of the ACL. She referred to the submission on
behalf of Prestige that the
rejection period is the period of the statutory guarantee, which had, being
three months or 5000km, expired
by the time of the rejection of the vehicle. It
was noted that Ms Bonnefin paid for and collected the vehicle on 1 November
The statutory guarantee period, lacking any evidence concerning mileage,
expired on 31 January 2015. It was noted that the ACL does
not include any
reference to the duration of statutory guarantees in the matters to be taken
into account when determining the relevant
“rejection period”.
Honour then referred to the evidence of Ms Bonnefin that she sought repair of
the defects within the period of the dealer guarantee
and that the car was with
Prestige for repair until 24 January 2015 and again on 27 January 2015. On 31
January 2015, Ms Bonnefin
again advised Prestige of the problems and was told to
return the vehicle for further inspection. The vehicle was then returned again
on 13 February 2015. Prestige did not repair the defect of which Ms Bonnefin and
Mr Bonnefin complained. It was on 24 February 2015
that Mr Bonnefin sent an
email on behalf of Ms Bonnefin to Prestige requesting a refund of the purchase
price. Prestige told Mr Bonnefin
on the same day that it would not issue a
Honour found that, although the date that the vehicle was rejected was 24
February 2015 (which was a date after the expiration
of the dealer guarantee),
in circumstances where Ms Bonnefin and Mr Bonnefin repeatedly complained to
Prestige of the defects within
the warranty period and they were not repaired,
the rejection period had not expired.
Honour was satisfied that Ms Bonnefin was entitled to reject the vehicle and
went on to consider the consequences of the rejection.
Her Honour next set out
the terms of s 263 of the ACL (with respect to the consequences of the rejection
of goods) and noted that,
under s 259(4) of the ACL, Ms Bonnefin was entitled to
recover damages. Her Honour then ordered that Ms Bonnefin was entitled to
recover her costs, being $37,750, repair costs of $446.57 and transfer of
registration cost of $1,165. The total amount ordered to
be paid was $39,361.57,
plus costs as agreed or assessed. Her Honour declined Ms Bonnefin’s
application to make an order for
indemnity costs.
The grounds of
25 July 2016, Ms Bonnefin filed an amended summons seeking leave to appeal and
commencing an appeal. It contained eight grounds
of appeals described in these
“Existence of defects
1. The Court erred in finding that the error messages (
Error Messages
displayed intermittently at the dashboard of the second-hand 2007 BMW X5
) purchased by the Defendant (
Ms Bonnefin
plaintiff (
Prestige Auto
) indicated that the cruise control function
and/or the 4 wheel drive function were in fact intermittently disabled or
failed. Specifically
(a) Had before it no evidence capable of supporting such
a finding; and/or
(b) Gave no adequate reasons for that finding.
2. The Court erred in finding that the cruise control function and/or the 4
wheel drive function were in fact intermittently disabled
Specifically the Court:
(a) Had before it no evidence capable of supporting such
a finding; and/or
(b) Gave no adequate reasons for that finding.
Acceptable quality
3. The Court erred in by finding that the leaks in the coolant reservoir, the
loosening of the front caster mounts, the intermittent
Error Messages and, if
these findings are allowed to stand, the intermittent disablement of the cruise
control function and/or of
the four wheel drive function (
resulted in the vehicle not being of
‘acceptable quality’
this phrase used in
Australian Consumer Law
, Schedule 2 to
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
), in circumstances
where the Vehicle at the time of purchase was second hand, had travelled a
distance of over 91,000 kilometres
and was sold at 1/3 of the price at which a
new model of such car would be sold. Specifically the Court:
(a) Did not give sufficient weight to those matters as
required by ACL, s 54(2) and (3); and/or
(b) Gave no adequate reasons for the weight awarded to those
4. The Court erred in finding that the NRMA inspection obtained by Ms Bonnefin
and/or the test drive by her prior to the purchase
were not examinations which
‘ought reasonably to have revealed’
that the Vehicle was not
‘of acceptable quality’,
within the meaning of ACL, s 54(7)
(as opposed to in fact not having revealed the Defects).
Ability to reject the Vehicle
Major failure
5. The Court erred in directing itself as to the test for
in ACL, s 259(3).
6. The Court erred in finding that any of the Defects, were
within the meaning of s 259(3).
Failure which cannot be remedied
7. The Court erred by not addressing the issue raised by Prestige Auto in its
submissions that Ms Bonnefin was precluded from relying
on the allegation that
any of the Defects could not have been ‘
meaning of ACL, s 259(3) (as opposed to them being a ‘
’) in circumstances where that issue was not pleaded by her and
was only first raised at the hearing.
8. In any event, the Court erred in finding that any of the Defects could not
in the meaning of ACL, s 259(3).
Specifically the Court:
(a) Had before it no evidence capable of supporting such
a finding; and/or
(b) Gave no adequate reasons for that finding.”
first four of these grounds of appeal were abandoned in written submissions
filed prior to the hearing of the appeal.
remaining four grounds of appeal, being Grounds 5, 6, 7 and 8, turn on her
Honour’s finding under s 259(3) of the ACL. For
ease of reference that
sub-section is extracted again here. It provides:
“(3) if the failure to comply with the guarantee
cannot be remedied or
is a major failure
, the consumer may:
(a) subject to section 262, notify the supplier that the
consumer rejects the goods and of the ground or grounds for the rejection;
(b) by action against the supplier, recover compensation for any reduction in
the value of the goods below the price paid or payable
by the consumer for the
[emphasis added]
this matter, Ms Bonnefin elected to reject the goods under s 259(3)(a).
the summary of her Honour’s reasons above discloses, her Honour found that
the breach of the guarantee that the vehicle was
of acceptable quality
“could not be remedied” within the meaning of the chapeau to s
259(3). She noted that she did not
then also need to consider whether the breach
was also a “major failure” within s 259(3). Despite this, she went
find that the breach also constituted a major failure.
7 and 8 concern her Honour’s first finding that the breach could not be
remedied. Ground 7 contends that it was a denial
of procedural fairness for Ms
Bonnefin to be able to rely on that limb of s 259(3), because in the statement
of claim filed she had
elected instead to rely upon “major failure”.
Ground 8 contends that there was no evidence to find that the defects could
be remedied.
5 and 6 concern her Honour’s second finding that the defects also amounted
to “major failures”. Ground 5
contends that her Honour misdirected
herself as to the correct statutory test for what amounts to a “major
failure” and/or
failed to provide adequate reasons for so finding. Ground
6 asserts that there was no evidence to find that the defects were in fact
“major failures”.
circumstances where her Honour’s determination that Ms Bonnefin was
entitled to reject the vehicle was based upon two discrete
findings, it was
conceded by counsel for Prestige that the appellant would have to establish
errors in relation to
findings in order to succeed in this
Her Honour first found that the defects could not be remedied, it is convenient
to deal with Grounds 7 and 8 first.
Grounds 7 and 8: her
Honour’s finding that the defects “could not be
Submissions on behalf of Prestige
complaint under Ground 6 is that it was unfair for the Magistrate to permit Ms
Bonnefin to rely upon the trigger in the chapeau
of s 259(3); namely, that the
defect concerning the four-wheel drive, DSC and cruise control function could
not be remedied. It was
submitted that, at paragraph [10] of the statement of
claim filed in the Local Court, Ms Bonnefin pleaded that she was entitled to
reject the vehicle because of “major failures” within the meaning of
s 260 of the ACL. Similarly, in the letter to Prestige
from Ms Bonnefin’s
solicitor on 13 March 2015, reliance was placed on the defect being a
“major failure”. The case
identified in the “Plaintiff’s
Statement of Facts and Issues” document was also that the defects
constituted “major
failures”. In his opening address at the Local
Court hearing, counsel for Ms Bonnefin referred to the case relying upon the
defects being “major failures”. It was not until closing submissions
that counsel for Ms Bonnefin first made submissions
in reliance upon both limbs
in the chapeau to s 259(3) of the ACL.
was submitted on behalf of Prestige that her Honour’s determination of the
matter on both bases resulted in a denial of procedural
fairness and prevented a
trial according to law. Counsel relied upon the decision in
Seltsam Pty
Limited v Ghaleb
[2005] NSWCA 208
per Ipp JA at [78]-[79]. The unfairness to
Prestige was that it was not afforded the opportunity to adduce evidence as to
the defect had been fixed by Mr Julier or to adduce expert evidence as
to whether the defects were remedied by 24 February 2015.
It was submitted that
a properly conducted trial might have produced a different result.
complaint was made under Ground 7 that the Magistrate failed to provide reasons
as to why she considered that Ms Bonnefin
was entitled to rely on both limbs in
s 259(3). The reasons do not disclose consideration of this threshold question
of whether such
a case was open on the pleading.
for Ground 8, it was submitted that there was no evidence to support her
Honour’s finding that that the four-wheel drive
and cruise control defects
were not remedied. Mr Julier’s evidence was that he had fixed the problem.
Mr Phan did not detect
any defects on 16 February 2015. The only evidence of any
defect after the vehicle was collected from Banksia Motors was the
“non-specific
hearsay evidence” to the effect that Mr Bonnefin had
complained about it to his wife and his brother-in-law and to Prestige.
material did not detail any separate occurrences except on 25 January
Submissions on behalf of Ms Bonnefin
for Ms Bonnefin relied upon the pleadings, statement of facts, addresses and
course of the hearing in support of her submission
that Prestige was clearly on
notice that she contended that the defect regarding the four wheel drive, DSC
and cruise control functions
could not be remedied.
was also submitted that any actual procedural unfairness caused by
Prestige’s inability to cross-examine Mr Julier (which
unfairness Ms Bonnefin denies) was caused by the failure of Prestige to comply
with the orders of the Local Court. The
evidence of Mr Julier was admitted as
reply evidence. Prestige filed its evidence in the Local Court six weeks from
the first date
on which it had been ordered to serve its evidence, three weeks
from the extended date on which it had been ordered to serve its
evidence, ten
weeks after Ms Bonnefin served her evidence and seven business days before the
for the complaint, raised for the first time in this Court, that the evidence
that the DSC/4x4 warning light came up on the dashboard
of the vehicle
approximately once a week from December 2014 to February 2015, was hearsay
evidence, it was submitted that no objection
was made to this evidence in the
Local Court. Nor was Mr Bonnefin cross-examined on this point. In her evidence,
Ms Bonnefin stated
that she regularly saw the warning light. No objection was
taken to the hearsay assertion in the affidavit of Mr Richardson. It was
submitted that her Honour was entitled to accept this evidence and to give it
the weight that she considered appropriate.
Consideration
will first consider the allegation of procedural unfairness concerning s 259(3)
of the ACL. It is well established that a failure
to afford procedural fairness
to a party constitutes both jurisdictional error and error of law within
Kirk v Industrial Court of New South Wales
(2010) 239 CLR
[2010] HCA 1
Re Refugee Review Tribunal; Ex parte
(2000) 204 CLR 82
[2000] HCA 57
, 91-101 [17]-[42], 143
similar complaint was made in an appeal concerning “a question of
Warkworth Mining Limited v Bulga Milbrodale Progress
Association Inc
[2014] NSWCA 105
). The Court
(Bathurst CJ, Beazley P and Tobias AJA) held that in such an appeal “...it
is necessary for there to have been
legal error in the manner in which a
question was determined in the Court below”: at [5].
went on to summarise the legal principles relating to procedural fairness at
[34]- [38] as follows:
“As the authorities indicate, it is sometimes not difficult to determine
that a particular circumstance requires procedural
fairness to be accorded. The
difficult question, more often, is in determining what is required in the
particular circumstance to
satisfy the obligation and whether those requirements
have been satisfied in the given case. It is in this sense that Gleeson CJ
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Lam
[2003] HCA 6
commented, at [37], in respect of procedural fairness
‘Fairness is not an abstract concept. It is
essentially practical. Whether one talks in terms of procedural fairness or
justice, the concern of the law is to avoid practical
injustice.’
Insofar as procedural fairness relates to the issues raised in the grounds of
appeal, the statement of Mason J in
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
at 587 is of particular relevance. As his Honour stated:
‘... recent decisions illustrate the importance
which the law attaches to the need to bring to a person’s attention the
critical issue or factor on which the administrative decision is likely to turn
so that he may have an opportunity of dealing with
it.’ (citations
This passage was endorsed by McHugh and Gummow JJ in
Ex Parte Lam
[81]. See also
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
[2006] HCA 63
228 CLR 152
On the same question, Mark Aronson and Matthew Groves,
Judicial Review of
Administrative Action
, 5th ed (2013) (Thomson Reuters) at 527 have
‘A fair hearing presumes that the parties to it
are fully informed of, and able to respond to, the relevant issues. That is
possible if disclosure is inadequate. Inadequate disclosure can also reduce the
accountability, acceptability and quality of
decision-making.’
Whilst the preceding comments were made in reference to administrative
decision-making, procedural fairness is also ‘an essential
characteristic
of judicial proceedings’:
RCB v The Honourable Justice Forrest
[2012] HCA 47
247 CLR 304
. However, as the High Court there observed,
‘its content is dependent upon the nature of the proceedings and the
persons claiming
its benefit’.”
effect, Ground 7 asserts that counsel for Prestige was taken by surprise when Ms
Bonnefin relied upon an assertion that she was
entitled to reject the goods
because the defects were unable to be remedied. It is useful to have regard to
the pleadings and manner
in which the hearing was conducted in order to
determine whether this complaint can be sustained.
paragraph [10] of the statement of claim it was pleaded
“The Defects constituted major failures within the meaning of section 260
of the ACL, as
(a) they were of a kind that, had a reasonable consumer
been fully acquainted with the nature and extent of the Defects, the consumer
would not have acquired the Vehicle; and
(b) they rendered the Vehicle substantially unfit for a purpose for which
vehicles of the same kind are commonly supplied, namely
off-road driving and
they could not, easily and within a reasonable time, be remedied to make the
vehicle fit for such a purpose
[emphasis added]
[12] of the statement of claim pleaded that, “On or about 24 February
2015, the plaintiff notified the defendant that
she rejected the Vehicle within
the meaning of section 259(3) of the ACL.”
the defects were described as being “major failures” in paragraph
[10] of the statement of claim, both sub-ss
260(a) and (c) were particularised.
Section 260(c) relies upon a definition of “major failure” which
includes the goods
not being able to be easily fixed within a reasonable time.
Moreover, the pleading in paragraph [12] did not seek to draw any distinction
between the alternative bases under s 259(3). Furthermore, the particulars
provided in paragraph [12] of the statement of claim were
listed as being the
email to Prestige from Mr Bonnefin on 24 February 2015 (see below at [90]) and
the letter from Ms Bonnefin’s
solicitor to Prestige on 13 March 2015
(extracted above at [25]).
the email from Mr Bonnefin to Prestige on 24 February 2015, it was asserted that
that one of the grounds for rejection of the vehicle
was that it could not be
“As you would probably know, I’ve taken the car back to your service
department 3 separate times during the warranty
period to fix the “4x4 has
failed” issue. Each time Warren from your service department tells me that
know what the problem is and can’t do anything to fix it.
The car is no good to me if the 4x4 continues to fail approximately
is consistent with the assertion by Mr Bonnefin in his affidavit that, “I
formed the view that the 4x4 failure was not
one that could be
the letter to Prestige from Ms Bonnefin’s solicitor dated 13 March 2015,
it was stated that, “...Mr Bonnefin was advised
by Prestige Auto that
their service technicians could not repair the 4x4 malfunction” and that,
“...a reasonable consumer
would not consider the vehicle’s repeated
operational failures and Prestige Auto’s inability to repair its extensive
defects acceptable.”
was pleaded in paragraph [13] of the statement of claim that, “On or about
24 February 2015, the plaintiff made an election
within the meaning of section
263(4)(a) of the ACL to receive a refund of the Purchase Price for the
vehicle.” The particulars
in support of that assertion were the same email
and letter pleaded at paragraph [12] of the statement of claim.
paragraph [10(c)] of the defence filed by Prestige on 8 May 2015 it was pleaded
that diagnostic testing performed on the vehicle
on 16 February 2015
“...failed to identify any history of logged faults with the 4x4 function
or the cruise control function.
The testing also failed to identify any history
of logged error messages with the on-board computer system.”
the alternative, it was pleaded at paragraph [13] of the defence
“....the defendant says that if the alleged Defects did or do exist, the
alleged Defects are not of a nature so as to constitute
major failures within
the meaning of s 260 of the ACL and
are capable of remedy
[emphasis added]
“Statement of Facts and Issues” prepared by Prestige in the Local
Court referred, at paragraph [6], to the inability
of the plaintiff to remedy
the problems with the vehicle, including the four-wheel drive
“The Defects individually or in combination constituted major failures
within the meaning of section 260 of the ACL, in particular,
because the
intermittent failure of the 4x4 function of a 4x4 car makes it unfit to be used
for the purpose for which 4x4 cars are
commonly supplied, that is for off-road
driving and for towing boats and trailers, and it
could not easily and within
a reasonable time be remedied
; and had a the [sic] plaintiff, as a
reasonable consumer, been fully acquainted within the nature and extent of the
Defects, she
would not have acquired the Vehicle.”
[emphasis added]
his opening address, counsel for Ms Bonnefin submitted that the defects were not
remedied. No complaint was made by counsel for
Prestige at that stage. Nor was
any objection made on behalf of Prestige to evidence led in Ms Bonnefin’s
case that Prestige
was unable to remedy the faults with the vehicle.
led evidence from a qualified mechanic and tendered a diagnostic report to
establish that, by 16 February 2015, there were
no faults detected regarding the
four-wheel drive, DSC and cruise control functions.
was made by counsel for Prestige in the Local Court in his closing address
concerning this issue as follows:
“My reading of the statement of claim, and I’m sure my learned
friend will correct me if I’m wrong on this, is
that the case is put, and
has indeed been litigated on the basis of an alleged major failure and
that’s found in paras 9 [sic]
and specifically para 10 of the statement of
The plaintiff alleges that the items set out in para 9, which are some of the
items that your Honour has heard evidence about, amount
to major failures.
Nowhere in the statement of claim, and I’m more than happy to be
corrected, does the plaintiff put her case
on the basis of the other limb, which
my learned friend has addressed you on and that other limb is found, of course,
in s 259(3).
Your Honour will find, again my learned friend has discussed this, that there
are two limbs there. One is that if the failure is
one that cannot be remedied,
then the right to make an election follows; or if the failure is a major failure
and in my submission,
the plaintiff is restricted in its case, to the second
For the avoidance of any doubt, the defendant submits that ultimately,
this doesn’t matter
, because (1) the plaintiff fails at the s 54
threshold, and certainly, in any event, neither of the two limbs of s 259(3) are
But as a matter of procedural fairness, the plaintiff’s case
has been put on the basis of a major failure, and that is the
basis upon which
the plaintiff should be put to
[emphasis added]
for Prestige went on to address the evidence in the case in support of the
position that no defect could be detected. There
was no exchange between the
Magistrate and counsel concerning the complaint of counsel for Prestige with
respect to Ms Bonnefin’s
reliance on the two limbs of s 259(3).
counsel for Ms Bonnefin made his submissions in reply, he pointed to paragraphs
[10(b)] and [12] of the statement of claim and
submitted that Prestige was on
notice that Ms Bonnefin relied on the fact that the defect could not be
am satisfied that her Honour did not err by not providing reasons for permitting
Ms Bonnefin to rely upon both limbs of s 259(3).
My reasons are as follows.
counsel for Prestige in the Local Court indicated that he stood to be corrected
as to whether the statement of claim mentioned
both limbs of s 259(3). When, in
reply, counsel for Ms Bonnefin pointed out paragraphs [10(b)] and [12] of the
statement of claim,
counsel for Prestige made no further submissions on the
counsel for Prestige told the Magistrate that “ultimately, it didn’t
matter” whether both limbs or triggers
were relied upon, because his
submission was neither could be satisfied in any event.
no application was made that involved an exchange between counsel for Prestige
and the Magistrate regarding this specified
issue. The submission extracted
above at [99] was simply one of many submissions made by counsel for Prestige.
After making it, he
went on to make submissions concerning the evidence. The
focus of his submissions regarding s 259(3) was that no defects were ever
fact detected.
these circumstances, it is not surprising that her Honour considered the matter
to be resolved by the close of submissions and
made no ruling at that time or
subsequently concerning this issue. She was not asked to do so and, after
paragraphs [10(b)] and [12]
were brought to the attention of counsel for
Prestige, no further discussion took place concerning whether one or both limbs
enlivened. Her Honour then reserved her decision.
any event, I am satisfied that Prestige was on notice that Ms Bonnefin asserted
that the vehicle was rejected because of the failure
of Prestige to fix the
defects. So much is apparent from the correspondence and pleadings set out above
and the way in which the
hearing was conducted. Although the statement of claim
did not expressly state that
triggers in s 259(3) would be relied
upon, I am not satisfied that the pleadings precluded the plaintiff from taking
that course.
As a matter of statutory construction, there is no bar in s 259(3)
to a consumer relying upon both limbs in the alternative in order
to establish
an entitlement to reject goods.
only am I satisfied that Prestige was on notice that such an argument would form
part of Ms Bonnefin’s case, I am also satisfied
that no practical
unfairness was caused to Prestige in any event, given the state of the evidence
in this matter. Prestige defended
this aspect of the allegation by reliance upon
evidence that the problem had been resolved and no longer existed. That is, that
was no problem regarding the four-wheel drive, DSC and cruise control
functions at the time of the rejection of the vehicle. The
evidence relevant to
whether the defects could be remedied was the same evidence relevant to whether
they constituted a “major
there could be cases in which the evidentiary basis for finding that a defect
could not be remedied may differ from the evidentiary
basis for finding that the
defect was a “major failure”, this is not that case.
was submitted on behalf of Prestige that unfairness was caused because, if it
had known that Ms Bonnefin would rely upon both limbs,
it would have sought
leave to cross-examine Mr Julier in order to establish that he had fixed the
relevant defect. I do not accept
that this is the case. The uncontradicted
evidence of Mr Julier extracted above at [35] was that, after he repaired the
he drove the vehicle for 100km and was satisfied that there was no
longer a defect. It is difficult to see what further evidence
could have been
adduced from Mr Julier relevant to the issue of whether between 8 January 2015
and 16 February 2015 the defect could
be remedied, as opposed to its being a
“major failure”.
am not satisfied that any unfairness was caused to Prestige by Ms
Bonnefin’s being permitted to rely upon both limbs in s
turn now to Ground 8 and the assertion that there was “no evidence”
that the defect could not be remedied. A claim that
there is “no
evidence” to support a particular finding raises a question of law: per
Hayne, Heydon, Crennan and Kiefel
Kostas v HIA Insurance Services Pty
(2010) 241 CLR 390
[2010] HCA 32
Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond (
1990) 170 CLR 321
[1990] HCA 33
Honour had before her the evidence of Mr Bonnefin and Ms Bonnefin that the
problem was ongoing after the vehicle was “fixed”
by Mr Julier in
Byron Bay. As against that evidence, she also had before her the evidence from
Mr Perrin and Mr Phan from Prestige
that the fault could not be detected when
the vehicle was examined on 16 February 2015. Her Honour had to resolve a
factual dispute
as to whether the defect was still in existence at the time of
the rejection of the vehicle. She accepted the evidence of Mr Bonnefin,
Bonnefin and Mr Richardson in the context of the long history of complaints
concerning the vehicle, as set out in the emails,
over the evidence called on
behalf of Prestige that no such defect existed.
was clearly sufficient evidence to enable such a finding. Complaint is now made,
in support of Ground 8, that the evidence of
Mr Richardson that he was told that
the warning light came on approximately once a week from December 2014 to
February 2015 was “hearsay.”
No objection was ever taken to any of
that evidence in the Local Court. In any event, both Mr Bonnefin and Ms Bonnefin
gave evidence
Prestige, which are annexed to his affidavit, show that the complaint
8 does not assert that there was insufficient evidence or that her Honour gave
too much weight to certain evidence. Such a
ground would not involve a question
of law. This ground asserts that there was “no evidence” to make
such a finding.
could not be said that there was no evidence before her Honour on this issue.
The argument under this ground is, in effect, that
the Magistrate should have
made a different finding. Her Honour was entitled to accept the evidence before
her and give it the weight
that she considered appropriate.
8 is not made out.
have found that no error is disclosed in her Honour’s consideration of
Grounds 7 and 8. In circumstances where her Honour
found in favour of Ms
Bonnefin on two separate bases, this appeal must fail no matter which findings I
make in relation to Grounds
5 and 6. Nonetheless, I propose to go on to consider
Grounds 5 and 6.
Grounds 5 and 6: her Honour’s finding that
the relevant defects constituted “major failures”
is convenient to deal with Grounds 5 and 6 together. Ground 5 relies upon a
contention that the Magistrate erred in directing herself
as to the relevant
test for “major failure”. Ground 6 asserts that there was no
evidence for her Honour to make the relevant
Submissions on behalf of Prestige
for Prestige relied upon three discrete arguments in relation to Ground 5.
it was submitted that her Honour erred in law by misdirecting herself as to the
test for “major failure” in s 260(a)
of the ACL. It was submitted
that her Honour misstated when it is that defects are to be assessed for the
test for “acceptable
quality” and that she effectively adopted that
as the same test for ”major failure”. Her Honour considered that
condition of the goods “at the time of trial” is the relevant time
when determining whether goods are of “acceptable
quality”. This was
an error, it was submitted, because it uses the power of hindsight, in respect
of events that occurred between
the time of supply and the time of trial, to
make a ruling whether goods are acceptable
at the time of the
transaction
passage in which this error is said to have occurred is extracted above at
it was submitted that her Honour erred by noting that there are similarities
between the definition of “acceptable quality”
in s 54(2) of the ACL
and that of “major failure” in s 260(a) of the ACL, such that a
finding that a good is not of acceptable
quality automatically means there will
also be a “major failure”. It was submitted that, if this were
correct, then s
260(a) would be “redundant”. It was submitted that
the two tests are different.
test under s 54(2) focuses on the reasonable consumer being acquainted with the
state and condition of the goods, whereas s 260(a)
is concerned with the
consumer being acquainted with the nature and extent of the failure. It was
submitted that her Honour conflated
the two tests by only using the language
contained in s 54(2). In making this submission counsel for Prestige noted the
any authority regarding the differences between the tests in ss 54(2)
and 260(a). He also conceded that the evidence in this matter
regarding whether
the vehicle was of an “acceptable quality” and that regarding
whether the defects were a “major
failure” were the same.
it was submitted that her Honour’s reasons do not disclose any separate
consideration of the statutory test in s 260(a).
It was submitted that the
absence of reasons for the finding of “major failure”, separate from
the finding of unacceptable
quality, was an error of law in itself.
it was submitted that there was no evidence to find that any of the defects were
“major failures.” Counsel for Prestige
focused his submissions upon
her Honour’s finding that the failure to fix the leaking coolant was a
“major failure”.
It was submitted that it was not reasonable to draw
a distinction between the problem in the radiator hose that caused the coolant
to leak for the first time, and which led to the replacement of the radiator
hose under the dealer guarantee, and the “wear
and tear” that
Prestige claimed caused the second coolant leak. It was further submitted that
there was no evidence that there
were not in fact two separate sources of the
coolant leak. Nor was there any evidence to establish that the distance
travelled by
the vehicle between purchase of the vehicle by Ms Bonnefin, the
time of the replacement of the radiator hose and the time of the
coolant leak
did not lead to wear and tear. If her Honour’s finding was that it was not
reasonable to refuse to fix the second
leak, that finding is not relevant to
whether it was a “major failure”, only to whether the defect came
within the statutory
guarantee of 5,000km or three months.
was conceded that her Honour did not need to find numerous “major
failures” and that, if this Court were satisfied
that the defect
concerning the cruise control, DSC and four-wheel drive failures was either
unable to be remedied or a “major
failure”, then any error in the
finding concerning the leaking coolant would not be determinative on its
Submissions on behalf of Ms Bonnefin
behalf of Ms Bonnefin it was submitted that, although her Honour’s
reference to the relevant time for determining whether
the goods were of
acceptable quality was “inelegantly expressed”, it is clear that her
Honour was acknowledging that
matters known at the time of trial are relevant to
the consideration of what a reasonable consumer would consider to be of
quality at the time of supply, including latent defects. The latent
defects in this case were the intermittent but significant failures
four-wheel drive, DSC and cruise control functions as well as the leaking
for the submission that her Honour had conflated the test for “acceptable
quality” in s 54(2) with that of “major
failure” in s 260(a),
it was submitted that nowhere in her Honour’s reasons did she state that
the defects constituted
“major failures”
the defects
caused the car to not to be of “acceptable quality”.
for the “no evidence” argument, Ms Bonnefin submitted that there was
evidence that, when the error message appeared
on the dashboard, the vehicle
from time to time slowed down and sped up at irregular intervals and that the
cruise control, DSC and
four-wheel drive did not function. This made the car
unsafe to drive. It was open to her Honour to find, based upon that evidence,
that the faults were “major failures”.
for the argument concerning the coolant leak, it was submitted that, even if her
Honour erred in holding that the leaking coolant
was a “major
failure”, the remaining failures concerning the DSC, cruise control and
four-wheel drive functions were
“major failures” in any
Consideration
relevant test in s 54(2) of the ACL of whether or not goods are of
“acceptable quality” is an objective one based
on whether a
reasonable consumer who was aware of the “defects” in the goods at
the time of the supply would have considered
them to be of acceptable quality.
There was no issue taken that the determination of what is objectively
reasonable for a consumer
to expect is to be made taking into account the
relevant information known as at the time of the trial, including
“after-acquired
knowledge”:
Medtel v Courtney
at [66] and
Honour quoted from the decision in
Medtel v Courtney
in her reasons. Her
Honour was satisfied that knowledge of
for the purpose of the
“acceptable quality” test is to be assessed at the time of the
trial. It was accepted by Prestige
in this Court that this is the appropriate
test. Rather, the complaint made on behalf of Prestige is that when her Honour
was considering
s 54(7) of the ACL in the passage described above at [56], she
again referred to
Medtel v Courtney
and stated that, “...the
relevant time of whether the goods are of acceptable quality is at the time of
am satisfied that a fair reading of her Honour’s reasons overall is
consistent with the application of the correct test with
respect to the question
of when the reasonable consumer’s knowledge is to be assessed, being the
time of trial. To conclude
otherwise would require a finding that, after having
quoted from
Medtel v Courtney
and stated the test correctly, her Honour
found the opposite test to be the case shortly thereafter. Although her
shorthand reference to the test is somewhat inelegantly phrased,
as submitted by counsel for Ms Bonnefin, I am not satisfied that
erred regarding the correct test.
second error alleged under this ground concerns her Honour’s direction of
law to herself regarding the test for “major
failure” in s 260(a) of
the ACL. It is contended that her Honour did not separately consider that test
after finding that the
goods were not of “acceptable quality” under
relevant passage is extracted at [62] above. The complaint made is that her
Honour did not independently consider s 260(a) of
the ACL because she had
already found that the vehicle was not of acceptable quality under s 54(2).
am not satisfied that any error is disclosed in her Honour’s reasons
concerning the test for “major failure” in
her Honour observed that she did not need to find that the defect concerning the
four-wheel drive, DSC and cruise control function
was a “major
failure”, having already found that it could not be remedied. Despite
this, her Honour went on to consider
this second limb briefly for completeness.
The adequacy of her Honour’s reasons for going on to consider whether the
was also a “major failure” must be considered in that
her Honour commenced her consideration of this issue by first extracting the
test in s 260(a) in full. There can be no doubt
that her Honour was aware of the
fact that she was considering a separate statutory provision.
her Honour at no times stated that the test was the same as that in s 54(2).
Rather, she simply observed that the tests were
“not dissimilar”.
Her Honour was clearly aware, when considering s 54(2) of the ACL, that the test
is whether a reasonable
consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition
of the goods would regard them as acceptable, whereas the test in s 260(a)
whether the goods would not have been acquired by a reasonable consumer fully
acquainted with the nature and extent of the
as was conceded during the hearing of this appeal, the evidence relevant to the
test in s 54(2) was the same as the evidence
relevant to the test in s 260(a).
Her Honour had already found that a reasonable consumer would expect that the
four-wheel drive,
DSC and cruise control functions would work without repeated
failure. She had also found that the vehicle was sold as a four-wheel
cruise control and that there was a defect in relation to each of those
features, which are central to the functioning
of such a vehicle. Those factual
findings were relevant to both tests.
is apparent that there is considerable overlap between ss 54(2) and 260(a) of
the ACL. I am not aware of any authorities concerning
the interplay between the
two sections, but as a matter of construction the two provisions clearly
constitute separate tests. I am
not satisfied in the particular circumstances of
this appeal that error is disclosed because her Honour did not provide extensive
reasons for separately finding that s 260(a) was satisfied on the evidence in
this matter, having already found s 54(2) was satisfied.
This is especially so
in circumstances where her Honour had already found that the defects could not
be remedied.
for the submission that the reasons regarding her Honour’s finding of
“major failure” were inadequate, it is
to be noted that the reasons
must be viewed as a whole and not scrutinised in sections. Her Honour provided
detailed reasons in this
matter as extracted above at [49] - [67].
5 is not established.
6 contended that there was no evidence to find that the defects were
“major failures”. I have already considered
the evidence that the
defects could not be remedied under Ground 8. I make the same findings regarding
the evidence concerning the
four-wheel drive, cruise control and DSC functions
under this ground. Prestige relied upon the same evidence, namely, that these
defects did not exist.
further discrete argument was relied upon under this ground that there was no
evidence for her Honour to find that the defect that
caused the coolant to leak
was a “major failure”.
evidence before her Honour was that the coolant leaked in December 2014, shortly
after the purchase of the vehicle, and was fixed
by replacing the coolant
expansion tank. Despite, this the coolant continued to leak. When the car was
returned in January with a
complaint that the coolant was still leaking,
Prestige identified the source on that occasion as being a leaking radiator hose
refused to replace it on the basis that the leak was this time said to be
caused by wear and tear.
Honour found that the fact that the coolant continued to leak after it had
already been fixed once was a “major failure”.
She further found
that the distinction drawn by Prestige between the first leak and second leak
was not “reasonable”.
I am satisfied that it was open to her Honour
to make such a finding. It would be quite unusual for the coolant to leak twice
a month for completely different reasons, and for one leak to be a defect
that required fixing under the dealer guarantee and the
other to fall into a
completely different category. The evidence was that it had failed twice. This
is sufficient for the coolant
leak to constitute a “major
any event, even if I am wrong in this conclusion and it was not open for her
Honour to draw such a distinction, nothing turns on
that finding in
circumstances where I am satisfied that there are no errors in her
Honour’s findings that the problems with
the four-wheel drive, DSC and
cruise control functions were “major failures” and could not be
remedied. As was conceded
by counsel for Prestige, it was sufficient that her
Honour was satisfied that there was one major failure in order to find that the
test was made out.
make the following orders:
(1) The appeal
is dismissed.
appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (381 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter