URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/66.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workcover Authority NSW (Inspector Marie Gregory) v Ontera Modular Carpets Pty Ltd [2006] NSWCIMC 66 (24 May 2006)
CHIEF INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
New South Wales
WorkCover Authority NSW (Inspector Marie Gregory)
Respondent:
Modular Carpets Pty Ltd
20414198/05/2
27 March 2006
Date of Decision:
Legislation:
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
Magistrate:
Representation:
Solicitor for the Prosecutor:
Turner, Moray and Agnew Solicitors
Solicitor for the Defendant:
M Wood, Holding Redlich Solicitors
Counsel for the Defendant:
Reasons for Decision
1. The defendant pleads guilty to a breach of
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2000
. The prosecution arises out of an incident on 30
September 2004 at the defendant’s premises at Northmead in the state of
where the defendant operates a business, both as a manufacturer and as an
importer and supplier of carpet products. At the defendant’s
there is a warehouse in which an employee, Mr Donald Smith suffered injuries on
that date when he was struck by some of
the contents of a carton containing
carpet squares which fell on him as a consequence of an instability in a plie of
cartons which
were stacked four high in an area immediately adjacent to a walk
way within the warehouse.
2. The prosecutor particularises the offence in an
amended court attendance notice in the following terms; -
“On the said
date, at the said place, the defendant, being an employer failed to ensure the
health, safety and welfare at work
of its employees, including Donald Smith
(“the worker”) when the worker was walking through the warehouse
area of premises
on his way to the steel rack store area and while passing a
stock pile of cartons containing Milliken Carpet tiles in the store area
the loading door, he was struck on the head and crushed to the floor by a carton
weighing about 300kg which had become unstable
and fallen from the top of the
pile, as a consequence of which the worker sustained serious injuries including
a factured pelvis
by reason of ;
1. The defendant failed to ensure that its
system of work and the working environment of its employees was safe and without
health in that;
a) The stacking of cartons of Milliken Carpet tiles
four high in the area that was used as an access way to the store area was
because of the instability of the stack of cartons, as a result of some
of the cartons only being partially filled.
b) The defendant failed to
conduct a proper risk assessment in relation to the actual contents of the
cartons to determine their suitability
for stacking purposes, prior to storing
them in such as manner as involved some of the cartons being four cartons
2. The defendant failed to provide such information and instruction and
training in relation to the work of stacking cartons of Milliken
Carpet Tiles
such as was necessary to ensure the health and safety at work of its
employees.”
3. The parties provided the court with an agreed statement
of facts at the sentencing hearing, and I do not propose to set out in
background facts and circumstances concerning this incident. The facts are well
known to the parties. It is sufficient
to note that Mr Smith was employed by the
defendant as a maintenance fitter and had been with the defendant for
approximately 20
years. At the time of the incident he was walking in an area
that was regularly used as an access walkway within the warehouse. Whilst
defendant company is a substantial manufacturer of carpet products in its own
right, it had decided, shortly before the incident,
to import a quantity of
Milliken carpet tiles from an overseas manufacturer. The cartons involved in the
incident had arrived a short
time earlier as part of the second batch of such
products received at the defendant’s premises. On this occasion, a forty
long steel shipping container had been brought by truck to the
defendant’s premises, and employees of the defendant had undertaken
task of unloading and storing the cartons of carpet tiles. The method of storage
adopted involved stacking the cartons four high
with each carton supported
entirely by the carton beneath it. The cartons were not placed on shelving or
4. At delivery, the carpet tiles were contained within the cardboard
cartons and plastic wrapping was also utilised to protect the
product. It was
considered undesirable to remove the carpet tiles from the cartons for storage
purposes, as protection of the product
was optimised by the cartons being stored
without first being opened and examination of the outside of the carton could
not establish
whether the carton was full or only partially full.
the first and earlier batch of Milliken carpet tiles had been delivered to the
defendant’s premises there had been no
difficulty encountered in relation
to the quality control associated with the packing of the cartons. Each of the
cartons previously
supplied had been full.
6. For reasons that remain
unknown, the second batch of cartons which had arrived short before 30 September
2004, contained one carton
which was not full. If that particular carton had
been identified as being only partially full of carpet tiles, it could have been
placed at the top of the stack and the incident which occurred would have been
unlikely to have eventuated. However, this particular
carton had been placed in
the lower part of the stack and constituted a hazard in that the gap at the top
of the carton permitted
the weight of the carton above to crush the top of the
partially filled carton to a depth of approximately 150mm. This created an
instability and made it possible for the contents of the top carton to fall and
strike Mr Smith while he was walking past. The evidence
suggests that Mr Smith
was not touching or working with the pile of cartons in any way and it was
extremely unfortunate that he happened
to be passing in front of the stack of
cartons at the very moment that the top of the partially filled carton gave way
and the contents
of the top box fell down and struck Mr Smith.
7. Mr Smith
suffered a serious injury, namely a fractured pelvis. Given that he was struck
on the head, in the initial impact of the
object falling from a considerable
height, the court must take note of the existence of the possibility that his
injuries could have
been far more serious including injuries to the head, neck
8. It is necessary for the court to give consideration to the
objective seriousness of this offence. The prosecutor asserts that in
circumstances where the defendant had not conducted an appropriate risk
assessment in relation to its system of stacking cartons
four high, the risk to
safety was foreseeable and that the court should regard the offence as falling
within the middle range of
matters coming before the court.
9. On behalf of
the defendant it was contended that the court could find that the matter falls
at the lower end of the scale. The
defendant has no prior convictions under the
Occupation Health & Safely legislation which indicates a diligent and
vigilant approach
to occupational health and safety matters, given that the
defendants operations are extensive and that more than 80 employees are
in the defendant’s undertakings. On this occasion, the defendant has
clearly relied upon the quality control at the
suppliers end and it was not
unreasonable for the defendant to rely on its previous experience in this
regard. There was nothing
in the prior conduct of the suppliers or in the
appearance of the new batch of carpet tiles which would have alerted the
to the possibility of one of the cartons being only partially filled.
Whilst the defendant acknowledged a flaw in its safe system
of work in this
regard, it was submitted that the court would find that it was by no means
readily foreseeable that the batch of
cartons would contain this hidden
10. The court notes that the defendant’s warehouse utilises
various forms of racking and shelving which are evident from the
photographic
evidence placed before the court. The defendant, being experienced in the
operation of a warehouse, would have been
well aware of the undesirability of
stacking cartons of this size to a height of four cartons, utilising only the
weight of the cartons
themselves for support. The evidence would suggest that
this method was adopted only because the defendant, at that time, lacked
sufficient storage space to store the cartons in any other way. It was an
expedient method of storage which was adopted without an
appropriate risk
assessment and consequentially without consideration of the Occupational Health
and Safety ramifications associated
with such a method.
11. I am satisfied
that it was reasonably foreseeable, given the method of stacking that any
imperfection or instability in the plie
could result in a heavy carton or its
contents falling from a considerable height onto persons using the access
walkway. The evidence
suggests that forklift trucks are used in the area. In the
view of the court, instability could result from a lower carton being
a carelessly driven forklift truck. That did not occur in this case. However, it
appears to the court that the method of
stacking created an inherent danger in
the event of instability from whatever cause. Following the incident, the
defendant took a
number of steps to eliminate or diminish the risk to safety.
The defendant immediately introduced a safe working procedure, which
the stacking or such cartons more than two high. Large signage was put in place
warning “No Triple Stacking”.
In addition, the defendant took other
steps to alleviate the shortage of storage space. It took steps to rent space in
another warehouse
and as a temporary measure, at least, a number of shipping
containers which could be placed at the defendant’s premises and
for temporary shortage. Whilst the court notes that these steps were entirely
appropriate and constituted an appropriate
response to the hazard identified by
the incident on 30 September 2004, these remedial steps also underline the fact
that simple
remedial steps were available to the defendant prior to 30 September
2004 which could easily have been adopted instead of the expedient
method which
had been selected of stacking the cartons four high. The courts notes that the
submission made on behalf of the defendant
that it was not unreasonable for the
defendant to protect the product by keeping it within the carton and that when
the product was
so packaged, it was impossible to tell from observation whether
the carton was completely full for not. In this regard, the defendant
established a safe system which involves weighing the cartons on arrival so that
any departure from the normal weight of a full
carton is detected immediately
and before the carton is moved to storage. This method not only assists in
safeguarding the health,
safety and welfare of employees, but also alerts the
defendant at an early stage to any quality control problem at the suppliers
which may have caused the defendant to be sent less product that was required
under the contract. This measure had also been
available to the defendant prior
to the incident on 30 September 2004.
12. I am satisfied that both a general
deterrence factor and a specific deterrence factor should be included in any
penalty imposed
by the court. The defendant conducts a substantial manufacturing
business and utilises equipment, including forklift trucks, which
are associated
with well-known hazards. Whilst the previously unblemished record of the
defendant goes to a generally diligent approach
to occupational, health and
safety matters the lack of a risk assessment for this particular, and relatively
new procedure, warrants
this offender being specifically deterred from
committing further breaches of the legislation. It is also necessary for the
to give appropriate consideration to subjective matters which mitigate in
favour of the defendant. I have already made reference
to the lack of any prior
convictions under the legislation and I am satisfied that the defendant is
entitled to be regarded as a
good industrial citizen, in terms of its general
attitude towards occupational health and safety matters. This is borne out by
lack of prior convictions as well as the prompt and appropriate action taken
immediately after the incident to put in place safe
systems of work. It is clear
that the defendant cooperated with WorkCover following the incident and that the
defendant has genuine
remorse and contrition concerning the injuries suffered by
Mr Smith. The defendant engaged rehabilitation specialists to assess Mr
Smith’s pre-injury duties and to produce an appropriate plan for his
Mr Smith had returned to
his pre-injury condition and was performing his pre-injury duties. The defendant
is involved in its local
community and financially assists local charities,
particularly those associated with children’s health and is entitled to
seen by the court as a good corporate citizen.
13. The legislation provides
for a maximum penalty of $550,000, where a defendant is incorporated and has no
prior convictions. This
court has jurisdiction to impose a penalty not exceeding
$55,000. Having given consideration to both the objective seriousness of
offence as well as the subjective matters which mitigate strongly in favour of
the defendant, I find that the defendant should
be fined the sum of $26,500.00.
The defendant is entitled to a discount in circumstances where the plea of
guilty was entered at
the earliest practical opportunity. In the view of the
court, a discount of 25% is warranted. Consequently the fine is discounted
$19,875.00. There will by a moiety of the fine to the prosecutor.
addition the defendant is ordered to pay the prosecutors professional costs and
disbursements in the sum of $3020.36. Both
the fine and the costs are to be paid
within 28 days at the registry of the court, Downing Centre, 143-147 Liverpool
Street, Sydney.
Chief Industrial Magistrate
24 May 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (32.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter