URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSIRADRS/2020/268.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ARO v NRMA Insurance (Claims Assessment) [2020] NSWSIRADRS 268 (7 December 2020)
ARO v NRMA Insurance (Claims Assessment)
[2020] NSWSIRADRS 268
NSW DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE (NSWDRS)
Miscellaneous Claims Assessment
Mostly at fault – motorcycle – collision with motor car –
illegal right turn across double unbroken dividing lines
indicating – motorcyclists and pedestrians at greater risk of harm –
take personal responsibility –
driving motor vehicles for about 40 years
– 75 year old female – COPS event report – no one actually saw
accident – CCTV footage – prefer the evidence of the
Insured Driver – claimant failed to keep a proper lookout,
failed to keep
a reasonable distance from the vehicle in front of him and failed to travel at a
safe speed – claimant’s
Legislation Cited
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
Motor Accident
Guidelines 2017
Civil Liability Act 2002
Road Rules 2014
(NSW) Regs 48, 49, 134, 140, 142
Cases Cited
AAI Limited trading as GIO v Moon
[2020] NSWSC 714
[2019] NSWCA 202
Broadhurst v Millman
[1976] VicRp 15
Hallowell v The Nominal Defendant
[1983] Qld R 266
(1983) 1 DLR (4
Mugford v Ames
Pennington v Norris
[1956] HCA 26
(1956) 96 CLR 10
Podrebersek v
Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
(1985) 59 ALJR 492
[1958] TASStRp 11
[1958] Tas SR 36
Stapley v Gypsum Mines Ltd
[1953] UKHL 4
ARO – Claimant
NRMA - Insurer
This decision has been edited to remove all Unique Personal
Identification including the name of the Claimant
MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
accordance with section 7.36(5) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
and clause 7.441 of the
Motor Accident Guidelines
Determination of a matter declared under Schedule 2, Clause
3 of the Act to be a miscellaneous claims assessment matter
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
Date of Accident
7 December 2019
DRS Reference
Date of Internal Review
Insurer failed to conduct an internal review
DRS Claims Assessor
Anthony Scarcella
Date of Decision
7 December 2020
Conference date and time
18 September 2020
Attendances for Claimant
Mr John Tryon, Barrister
Mr Andrew Tohme, Solicitor
Turner Freeman
ARO, the Claimant
Attendances for Insurer
Mr Peter Hunt, Solicitor – McCabe Curwood
GP, the Insured Driver
The findings of the assessment of this dispute are as follows:
the purposes of
section 3.11
Motor Accident Injuries Act
, the motor accident was caused mostly by the fault of the
the purposes of
section 3.28
Motor Accident Injuries Act
, the motor accident was caused mostly by the fault of the
Costs: The amount of the Claimant’s costs assessed in accordance with the
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation
is $3,652 inclusive of
A brief statement of my reasons for this determination is
attached to this certificate.
Anthony Scarcella
Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
REASONS FOR DECISION – MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS
Issued in accordance with
section 7.36(4)
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
This determination relates to a Miscellaneous
Claim, which is a reviewable decision under Schedule 2, Clause 3(d) and (e) of
Motor Accident Injuries Act
(the MAI Act), about
whether the Claimant was wholly or mostly at fault in causing the motor
is a dispute between the Claimant and the Insurer in respect of the cessation of
statutory benefits for weekly payments and
treatment and care expenses incurred
more than 26 weeks after the motor accident, based on the Insurer’s
decision that the
Claimant was wholly or mostly at fault under sections 3.11 and
3.28 of the MAI Act.
7 December 2019, the motorcycle the Claimant was riding was involved in a
collision with a motor vehicle driven by the Insurer’s
insured (the
Insured Driver) at the intersection of Lyons Road West and Elizabeth Street,
7 April 2020, the Insurer notified the Claimant that it had decided that the
Claimant was wholly or mostly at fault in the subject
motor accident.
Claimant received statutory benefits in the form of weekly payments and
treatment and care expenses in the 26-week period following
the motor accident
and such payments ceased from 6 May 2020.
7 May 2020, the Claimant made an application for an internal review of the
Insurer’s decision.
Insurer failed to conduct an internal review.
15 June 2020, the Claimant lodged the application and supporting documents,
which are now before me, with the Dispute Resolution
Service (DRS).
10 July 2020, the Insurer lodged its reply and supporting documents with the
the teleconference in this matter on 24 July 2020, the parties
(a) The issue in dispute is whether the Claimant was mostly
at fault under sections 3.11 and 3.28 of the MAI Act.
(b) The Insurer bears the onus of proof in respect of the issue as to whether
the Claimant was wholly or mostly at fault in the motor
matter proceeded to an audio visual assessment conference on 18 September
DOCUMENTS CONSIDERED
have considered the documents provided in the application dated 15 June 2020 and
the reply dated 10 July 2020 and the following
further documentation provided by
the parties:
(a) A Google Maps street view photograph of the site of
the motor accident date stamped 24 July 2020.
(b) A Google Maps overhead view of the site of the motor accident date
stamped 24 July 2020.
(c) Statement by ARO dated 28 July 2020.
SUBMISSIONS
Claimant provided written submissions dated 28 July 2020 and oral submissions at
the audio visual assessment conference.
Claimant’s principal submissions may be summarised as
(a) The Insured Driver was wholly or mostly at fault in the
motor accident on 7 December 2019.
(b) The Insured Driver made a left turn into Lyons Road West from James
Street when it was not safe to do so. The Claimant was startled
when the Insured
Driver entered Lyons Road West, causing him to swerve onto the incorrect side of
the road in an attempt to avoid
a collision.
(c) The Insured Driver commenced to make an illegal right turn across double
unbroken dividing lines on the roadway from Lyons Road
West into Elizabeth
Street without having activated her right direction indicator lights. The
Claimant assumed that the Insured Driver
was continuing to drive straight on
Lyons Road West, given the fact that she was not permitted to turn right into
Elizabeth Street.
(d) The CCTV footage is very unclear but does show
that the Insured Driver attempted to make an illegal right hand turn across
unbroken dividing lines on the roadway. The CCTV footage does not reveal
whether the Insured Driver’s right direction indicator
lights had been
(e) Constable Robert Elliott is not an expert. Whilst Constable Elliott is
entitled to his opinion, he was not present when the motor
accident occurred and
there was no evidence to suggest, other than from the Insured Driver, that her
right direction indicator lights
had been activated.
(f) The oral evidence given by the Insured Driver was inconsistent with the
CCTV footage. The Insured Driver could not have activated
her right direction
indicator lights and, if she did, then there was not enough time for the
indicator lights to be observed because
of the short distances involved as
demonstrated by the measurements in the sketch plans. In this regard, the
Insured Driver was in
Regulation 48(1)
and (2) of the
There was no reference in the police notebook that the Insured Driver had
indicated to turn right into Elizabeth Street.
(g) The Insured Driver created the hazard by making a left turn into Lyons
Road West when it was not safe to do so, which startled
the Claimant and caused
him to swerve onto the incorrect side of the road. The Insured Driver then
illegally attempted to make a
right turn into Elizabeth Street without
indicating and collided with the Claimant. The motor accident would have been
the Insured Driver had not attempted to make an illegal right hand
(h) Even if there were to be a finding of
contributory negligence on the part of the Claimant, the relative culpability of
the parties
falls heavily on the Insured Driver, given that she had attempted to
make an illegal right hand turn without indicating. There ought
to be a finding
that the Claimant was not wholly or mostly at fault.
Insurer provided written submissions dated 10 July 2020 and 8 September 2020.
The Insurer also provided oral submissions at the
audio visual assessment
conference.
Insurer’s principal submissions may be summarised as
(a) The Insurer conceded that the Insured Driver crossed
double unbroken dividing lines on the roadway when making her right hand
from Lyons Road West into Elizabeth Street. Having made that concession, the
Insurer maintained that the Claimant was mostly
at fault in the motor accident
because he failed to keep a proper lookout; rode his motorcycle at an excessive
speed for the circumstances;
failed to observe the Insured Driver waiting to
enter Lyons Road West and slow his motorcycle and/or keep the Insured
vehicle under careful observation; failed to brake when the
Insured Driver made a slow right hand turn into Lyons Road West; failed
at any time; failed to observe the Insured Driver’s right direction
indicator lights; and attempted to perform a dangerous
overtaking manoeuvre on
(b) The CCTV footage depicted the Insured Driver stop her vehicle at the
corner of James Street and Lyons Road West; wait patiently
for four sedans and
one motorcycle to pass before deciding it was safe to enter Lyons Road West;
make a slow, careful left hand turn
into Lyons Road West; and then proceed to
make a slow, careful right hand turn into Elizabeth Street (albeit across double
dividing lines on Lyons Road West).
(c) The Claimant should have been travelling at a safe speed and should have
remained sufficiently alert so that he could react appropriately
to vehicles
entering the road and not become ‘spooked’ by their presence. The
very fact that the Claimant alleged that
he was ‘spooked’ by a slow
moving vehicle entering his path demonstrated that he was not maintaining a
proper lookout
and that he was driving too quickly for the circumstances.
(d) The Insurer referred to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal decision in
Kosinski v Snaith
) and submitted that, when assessing the Claimant’s
negligence in this claim, it does not matter why the Insured Driver slowed
or stopped in the Claimant’s path; irrespective of the reason, the
Claimant was required to anticipate that, for whatever
reason, the vehicle ahead
may stop; and the Claimant was required to proceed with care which would enable
him to avoid colliding
with the Insured Driver’s vehicle. Even with the
presence of a parked car on Lyons Road West, there was room for the Claimant
pass the Insured Driver’s vehicle on the left.
(e) The Claimant, as a motorcycle rider, was in a vulnerable position and
should have taken extra care for his own safety. In this
regard, the Insurer
referred to and relied on the reasoning of McCallum JA in
this case, the Claimant demonstrated a similar disregard for his own safety as
the plaintiff in
, by travelling onto the wrong side of the road, at
some speed, with the intention of overtaking a vehicle executing a right hand
turn. Even if the Claimant did not observe the Insured Driver’s right
direction indicator lights, attempting to overtake a
slow moving vehicle on a
suburban road, with a 50 km/h speed limit, with multiple cross roads and
driveways, from which a car could
emerge at any time, was extremely
(f) There is a heavy onus on drivers to exercise extreme caution when
overtaking other vehicles and in this regard, the Insurer referred
to and relied
Regulations 140
(g) If some fault was attributed to the Insured Driver, the Claimant’s
contributory negligence should be assessed at 80%.
LEGISLATION
making my decision, I have considered the following legislation and
guidelines:
Motor Accident Injuries Act
(NSW) (the MAI Act).
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
(the Regulation).
Motor Accident Guidelines 2017
(the Guidelines).
Civil Liability Act 2002
Road Rules 2014
made under the Road
Transport Act 2013
The relevant legislation and legal
relevantly provides that before a driver changes direction
to the right, the driver must give a right change of direction signal
enough to give sufficient warning to other drivers and pedestrians.
relevantly provides that the driver of the vehicle must
give a right change of direction signal by operating the vehicle’s
direction indicator lights.
relevantly provides that a driver must not overtake a
vehicle unless the driver has a clear view of any approaching traffic, and
driver can safely overtake the vehicle.
relevantly provides that a driver must not overtake to
the right of the vehicle if the vehicle is turning right or making a U-turn
the centre of the road and is giving a right change of direction signal.
1.4(1) of the MAI Act defines fault as negligence or any other tort.
3.11 and section 3.28 of the MAI Act relevantly provide that statutory benefits
by way of weekly payments (section 3.11) and
treatment and care expenses
(section 3.28) are not payable beyond 26 weeks from the date of the accident in
the event that the motor
accident was caused wholly or mostly by the fault of
the injured person.
3.11(2) and section 3.28(2) of the MAI Act provide that a motor accident was
caused mostly by the fault of a person if the
contributory negligence of the
person in relation to the motor accident was greater than 61%.
this case, the Insurer conceded that the Insured Driver crossed double unbroken
dividing lines on the roadway when making her right
hand turn from Lyons Road
West into Elizabeth Street. Having made that concession, the Insurer maintained
that the Claimant was mostly
at fault in the motor accident. The Insured
Driver’s crossing of the double unbroken dividing lines on the roadway
when attempting
to make her right hand turn from Lyons Road West into Elizabeth
Street did not fall within any of the exceptions in
Regulation 134
3.38(1) of the MAI Act provides that in assessing contributory negligence,
regard must be had to the common law and the enacted
there is any contributory negligence requires, pursuant to section 5R of the
CLA, a determination of whether a reasonable
person in the Claimant’s
position, would have crossed the parallel unbroken dividing lines in Lyons Road
West where and when
he did, knowing what he did or what he ought to have
assessing the degree of negligence, I am required to weigh up the respective
acts of negligence of the parties involved and determine
an appropriate
apportionment between them.
Podrebersek v Australian Iron and Steel Pty
Podrebersek
High Court of Australia confirmed that the following considerations should be
made when determining the apportionment of culpability
(a) The culpability of both parties; that is, the degree of
departure and standard of care of the reasonable man;
Pennington v
(b) The relative importance of the acts of the parties in causing the damage:
Stapley v Gypsum Mines Ltd
Broadhurst v Millman
(c) The whole conduct of each negligent party in relation to the
circumstances of the accident must be subjected to comparative examination.
significance of the various elements involved in such an examination will vary
from case to case.
Ultimately,
the apportionment becomes a matter of impression having regard to the
circumstances of the location, the amount of traffic,
the skill of the driver,
the condition of the vehicle and any loss of its control:
Hallowell v The
Nominal Defendant
its submissions, the Insurer referred to
. The Insurer stated
, the defendant ran into a deer on a highway and the
plaintiff ran into the rear of the defendant’s vehicle. The Insurer stated
that, in finding that the accident was wholly caused by the negligence of the
plaintiff, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal found:
presence of the deer was not, in my opinion, a factor to be considered when
determining if [the plaintiff] had been negligent.
There is a clear and well
defined standard of care imposed upon the driver of a vehicle which follows
another. He must keep a reasonable
distance behind the vehicle ahead; he must
keep his vehicle under control at all times; he must keep an alert and proper
and he must proceed at a speed which is reasonable relative to the
speed of the other vehicle. He must anticipate that for whatever
reason, the
vehicle ahead may stop. He need not anticipate the reason. He must proceed with
that care which will enable him to avoid
colliding with
South Australian Court of Appeal decision of
referred to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal in
correctly characterised the onus on the following driver as a heavy one, noting
that the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal provided
a helpful and accurate summary of
the content of the duty in the observations cited in [30] above.
its submissions, the Insurer relied on the NSW Court of Appeal decision in
, the motor accident occurred when the defendant
attempted to make a right hand turn into a driveway. At the same time, a motor
driven by Mr Smith and a motorcycle driven by the plaintiff were
travelling in the opposite direction. The plaintiff was travelling
behind Mr Smith, such that the defendant's view of the plaintiff was obstructed.
The defendant commenced turning right,
without coming to a complete stop. At the
same time, the plaintiff increased his speed, passing Mr Smith on the inside,
in the plaintiff colliding with the back passenger side of the
defendant's vehicle. The plaintiff was injured and made a claim for
, the trial judge found that the defendant had breached her duty of
care to the plaintiff; but assessed contributory negligence on
the part of the
plaintiff at 50%. The defendant appealed the findings on liability, contributory
negligence and quantum of damages.
The Court of Appeal accepted that the
Plaintiff was travelling in excess of 100 km/h in a 50 km/h zone. However, the
majority (Macfarlan
and McCallum JJA, Basten JA dissenting) upheld the findings
that the defendant breached her duty of care, in that, she did not slow
therefore, failed to keep a proper lookout for vehicles approaching in the
opposite direction. Basten JA would have allowed
the appeal because it was not
reasonable to have expected the defendant to take precautions against a
motorcycle appearing from behind
another vehicle travelling at excessive
respect of the issue of contributory negligence, the Court of Appeal cited the
common law test set out in
Podrebersek
referred to above and further,
McCallum JA (with whom Macfarlane JA agreed), relevantly
“As observed by Basten JA in
Gordon v Truong
precautions reasonably required of a party to a motor accident may be different
in kind where the drivers were in control of
different vehicles. A motorcyclist,
like a pedestrian, faces a greater risk of harm relative to the driver of a car
or truck. It
is this harm against which the contributory negligence of the
plaintiff is to be assessed. The plaintiff’s wholesale disregard
own safety in riding at a speed of at least 100 kph in an area where the
designated speed limit was 50 kph and the very significant
contribution of that
excess speed in causing the accident justifies a substantially greater reduction
in the liability of the
defendant.”
Court of Appeal in
set aside the primary judge’s determination
as to contributory negligence and substituted an apportionment of 80% to the
and 20% to the defendant.
reasoning of the majority in
clear that motorcyclists and pedestrians are required to recognise their
vulnerability or greater risk of harm relative to
a driver in control of a car
or truck and therefore, should take personal responsibility by exercising a
reasonable level of caution
for the circumstances. A failure to do so will
likely result in a high level of contributory negligence.
will now provide an analysis of the relevant evidence.
of the motor accident
uncontested evidence may be summarised as follows:
(a) The motor
accident occurred in Lyons Road West, Fivedock at the intersection of Elizabeth
Street on 7 December 2019 at about 12:35
(b) Lyons Road West runs in a general east-west direction and allows for one
lane of traffic in either direction with parking permitted
on both sides of the
(c) Elizabeth Street runs in a general north-south
direction and allows for one lane of traffic in either direction.
(d) Lyons Road West had a sealed bitumen surface. The weather was fine and
the roadway was dry. The road alignment was straight. The
road gradient was
(e) The speed limit was 50 km/h.
(f) The Insured Driver crossed double unbroken dividing lines on Lyons Road
West when making her right hand turn into Elizabeth Street.
The Claimant’s evidence
Claimant provided a statement to Constable Robert Elliott on 7 December 2019 at
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, which was recorded
in the Constable’s police
notebook. The police notebook was not in evidence but Constable Elliott quoted
the entry in his notebook
during his record of interview with the
insurer’s investigator on 5 February 2020. Constable Elliott recorded the
description of the motor accident in his notebook as
“I had turned off Harris Road onto Lyons Road, Five
Dock heading east when a grey BMW has pulled out in front of me and I have
attempted to go around her but she has hit me and I have a bit [sic] gone over
on the ground. While on the ground underneath the
car some bystanders have come
in helped lift the car off me and I was dragged out from underneath the
evidence, there is an unsigned statement by the Claimant taken by an
investigator from AHC Investigations engaged by the Insurer
over the telephone
on 13 February 2020. At the audio visual assessment conference, the Claimant was
not asked to adopt the unsigned
statement, nor was he questioned about it.
Accordingly, I give the unsigned statement no weight. I will not refer to the
statement any further as the Claimant provided a signed statement to
his lawyers, which is in evidence before me.
evidence, there is a statement by the Claimant dated 28 July 2020 taken by his
lawyers. I will now refer to the relevant parts
of that statement.
Claimant stated that, on 7 December 2019, he had been at work between 7:00 am
and 12:30 pm at Chipping Norton. After finishing
work, he intended to ride
straight home on his 2010 Harley-Davidson motorcycle. He was wearing a black
open faced helmet; high visibility
work wear shirt and pants; steel capped work
boots; and gloves.
Claimant described the motor accident as follows:
riding on Lyons Road West when suddenly a car turned left onto Lyons Road West
from James Street. The car spooked
me as that car turned left onto Lyons Road
West when it was not safe to do so. This is when I swerved to the right to try
her, however that same vehicle then turned right illegally over
unbroken double lines and impacted me. The car essentially drove
over the top of
me. I would have been riding approximately 40-50 kms per hour, however I cannot
recall exactly how fast I was going.
I maintain that I was not speeding. I was
just spooked that the car turned left onto Lyons Road West and then further
attempted to
make it illegal right hand turn. I do not recall what she was
hit me when I was still on my motorcycle. As she hit me, I fell onto the ground
and she ran over the top of me. I was stuck underneath
her car for about 5-10
Claimant stated that he had read the statement of the Insured Driver referred to
below taken by an investigator from AHC Investigations.
The Claimant denied that
the Insured Driver had turned left onto Lyons Road West when it was safe to do
so. He stated that he was
clearly travelling straight on Lyons Road West and
that the Insured Driver should have waited for him to pass before turning left
onto Lyons Road West. She failed to keep a proper lookout and should have seen
him on his motorcycle. The Claimant denied that the
Insured Driver had activated
her right direction indicator lights to turn into Elizabeth Street. The Claimant
alleged that the Insured
Driver had attempted to make an illegal right hand turn
into Elizabeth Street (presumably a reference to her crossing the double
unbroken dividing lines on Lyons Road West).
Claimant gave oral evidence at the audio visual assessment conference, the
relevant parts of which may be summarised as follows:
Claimant had driven along Lyons Road West many times before the motor accident.
The road is a major road and busy every day
of the week. He had never witnessed
the manoeuvre performed by the Insured Driver prior to the motor accident.
(b) Prior to the collision, the Claimant had made a right hand turn from
Great Northern Road on a roundabout about one block from
James Street, that is,
(c) When it was put to the Claimant that the contents of his application for
personal injury benefits was inconsistent with his evidence,
in that, it
referred to the Insured Driver swerving and the motor accident having occurred
in the Harris Road and Lyons Road West
roundabout, he stated that he could not
recall filling in the form. He then stated that he did not fill in the
application form.
I note that the Claimant’s application for personal
injury benefits was not in evidence.
(d) The Claimant did not see the Insured Driver waiting in James Street. She
pulled out suddenly from James Street. He did not see
her car “until the
last minute”. He was looking straight ahead. He thought that the Insured
Driver was going to continue
straight along Lyons Road West.
(e) The Claimant denied that the Insured Driver moved slowly out of James
Street into Lyons Road West.
(f) The Claimant stated that there was no time for him to brake. Manoeuvring
around the left of the Insured Driver’s vehicle
was not an option because
there was not enough room on the left. He saw a tree on the left. He had to go
to her right. He was aware
that there were double unbroken dividing lines and
that he crossed them. He was “not worried about the side
(g) The Claimant denied that the Insured Driver had activated her right
direction indicator lights to turn into Elizabeth Street.
He stated that he
“looked for the blinker”. He then added: “Why would she have
her blinker on when there were double
(h) The Claimant stated that the Insured Driver had commenced her right turn
into Elizabeth Street when the collision occurred.
The Insured Driver’s evidence
Insured Driver provided a statement to Senior Constable Coskin at the accident
scene on 7 December 2019, which was recorded in
his police notebook. The police
notebook was not in evidence but Constable Elliott quoted the entry in his
notebook during his record
of interview with the Insurer’s investigator on
5 February 2020. Senior Constable Coskin recorded the Insured Driver’s
description of the motor accident in his notebook as
“I came out of my driveway on Number 00 James Street,
Five Dock. The road was clear for me. About 100 metres when I turned right,
heard a bang and I saw someone underneath my car, a motorcyclist next to my
door. People came out, lifted my car off the
evidence, there is a statement by the Insured Driver dated 27 January 2020 taken
by an investigator from AHC Investigations engaged
by the Insurer. I will now
refer to the relevant parts of that statement.
Insured Driver stated that she visited her elderly mother in Haberfield on a
daily basis. The route she took was dependent on
the day and the amount of
on the afternoon of 7 December 2019, the Insured Driver left home in her 2007
BMW 120i sedan for the purpose of visiting her
mother. The Insured Driver then
described the motor accident as follows:
“18. I left home that
early afternoon and stopped at the end of my street [James Street] and Lyons
Road West. It was my intention
to turn left. I am pretty sure that when I
reached the end of my road that afternoon that I stopped and gave way to
oncoming cars
on my right. When the road was clear, I turned left on Lyons Road
West, and I drove in an easterly direction on Lyons Road West.
As there were no
oncoming cars head [sic] in the opposite direction on Lyons Road West I put on
my right indicator as I was going
to turn right onto Elizabeth Street. I
remember that there were oncoming cars and I brought my car to a complete stop.
I was stopped
to make sure that I could go. When I was stopped waiting for
traffic that is when I felt a bang to my car.
stopped the engine straight away. I had no idea what had happened. The next
thing I realise is that my car had been pushed forward
and I had actually been
moved to the corner of Elizabeth Street and Lyons Road West. I was in shock. I
saw the head of a man, I think
he had a helmet on and this head was at the front
of my car.”
Insured Driver stated that people started running from everywhere. She was
unable to get out of her vehicle because the Claimant’s
motorcycle was
leaning up against her door. Some men lifted her car and took the Claimant out
from underneath it. She alighted from
her vehicle. Someone brought a chair over
to her. She sat in the chair and was given some water. She was trembling and in
She recalled speaking to Senior Constable Coskin at the accident scene
and signing her statement in a notebook.
Insured Driver stated that she was stationary in Lyons Road West, with her right
blinker activated, when the Claimant’s
motor cycle collided with her car.
She may have been at a slight angle waiting to turn, or about to commence to
turn, when the motor
cycle hit her car. She also stated that her “brake
lights would have been on” as the Claimant approached her from
Insured Driver stated that a neighbour, George, “who lives on the
corner” told her that he had provided the police
with CCTV footage of the
motor accident. George drove her car home. She walked home assisted by friends,
who stayed with her until
she had calmed down a bit.
Insured Driver stated that she had lived at her address in James Street for
every day before she retired.
She had driven the exact same path more times than she could count. She had come
to a stop to give
way when she was hit by the Claimant’s motorcycle.
Insured Driver gave oral evidence at the audio visual assessment conference, the
relevant parts of which may be summarised as
Insured Driver confirmed that the contents of her written statement were true
and correct. She also stated that she had a
clear memory of the motor accident
at the time of making her written statement.
(b) The Insured Driver confirmed that George had told her that he had
provided police with CCTV footage of the motor accident. She
has never seen the
CCTV footage.
(c) The Insured Driver stated that the distance between Elizabeth Street and
James Street on Lyons Road West was very close. She stated
that she turned left
from James Street into Lyons Road West when the road was clear and activated her
right indicator once in Lyons
Road West. The indicator activator in her car was
located on the left side of the steering column.
(d) The Insured Driver stated that there was oncoming traffic in Lyons Road
West about 100 metres away and she was stationary on Lyons
Road West waiting for
that oncoming traffic to pass. She disagreed that she had commenced to turn
almost immediately into Elizabeth
(e) When it was put to the Insured Driver that she
had not activated her right direction indicator lights, she was adamant in her
denial. She stated that she did activate her right direction indicator lights
because she had time to do so whilst stationary and
waiting for the oncoming
traffic to pass her.
(f) The Insured Driver stated that she had been driving motor vehicles for
lights. She had
never timed herself in respect of the activation of indicator lights but stated
that “turning on an indicator
is a quick job”. She was careful to
activate her right direction indicator lights. The oncoming cars had passed
commenced the turn into Elizabeth Street.
(g) The Insured Driver was referred to Constable Elliott’s transcript
of the record of interview on 5 February 2020 and in particular,
that Senior
Constable Coskin did not mention in the Insured Driver’s police notebook
statement that she had activated her right
direction indicator lights whilst in
Lyons Road West. The Insured Driver stated that she had told Senior Constable
Coskin that she
had stopped her car and activated her right direction indicator
lights. She stated that she was in shock after the motor accident.
(h) The Insured Driver stated that she was on her way to visit her
100-year-old mother that day. She had used that route many times
before. It was
lunchtime. So, Lyons Road West was not so busy. There were traffic lights
further down the road that provided breaks
in the traffic and the opportunity to
turn into Elizabeth Street. It is a main road and can be very busy during peak
(i) The Insured Driver stated that she did not know if the Claimant could
have avoided the collision by passing to the left of her.
She stated, “I
think it’s another lane”. She did not know if cars can park in the
left lane. She stated that Lyons
Road West is “a four lane street, with
two lanes each way”.
The police report
evidence, there is the NSW Police letter dated 26 March 2020, which had attached
to it the COPS event report produced on 25 March
recording the particulars of the parties involved in the motor accident, the
COPS event report relevantly recorded the following:
(a) Date and
time of motor accident: 7 December 2019 at 12:35 hours.
(b) Location of motor accident: Lyons Road, at the intersection of Elizabeth
(c) Road alignment: straight.
(d) Road gradient: level.
(e) Surface: sealed and dry.
(f) Speed limit: 50 km/h.
(g) The Insured Driver was travelling in an easterly direction along Lyons
Road at a pre-crash speed of 10 km/h.
(h) The damage to the Insured Driver’s motor vehicle was recorded as
“FRONT N/S DOOR”.
(i) The Claimant was travelling in an easterly direction along Lyons Road at
a pre-crash speed of 50 km/h.
(j) The damage to the Claimant’s motorcycle was recorded as
(k) The crash summary details were recorded as follows:
“At 12:35 Hrs on the 7 December 2019 DR2, 75 year old female was
driving a BMW east along Loyons [sic] Rd, Five Dock. Approx.
10 M South of?
Elizabeth St DR1 has attempted to over take [sic] DR2 and collided with the
drivers [sic] door of DR2 vehicle and
fallen off his mototcycle
the COPS event report referred to Lyons Road, the motor accident took place in
Lyons Road West.
The AHC factual investigation report
evidence, there is a factual investigation report by AHC Investigations dated
27 February 2020.
investigators attended the accident scene, took photographs and prepared scene
plans, including measurements. The photographs
and scene plans are attached to
the factual investigation report.
investigator took the unsigned statement from the Claimant referred to above. An
investigator took the statement dated 27 January
2020 from the Insured Driver
referred to above. Both statements were attached to the factual investigation
investigator recorded an interview with one of the attending police officers,
Constable Robert Elliott, on 5 February 2020. The
transcript of the record of
interview was attached to the factual investigation report.
factual investigation report provided an accident scene description, the
relevant parts of which may be summarised as follows:
(a) Lyons Road
West runs in a general east-west direction and allows for one lane of traffic in
each direction. Parking is allowed
on both sides of the roadway. The width of
Lyons Road West measured 12.7 metres.
(b) Elizabeth Street runs in a general north-south direction and allows for
one lane of traffic in each direction. The width of Elizabeth
Street measured
6.6 metres.
(c) Directional traffic on Lyons Road West was separated by painted double
white lines. A measurement was taken from the eastern side
of James Street to
the telegraph pole on the north western corner of Lyons Road West and Elizabeth
Street, which measured 7.7 metres.
(d) There were no visual obstructions to motorists on Lyons Road West. This
was supported by the accident scene photographs attached
to the factual
investigation report.
photographs of the Insured Driver’s vehicle attached to the factual
investigation report depicted damage to the driver’s
door and the
driver’s side front panel behind the front wheel.
record of interview with Constable Robert Elliott
evidence, there is a transcript of a record of interview between the
Insurer’s investigator and Constable Robert Elliott
on 5 February 2020 in
relation to the motor accident. I will now refer to the relevant parts of the
transcript of the record of interview,
which may be summarised as
(a) Constable Elliott stated that he had four years
policing experience, mainly in general duties. He did not possess any
qualifications
as a crash investigator. However, he had attended and
investigated in excess of 100 motor accidents.
(b) Constable Elliott stated that, on 7 December 2019, he attended the scene
of the motor accident with Senior Constable Ethan Coskin.
On arrival, he
observed the Claimant sitting on the western kerb of Elizabeth Street, Five
Dock. The Insured Driver was sitting in
a seat near the Claimant.
(c) Constable Elliott stated that he was informed that six men came along,
lifted up the Insured Driver’s vehicle and dragged
the Claimant out from
under the vehicle.
(d) Constable Elliott stated that no one actually saw the motor accident
happen. He had canvassed the accident scene and obtained
CCTV footage after
speaking to a woman at the scene.
(e) Constable Elliott stated that whilst the Claimant was being conveyed to
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, he and Senior Constable
Coskin took a statement
from the Insured Driver at the accident scene. Constable Elliott read out to the
investigator the statement
they had taken in a police notebook from the Insured
Driver, which has already been quoted in [46] above.
(f) Constable Elliott stated that he only spoke briefly with the Claimant at
the accident scene because he was being treated for his
injuries. He took a
statement from the Claimant in Royal Prince Alfred Hospital later that same
(g) Constable Elliott read out to the investigator the statement he had taken
in his police notebook from the Claimant, which has
already been quoted in [39]
(h) Constable Elliott telephoned the Claimant a few days later and he was
still in hospital. The Claimant said that the Insured Driver
was at fault.
Constable Elliott did not want to upset the Claimant and so, he did not want to
make a ruling as to fault. He decided
to let his Traffic Sergeant watch the CCTV
footage and make a decision. Constable Elliott stated that the Traffic Sergeant
that the Claimant was at fault because he had crossed the double
lines. Also having viewed the CCTV footage, Constable Elliott was
of the same
view. He opined that the Insured Driver had pulled out with plenty of time for
any oncoming traffic coming up the hill
to slow down. He further opined that the
Claimant had accelerated and obviously not seen the Insured Driver’s
blinker and a
collision ensued.
(i) Constable Elliott stated that, normally, the Claimant would have been
charged but the Traffic Sergeant felt his injuries were
enough punishment and
did not charge him. Police investigations into the motor accident had been
The CCTV footage of the motor accident
unchallenged evidence is that the CCTV footage came from an occupant of a house,
George, on the corner of Lyons Road West and
James Street, Five Dock.
clock on the camera from which the CCTV footage was taken was inaccurate. The
CCTV footage commenced at 11:43:31 and ended at
CCTV footage demonstrated the following:
(a) At 11:43.31, the
Insured Driver’s vehicle is observed to be stationary in James Street at
the intersection of Lyons Road
West, waiting for a car to its right travelling
in an easterly direction along Lyons Road West to pass.
(b) At 11:43:34, a second car travelling in an easterly direction on Lyons
Road West is observed to pass the Insured Driver’s
stationary vehicle.
(c) At 11:43:36, a third car travelling in an easterly direction on Lyons
Road West is observed to pass the Insured Driver’s
stationary vehicle.
(d) At 11:43:39, a fourth car travelling in an easterly direction on Lyons
Road West is observed to pass the Insured Driver’s
stationary vehicle.
(e) At 11:43:41, a motor cycle travelling in an easterly direction on Lyons
Road West is observed to pass the Insured Driver’s
stationary vehicle.
(f) At 11.43:42, the Insured Driver’s vehicle is observed to commence
slowly entering Lyons Road West.
(g) At 11:43:45, the Claimant’s motor cycle comes into view and the
Insured Driver’s vehicle is in the east bound lane
on Lyons Road West.
(h) At 11:43:47, the Insured Driver’s vehicle is observed to commence
its right turn into Elizabeth Street. Contrary to the
Insured Driver’s
evidence, her vehicle did not come to a stop prior to commencing the turn into
Elizabeth Street.
(i) At 11:43:48, the Insured Driver’s vehicle is observed to be well
into its turn into Elizabeth Street, when the Claimant’s
motor cycle
crosses the double unbroken dividing lines on Lyons Road West onto the incorrect
side of the road. The collision is blocked
from view because of a large tree.
From the time the Claimant’s motor cycle came into view to the time just
prior to the collision,
the motor cycle was rapidly closing in on the Insured
Driver’s vehicle.
this case, the CCTV footage was of assistance and I have considered it together
with the other evidence available to me.
Consideration and
give no weight to the evidence that the police took no action against either the
Claimant or the Insured Driver. Whilst I note that
the police concluded that the
Claimant was the party at fault in the motor accident, it is not determinative
as I must assess the
contributions of the respective parties based on the
evidence before me and by applying the relevant legislation and legal principles
to that evidence.
were no independent witnesses to the motor accident. I must assess the competing
evidence of the Claimant and the Insured Driver.
There were inconsistencies in
both the Claimant’s evidence and the Insured Driver’s evidence. My
task in this regard
was assisted by the CCTV footage to a limited extent.
Insured Driver owed the Claimant a duty of care. I find that she breached that
duty of care when she crossed the double unbroken
dividing lines on the roadway
in her attempt to make a right hand turn from Lyons Road West into Elizabeth
Street. The Insured Driver’s
actions in this respect did not fall within
any of the exceptions in
Regulation 134
. The Claimant
submitted that the motor accident would have been avoided if the Insured Driver
had not attempted to make an illegal
right hand turn. However, that submission
on its own is flawed, in that, in assessing the degree of negligence, I am
required to
weigh up the respective acts of negligence of the parties involved
and determine an appropriate apportionment between them in accordance
principles espoused in
Podrebersek
was an issue as to whether the Insured Driver had activated her vehicle’s
right direction indicator lights. The Insured
Driver maintained that she had.
The Claimant maintained that she had not and that, even if she had, then there
was not enough time
for the indicator lights to be observed because of the short
distance between James Street and Elizabeth Street as demonstrated by
measurements in the sketch plans attached to the AHC factual investigation
report. The CCTV footage was of no assistance in this
regard. I found the
Claimant’s evidence that he “looked for the blinker”
inconsistent with his evidence that there
was no time for him to brake or
manoeuvre around the Insured Driver. Further, I found his statement, “Why
should she have her
blinker on when there were double lines?” blatantly
self-serving. For these reasons, I prefer the evidence of the Insured Driver
that she had activated her vehicle’s right direction indicator lights
prior to commencing the turn into Elizabeth Street.
the Insured Driver’s evidence that whilst she was in Lyons Road West, she
was stationary waiting for oncoming traffic
to pass before she commenced her
right hand turn was inconsistent with the CCTV footage. The CCTV footage clearly
demonstrated and
I find that, the Insured Driver’s vehicle did not come to
a complete stop in Lyons Road West at its intersection with Elizabeth
Accordingly, I find that the activation of her vehicle’s right direction
indicator lights could not have been on long
enough to give sufficient warning
to other drivers and pedestrians and therefore, the Insured Driver was in breach
Regulation 48(1)
and (2) of the
Claimant submitted that the Insured Driver made a left turn into Lyons Road West
from James Street when it was not safe to do
so, which startled the Claimant and
caused him to swerve onto the incorrect side of the road. I reject the
submission that the Claimant
made the turn when it was not safe to do so. The
CCTV footage clearly demonstrated that she waited in James Street until four
and one motorcycle travelling eastbound along Lyons Road West drove past
her. She then appeared to make a slow and careful left hand
turn into Lyons Road
West. In this regard, the Claimant’s evidence was inconsistent with the
CCTV footage.
am satisfied on the evidence of the Insured Driver and the CCTV footage that she
made the left hand turn into Lyons Road West from
James Street when it was safe
to do so. I do not accept the Claimant’s evidence that he was
‘spooked’ by the slow
moving vehicle entering Lyons Road West. I do
not accept the Claimant’s evidence that the Insured Driver pulled out
from James Street and that he did not see her car “until the last
minute”. On the evidence of Constable Elliott and the
photographs attached
to the AHC factual investigation
there were no visual
obstructions to motorists on Lyons Road West from the direction he was
travelling.
to whether the Claimant could have taken evasive action by passing the Insured
Driver’s vehicle on her left, the Claimant
was adamant that there was no
room for him to do so. He referred to a tree but the tree could be seen on the
CCTV footage and the
accident scene photographs on the nature strip beside the
footpath. The Insured Driver could not recall whether there were vehicles
in what she understood to be the left east bound lane in Lyons Road West. The
Insured Driver was incorrect when she stated
that Lyons Road West had two lanes
for traffic in each direction. The photographic evidence and the AHC factual
investigation report
accident scene plans clearly identified one lane of traffic
in either direction with parking permitted on both sides of the roadway.
there appeared that there may have been room for the Claimant to pass the
Insured Driver’s vehicle on her left, I am
not prepared to make a finding
in this regard. The CCTV footage did not portray a wide enough angle to observe
whether any cars were
parked at the kerbside to the left of the Insured
Driver’s vehicle. There was no evidence from an expert traffic engineer or
accident reconstruction expert. In those circumstances, it is inappropriate for
me to carry out my own calculations on the inadequate
evidence in this
find that the Claimant failed to keep a proper lookout, failed to keep a
reasonable distance from the vehicle in front of him and
failed to travel at a
safe speed for the circumstances. Had the Claimant been keeping a proper
lookout, keeping a reasonable distance
from the vehicle in front of him and
travelling at a safe speed for the circumstances, he ought to have been able to
observe the
Insured Driver’s vehicle and slow down or stop without having
to cross onto the incorrect side of the road. Instead of slowing
down, the CCTV
footage showed the Claimant maintaining or increasing his speed to overtake the
Insured Driver’s vehicle, albeit
within the speed limit for the area. The
fact that the Claimant stated that he did not see the Insured Driver’s
vehicle waiting
in James Street and only saw her vehicle at the
“last-minute”, further supports my findings that he failed to keep a
proper lookout, failed to keep a reasonable distance from the vehicle in front
of him and failed to travel at a safe speed for the
circumstances.
his own evidence, the Claimant made an assumption which turned out to be
incorrect. The Claimant incorrectly assumed that the Insured
vehicle was going to continue straight along Lyons Road West. Such an assumption
followed by the decision to cross
the double unbroken dividing lines on the
roadway was a dangerous manoeuvre and in breach of the
. The driver of
the vehicle that follows another must keep a reasonable distance behind the
vehicle ahead; must keep their vehicle
under control at all times; must keep an
alert and proper lookout; and must proceed at a speed which is reasonable
relative to the
speed of the vehicle in front. The driver following must
anticipate that the vehicle ahead may stop for whatever reason. The reason
not be anticipated, but the driver following must proceed with such care that
will enable the driver to avoid colliding with
the vehicle in front:
Motorcyclists,
cyclists and pedestrians are required to recognise their vulnerability or
greater risk of harm relative to a driver
in control of a car or truck and
therefore, should take personal responsibility by exercising a reasonable level
of caution for the
circumstances:
. In this case, I find that the
Claimant, as a motorcyclist, failed to exercise a reasonable level of caution
for the circumstances.
reasonable person in the Claimant’s position, would not have crossed the
parallel unbroken dividing lines in Lyons Road West
where and when he did,
knowing what he did or what he ought to have known. He knew or ought to have
(a) the importance of keeping a reasonable distance behind
the vehicle ahead;
(b) that he must keep an alert and proper lookout;
(c) that he must proceed at a speed which is reasonable relative to the speed
of the vehicle in front of him;
(d) that he must anticipate that the vehicle ahead may stop for whatever
reason and proceed with such care that would have enabled
him to avoid colliding
with the vehicle in front of him;
(e) that to cross the double unbroken dividing lines on the roadway was a
dangerous manoeuvre in all the circumstances and in breach
(f) I have weighed up the respective acts of negligence of the parties
involved. I find on the evidence that the Claimant’s
contribution to the
motor accident significantly outweighed the Insured driver’s contribution
for the reasons stated above.
Accordingly, I am satisfied that the Insurer has
discharged its onus and established that the motor accident was caused mostly by
the fault of the Claimant for the reasons stated above.
COSTS AND DISBURSEMENTS
(g) Section 8.10 of the MAI Act relevantly
8.10 Recovery of costs and expenses in relation to claims for
statutory benefits
(1) A claimant for statutory benefits is (subject to this section) entitled
to recover from the insurer against whom the claim is
made the reasonable and
necessary legal costs, and other costs and expenses, incurred by the claimant in
connection with the claim.
Other costs and expenses include the cost of medical
and other tests and reports.
(2) The regulations may make provision for or with respect to fixing the
maximum costs and expenses recoverable by a claimant under
this section
(including any matters for which no costs and expenses are recoverable from the
(3) A claimant for statutory benefits is only entitled to recover from the
insurer against whom the claim is made reasonable and necessary
legal costs
incurred by the claimant if payment of those costs is permitted by the
regulations or the Dispute Resolution Service.
(4) The Dispute Resolution Service can permit payment of legal costs incurred
by a claimant but only if satisfied that –
(a) the claimant is under a legal disability, or
(b) exceptional circumstances exist that justify payment of legal costs
incurred by the claimant.
(h) Section 8.10 of the MAI Act confers a costs power on DRS assessors not
previously held by CARS assessors under the
Motor Accidents Compensation Act
(the MAC Act).
(i) Schedule 1, Part 1, Clause 3(2)(a) - (m) of the Regulation sets the
maximum costs recoverable for legal services in various miscellaneous
assessment matters. Schedule 1, Part 1, Clause 3(1) of the Regulation provides
that the maximum costs for legal services provided
to a claimant or an insurer
in connection with an assessment under Division 7.6 of the MAI Act involving a
dispute about a regulated
miscellaneous claims assessment matter are 16 monetary
units (to a maximum of 60 monetary units per claim).
(j) The Claimant seeks to claim regulated costs for this application.
(k) The Insurer disputed that the maximum regulated costs should be awarded
in this matter in each of the miscellaneous claims for
my determination. The
Insurer submitted that the Claimant would only be entitled to one set of costs
at 16 monetary units.
(l) The Claimant’s application has been unsuccessful. Given the
circumstances of the accident and the nature of his injuries,
I find that it was
not unreasonable for the Claimant to refer this dispute to the DRS for
determination. I have had regard to section
8.10 of the Act and Schedule 1, Part
1, Clause 3 of the Regulation. Section 8.10 (2) of the MAI Act enables the
Regulation to specify
when costs and expenses are not recoverable. There is
nothing in the Regulation that states that claimants are not able to recover
costs if they are unsuccessful in Miscellaneous Claims proceedings. Further,
Wright J in
AAI Limited trading as GIO v
determined:
“... There is nothing in s 8.10 or any other provisions of the MAI
Act that suggests that a claimant’s entitlement to
recover legal costs
under s 8.10 depends on whether or not the claimant was successful before
the DRS. ...”
(m) My referral from DRS referred to two miscellaneous claims assessment
matters that required my determination, namely, whether for
the purposes of
section 3.11 the motor accident was caused mostly by the fault of the injured
person and whether for the purposes
of section 3.28 the motor accident was
caused mostly by the fault of the injured person.
(n) Under Schedule 1, Part 1, Clause 3 of the
Regulation, the Claimant is entitled to the costs in each dispute for
determination
subject to the cap of 60 monetary units.
(o) Accordingly, I am satisfied that the Claimant is entitled to the payment
of legal costs at the regulated maximum in each dispute.
In accordance with
section 8.3(4) and section 8.10(3) of the MAI Act, I permit the Claimant to
recover from the Insurer the reasonable
and necessary costs associated with the
statutory benefits claim as allowed under the Regulation on each of the disputes
matter as follows:
(a) Dispute under Schedule 1, Part 1, Clause 3(2)(d) of the Regulation: 16
monetary units or $1,660 plus GST; and,
(b) Dispute under Schedule 1, Part 1, Clause 3(2)(e) of the Regulation: 16
monetary units or $1,660 plus GST.
(p) Therefore, I allow costs in the total sum of $3,320 plus GST (being
$3,652 inclusive of GST).
My determination of the Miscellaneous Claim is as
(q) For the purposes of section 3.11 of the MAI Act, the motor accident was
caused mostly by the fault of the Claimant.
(r) For the purposes of section 3.28 of the MAI Act, the motor accident was
caused mostly by the fault of the Claimant.
(s) Legal Costs:
The amount of the Claimant’s costs assessed in
accordance with the Regulation is $3,652 inclusive of GST.
Anthony Scarcella
Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
Kosinski v Snaith
1 DLR (4th) 170
Ayre v Swan
Podrebersek v Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
(1985) 59 ALJR 492
[1985] HCA 34
Pennington v Norris
[1956] HCA 26
(1956) 96 CLR 10
Stapley v Gypsum Mines
[1953] UKHL 4
[1953] AC 663
Smith v McIntyre
[1958] TASStRp 11
[1958] Tas SR 36
Broadhurst v
[1976] VicRp 15
[1976] VR 208
Hallowell v The Nominal
[1983] Qld R 266
, per Jones J.
Kosinski v Snaith
(1983) 1 DLR (4th) 170
Mugford v Ames
(2000) SASC 241
Ayre v Swan
[2019] NSWCA 202
A4 Transcript of Record
of Interview with Constable Elliott on 5 February 2020 at page
Statement by the Claimant
dated 28 July 2020 at pages 1-2 at
A4 Transcript of
Record of Interview with Constable Elliott on 5 February 2020 at page
A4 Statement by the
Insured Driver dated 27 January 2020 at
A4 Photographs 5 and
AAI Limited trading as
[2020] NSWSC 714
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (533 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter