URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kelly Sousa v Enfield Veterinary Hospital [2003] NSWCC 9 (15 April 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Kelly Sousa v Enfield
Veterinary Hospital
[2003] NSWCC 9
James Alexamder Allen, Catherine Maria Brett Trading as Enfield
Veterinary Hospital
CASE NUMBER: 6048 of 1997 of
CATCH WORDS: Proceedings to Obtain
Compensation
LEGISLATION CITED:
CORAM: Geraghty
DATES OF HEARING: 15/04/2003
EX TEMPORE DATE:
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT:
TAYLOR instructed by Keddies
FOR RESPONDENT:
MR L MORGAN instructed by
Vardanega Roberts
1. The matter comes before me on notice of motion, seeking a reconsideration
of an award, partly in favour of Kelly Santos Sousa,
partly in favour of the
respondent. The applicant, Kelly Sousa, seeks a re-consideration of the award,
pursuant to s 17(4) of the
Compensation Act, to rescind the award in respect of
the back and left arm made in favour of the respondent, though no application
made to reconsider the award in respect of any neck impairment.
2. After the filing of affidavits and cross-examination of Kelly Sousa, the
applicant instructed her barrister, Mr Taylor, to withdraw
her application made
in a notice of motion. Counsel for the respondent informed me that he was
instructed not to object to this application,
but to make a further application
that the applicant pay the respondent’s costs on the basis that her
application was brought
frivolously, vexatiously, or without proper
justification.
3. On 11 April 1997 Kelly Sousa had filed an application for determination.
She had instructed her solicitors, Gells, to seek a
s 66 award for neck and
back impairments and loss of use of her left arm, together with payment of
medical expenses. On 4 June 1997
Michael Joseph Gerard Roberts of Vardanega
Roberts filed a notice of appearance and, on the same day, an answer on behalf
Workers Compensation (NSW) Limited. The application was settled and a
notice of settlement, signed by the parties (including Kelly
Sousa) and dated 23
April 1998, was completed in respect of the neck injury. A sum was agreed upon,
and short minutes of order were
concluded on 23 April 1998, Martin Claridge of
counsel signing them on behalf of Kelly Sousa.
4. The short minutes of order established that an amount in respect of 10 per
cent of permanent neck impairment would be paid to Ms
Sousa, and an award in
favour of the respondent would be entered in respect of her claim for back
impairment and loss of use of her
left arm. The order in respect of medical
expenses was somewhat more complicated but it is set out in the award issued by
and dated 2 September
1998. Par 4
and par 5 of the orders and awards
refer to the payment of s 60 expenses.
5. By notice dated 1 May 2002, Keddies, solicitors, filed a notice of change
of solicitors and on 16 May 2002, on behalf of Kelly
Sousa, Keddies filed a
first proposed amended application for determination, pleading a motor vehicle
accident injury sustained on
4 June 1991 (the same accident as referred to in
the initial application for determination filed in April 1997 which had been
between the parties).
6. The first proposed amended application from May 2002 sought an award for
permanent neck impairment, as well as for a back impairment
and left arm loss,
and a general order pursuant to s 60 for payment of medical expenses. The
applicant had changed her solicitors.
A notice of motion was filed also on 1
May 2002 (when the change of solicitors notice was filed) seeking a
reconsideration of the
award made in September 1998, but only in respect of the
back and left arm, this amendment being made on the first day of hearing
was September 2002.
7. The notice of motion was supported by an affidavit of Kelly Sousa sworn on
22 April 2002. In her affidavit, Sousa asserted that
when the matter was
settled, her only concern had been that she leave open her rights to claim
further compensation, especially in
relation to the medical expenses (par 5).
She stated on oath that she was not aware that an award for the respondent had
been entered
in respect to her claim for back impairment and left arm loss. She
said she was not aware that the award for the respondent in relation
two body parts meant that she could not claim further lump sum compensation in
respect of them.
8. She said that she had continued to experience difficulties after
settlement, particularly difficulties when she sought payment
of her medical
expenses from the insurance company, though when these difficulties began was
not disclosed. Whether they began soon
after the award was entered into, or
years after, I do not know. Kelly Sousa said on oath, at par 7 of her
affidavit, that she
consulted Keddies solicitors, though she does not state why
it was that she changed her solicitors from Gells where, it would appear,
had sought assistance on referral from a family friend who knew the solicitor
who acted for her, Maria Townsend.
9. In par 8 of her affidavit, Sousa stated:
It was not until I consulted Keddies, solicitors, that it was brought to
my attention that I could not make further claims in relation
to my back and
left arm. My condition had worsened since 23 April 1998 and Keddies advised
that I could make a claim for increased
impairment.
10. In par 9, she boldly stated that when her previous matter had been
settled, she had not been told that she would not be able to
make further claims
for compensation in relation to the back and left arm. She did not say that
she does not remember being told,
she simply stated, quite boldlyk, that she was
11. The matter came before me on 23 September 2002 when Ms Sousa was
cross-examined on her affidavit. She said, among other things,
that she was not
aware that the money she received was just for her neck:
Q - It was never explained to you that the money that you were being
offered was for your neck only; is that your evidence.
A - Not that I am aware of. (tr. p.6)
12. She said that as far as she was aware, it was being left open to her to
be able to claim for her arm, her back and her neck in
the future. I asked her
whether she was present on the day at Court when her claim was settled. She said
she had been. I asked
did she remember the day. She said she did. I asked
her was her solicitor present. She said that her solicitor had been present
that her name was ‘Maria Townsend’. I asked was her barrister
present, and she said that he had been. I asked did
she speak with them and she
said she had.
13. Mr Morgan asked whether, when she had spoken to her barrister and
solicitor, she had discussed with them at all what she was receiving
for. She agreed that she did speak about this but she could not remember the
details. Mr Morgan asked whether it was
possible that they had discussed with
her that she was only receiving money in respect of her neck, and she replied
that that might
have been so:
Q - They may have also discussed with you that you were not receiving any
money in respect of your back or your left arm because
you were giving up
those claims.
Q - That is not possible.
A - I was not giving up those claims as far as I was aware.
Q - So your memory was clear, was it.
A - It was in respect to that, yes. (tr. p.6)
14. Mr Morgan, later in his cross-examination, asked Sousa whether she had
had any contact with Gells and she said she had not:
Q - Do you agree with me that the allegation you are making towards Gells
is that they acted without your authority on the previous
A - They did act without my authority, yes.
Q - That they did not advise you at all about what you were doing in terms
of settling your case, that is the allegation you are
making against
A - That’s right. I did not agree to those terms.
Q - Have you made any complaint elsewhere about your dealings with your
former solicitor?
A - No, I have not. (tr. p.7)
15. Sousa was re-called, warned again and further cross-examined. A document
was shown to her. It is now Exhibit 1/1 and is entitled
Settlement.
She identified her signature, though she said that she did not
recognise the document:
Q - Can I ask you to look at the first page of the document ... at the
bottom right-hand column of the first page.
A - Bottom right?
Q - Does the word “neck” appear there in that bottom
A - Yes, it does - on the bottom left.
Q - Do you agree with me that you signed that document
Q - Do you agree with me that there is no mention of injury to any other
part of your body other than your neck.
A - That’s right.
16. Mr Taylor, in re-examination, asked did his client remember signing the
document. She did not. He asked whether she remembered
the document being
explained to her. She said she did not remember the document at all. He asked
whether she remembered reading
the document before she signed it. She answered,
(tr. p. 12)
17. Then the matter was stood over so that affidavits could be filed by both
Maria Townsend, the applicant’s former solicitor,
and by Martin Claridge
of counsel, the barrister who acted for her in April 1998. Those affidavits are
on file and have been read.
Ms Townsend, for example, said that she had a clear
recollection of Kelly Sousa
because she was referred to me by a family friend
and I had numerous telephone conversations throughout the conduct of the
18. Ms Townsend referred to the fact that Mr Claridge of counsel had been
briefed in September 1996, that he had had a conference
with Ms Sousa and
herself on 23 May 1997, and that the conference on the day of the hearing had
commenced at the Compensation Court
at 9 am on 23 April 1998. It is clear from
Ms Townsend’s affidavit that her client was concerned about future
treatment and
who would pay for it, and that this matter was negotiated and
explained to her. She recorded her memory of Mr Claridge’s advice
client in par 15. She recorded that he read out the short minutes and what he
was writing on the document. She said that
he had asked her whether what was
recorded on the document sounded alright to her and Ms Townsend said that it did
sound alright
to her and that the client had replied in words to the effect
yes, alright.
19. Martin Claridge of counsel also gives details of the conference on 23
April 1998 in his affidavit sworn on 9 December 2002. He
said, in par 17 for
example, that he had told Ms Sousa that according to the terms of the
settlement, if the terms were accepted
by her, it would leave open to her any
rights to future weekly payments and for future medical expenses in respect of
That matter is further clarified in par 24. Mr Claridge also swore
in his affidavit that it was his practice, in all cases without
exception, to
explain the short minutes and terms of settlement to the worker, before signing
them. He observed that he had appeared
as counsel for workers in literally
thousands of matters in the Compensation Court since his admission in 1984, and
he had never
once failed to explain the settlement documents to the worker. He
said, in par 29, that on that day of April 1998 he had followed
practice. He sat in the conference room with the applicant and Ms Townsend,
with both the short minutes and the HIH notice
of settlement form. He did not
recall, he said, which he completed first, although commonly the short minutes
would be done first.
sets out in extensive detail what his memory was of the conference
on 23 April 1998. He had said, inter alia, that the terms of
settlement meant
(Sousa) would get nothing for the back and nothing for the left
arm, and that in the future she would be able to make a claim for
further lump
sums if she got significantly worse. He had said also that it would not be
enough that she got worse. She would only
be able to claim for a new
impairment, which did not exist on the day of 23 April 1998, but which arose in
the future as a result
of her condition getting significantly worse.
21. Given that the applicant had a genuine belief that she was never told of
the terms of settlement, that the details and implications
were never explained,
was this sufficient reason in the circumstances to initiate this present claim?
The question before me is:
was she properly justified in the circumstances to
rely on her memory of events, to do nothing more to confirm or test her memory,
given that terms had been filed, money had been paid and awards entered in
favour of the respondent? In order to be properly justified
in commencing
these proceedings, what could she and her solicitors have done other than what
they did do? What more should they
have done? Is it enough for her to state
bluntly that the settlement was never explained to her, which I interpret as
the circumstances: she does not remember it having ever been
explained to her. She does not say, for example, that had it been explained,
she did not understand; she simple states she does not remember the explanation
being given.
22. This is not just a routine claim based on an injury at work and some
medical evidence. The applicant sought to impugn the validity
of the agreement
on which the earlier awards were based. She sought to challenge the
professional standards of her counsel and
of her solicitor, to overturn an award
of the Court which has stood for years and of which she had already enjoyed a
financial benefit.
It is her prerogative to do these things. The law, in
certain circumstances, allows for such a challenge, but the process is not
simple, and to prosecute such a claim entails a good deal of work for the
respondent. Conferences, searches, statements from witnesses,
affidavits,
mentions and, of course, a hearing.
23. The applicant would have been able to identify her earlier solicitor and
counsel from the previous file. In any event, it had
been a friend who had
referred her to a solicitor at Gells. The solicitor was in fact a friend of a
friend. Perhaps once the signed
short minutes were examined and the award
perused, a telephone call, a letter of enquiry, a conference with counsel to
the circumstances surrounding the conclusion of the agreement and the
signing of the terms. Solicitors know how these activities
are concluded. They
are party to framing and completion of the terms of settlement every day, often
several times a day. Of course
mistakes can be made. Perhaps explanations are
given hurriedly, in shorthand, without the time or circumstances required to
comprehend them. The applicant does not make any such a claim. She
stated that they were never explained to her. I interpret this
as meaning she
does not remember anything being explained to her. She does not remember not
being able to understand them; she only
remembers that they were not explained
to her. No criticism is made by the applicant of the circumstances surrounding
the agreement.
She simply stated that no explanation was provided and that she
did not understand the import of the terms of the agreement, especially
permanency of the award of the respondent.
24. To begin the process solely on the blunt assertions of the applicant,
without further enquiry to test her memory of events, is
to begin with some
justification - but, in my estimation, not proper justification. In the
circumstances, to begin such a claim,
the applicant and her solicitor needed to
do more, and more could have been done. More could have been done, for example,
to establish
the state of mind of the applicant at the time; or to detail the
circumstances surrounding one agreement; or to confirm the understanding
applicant by evidence of contemporaneous conversations with family or friends;
or to confer with earlier counsel or with her
former solicitors; or to explain
why it was that she changed from one solicitor’s firm to another. None of
these were done.
It seems to me that, whatever about whether this application
was made frivolously or vexatiously, it was made without proper justification.
25. I therefore order the applicant to pay the respondent’s costs.
MR R TAYLOR instructed by Keddies appeared for the applicant
MR L MORGAN
instructed by Vardanega Roberts appeared for the respondent
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (22.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter