URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/127.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Council of the Law Society of NSW v Grubisa [2025] NSWCATOD 127; (1 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
The Council of the Law Society of NSW v Grubisa
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 127
Hearing Date(s):
14 July 2025
Date of Orders:
1 October 2025
Decision Date:
1 October 2025
Occupational Division
ADCJ The Hon A Ainslie-Wallace AM
Principal Member
M Sindler, Senior
M Bolt, General Member
(1) The Tribunal finds that the Respondent is guilty of professional
misconduct and unsatisfactory professional conduct and pursuant
to s302(1)(f) of
the Legal Profession Uniform Law, the Tribunal recommends that the
Respondent’s name be removed from the roll
maintained by the Supreme Court
of New South Wales pursuant to s22 of the Legal Profession Uniform Law.
Pursuant to clause 23 of Schedule 5 of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(NSW) the Respondent is to pay the Law Council’s costs of the
proceedings as agreed or assessed.
Catchwords:
OCCUPATIONS - legal practitioners – solicitors – disciplinary
proceedings – where respondent lawyer found guilty
of professional
misconduct for multiple breaches of the Legal Profession Uniform Law - where
breaches were persistent and serious
and demonstrated a pattern of conduct
– finding lawyer unfit to practise – finding is likely indefinitely
unfit to practise
– removal of name from roll recommended - costs
Legislation Cited:
Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors’ Conduct Rules
Conveyancing Act 1919
Property Law Act 1958
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v
Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
Tangsilsat v Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales
[2019] NSWCA 144
Law Society v Ford
[2024] ACTSCFC
Victorian Legal Services v Wong
[2022] VCAT 432
New South Wales Bar
Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
Law Society v Ford (no 2)
Self Care IP Holdings Pty Ltd v Allergan Australia Pty Ltd
in Marcolongo v Chen
[2011] HCA 3
Cannane v J Cannane Pty Ltd (in
[1998] HCA 26
PT Garuda Indonesia Ltd v Grellman
[1992] FCAFC 188
(1992) 107 ALR
Law Society of New South Wales v Bannister (1993) 4 LPDR 24
South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
Law Society of New
South Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
Stanoevski v The Council of the
Law Society of New South Wales
[2008] NSWCA 93
Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales v Sideris [2026] NSWCA 159
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
The Council of the Law Society (Applicant)
Dominique Grubisa
(Respondent)
Representation:
K Morgan SC, N Wootton, E
(Applicant)
Solicitors:
The Law Society of NSW
(Applicant)
Respondent (No appearance)
File Number(s):
2022/00387737
2023/00140578
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(a) The person referred to in [45] of the reasons will be referred to
as “Person A”
(b) The Three purchasers of the MWC products
referred to in paragraph [172] will be referred to as “Clients B, C and
respectively
(c) The purchaser of the MWC product referred to in
paragraph [267] will be referred to as Client E
REASONS FOR DECISION
Proof of the Grounds
Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct and Professional
Master Wealth Control Pty Ltd
Complaint 1 – 2022/387737
Were they lay associates?
Was the Respondent aware that Mr and Ms Fitzsimmons
were consulting to the firm and providing services related to the legal services
provided by the practice and thus were lay associates?
Complaint 1: Grounds 2 and 3 and Complaint 2:
Grounds 7.8 and 9
The Baker Complaint.
Grounds 7.8 and 9
Complaint 2
Did the Respondent provide legal services to Client
Were the legal services not competently
Did the Respondent make a misleading and deceptive
representation?
Did the Respondent by her conduct and
representations encourage or advise the purchasers of the MWC Package to enter
into voluntary
transactions for the purpose of delaying, hindering or defeating
claims by present or future creditors which transactions might be
voidable transactions?
Grounds 10 and 11
REASONS FOR DECISION
Council of the Law Society of NSW (“the Council”) by two
Applications seeks disciplinary findings against Dominique
Grubisa (“the
Respondent”) in respect of complaints arising from her conduct as a
solicitor pursuant to the Legal Profession
Uniform Law (NSW), (the
“Uniform Law”).
two Applications, 2022/387737 and 2023/140578 were heard together and the
evidence in one became the evidence in the other. They
concern a number of
aspects of the Respondent’s practise as a lawyer.
two Applications set out the findings sought in the proceedings, namely that the
Tribunal makes a finding that the Respondent
is guilty of professional
misconduct. Each Application sets out the basis on which this order is sought
expressed as “Grounds”.
We propose to refer to the document in which
the Grounds appear as the “Complaint”.
Respondent did not appear, did not rely on any documents that she had previously
filed in the proceedings and did not oppose the
order sought by the Council
which is that it be recommended that her name be removed from the roll of
solicitors in NSW. She did
however earlier in the proceedings file replies to
the two Applications which we will take into account in determining the issues
relevant to each complaint and their individual grounds.
Council provided detailed and meticulously prepared submissions which, by way of
footnotes, gave the sources of information from
which the statements in the
submissions were derived. As we have said, the bulk of facts and circumstances
on which the Council relies
in support of the Applications and their Grounds is
not challenged and we have, by reference to the submissions and the associated
documents, set out those unchallenged facts as part of the Tribunal’s
the Respondent has put in issue some alleged facts, the thrust of her response
to the Council’s case goes to the complexion
to be put on those facts or
the conclusions to be drawn from those admitted facts. The resolution of the
challenges raised by the
Respondent is not entirely easy because she relied on
no evidence nor gave evidence and sometimes the dispute is reflected in a bare
denial of the particular supporting the ground. Nonetheless, the Tribunal has
done its best to resolve those disputes on the material
Confidentiality orders
Council’s Applications did not seek orders protecting the identity of the
purchasers of the Master Wealth Protection Plan
or other products promoted by or
associated with the Respondent, however, the Tribunal considers that the names
of those clients
be kept confidential because of the sensitivity of the
information concerning their purchase of the products. The Particulars of
Complaint 1 refer to a person in respect of whom a Real Estate Rescue
“take over deal” was attempted whose confidentiality
ought to be
preserved because of the subject matter of the proposed deal.
coming to the decision, while the Tribunal is mindful that the objects of the
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013 (the
NCAT Act) include the
Tribunal to be accountable and its processes open and transparent, s64 of the
NCAT Act permits the Tribunal
whether of its own motion or on the application of
a party make an order restricting the disclosure of the name of any person
or not a party or a witness) by reason of the confidential nature of
any evidence or matter or for any other reason.
in these reasons, the name of the person in relation to whom a Real Estate
Rescue “take over deal” was attempted
(paragraph 45) will be
referred to as Person A. The four purchasers of MWC products will be referred to
as Clients B, C, D and E.
Respondent was admitted as a lawyer in New South Wales on 30 June 1994. She has
not renewed her NSW practising certificate but
her name remains on the roll of
solicitors of NSW. The Respondent held a practising certificate in Victoria from
29 August 2017 until
20 June 2022. Between 29 August 2017 and 31 January 2018,
the Respondent practised as the Principal of Dominique Grubisa Solicitors
Sydney NSW and from 1 February 2018 until 27 March 2022 as the Principal of DGI
Lawyers Pty Ltd (which changed its name to Assure
Lawyers Pty Ltd on 31 July
Respondent practised law as a sole practitioner of Dominique Grubisa Solicitors
(DGS) from 19 May 2015. The Respondent practised
as sole Legal Director of DGI
Lawyers (later Assure Lawyers) from 1 April 2018. The Respondent was the sole
Director of DGI Lawyers
from 27 July 2017 to 19 August 2021 and a joint Director
until 27 May 2022. The Respondent was a shareholder of Assure Lawyers as
Respondent was also the “public face” as the Council described it,
of companies, the DGI Group which trades under
the name “DG
Institute”. The Group provides a range of products and services including
educational programs for investment
strategies in the property and business
sectors. The Group further provided advice relating to debt management, asset
and wealth creation.
to these proceedings, within the DG Institute was “Master Wealth Control
Pty Ltd” which sold a package called
Master Wealth Control. The Group
also sold a product called “Real Estate Rescue” which provided
information on a “takeover
deal” which is designed to be used where
a property owner was in default of their mortgage.
Group also includes DGI Lawyers (later Assure Lawyers)
conduct to which the Complaints are addressed is alleged to have occurred both
as to the Respondent’s legal practice and
in relation to Master Wealth
Control Pty Ltd.
Proof of the Grounds
the Respondent did not appear or rely on any documents or make submissions, her
filed replies to both Applications put in issue
some of the matters on which the
Council relies in order to make out the complaints generally and the underlying
grounds. It is thus
necessary for the Tribunal to resolve the facts put in
determining disputed questions of fact, Tribunals have adopted the principle in
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
and s140 of the
Evidence Act
(1995) NSW as informing the fact finding process in that while the
standard of proof is to the civil standard, the tribunal should
“comfortably satisfied” of the determination of facts cognisant of
the well-known passage from
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty
[1992] HCA 66
at 171 that:
[T]he strength of the evidence necessary to establish a fact or facts on the
balance of probabilities may vary according to the nature
of what it is sought
to prove. Thus, authoritative statements have often been made to the effect that
clear or cogent or strict proof
is necessary where so serious a matter as fraud
is to be found.
20 of Schedule 5 of the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act provides an
exception to section 38 of the Act which is that
the Tribunal is not bound by
the rules of evidence, and instead provides that in dealing with proceedings
under the Uniform Law concerning
a question of professional misconduct, the
Tribunal is to observe the rules of evidence.
Unsatisfactory
Professional Conduct and Professional Misconduct
Professional
Misconduct is defined in the Uniform Law as:
297 (1) For the purposes of this Law,
professional
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a lawyer, where the conduct
involves a substantial or consistent failure to reach or maintain
a reasonable
standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of a lawyer whether occurring in connection with the practice of law
or occurring otherwise than in connection with the
practice of law that would,
if established, justify a finding that the lawyer is not a fit and proper person
to engage in legal practice.
determining the question of whether a practitioner is a fit and proper person to
engage in legal practice, the Tribunal is entitled
to have regard to the matters
that would be considered if the lawyer were an applicant for admission to the
Australian Legal profession
or for the grant or renewal of the Australian
practicing certificate. (s297(2))
of professional misconduct does not require proof of both aspects of s297.
Tangsilsat v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2019] NSWCA
and following)
in relation to all of the Grounds in both Complaints save for Grounds 10 and 11
in the Second Complaint, the Council contends
that the conduct, if proven
amounts to professional misconduct.
determining this issue, that is whether conduct amounts to professional
misconduct the Tribunal bears in mind that the primary
purpose of disciplinary
proceedings is the protection of the public and in maintaining the public
confidence in the legal profession.
protective function of disciplinary orders is not confined to the protection of
the public from further breaches by the practitioner,
but extends to protection
of the public from similar breaches by other practitioners.
as here, the Council submits that the Respondent’s name should be removed
from the roll of solicitors, we note what was
Law Society v Ford
[2024] ACTSCFC 2
Southern Law Society v Westbrook
[1910] HCA 31
(1910) 10 CLR 609
at 612, Griffith CJ referred with approval to the formulation
articulated in
In re Weare, a Solicitor; In re The Solicitors Act,
[1893] UKLawRpKB 130;
[1893] UKLawRpKQB 130
[1893] 2 QB 439at
To my mind the question which the Court in cases like this ought always to put
to itself is this, Is the Court, having regard to
the circumstances brought
before it, any longer justified in holding out the solicitor in question as a
fit and proper person to
be entrusted with the important duties and grave
responsibilities which belong to a solicitor?
passage serves to underscore the importance of the
consideration.
Master Wealth Control Pty Ltd
Respondent was at all material times, the director of MWC which was itself
wholly owned by DGI Holdings Pty Ltd. In March 2017
the Respondent’s
husband became the sole director of DGI Holdings, which was wholly owned by RER
Properties Pty Ltd of which
the Respondent’s husband was the sole director
and shareholder. The Respondent was also a director of RER Properties between
April 2014 until 21 August 2019.
trading as DG Institute sold a number of products called “Master Wealth
Control” which, for convenience and adopting
the reference used by the
Council, we will refer to as the” MWC Package”. In the MWC Package
and relevant to these proceedings
was an “Asset Protection Plan” as
well as access monthly webinars delivered by the Respondent, access to DGI
and to the Respondent, a document entitled “On-Market distressed
properties” and two booklets written by the Respondent
“Your guide to asset protection” and “Forbidden
Knowledge”.
Asset Protection Plan was described in the materials as “personalised
legal advice for your current wealth situation and
future goals”. The Plan
comprised a number of documents which included a trust deed, an equitable
mortgage, a promissory note,
a deed of gift, a notice of assignment, a
testamentary trust and caveats. The stated aim of these legal documents was to
a “watertight” protection of the customer’s assets and
the information provided referred to a “Vestey Trust”,
a reference
to a celebrated and apparently impenetrable trust established by the Vestey
family in the UK to protect its assets.
was no dispute that the scheme was to operate by the customer mortgaging all of
their equity in property to a trust which would
then register a caveat over the
title of the property (or properties) in support of the mortgage. The documents
promised that the
caveat would “... sit there compounding and will soak up
all remaining equity so that there is nothing else for others to take”.
Council obtained the opinion of an expert, Scott Atkins in relation to a number
of matters to which we will later return, however
in his report he extracts from
the Respondent’s promotional material the intended operation of the Asset
Protection Plan:
What we want to do with our asset protection is, in effect, mortgage all of your
equity to a trust and that trust will then register
a caveat on the title to
each of your properties to represent that mortgaged interest. The caveat (noting
an ‘equitable’
or unregistered mortgage) will sit there compounding
and will soak up all remaining equity so that there is nothing else for others
to take. In addition any of your personal property of value would be assigned
and transferred to the trust. You will not have any
bank accounts in your name
as all of your banking will be done through the trust.
their submissions, the Council noted that on purchasing the package customers
received an email which said:
Congratulations! You have invested your time and resources into safeguarding
your future and your assets are now fully protected.
You can now get on with
living your life and building your wealth with the peace of mind that comes with
being bullet proof.
was not a law practice and the legal work in relation to the MWC Package was
undertaken by DGI Lawyers or the Respondent.
documents provided to a purchaser of the Asset Protection Plan were prepared by
and associated legal work was done by DGI Lawyers
or the Respondent.
who purchased the Asset Protection Plan were asked to complete an on-line
questionnaire and they would then be contacted
by a member of the “Master
Wealth Team” if further information was required. The responses to the
questionnaire were
then fed into a platform “the MWC System”
designed by the Respondent to generate what the Respondent described as
“personalised
documents based on the input provided by the
customer.” The Respondent said that no “specific person”
the Asset Protection Plan.
program offered by the DG Institute was called “Real Estate Rescue”
was said to be involve a “takeover deal”.
The idea behind the scheme
was that the purchaser of the program, who was referred to as a
“student” of DG Institute
would identify a third party who was
“in financial distress”, that is, in default of their mortgage or
struggling to
pay their mortgage. The “student” approaches that
person and offers to enter into an agreement in which the home owner
their equity in the property and gives a power of attorney to the student to
sell the property in return for a cash payment
and an agreement that the
“student” would make the mortgage payments. The idea being that at
some point, the student
can sell the property, discharge the mortgage and retain
the residue.
operation of this scheme was not itself the subject of complaint by the Council
but, as a result of a complaint about the Respondent’s
conduct by Mr
Andrew Drysdale who had entered the program and unsuccessfully tried to purchase
a property from a defaulting mortgagee
using the “takeover
strategy”. That complaint ultimately devolved to a complaint about the
Respondent’s use of
lay associates in the legal practice Dominique Grubisa
Solicitors in breach of sections 35 and 121(1) of the Uniform Law. When the
Professional Conduct Committee of the Law Council determined to commence
proceedings in relation to this complaint, the Respondent
was invited to make
submissions but declined.
COMPLAINT 1
particulars of this ground of the complaint are:
Between about 9 August 2016 and 7 February 2017:
1. the Respondent was the Principal of the law practice known as Dominique
Grubisa Solicitors (DGS).
2. contrary to sections 35 and 121(1) of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(Uniform Law):
a. DGS had lay associates, namely Ms Maria Fitzsimons and Mr Christopher
Fitzsimons (also known as Mr Christopher Jackson);
b. Mr and Mr Fitzsimons were disqualified persons for the purposes of the
Uniform Law;
c. the Respondent knew that Mr Fitzsimons and Mrs Fitzsimons were disqualified
persons for the purposes of the Uniform Law;
d. neither Mr Fitzsimons nor Mrs Fitzsimons was approved to be a lay associate
of a law practice; and
e.the Respondent knew that:
i. Mr Fitzsimons and Mrs Fitzsimons were lay associates of DGS; and
ii neither Mr Fitzsimons nor Mrs Fitzsimons was approved to be a lay associate
of a law practice; or
3. in the alternative, the Respondent was, or ought to have been, in a position
to influence the conduct of DGS but failed to take
reasonable steps to prevent
DGS from contravening s 121(1) of the Uniform Law.
her reply the Respondent admitted the allegation in paragraph 1 and the
allegations in paragraphs 2 b and d. She denied the allegation
in paragraph 3.
Thus the Respondent admitted that at the relevant time she was the principal of
DGS, that Mr and Mrs Fitzsimmons
were disqualified persons for the purposes of
the Uniform Law, she knew they were disqualified persons and that they were not
to be lay associates of the law practice.
121 of the Uniform Law says:
121 Contravention by law practice--disqualified or convicted person as lay
(1) A law practice contravenes this subsection if the law practice has a lay
associate whom any principal or other legal practitioner
associate of the law
practice knows to be--
(a) a disqualified person; or
(b) a person who has been convicted of a serious offence--
unless the lay associate is approved by the designated local regulatory
authority under subsection (2)
35 of the Uniform Law is as follows:
(1) If a law practice contravenes, whether by act or omission, any provision of
this Law or the Uniform Rules imposing an obligation
on the law practice, a
principal of the law practice is taken to have contravened the same provision,
(a) the principal knowingly authorised or permitted the contravention; or
(b) the principal was in, or ought reasonably to have been in, a position to
influence the conduct of the law practice in relation
to its contravention of
the provision and failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the contravention
by the law practice.
two lay people, the subject of this ground are Mr and Mrs Fitzsimmons, the
Respondent’s parents. Each was formerly a solicitor
and the name of each
had been removed from the roll of solicitors.
issue then is whether Mr and Mrs Fitzsimmons were lay associates of DGS and
whether the Respondent was or ought to have been in
a position to influence the
conduct of DGS in contravening the act but failed to take reasonable steps to do
Council relies on correspondence between the law firm and Mr Drysdale and his
wife, Mr Shariatinia and Gooroo Training Pty Ltd
in relation to a
“takeover deed” entered into with Person A.
the time the deed was entered into in May 2016, it recorded that the estimated
market value of the property was about $550,000
and the mortgage balance
$140,000. Under the deed, Mr Drysdale and the others said that they were
prepared to discharge the arrears
on the mortgage and continue to make the
monthly payments. In return Person A agreed to vacate the property and to give
Mr Drysdale
and the others an irrevocable power of attorney to deal with the
property and a caveatable interest in the property and that she
would sign a
transfer of title to a buyer.
Drysdale contended that while the Respondent prepared a number of legal
documents to give effect to the takeover deed, their main
point of communication
and contact within DGI lawyers was Mr Fitzsimmons.
Council submissions set out significant extracts from the correspondence between
Mr Drysdale and the others and Mr Fitzsimmons
(who also went by the name Chris
Jackson). The email address provided by Mr Fitzsimmons was
support@dominiquegrubisa.com.au.
correspondence demonstrates that Mr Fitzsimmons was performing legal work for
DGI lawyers, for example in a letter of 9 May 2016
Mr Fitzsimmons introduced
I’m Chris Jackson in Dominique’s office and I am finalising the
documentation in relation to the past loan and current
additional advance.
letter continues and attaches the legal documents necessary to pursue the
takeover deed arrangement. It contains explanations
and their effect. For example, it says:
The loan agreement sets out the terms of the loan. The mortgage will be
registered with [Department of Natural Resources and Mining]
so that the terms
of the loan remain private.
The powers of attorney and deed of assignment will be involved if the mortgage
is breached and the lender has to enforce security
letter concludes by asking Mr Drysdale to send the documents back to Dominique
email of 15 August 2016 from the support@dominiquegrubisa email address notes
that Mr Jackson was “preparing the contract”.
an email at 7.09pm on the same day, Mr Drysdale wrote to the other parties
copying in Ms Fitzsimmons at the email address: maria@dominiquegrubisa.com.au
and he said:
The contact name at our solicitor’s office at this time is Ms Maria
Fitzsimmons. Can you please liaise with Ms Fitzsimmons
in this matter...
7.15pm the Respondent sent an email to Mr Drysdale
Good work Andrew
8.28pm again on the same day, Ms Fitzsimmons sent an email to Mr Drysdale into
which she copied the Respondent and the signature
on the email was:
Maria Fitzsimmons
Dominique Grubisa
12 September 2016 the Respondent wrote to one of those involved in the takeover
deed confirming settlement and on 14 October 2016
the Respondent wrote to Person
A noting money was to be paid to her from the sale of the property. On 14
October some four days later,
Ms Fitzsimmons wrote to Mr Drysdale referring to
the email sent to Person A as “...the email I sent to Person A on Friday
October 2016”. She went on and noted that before she sent the email she
discussed the matter with the Respondent and attempted
to discuss it with
another of the people interested in the takeover deed. She set out the advice
that she had given the Respondent
that the Respondent had followed that advice.
asking Mr Drysdale to draft a letter to Person A in Ms Fitzsimmons added that
she would “...draft the end paragraph and
then transpose it onto Dominique
Grubisa’s letterhead and send it back to you for formal
proposed deal fell apart and there was correspondence between Mr Drysdale and Ms
Fitzsimmons who on 20 October 2016 noted that
she had discussed the matter with
“Dom”, the Respondent.
21 October 2016, Ms Fitzsimmons wrote to the Department of Natural Resources and
Mining office in Queensland and noted “We
are the solicitors acting on
behalf of the transferee...”. The email was signed, “Maria
Fitzsimmons LLB, Property Consultant,
Dominique Grubisa, Solicitor”.
an email to Mr Shariatina, one of those involved in the takeover deed, to which
Ms Fitzsimmons was copied, the Respondent said:
... We achieved all we needed to you yesterday and there was nothing I could do
last night to advance things...
...Maria was manned with everything possibly relevant and made a forensic
decision as to what was the best angle and what hand to
play when she was face
to face with the assessor or decision maker which was the whole point of me
flying her up there for you...
Drysdale provided an affidavit sworn on 20 December 2022, in which he said at
(25) that at a face to face meeting with the Respondent
and the other members of
the group, Mr and Mrs Fitzsimmons were present and the Respondent introduced
them as “lawyers that
work for me..”. Mr Shariatina who also
attended that meeting said in an affidavit that the Respondent introduced Mr and
Fitzsimmons as “senior lawyers from my office”
were a number of other documents on which the Council relied to demonstrate the
role of Mr and Ms Fitzsimmons and the Respondent’s
understanding of what
they were doing but it is unnecessary to set them all out in these reasons.
we have said, the Respondent agreed that she was the principal of DGS at the
relevant time and that Mr and Ms Fitzsimmons were
disqualified persons and that
neither had approval to be a lay associate of the firm.
Respondent disputed that they were lay associates of the
Were they lay associates?
Associate is defined in the Uniform Law as being “...officer, employee or
agent of the law practice”. To “engage
in legal practice” is
defined as including practise law or provide legal services and finally a
“lay associate”
is defined in section 6 as:
"lay associate"
of a law practice means a person who is not an
Australian legal practitioner and who is--
(a) an associate of the law practice; or
(b) a consultant to the law practice (however described) who provides services
related to legal services to the law practice, other
than services of a kind
specified in the Uniform Rules for the purposes of this definition; or
c) a person who shares the receipts, revenue or other income arising from the
law practice;
the Council asserts that Mr and Mrs Fitzsimmons were lay associates because they
were either consultants to the law practice
or they acted as agents for the law
Council argued that Mr and Ms Fitzsimmons were consultants because they were,
for all practical purposes working for the law practice
and pointed to their
extensive and ongoing involvement in the failed takeover deed of which Mr
Drysdale was a part, including personally
attending the Department of Natural
Resources and Mining office in Brisbane, Mr Fitzsimmons preparing legal
documents, sending them
to the parties with instructions on how to complete them
and discussing the difficulties being encountered. Indeed, Ms Fitzsimmons
herself out to be a “property consultant” to the practice. Equally
so, the evidence on which the Council relies
supports Mr and Ms Fitzsimmons as
acting as agents for the practice by acting on behalf of the Respondent.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that Mr and Ms Fitzsimmons were acting as
consultants to DGS law practice of which the Respondent
was then the principal.
It was not necessary for Mr and Ms Fitzsimmons to be paid for their work to
qualify them as lay associates
as the definition makes clear. The Tribunal is
thus satisfied that the Respondent as principal of the law practice contravened
121(1) of the Uniform Law.
Was the Respondent aware that Mr and
Ms Fitzsimmons were consulting to the firm and providing services related to the
legal services
provided by the practice and thus were lay associates?
all emails sent by Mr and Ms Fitzsimmons were sent from an email associated with
the Respondent’s legal practice (support@dominiquegrubisa.com.au)
as demonstrated by the email correspondence, the Respondent was copied into much
of it and in several emails, Ms Fitzsimmons
observed that she had “spoken
to Dom” about an issue or copied her in to the emails and, in at least one
instance, the
Respondent directly responded in relation the issue raised.
Council relied on parts of the Respondent’s affidavit filed in the
proceedings, and in relation to this aspect, the Respondent
said that she asked
her parents to attend the face to face meeting with Mr Drysdale and the others
engaged in the takeover deed process
because, she said she thought the clients
would not be “placated by staff members” and so asked her parents
She further said that she knew her father had some familiarity with
the Drysdale matter because she has sought his views from time
to time and he
has some past expertise in property and conveyancing law.
the Tribunal’s view, the Respondent’s characterisation of Mr and Ms
Fitzsimmons’ role does not accord with the
documents nor her own
demonstrated involvement in the unfolding problem with the take-over deed.
is no doubt, that at least on one occasion, the Respondent sought Mr
Fitzsimmons’ views about the issue. On 14 November
2016, Mr Drydale sent
the Respondent an email about the matter seeking the Respondent’s advice.
Shortly afterwards, the Respondent
sent an email to Mr Fitzsimmons seeking his
input in relation to the questions asked. Mr Fitzsimmons replied with responses
“...drafted for your consideration. Edit as you think fit and
send”. The suggested responses were extensive and contain
advice about
applying to the State Revenue Office for a refund of duty paid on the contract
17 November 2016, Mr Fitzsimmons wrote to the Respondent saying that he would
write to the Department of Natural Resources and
Mining about the transfer of
the property, the subject of the take-over deed and “...explain the power
of attorney to them,
that the mortgage has been discharged, that the instrument
has not been revoked....I will fix up the transfer ...”
received this email there appears to have been no response from the Respondent
to the effect that Mr and Ms Fitzsimmons were
not to take the actions
overwhelming effect of the evidence was that Mr and Ms Fitzsimmons were acting
as consultants to and agents of DGS law practice
with the Respondent’s
knowledge and consent and she knew at the relevant time that neither had been
approved to act as lay
associates of her firm in contravention of s35 of the
Uniform Law.
Ground is made out.
Council submitted that the Respondent’s conduct amounts to professional
misconduct because of both the gravity and extent
of the breach. It was argued,
and the Tribunal accepts that the Respondent knew that her parents were both
disqualified and if they
were to be lay associates, needed relevant consent. She
knew that they were conducting complex negotiations and drafting documents.
was copied into their email correspondence with the clients and authorised and
endorsed their work.
Council referred to the decision of
Victorian Legal Services v Wong
[2022] VCAT 432
in which a solicitor employed as a volunteer paralegal, a person
who had surrendered his practising certificate and who while acting
in that role
executed a fraud. The Court was concerned to stress the need for practitioners
to have “risk management”
strategies in place to guard against such
“errant” conduct to protect their clients and the public. While it
Council’s case that the Respondent’s parents engaged in
fraud, that they were permitted to act as agents and consultants
and carry out
important and complex functions in relation to clients, was said to demonstrate
a failure to appreciate the risks against
which the necessary permissions were
said to operate.
was argued that the Respondent breached the relevant section which, of itself
shows she did not appreciate the risks. In those
circumstances it was argued
that the Tribunal could not be confident that this conduct would not occur
Tribunal concludes that the conduct to which this Ground relates amounts to
professional misconduct both because of the seriousness
of the conduct, that it
was in breach of the Uniform Law and that, as the Council submitted, that the
Respondent did not see it as
a problem does not engender confidence that it will
not happen again.
Complaint 1: Grounds 2 and 3 and Complaint 2:
Grounds 7.8 and 9
The Baker Complaint.
appearing in separate Complaints, these Grounds are factually associated and it
is convenient to deal with them together.
2 and 3 allege:
Between about 12 April 2019 and 5 June 2019, the Respondent engaged a private
investigator to investigate another lawyer, Christopher
Baker, to obtain
information about potential litigation against the Respondent and/or companies
within the DGI Group.
Between about 12 April 2019 and 5 June 2019, the Respondent engaged a private
investigator to investigate another lawyer, Christopher
Baker, in respect of
potential litigation against the Respondent and/or companies within the DGI
Group and the Respondent:
1.authorised the investigators, through DGI Lawyers, to engage in deceptive
conduct towards Mr Baker; and/or
2. knew that the investigators were engaging in deceptive conduct towards Mr
Baker and did not instruct them not to engage in such
deceptive conduct
Respondent’s reply to this ground, admits that at the relevant times she
was the founder and CEO of the DGI Group and that
MWC is a company within that
Group. She also admitted that DGI Lawyers instructed private investigators and
that a paralegal in her
firm, Vanessa Nakhl instructed them. However, the
Respondent asserted that the only matter in relation to which the investigators
were engaged was about a potential trademark infringement. The Respondent denied
the balance of the allegation.
7,8 and 9 in Complaint 2 allege:
7. On or about 7 May 2020, the Respondent engaged in professional misconduct
within the meaning of s 297 of the Uniform Law by instructing
Russells to make
misleading submissions, on behalf of the Respondent, to the Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales, in response
to an investigation into a complaint
made by Mr Christopher Baker on 31 January 2020, under Chapter 5 of the Uniform
8. On or about 9 May 2019, the Respondent engaged in professional misconduct
within the meaning of s 297 of the Uniform Law by offering
to assist Ankita
Jain, a paralegal employed under her supervision with DGI Lawyers, to create a
false receipt in the name of Andre
On 23 March 2020, the Respondent engaged in professional misconduct within the
meaning of s 297 of the Uniform Law by instructing
Russells to deny to
Christopher Baker that she had engaged Lyonswood to conduct any investigation of
Mr Christopher Baker, then a
legal practitioner.
to these Grounds, the Respondent denied that she gave any instruction or
direction to Lyonswood Investigation requiring them to
deliberately or otherwise
deceive Mr Baker and obtain information from Mr Baker about claims and claimants
who might be considering
legal action against DGI Lawyers. The Respondent also
asserted that she knew of no basis on which Mr Baker would allege that Lyonswood
had acted unlawfully or in a way that might reflect adversely on her and if they
had acted in that way, she was not responsible for
that conduct.
Grounds arise from a complaint by a solicitor, Mr Christopher Baker, who was, at
the relevant times, acting for Mr Drysdale.
Mr Baker complained that the
Respondent had retained a private investigator going by the name of “Andre
Ronvegas” to
litigants in a proposed class action against the DG Institute.
circumstances in which the complaint arose are set out in Mr Baker’s
affidavit and that of Nadia Haddad Deputy Director,
Investigations, Professional
Standards of the Law Society attaching relevant documents and succinctly set out
in the reasons for
determination of the Professional Conduct Committee of the
Law Society in considering Mr Baker’s complaint from which we have
the following summary.
2018, Mr Drysdale registered a private Facebook Group called DG Institute
Graduates Independent which discussed the DGI products
and “...the impact
that their failure has had and could have on you personally.” The page
continued and said the group
could help people get a refund where the product
they had bought is defective.
Baker’s complaint arose when in April 2019 he was asked to call Mr Andre
Ronvegas about DGI and Mr Baker was told that Mr
Ronvegas had been referred to
him by Mr Drysdale. Mr Baker spoke to Mr Ronvegas and they discussed the DGI
issues and Mr Ronvegas
represented that he had purchased a product from DGI and
he wanted to know whether he could recover the money he had paid for it.
Baker was a member of the Facebook group and had acted for purchasers of DGI
products with which they were dissatisfied. Mr Baker
said he had received calls
from other clients of DGI. He asked Mr Ronvegas to give him a copy of the
receipt for the DGI Wealth Creation
product he had purchased and also said that
he would send Mr Ronvegas a template document to complete with details about the
purchased, how much he paid and any transactions he entered into using
the product.
9 May 2019 Mr Baker was contacted by a Mr Brenchley who said he was a friend of
Mr Ronvegas and he too discussed recovering money
paid by Mr Brenchley’s
wife for a DGI Wealth Creation product. Mr Brenchley enquired about the
possibility of a class action
against DGI.
29 May 2019 Mr Baker was told by another solicitor, Ms Nakhl who had previously
worked for the Respondent, that DGI had retained
a private investigator called
Mr Ronvegas to gather information about any potential action that Mr Baker might
bring against DGI
including the names of potential litigants. Mr Baker
discovered from Mr Brenchley’s email address that he too was an
investigator.
Baker complained that the engagement of the investigators had seriously
concerned his wife who had noted cars parked outside their
house and he
complained about the conduct of the Respondent as a solicitor using deceit to
obtain information about potential claims
and clients.
Baker expressed his concerns to solicitors then acting for the Respondent who
responded that they acted for MWC and the Respondent
and denied that their
clients had engaged anyone to undertake surveillance of or conduct any
investigations about him.
the matter came to the attention of the Law Society, the lawyers for the
Respondent responded to the correspondence from the
Law Society alleging a
campaign waged by Mr Baker against the Respondent and said that an opinion had
been sought from senior counsel
concerning the infringement of the DGI trademark
in the title of the Facebook group and that MWC engaged Lyonswood Investigations
to investigate the infringement of the DGI trademark. The letter continued and
noted the Respondent’s denials that she had
instructed the investigators
to conduct surveillance of Mr Baker or his family, to deliberately or otherwise
deceive Mr Baker, to
obtain information about claims and claimants who may be
considering legal action against her and to pretend that Lyonswood had not
engaged by her.
the Law Society issued a Notice pursuant to s371 of the Uniform Law to them,
Lyonswood provided a statutory declaration which
said that in April 2019
Lyonswood was engaged by DGI lawyers on behalf of Master Wealth Control Pty Ltd
trading as DGI Institute
to provide investigation services in relation to Mr
Baker to approach him and to ascertain:
...His involvement in a class action understood to be promoted against DG
Whether the class action was proceeding
How the class action was being funded and
The cost to engage Mr Baker
provided to the Law Society by Lyonswood confirmed the engagement and
instructions to Lyonswood including that Lyonswood
would create false
identities, namely Mr Ronvegas (also known as Anthony Romeo) and Mr Brenchley to
infiltrate the Facebook group.
In particular, the documents produced by
Lyonswood reflected that the contents of the conversation between “Mr
and Mr Baker were conveyed to the Respondent and that DGI
Lawyers were to prepare a false invoices for DGI products for Mr Ronvegas
Brenchley to give to Mr Baker. The documents were sent either to DGI Legal and
some were also sent directly to the Respondent
at her email address
“Dominique Grubisa”.
information provided to the Law Society by Lyonswood was sent to the lawyer for
the Respondent, now Automic Lawyers who responded
saying that their instructions
had been “expanded” and what the Respondent had sought to ascertain
through the use of
the investigators was Mr Baker’s level of involvement
in the potential claims, whether he was using the trademark in attracting
potential clients and promoting the potential law suit, whether Mr Baker was
acting in his own right or as an employee of another
firm, whether he was using
any of the Respondent’s or DGI Lawyer’s trademarks to obtain legal
costs as part of the proposed
action and what personal benefit Mr Baker had in
the conduct.
Respondent denied that she had retained Lyonswood to conduct surveillance on Mr
Baker or his family and we note that this assertion
does not form part of the
grounds alleged against the Respondent in these proceedings.
Law Society required the Respondent to provide information about the asserted
false receipt for purchase of MWC products. The
Respondent denied any false
receipt was provided for Mr Ronvegas although she produced a receipt for
purchase of Master Wealth Control
products by Mr Brenchley.
Respondent denied she engaged the investigator to obtain information about Mr
Baker’s clients and said that Vanessa Nakhl,
a solicitor employed by her
had instructed the investigators. As the Council submissions note, Ms Nakhl was
not employed by DGI Lawyers
during the period that the investigation extended to
Mr Baker. Ms Nakhl provided an affidavit in which she said that the client for
the purposes of the investigation was MWC and that she acted on the
Respondent’s instructions during the initial engagement
of Lyonswood.
Nakhl also said that she was closely supervised by the Respondent and that she
was required to keep the Respondent informed of
the work she was doing.
proof of the purpose for which the investigators were engaged, the Council
relies on the letters from the Respondent’s lawyers
to the effect that the
Respondent, as sole director of DGI Lawyers, advised the retaining of the
private investigator and on the
letter from Automic Group of 16 July 2019 in
which it was said the initial investigation was in relation to a potential
infringement,
.... The engagement of Lyonswood was expanded to investigate the use by Mr Baker
(and others) of the DGI trademark and its intellectual
property in connection
with a foreshadowed class action...
23 June 2021 the Respondent’s lawyer from Automic Group again wrote to the
Law Society saying that the expanded terms of
engagement of Lyonswood included
Mr Baker’s : “... involvement in a foreshadowed class action ....
And more specifically,
whether that use was designed to obtain a commercial
further support for the ground, the Council relied on the correspondence between
DGI Lawyers and Lyonswood all of which were copied
to an account at DGI Lawyers
to which the Respondent had access.
complaint relates to a period between 12 April 2019 and 5 June 2019. Before that
time, Mr Jarvis, the principal of Lyonswood informed
Ms Nakhl that an
investigator Anthony Romeo, using the name Andre Ronvegas had been accepted into
the Facebook group. After Ms Nakhl
left DGI Lawyers, Mr Jarvis communicated with
Ms Ankita Jain, a paralegal at DGI Lawyers. On 15 April 2019, Mr Jarvis informed
Jain that the next day, Mr Romeo would ask Mr Baker questions about the class
action including:
Who is paying for it
How many people are involved
How much is charged
Is it going ahead
we have indicated, Mr Baker was contacted by a Mr Ronvegas and when they spoke,
Mr Ronvegas asked him those questions. Mr Jarvis
wrote to Ms Jain and told her
the details of the conversation between Mr Ronvegas and Mr Baker including the
answers to the questions
referred to in the earlier email.
a few minutes of receiving this email, Ms Jain forwarded it to the Respondent
and others including Greg Klopper the Chief Operating
Officer of MWC
that day, Ms Jain wrote to the Respondent and told her that Lyonswood was
arranging for another person to pose as a client of
MWC and a friend of Ronvegas
she added that the new person would “... talk to Chris Baker about the MWC
and dig out all the
relevant information.” Ms Jain also referred to the
need to complete the questionnaire given to Mr Ronvegas by Mr Baker and
provide receipts for RER (Real Estate Recovery – a MWC product).
9 May 2019 Mr Jarvis wrote to Ms Jain giving her an update and reminding her
Ms Jain forwarded this
email to the Respondent as an update.
17 May 2019 Ms Jain wrote to Mr Jarvis asking him to get the
“operative” to contact Mr Baker because “... we
are trying to
The extend (sic) of the class action through Baker’s language when he
enquires (how many people are involved- what have people
The financial commitments he is asking for
Why is he doing it
reply Mr Jarvis pressed for the “receipt” for Andre Ronvegas.
afterwards, Mr Baker received communication from Mr Brenchley and Mr Baker sent
him a form to complete about his purchase
of DG Institute products. The
information given to “Mr Brenchley” by Mr Baker was sent to Mr
Jarvis, as was the form
to complete.
23 May 2019 Mr Jarvis sent an update to Ms Jain and noted that Mr Brenchley had
a form to complete from Mr Baker. Ms Jain replied
that they would be in touch
once they had the information necessary to complete the form. On 30 May 2019 Ms
Jain sent Mr Javis the
completed form and an invoice in the name of Brenchley.
Mr Jarvis wrote to Mr Klopper and asked him to confirm that providing the
invoice as proof of sale would not constitute fraud or some other crime. Mr
Klopper replied that the invoice was a “mock up”
their internal procedures” and would not amount to fraud or another
this time, Mr Baker had been warned of the involvement of the investigators by
Ms Nakhl and Mr Baker wrote to Lyonswood on 30 May
2019 saying that an
investigator had posed as a student of the Respondent’s business. This
email was passed on to DGI Lawyers
and Mr Jarvis was advised not to engage with
Mr Baker further.
documents make it abundantly clear that Mr Baker was the subject of
investigation by Lyonswood at the instigation of DGI Lawyers
and that the
purpose of the investigation was to obtain information about the potential class
action and the identity of Mr Baker’s
documents also establish that the Respondent was providing the instructions for
the course of the investigation and knew what
was going on. The correspondence
between Mr Jarvis and Ms Jain was copied to the Respondent and it is not
reasonable to assume that
a paralegal was acting independently of the Respondent
and without instructions from her. Council also relied on Ms Jain’s
the words “we” and “our” when passing on information to
Mr Jarvis. The information in emails from
Mr Jarvis and in particular in which
he details the answer to the questions wanting answers was passed on to the
Respondent by Ms
also relies on an email from Ms Jain in which she refers to a conversation with
the Respondent earlier on about the investigation
into Mr Baker. Further,
although relied on in proof of another ground relating to the investigation of
Mr Baker, Ms Jain refers to
the need to create a false invoice for Mr Ronvegas
to which the Respondent replies asking whether she needs help.
the Council relies on the evidence of Ms Nakhl to the effect that she, as an
employed solicitor in the Respondent’s
firm was closely supervised to
argue that it is not reasonable to accept that Ms Jain was acting alone without
supervision. We agree.
Tribunal is satisfied that the Respondent as Principal of DGI Lawyers
orchestrated the investigation into Mr Baker in the period
to which this ground
refers to obtain information about a proposed class action against her and the
details of the potential participants.
4.1.2 of the Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors’ Conduct
Rules 2015 (the Rules) provides that a solicitor
must be “honest and
courteous in all dealings” in the course of legal practice. Rule 5
provides that a solicitor must
not engage in conduct in the course of legal
practice or otherwise that:
5.1.1 demonstrates that the solicitor is not a fit and proper
person to practise law or
5.1.2 is likely to a material degree to –
(i) Be prejudicial to, or diminish the public confidence in, the administration
of justice, or
(ii) Bring the profession into disrepute.
Council relies on s 35 of the Uniform Law which fixes the principal of a law
firm with the acts or omissions which contravene
the act however, as we have
found that the Respondent herself directed and controlled the investigation of
Mr Baker, it is not necessary
to have recourse to that section.
Tribunal finds the particulars of this Ground made out.
ground alleges that in the course of directing the investigation into Mr Baker,
the Respondent authorised the investigators to
engage in deceptive conduct
towards Mr Baker and/or knew that they were engaging in deceptive conduct to Mr
Baker and did not instruct
them not to.
deceptive conduct relied on by the Council is:
The use of false identities in contacting Mr Baker
Representing to Mr Baker that the investigators had purchased or represented
someone who had purchased a MWC product
Representing that they were interested in joining the potential class action
against the Respondent and or the DGI Group
Through the use of this false information, obtaining information from Mr Baker
details of the potential claims and potential claimants
her reply to the Complaint and in other documents, the Respondent denied she
authorised the investigators to act deceptively.
in Ground 2, the Council relies on the contemporaneously created documents to
support the alleged ground. The Tribunal is satisfied
that these documents
demonstrate that the Respondent instigated and directed the investigation into
Mr Baker and understood the methods
to be used by the investigators involved
deceptive conduct including the conduct particularised in the ground. In
particular, an
email from Ms Jain to the Respondent dated 1 May 2019
As discussed I spoke to Lachlan at Lyonswood [PI] regarding appointing a new
person as a MWC client and introducing him as a friend
of Anthony Ron Vegas
(sic) – our current PI for RER
Lachlan understood my instructions and will organise the new person to talk to
Chris Baker about the MWC and dig out all the relevant
information.
I also mentioned that we will organise to fill in the questionnaire –
attached and provide receipts for RER as requested by
Chris Baker in due course.
Jain said she would keep the Respondent posted.
9 May 2019 at 11.03 am Ms Jain received an email from Lyonswood which
We have another agent (using a different name/email address/pone number) make
email contact with Hickeys Lawyers and requested they
pose as a friend of Andre Ronvegas and inquire about the class action as a
purchaser or the DGI Master
Wealth Control Program.
minutes later, Ms Jain forwarded this email to the Respondent and Mr
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the investigation of Mr Baker involved
the investigators using false names and cover stories
in an attempt to obtain
information from Mr Baker about his clients. We are further satisfied that the
Respondent knew of the deception
and falsities employed by the investigators and
she was responsible for that conduct in knowingly permitting it to occur.
Tribunal concludes that this ground establishes a contravention of Rule 4.1.2
and Rule 5 of the Conduct Rules.
conduct, like the conduct comprising Ground 2, is as the Council submitted
deceitful and the evidence demonstrates that the Respondent
knew of and approved
of the tactics employed by the investigators in trying to obtain the
information. It was argued that the Respondent
conducted herself in way that is
inimical to the essential standards of professional integrity and honesty. The
Tribunal agrees and
considers that her conduct in respect of both Grounds 2 and
3 amounts to professional misconduct.
Grounds 7.8 and 9
7, 8 and 9 Grounds comprised in Complaint 2 also deals with the investigation
into Mr Baker.
7 and 9 concern the Respondent’s submissions made through her lawyers, to
the Law Society while investigating the complaint
by Mr Baker. Each complaint
alleges that the Respondent made misleading submissions which amounts to
professional misconduct pursuant
to s297 of the Uniform law. Ground 7 refers to
submissions made on 7 May 2020 and Ground 9 to submissions made on 23 March
Particulars of the Ground are:
54. The Submissions stated that, in the initial engagement of Lyonswood to
investigate Christopher Baker's alleged infringement of
the DGI trademark
(Lyonswood Investigation)
and during the course of the Lyonswood
Investigation, the Respondent did not issue any instruction or direction (nor
did the engagement
of Lyonswood contain any term or condition) requiring
Lyonswood to:
a. deliberately or otherwise deceive Christopher Baker; and
b. obtain information about claims and claimants who may be considering legal
action against DGI Lawyers
(First Statement).
55. In addition, the Submissions stated:
a. the Respondent knew of no basis on which Christopher Baker could contend that
Lyonswood has "acted in any way unlawfully or in
any way that might adversely
reflect on her"; and
b."[e]ven if Lyonswood had engaged in any conduct in which it ought not have
engaged and even if such conduct involved a contravention
of the law, it
is...difficult to see how [the Respondent] could be in any way responsible for
56. In the context of subparagraph 54(a) above, and by reason of the matters set
out in paragraph 55 above, the Respondent instructed
Russells to convey to the
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales that she had no awareness or
involvement in any attempt by
Lyonswood to deceive Christopher Baker, or that
Lyonswood may have intended to attempt to deceive Christopher Baker
57. The First Statement was false and misleading because:
a. the Respondent had given instructions to Lyonswood to identify the number of
claimants involved in the proposed class actions
against DGI entities; and
b. the Respondent caused Lyonswood to obtain information about claims and
claimants who may be considering legal action against DGI
58. The Second Statement was misleading because:
a. the Respondent was, through email correspondence, aware that Lyonswood used
two assumed identities (called "Andre Ronvegas" and
"Richard Brenchley") to
conceal from Christopher Baker the investigators' true identity and purpose of
corresponding with Christopher
b. the Respondent was aware of, and offered to assist in, the preparation of a
false receipt in the name of Andre Ronvegas so that
Lyonswood could provide it
to Christopher Baker in order to cause Christopher Baker to believe that the
investigators' assumed identity,
Andre Ronvegas, had bought a product from MWC
(False Receipt);
c. by reason of the matters set out in sub-paragraphs 58(a) and 58(b) above, the
Respondent was aware that during the course of the
Lyonswood Investigation,
Lyonswood deliberately attempted to deceive Christopher Baker by using assumed
identities and Lyonswood
may have intended to deceive Christopher Baker by the
assumed identity providing the False Receipt to Christopher Baker so that
Christopher
Baker believed that the assumed identity, Andre Ronvegas, was a
customer of MWC.
Respondent admitted that she instructed her solicitors to make submissions in
response to the Law Society’s investigation
of the complaint and she
admits that those submissions stated:
In the initial engagement of Lyonswood to investigate Mr Baker's alleged
infringement of the DGI trademark (Lyonswood Investigation)
and during the
course of the Lyonswood Investigation, Ms Grubisa did not issue any instruction
or direction (nor did the engagement
of Lyonswood contain any term or condition)
requiring Lyonswood to:
(i) deliberately or otherwise deceive Mr Baker; and
(ii) obtain information about claims and claimants who may be considering legal
action against DGI Lawyers (First Statement).
[The Respondent] knew of no basis on which Mr Baker could contend that Lyonswood
has "acted in any way unlawfully or in any way that
might adversely reflect on
"[e]ven if Lyonswood had engaged in any conduct in which it ought not have
engaged and even if such conduct involved a contravention
of the law, it is ...
difficult to see how [the Respondent] could be in any way responsible for
Respondent further denied the assertion that she had instructed her lawyers to
convey the fact that she had no awareness of or
involvement in any attempt by
Lyonswood to deceive Mr Baker or that Lyonswood may have intended to deceive Mr
Council relied on the correspondence and other documents to which we have
already referred in relation to the earlier grounds
relating to the Baker
complaint and submitted that those documents show that the Respondent knew that
Mr Baker was the target of
an investigation by DGI Lawyers and that she knew of
the purpose, scope and the methods to be deployed in obtaining the information
and also that the Respondent knew of the creation of false documents and offered
to assist in creating the false invoice. (this is
the subject of Ground 8).
Tribunal concludes that the correspondence and other material clearly
demonstrates that the Respondent well knew of the methods
to be deployed by the
investigators and that they were attempting to obtain information from Mr Baker
and details of his clients. We are satisfied that
the assertions in the submissions to the Law Society were wholly false and
misleading.
the submission that the Respondent knew of “no basis on which Christopher
Baker could contend that Lyonswood has "acted
in any way unlawfully or in any
way that might adversely reflect on her"; and that there was no way in which the
Respondent could
be responsible for that conduct, clearly contains the
implication that she knew of no basis on which it could be asserted that
had acted unlawfully or that she could be responsible for their
actions. Taking into account the same evidence, it is clear that
implication was false and palpably so.
Council alleges that in instructing her solicitors to make those misleading and
false submissions, the Respondent was in breach
of Rules 4 and 5 of the Conduct
Rules and in breach of rule 43 of the Conduct Code that says:
Subject only to his or her duty to the client, a solicitor must be timely, open
and frank in his or her dealings with a regulatory
Tribunal finds this ground established.
ground, like Ground 7 concerns the submissions the Respondent instructed her
solicitors to provide to the Law Society on 23 March
Particulars of this ground are:
62. In around February 2019, the Respondent instructed Lyonswood, or caused
Lyonswood to be instructed, to conduct investigations
in connection with
Christopher Baker.
63. Between about February 2019 and March 2020:
a. Christopher Baker was a legal practitioner; and
b. by reason of the investigation referred to in paragraph 62 above, the
Respondent knew that Christopher Baker was a legal practitioner.
64. On 20 March 2020, Christopher Baker sent an email to Russells, stating "If I
see one more car outside my house I will be going
to the Police again..."
65. On or before 23 March 2020 the Respondent instructed Russells to deny to
Christopher Baker, then a legal practitioner, that she
engaged Lyonswood to
conduct any investigation of him.
66. On 23 March 2020, Russells emailed Christopher Baker and stated that the
Respondent had instructed it that neither her nor Master
Wealth Control had
engaged anyone to undertake investigations of Christopher Baker
Respondent in her reply to this ground denies that she through DGI Lawyers or in
any other way, instructed the investigators in
relation to the investigation of
Mr Baker and that is was Ms Nakhl who gave them their instructions. Further, the
Respondent denies
that she knew Mr Baker was a legal practitioner and instructed
Lyonswood to deny to Mr Baker that she had engaged them to investigate
Respondent did not admit she instructed her solicitors to write to Mr Baker and
inform him that neither she nor MWC had engaged
anyone to investigate him.
is no doubt that on 23 March 2020 the Respondent’s solicitors wrote to Mr
Baker denying that she or MWC had engaged anyone
to investigate him. That
statement is clearly incorrect. When the Law Society commenced to investigate
the Baker complaint, the Respondent’s
then solicitors wrote to the Law
Society and noted that in early 2019 DGT Lawyers engaged Lyonswood to
investigate whether Mr Baker’s
Facebook group title was infringing the
tradmark of MWC and the letter continued:
We are instructed that in line with legal advice received by our client, the
scope of the engagement of Lyonswood was expanded to
investigate Mr Baker's use
of the DGT trademark and involvement in a foreshadowed class action (which was
regularly referred to by
Mr Baker in the Facebook Group (as defined in our
letter dated 10 August 2020)) and more specifically, whether that use was
to obtain a commercial or benefit.
Relevantly, our client was not seeking to thwart or interfere with any process
or proposed proceedings but rather, simply to ascertain
her affidavit sworn in the proceedings and relied on in part by the Council, the
Respondent said at (95) and (96):
95. On 23 March 2020, Mr Baker wrote to Russells, among others, suggesting that
there was a car outside his house from one of the
investigators.
96. This email was in March 2020. (...redacted ...) I instructed Russells to
convey that I had not engaged anyone to undertake surveillance
of Mr Baker nor
conduct any investigation of him.
the Council argued that the two admissions, that the investigation by Lyonswood
was expanded to investigate Mr Baker’s
proposed class action against MWC
and the Respondent’s evidence that she directed her lawyers to deny to Mr
Baker that she
was undertaking any investigation of him demonstrates the
underlying particulars and, in light of the other evidence proves that
misleading.
agree. The particulars of this ground are made out.
Ground concerns the Respondent offering to assist Ms Jain in creating a false
invoice in the name of Andre Ronvegas to be provided
to Mr Baker in proof that
Mr Ronvegas had purchased a MWC product.
foundation for this ground is found in an email written by Ms Jain to the
Respondent on 1 May 2019, in which the following appears
after updating the
Respondent about finding a second person to pretend to Mr Baker that they had
purchased a MWC product and seeking
information about the proposed class
I also mentioned that we will organise to fill in the questionnaire- attached
and provide receipts for RER as requested by Chris
Baker in due course
I will keep you posted once I hear from Lachlan.
9 May 2019 Ms Jain received an email from Mr Romeo (aka Mr Ronvegas) reminding
her that “...you are in the process of arranging
a fake receipt foe the
Andre Ronvegas purchase of the Real Estate Rescue package which will be provided
by Ronvegas to Hickeys Lawyers...”
minutes later Ms Jain copied the Respondent and Mr Klopper into that email.
Later that day, the Respondent replied to Ms Jain
Thanks Ankita,
Do you need help to issue Andre Ronvegas with the invoice?
minutes later, Ms Jain replied:
Yes please, as we discussed previously we need to make sure that we put correct
dates on the invoice and cover any other loophole.
I was also wondering that the questionnaire [provided by Hickey lawyers] has
been sent to Greg Sirtes in the brief and as you are
meeting him on Monday, we
can seek his advice and then issue invoice and then correspond with Pl.
shortly afterwards, the Respondent replied saying that it was a good idea.
Tribunal is satisfied that the email exchange makes it entirely clear that not
only was the Respondent aware of the request to
create a false receipt for Mr
Ronvegas to further the deception of Mr Baker, but offered to assist Ms Jain in
its creation. We find
this ground made out.
relation to each of the grounds relating to the Baker complaint, that is
Complaint 1, grounds 2 and 3 and Complaint 2, grounds
7,8 and 9, the Council
asserts that the conduct in each amounts to professional misconduct as defined
by s297 of the Uniform Law.
The Council also relies on section 298 that provides
that, in a breach of the Uniform Law and the Conduct Rules can amount to
professional
misconduct.
the question for the Tribunal is whether in relation to the proven grounds in
relation to the Baker complaint, the Respondent’s
conduct when taken
either separately or together amounts to professional misconduct.
Tribunal concludes that each of these complaints taken separately and together
demonstrate conduct which amounts to professional
misconduct.
conduct established in Complaint 1; Grounds 2 and 3 demonstrates that the
Respondent knew of and authorised the deliberate deception
of another solicitor
hoping to obtain privileged material about a proposed class action and details
relating to his clients. Information,
the Tribunal imagines, that could not have
been obtained by the Respondent using legitimate enquiries. The evidence
established that
the Respondent knew of and authorised the methods used by the
investigators to deceive the solicitor.
conduct was both serious and sustained, taking place over a period of
the conduct, may not, strictly be in connection with the Respondent’s
legal practice, s297(1)(b) entitles a finding that
it can amount to professional
misconduct if it would justify a finding that the lawyer is not a fit and proper
person to engage in
legal practice.
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
Spigelman CJ said:
19 Honesty and integrity are important in many spheres of conduct. However, in
some spheres significant public interests are involved
in the conduct of
particular persons and the state regulates and restricts those who are entitled
to engage in those activities and
acquire the privileges associated with a
particular status. The legal profession has long required the highest standards
of integrity.
20 There are four interrelated interests involved. Clients must feel secure in
confiding their secrets and entrusting their most
personal affairs to lawyers.
Fellow practitioners must be able to depend implicitly on the word and the
behaviour of their colleagues.
The judiciary must have confidence in those who
appear before the courts. The public must have confidence in the legal
by reason of the central role the profession plays in the
administration of justice. Many aspects of the administration of justice
on the trust by the judiciary and/or the public in the performance of
professional obligations by professional people.
Respondent’s conduct demonstrates a want of honesty and integrity in her
dealings with another solicitor which, in the Tribunal’s
view of itself
justifies a finding that the Respondent is not a fit and proper person to engage
in legal practice and amounts to
professional misconduct.
then to Grounds 7 and 9.
relate to the Respondent’s misleading the Law Council in its inquiries
into Mr Baker’s complaint. The Council contends
that the conduct of the
Respondent established by the proven complaints amounts to professional
misconduct. First, the Council pointed
to the vehemence with which the
submission denies not only the Respondent’s conduct but challenges how any
misdoing by the
investigators would be sheeted home to her, against what the
Tribunal finds was her clear knowledge and understanding of what the
investigators were doing and why, shows a clear intention to mislead the Law
Council. We agree.
Tribunal also notes that in
Law Society v Ford (no 2)
[2024] ACTSCFC 2
123, the Court there considered the relationship between a solicitor and the law
society and said:
123․ Second
, when it comes to dealings between a lawyer and the Law
Society, it has to be recognised that, so far as solicitors are concerned,
Law Society is central to the scheme of regulation and, hence, the advancement
of the public interest in the maintenance of standards
within the legal
profession. One of the burdens associated with the privileges of being an
officer of the court is the need for honesty
and disclosure when dealing with a
regulatory body such as the Law Society. That is reflected in the terms of the
Solicitors Rules:
see r 43.1 set out above. It is inherent in the role of a
lawyer, as an officer of the court, that the lawyer is able to deal honestly
with the regulatory body established by law to regulate the conduct of lawyers.
That extends to honesty and openness in circumstances
where full disclosure may
not be in the professional or financial interests of the lawyer in question. It
involves subordination
of the self-interest of the lawyer to the legal system to
which they have been admitted to serve.
the Tribunal’s view, the misleading of the Law Society by the Respondent
is a significant and serious breach of her obligations
as a practitioner.
Tribunal is satisfied that the conduct established by the proof of Grounds 7 and
9 amounts to professional misconduct.
Ground 8 involves the Respondent’s knowing participation in the creation
of a false invoice to further the deceit of
Mr Baker, to demonstrate that the
investigator posing as “Andre Ronvegas” had purchased a MWC Package.
This conduct,
like the other conduct demonstrated in the proof of this group of
grounds represents a substantial departure from the standards of
honesty and
integrity expected of a practitioner and it too amounts to professional
misconduct.
COMPLAINT 2
1 to 4 in this Complaint refer to the Respondent’s conduct as a lawyer
acting for MWC and allege that there was a conflict
of interest when the
Respondent was acting for MWC and customers of the MWC Package at the same
ground alleges:
Between about 26 November 2017 and 21 August 2020 Dominique Grubisa (Respondent)
engaged in professional misconduct within the meaning
of s 297 of the Uniform
Law by acting for two or more clients, being MWC and customers of MWC, namely
each of Client B and/or Client
C and/or Client D, in circumstances where there
was a conflict or potential conflict of her duties to act in the best interests
each client.
relation to this Ground, the Council relies on the Respondent’s
admissions:
Respondent admitted that she was the sole principal of Dominique Grubisa
Solicitors. She was the founder and CEO of the DGI Group
and was the sole
Director of MWC which was part of the DGI Group.
Respondent admitted that DGI Lawyers under her supervision performed legal work
for entities within the DGI Group and its customers.
She further admitted that
MWC was a client of DGI Lawyers, that MWC sold the MWC package and MWC had an
interest in each of the persons
named in the ground purchasing the MWC
Respondent further admitted that in relation to each of those named customers,
and within the period nominated in the Ground,
solicitors from DGI Lawyers under
her supervision provided legal services to customers of MWC by creating and
reviewing the Asset
Protection Plan Legal documents based on the
customers’ instruction.
Respondent admitted that:
Respondent further admitted that she did not ensure that the persons named in
the Ground were aware that MWC was a client of DGI
Lawyers (Council’s
submissions note that the Respondent, however, does not admit she had any legal
obligation to do so).
Respondent admitted that DGI Lawyers, through its employed solicitors at the
same time acted for MWC and the named purchased of
the MWC Package although the
Respondent disputes that this gave rise to a conflict of interest.
Respondent further admitted that the Asset Protection Plan:
(1) set out instructions on engaging an accountant, registering property on the
personal property securities register, opening a
trust bank account, lodging a
caveat and signing legal documents; and
(2) included the Asset Protection Plan Legal Documents.
Asset Protection Plan Legal Documents were created for each customer of MWC
based on the customer’s instructions and adjusted
for each client’s
personal information. In order to create the Asset Protection Plan, each client
was provided with a questionnaire
which was accompanied by a video series in
which the Respondent provides instructions on how to complete the questionnaire.
The Respondent
also agreed that there was also a written guide accompanying the
videos; that some clients would have the questionnaire and the written
emailed to them, and that some clients would answer the questions over the
answers to the questionnaire and other personal details were used to create an
individualised plan.
Respondent or a solicitor of DGI Lawyers under her supervision was then
responsible for settling and approving the Asset Protection
Council’s submissions note that while the Respondent admits she was the
sole principal of DGS in the period between 26 November
2017 and 31 January
2018, she denies she was the sole principal of DGI Lawyers. However, a
Certificate provided pursuant to s 446
of the Uniform Law (Vic) of 6 November
2024 provides that in the period between 1 April 2018 to 21 August 2020, the
Respondent was
the sole legal director of DGI Lawyers and no other person was a
principal of DGI Lawyers in the period in which she was a principal.
Tribunal accepts that at the times relevant to Ground 1 (and in relation to
Grounds 2 and 3) the Respondent was the sole principal
of DGS and between 1
April 2018 and 21 August 2020 she was the sole principal of DGI Lawyers.
to the preparation of the Asset Protection Plan Documents, although the
Respondent denied that if a customer made enquiries or
requested information in
relation to the documents, people employed by MWC referred to as the MWC Support
Team, provided the answers
and that the MWC Support Team was supervised by the
Respondent, the Council relied on the Respondent’s admissions contained
a Statutory Declaration she swore on 28 July 2022 that the matters alleged were
correct and it was she, in her role of practising
solicitor who supervised the
MWC Support Team who were employed by Master Wealth Control.
Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s admissions provided in the Statutory
Declaration as to these matters.
then to the individuals referred to in the Ground who purchased the MWC
30 November 2017 Client B purchased the MWC Package and on 20 December 2017
completed the questionnaire provided by MWC and in
response received an email
from the Respondent from support@masterwealthcontrol.com.au in which she said
that her details would be
reviewed and “one of our team” will be in
touch if further information is needed. She as advised that “our legal
Strategists” will finalise her asset protection within 20 working days.
Client B received the Asset Protection Plan Legal
Documents personalised for her
and her husband on 28 February 2018.
C purchased the MWC Package on 17 April 2018 and, according to her affidavit,
she received an email from the Respondent, at
the same email address as for
Client B. Client C said she was interested in the MWC Package as she had a
franchise business and was
concerned about the success of the business and to
protect her assets. Client C completed the questionnaire and listed her assets.
The questionnaire did not seek information about debts nor whether she was in
financial difficulties.
emails between Client C and the MWC Support team show that she told the team of
her financial circumstances. On 8 May 2018
Client C emailed MWC Support
referring to an earlier call in which she was apparently wanting to put the
protection scheme in place
as soon as possible and in this email said
“...under financial pressure ... and was wanting some protection to move
with negotiations on rents/franchise fees etc”. Her email was
answered on 9 May 2018 and in relation to the name she wished
to ascribe to the
Trust, the email said “... Dominique recommends that you choose a name
without “family” word.”
In that email, it was observed that
while Client C had listed amongst her assets a property she had not included any
liabilities
on it, the email said that their searches show two registered
mortgages over her property and sought details. In an email of 11 May
MWC Team member sought further information and noting the dealings on the title
of her residential property said that “..this
will not impact your assets
protection documents in any way”.
C received her personalised Asset Protection Plan Legal Documents on 5 June 2018
which included the equitable mortgage over
her residential property which noted
that the property was subject to a mortgage to the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia as security
for a loan and a line of credit.
12 June 2019 Client C emailed mwc@dginsitute.com.au and said that it was likely
that she would be “forced into bankruptcy
and will lose the house when I
had purchased the package from you to stop this happening.” She said she
wanted to know “...
if the Vestey Trust I purchased is water tight and the
caveat is strong so the trust receives any equity.”
D purchased the MWC Package on 31 October 2019 and before he did, he revealed
that he was under financial stress which was
the reason why he purchased the
package and said that he was worried that if he went ahead with the Package and
the bank decided
to pursue him in court, it might look as if they had acted on
the Package to avoid paying his debt. Client D received a reply which
“...the Master Wealth Control service will protect you in financial
distress. It is when you’re actively been (sic)
pursued by creditors in
the form of caveats being lodged on your assets that it becomes too late to
protect your assets”.
D completed the questionnaire to enable the preparation of his personalised
Asset Protection Plan Legal documents and he received
the package on 4 December
Council submitted that given that the Respondent admitted that DGI Lawyers
through its employed solicitors acted both for MWC
and for clients of MWC, it
created a conflict of duties as between MWC on the one hand and the purchasers
of the MWC Package on the
other. Further, the Council argued, the Respondent did
not make the nominated purchasers aware of that conflict.
Tribunal finds that there was a potential conflict of duties between the
Respondent’s duty owed to MWC on the one hand and
the purchasers of the
package on the other because MWC had an interest in the purchase of the packages
and the purchasers had an
interest in whether the package would be suitable for
their circumstances and capable of providing them with the protection they
sought and which MWC said it would. It was submitted and it is apparent from the
documents and emails of each of the named purchasers,
that had they known that
their personal circumstances may not have been protected, they may not have
purchased the product or, perhaps
sought a refund of the purchase prices when
they were not protected as they wished to be. The Respondent had an obligation
to consider
whether the scheme in which the purchasers were to become involved
would in fact be suitable for them and whether the accompanying
documents would
be effective in their individual cases.
interests of the purchasers of the MWC Package were not aligned with those of
MWC and the Respondent’s corresponding duties
were in conflict.
Council submits that the Respondent has breached Rule 11 of the Conduct Rules
which says:
11 Conflict of duties concerning current clients
11.1 A solicitor and a law practice must avoid conflicts between the duties owed
to two or more current clients, except where permitted
by this Rule.
11.2 If a solicitor or a law practice seeks to act for two or more clients in
the same or related matters where the clients’
interests are adverse and
there is a conflict or potential conflict of the duties to act in the best
interests of each client, the
solicitor or law practice must not act, except
where permitted by Rule 11.3.
11.3 Where a solicitor or law practice seeks to act in the circumstances
specified in Rule 11.2, the solicitor or law practice may,
subject always to
each solicitor discharging their duty to act in the best interests of their
client, only act if each client:
11.3.1 is aware that the solicitor or law practice is also acting for another
client, and
11.3.2 has given informed consent to the solicitor or law practice so acting.
Council also relies on s35 of the Uniform Law as to the Liability of
Principals.
Respondent was the sole principal of DGS between 26 November 2017 and 31 January
2018 and between 1 February 2018 to 31 March
2018, she was the sole practitioner
of DGS. From 1 April 2018 until 21 August 2020 she was the sole legal director
of DGI Lawyers
at the time that the conflict or potential conflict arose and as
principal, she either knew of, authorised or permitted the contravention
Rule or ought reasonably to have been in a position to influence the conduct of
the law practice in relation to the contravention
and failed to prevent it from
occurring. She did not ensure that the purchasers knew that MWC was also a
client of DGI Lawyers.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the breach alleged in Ground 1 has been
assessing the gravity of the breach, Council submitted that the conflict between
her duty to MWC and the purchasers was obvious
given the purchasers had revealed
their financial distress and the circumstances of those financial pressures may
well have made
the purchase of and giving effect to the Asset Protection Plan
ineffective and unsuitable for the purposes for which they wanted.
The conduct
was not limited to one purchaser but, here, there were three and because the
Respondent insisted that no conflict of
duties arose, the Council argued that
the failure to appreciate the conflict brings with it the need to act to protect
from its recurrence.
Tribunal agrees. The conflict of duties between those owed to the purchasers of
MWC Package and to MWC were or should have been
obvious to the Respondent and
her denial that such a conflict existed reflects, in the Tribunal’s view a
failure to understand
her legal obligations and also does not offer any comfort
that similar conduct might occur in the future.
solicitor’s duty is to avoid a real or substantially possible conflict
between their duty to serve the interests of one client
and another client. It
is not necessary that there be an actual conflict but the obligation of the
solicitor is to be astute to the
possibility. The Tribunal adopts the reasoning
of Wotton J in
Thompson v Mikkelsen (3 October 1964 unrep)
[A client] is entitled to assume that [the solicitor] will be in a position to
approach the matter concerned with nothing [in mind]
but the protection of his
client's interests against [those] of the other party. He should not have to
depend on a person who has
conflicting allegiances and who may be tempted either
consciously or unconsciously to favour the other client, or simply to seek
resolution of the matter in a way which is least embarrassing to himself.
ground alleges:
Between about 26 November 2017 and 21 August 2020 the Respondent engaged in
professional misconduct within the meaning of s 297 of
the Uniform Law by acting
for customers of MWC, namely each of Client B and/or Client C and/or Client D,
in circumstances where there
was a conflict or potential conflict between her
duty to serve the interests of those customers and her own interests.
the ground is concerned with the conflict or potential conflict between the
interests of the purchasers of the MWC Package and
the Respondent’s own
5 September 2019 the Respondent and her husband were the shareholders of MWC,
after that date, MWC was wholly owned by DGI
Holdings which itself was wholly
owned by RER properties and the Respondent was the sole shareholder of RER
Properties.
the financial year ending 30 June 2019, the Respondent was paid $91,701 in
directors fees from MWC, in the following financial
year, ending 30 June 2020
she received $42,648 in director’s fees from MWC and received fully
franked dividends from DGI Holdings
of $58,000. Thus, the Council submitted that
the Respondent had a financial interest in the sale of the MWC products.
her reply to the Application, the Respondent denied that she had an interest in
customers purchasing MWC products. In a submission
to the Law Society by the
Respondent’s lawyer in November 2021, the Respondent described her
interests and those of the nominated
customers as “entirely
Tribunal accepts that the evidence of the Respondent’s receipt of
financial benefits from MWC through her associated shareholding,
interest in the continued sale of MWC products.
Council argued that this then created a conflict or potential conflict between
the interests of the named purchasers of MWC Package
and the Respondent’s
personal interests. The Respondent denied that there was a conflict or potential
conflict of interest
between her duty to serve the interests of the people who
purchased the MWC product and her personal, financial interest in the continued
use of that product.
Tribunal is unable to determine how it is that the Respondent disputes the
existence of a conflict or potential conflict of interest
nor how her interests
and those of the purchasers could be considered “aligned”, given the
unchallenged evidence of that
financial interest, the Tribunal is comfortably
satisfied that it created a conflict or potential conflict between the
Respondent’s
and her clients’ interests.
the Council alleges a breach of Rule 12 of the Conduct Rules namely:
12 Conflict concerning a solicitor’s own interests
12.1 A solicitor must not act for a client where there is a conflict between the
duty to serve the best interests of a client and
the interests of the solicitor
or an associate of the solicitor, except as permitted by this Rule.
Council asserts that the Respondent’s husband was an
“associate” for the purposes of the Rule, it being defined
include a member of the solicitor’s family, and, as a shareholder of MWC
between 26 November 2017 and 4 September 2019,
he benefitted from the sale of
MWC products.
evidence persuades the Tribunal that over the period to which the Ground
relates, the Respondent and her husband had an interest
in MWC. The
Respondent’s admitted financial interest in MWC created a conflict between
her duty to advise the purchasers of
the suitability of the package to meet
their individual needs and her own interest in selling the products to the
Council submits and the Tribunal accepts that this breach is substantial because
of its seriousness, not isolated to one client
and because the Respondent
apparently did not recognise the conflict when it arose nor when it formed part
of the Law Society’s
investigation into the
complaints.
Ground alleges:
Between about 26 November 2017 and 21 August 2020 the Respondent engaged in
professional misconduct within the meaning of s 297 of
the Uniform Law by acting
for customers of MWC, namely each of Client B and/or Client C and/or Client D,
in circumstances where there
was a likely conflict between her duty to serve the
interests of those customers and her own interests and failing to cease to act
for each of Client B and/or Client C and/or Client D when the Respondent's
independent service of each of the client's' interest
was reasonably likely to
be affected by the Respondent's interest in MWC
the Council relies on the evidence adduced in support of Ground 1. The gravamen
of the complaint is that in acting for customers
of MWC where there was a likely
conflict between her duty to MWC on the one hand and to the customers on the
other, where her service
of the interests of each was likely to be affect,
failed to cease to act for the customers of MWC products.
Council relies on the Respondent’s admissions that she was the sole
principal of DGI Lawyers and supervised the solicitors
working there and DGI
Lawyers were independent of MWC. The Respondent had, prior to 5 September 2019 a
50% interest in the shareholding
of MWC with her husband holding the other 50%
and between 26 November 2017 and 21 August 2020, the Respondent had material
over the conduct and operations of MWC.
Respondent however, denied that she was engaged in another business, namely MWC
at the same time as acting for the customers of
MWC and denied that her
involvement with MWC was reasonably likely to impair or conflict with her duties
to her clients.
alleged breach concerns Rule 8 of the Conduct Rules which says:
8.1 A solicitor who engages in the conduct of another business concurrently, but
not directly in association, with the conduct of
the solicitor’s legal
practice must:
8.1.1 ensure that the other business is not of such a nature that the
solicitor’s involvement in it would be likely to impair,
or conflict with,
the solicitor’s duties to clients in the conduct of the practice, and
8.1.4 cease to act for the client if the solicitor’s independent service
of the client’s interest is reasonably likely
to be affected by the
solicitor’s interest in the other business.
8.2 For the purposes of this rule, a solicitor is taken to engage in the conduct
of another business where the solicitor, or an associate:
8.2.1 is entitled, at law or in equity, to an interest in the assets of the
business which is significant or of relatively substantial
8.2.2 exercises any material control over the conduct and operation of the
business, or
8.2.3 has an entitlement to a share of the income of the business which is
substantial, having regard to the total income which is
derived from it.
on the Respondent’s admissions, the Council argues that at the material
time, MWC was run concurrently with but not directly
in association with DGI
Lawyers. As to the likelihood of that the Respondent’s involvement with
MWC would impair or conflict
with her duties to the clients of DGI Lawyers, the
purchasers of MWC products, the Council relies on the evidence that the three
nominated persons had purchased the product and there was an inherent conflict
between the business of MWC and the Respondent’s
duty to her clients.
Council also submitted that the conflict was manifest in the circumstances of
the purchasers when each disclosed they were in
a degree of financial distress.
Client C wrote to MWC and said she was likely to become bankrupt and was anxious
to know whether
the trust was “watertight” and she continued to
receive legal advice (admitted by the Respondent to have come from DGI
Council submitted that at this point, the Respondent owed Client C a duty to
give her frank legal advice about the questionable
ability of the Asset
Protection Plan to protect her assets and argued that in not doing so, the
conflict between her duties to MWC
and to the clients became real.
D too revealed himself to be under financial pressure and concerned that any
step he took might give rise to the bank arguing
that he was trying to avoid his
obligations to them. Council pointed to the date stamp on the invoice for the
purchase of the package
to submit that after Client D revealed his financial
circumstances and asked the question about what might concern the bank, and
invited the Tribunal to conclude that he purchased it having been assured that
the package would protect his assets. It is a reasonable
inference in the
circumstances.
B wanted to protect assets in the United Kingdom and in completing the
questionnaire. Client B requested information on how
the “international
scope of MWC will work to protect that”. She was advised that her assets
in the UK can be placed under
the assets in her plan. Later, Client B was
advised that she would require the assistance of a lawyer in the UK to assist
with registering
a caveat supported by the Trust and Equitable Mortgage to be
executed by her.
B obtained a private ruling from the Australian Taxation Office which was to the
effect that when she executed the legal documents
and implemented the Master
Wealth Control Asset Protection Package, capital gains tax will be incurred and
it will when the equitable
interest in assets were transferred to the trust
under a deed of gift. On receiving this advice, Client B wrote to MWC noting
she was told that no tax burden would arise if she implemented the
processes in the MWC Package. She asked for a refund of the purchase
Council argued and the Tribunal agrees that in each of the three purchasers to
which this Ground relates, a specific conflict
arose in addition to the conflict
inherent in the circumstances of the Respondent running MWC and acting for
clients of MWC.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the Ground is established and that the
Respondent breached Rule 8 of the Conduct Rules.
Tribunal finds that the Respondent’s breach is substantial because of its
gravity and consistent with a “pattern”
of behaviour at least in
relation to the three persons named in the Ground and represents a consistent
departure from the standard.
Because the Respondent does not concede that she
acted contrary to the standard and the Rule, the Council argued that this raises
the risk that she will repeat this conduct.
Respondent’s conduct in relation to these three complaints, each alleging
the existence of and a failure by the Respondent
to appreciate relevant
conflicts of duties, is extremely serious and operates to undermine the
confidence of the public in the legal
profession where it is expected that the
solicitor will understand and act on real or reasonably possible conflicts.
relation to conduct in relation to these three grounds, the Tribunal is of the
view that the Respondent’s conduct is sufficiently
serious so as to amount
to professional misconduct.
the ground alleges
Between about November 2017 and about August 2020 the Respondent engaged in
professional misconduct within the meaning of s 297 of
the Uniform Law by
advertising, representing, or engaging in conduct, which states or implies, that
MWC is entitled to engage in
legal practice
particulars of this complaint allege that MWC was not a “qualified
entity” pursuant to s6 of the Uniform Law the definition
of which includes
an Australian legal practitioner or a law practice; that the Respondent was the
sole director of MWC and she knew
that MWC was not a qualified entity and she
sold the MWC Package which included the Asset Protection Plan Legal documents.
Respondent admitted that MWC was not a qualified entity and she knew that to be
the case, that she was the sole director of MWC
and that MWC sold the MWC
Package which included the Asset Protection Plan Legal Documents.
ground further asserts that preparing, reviewing and providing the Asset
Protection Plan Legal Documents to customers, involved
the provision of legal
services and at the relevant time, the Respondent engaged in conduct in relation
to the three nominated purchasers
of the MWC Package, that represented that MWC
was entitled to provide legal services and in so doing she contravened s11(2) of
Uniform Law.
Respondent denied that MWC was providing legal services, that she conducted
herself so as to represent that MWC was entitled to
provide legal services and
that the Asset Protection Booklet represented that the MWC Package protects
assets and gave advice as
to the legal effect of the documents forming part of
the Asset Protection Plan Legal Documents.
to whether MWC provided legal services through the Asset Protection Plan, the
Council relied on:
way in which the documents were sent to purchasers which was from MWC and DG
Institute with an invitation to contact
“support@masterwealthcontrol.com.au.
for explanation or if amendments were
required. In particular, the Council pointed to the communication with Client D
under the Respondent’s
name but from an email address, mcw@dginstitute,
telling Client D that the Respondent would guide him through the process of
the documents and if he needed assistance to put the Plan in place,
he could call “my team on mwc@dginstitute.com.au.
invoices sent to the three nominated customers were sent from
“dginstitute”.
wording of the correspondence from MWC and the purchasers which refer to
“our legal strategists” or their “legal
several instances, the communications from MWC provided legal advice, for
example, Client D received correspondence from a “product
specialist” who provided him with a copy of a decision in a Bankruptcy
case and advised Client D: “we need to have the
structure and securities
of Master Wealth Control in place before we poke a stick at Westpac”.
in relation to Client D who was concerned about whether the Asset Protection
Plan would help him since he was in “financial
stress” and said he
was worried that his actions could be seen as being an attempt to avoid paying
the bank, he was told by
a “consultant manager”:
“...the Master Wealth Control service will protect you in financial
distress. It is when you’re being actively pursued
by creditors in the
form of caveats being lodged on your assets that it becomes too late to protect
your assets.
Client C seeking advice about asset protection before she entered into voluntary
bankruptcy, she was told by a “Master Wealth
Control Consultant”
that her question had been referred to “our legal team” or
“legal” without clarification
that it was a reference to DGI
Lawyers. She received a response which commenced: “Legal have provided the
below response”
and continued and explained the effect of a caveat lodged
on the title of property.
6 December 2019, Client C received an email from “DG Institute at the
email address; mwc@dginstitute.com.au which said:
As part of our MWC service, we constantly review and refine client documentation
in light of regular changes to the law. ... We have
sought senior
counsel’s advice which confirms that your protection is gained by your
Equitable Mortgage (making your Vestey
Trust your creditor to whom you owe
money) and this is reinforced by the Promissory Note. The Deed of Gift is not
necessary to afford
you protection and so we have removed it to (sic) as an
undue complication.
In line with this, the DGI team have worked on your documentation and are
providing you with a Deed of Recission. ...
Council argued and the Tribunal accepts that the emails demonstrate both that
there is no differentiation between DG Lawyers and
MWC and that they represent
that it is MWC that is providing the legal services.
the Master Wealth Control website is a link to promotional videos in which the
Respondent promotes the product and in which she
represents that legal services
are available to purchasers of the MWC Package. The promotional material refers
to “Dominique
and her legal team”. Further, in one of the videos
that accompanies the purchase of the MWC Package, in relation to the completion
of the questionnaire the Respondent appears and says that if the purchaser has
any difficulties completing the document “my
team is here to help
you” and gives the email address MWC@dginstitute. The Respondent refers to
herself as having worked as
a solicitor in debt collection and then continues to
describe how MWC can keep the purchaser’s assets away from creditors.
Council submits that in this material, the Respondent does not indicate that the
legal services are being provided by DGI Lawyers
rather than by MWC itself.
Council relies on the Booklet published by the DG Institute “Your Guide to
Asset Protection” and which explains how
a trust works to protect the
purchaser’s assets and the operation of an equitable or unregistered
the Respondent did not do more that deny the particulars of the ground, Council
drew the Tribunal’s attention to the Respondent’s
submissions dated
8 November 2021 to the Law Society in response to their investigation. Under the
heading “Allegation 4- advertisements
of representations by or about
unqualified entities” the submission contends that “every effort is
taken by MWC to ensure
that there is a clear demarcation between the legal
services provided by DGI Lawyers and other professional services provided as
part of the MWC Package. The submission referred to the Terms and Conditions
which appeared in the “Conditions of Purchase”
of the MWC Packages
in two iterations, one applied up to about 4 August 2019 and a later iteration
from 5 August 2019 until July
2021, the latter of which contained the following:
Aspects of the products and services provided by the Company may have been
prepared and supplied by DGI Lawyers Pty Ltd...The Company
may retain the
services of DGI Lawyers from time to time at no cost to the Customer for advice
and opinion...
the foot of the Terms and Conditions was a note:
This legal practice conducted by Dominique Grubisa and her legal services are
independent of and not provided by or affiliated with
Dominique Grubisa’s
other businesses.
submission continued and noted that after purchasing the MWC Package customers
are supplied with contact details for DGI Lawyers
and invited to seek legal
service from DGI Lawyers. Thus the submission concludes that MWC clearly
distinguishes the services it
provides with legal services.
Tribunal is satisfied that notwithstanding the disclaimers in the Terms and
Conditions of Purchase, the Respondent by her actions
as the “public
face” of MWC, the content of the videos and correspondence providing legal
documents not from the email
address of DGI Lawyers but from the MWC email
address and representing that her “legal team” could assist with
to the documents, the Respondent conveyed the clear impression that
MWC was itself providing legal services.
10(1) of the Uniform Law provides:
An entity must not engage in legal practice in this jurisdiction, unless it is a
qualified entity.
11(1) provides:
An entity must not advertise or represent, or do anything that states or
implies, that it is entitled to engage in legal practice,
unless it is a
qualified entity.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that this Ground has been made out and further
accepts that the Respondent by her conduct and
representations implied that MWC
was entitled to engage in legal practice. The breach is, in the Tribunal’s
view serious not
least because the Respondent apparently did not accept that her
conduct and representations had that effect and constituted a breach.
Tribunal concludes that the conduct amounts to professional
misconduct.
Ground alleges
Between about November 2017 and August 2020, the Respondent engaged in
professional misconduct within the meaning of s 297 of the
Uniform Law by
failing to provide legal services competently, in the provision of the Master
Wealth Control Asset Protection Plan
to each of Client B and/or Client C and/or
Client D and/or Client E.
particulars of the Ground allege that in relation to each named purchaser, the
Respondent or those under her supervision at DGI
Lawyers prepared and reviewed
the Asset Protection Legal Documents and between the relevant dates, MWC sold
the MWC Package to the
named purchasers and in the same period provided the
Asset Protection Plan documents to Client B, Client C and Client D.
Respondent admits these particulars, however she denied that the preparation and
review of the Asset Protection Plan documents
were legal services.
the purposes of this Ground, Legal Services is defined in Section 6 of the
Uniform Law as “work done, or business transacted,
in the ordinary course
of legal practice”.
Particulars further assert that as part of the MWC Package, Client E received a
documents entitled “Master Wealth Control”
authored by the
Respondent and in which the Respondent made assertions about the legal effect of
the documents forming part of the
MWC Package that Client E had purchased, that
she provided assurances about and instructions in relation to the steps Client E
to take to prepare the Asset Protection Plan Legal Documents and made
representations about Client E’s legal rights once the
Asset Protection
Plan Documents were completed and finalised. The Particulars further assert that
it was claimed by MWC that the
Asset Protection Plan documentation provided to
the named purchasers would be effective, once completed, in preventing or
creditors from obtaining access to the person’s assets. These
claims were referred to in the particulars and in Council’s
submissions as “the Effectiveness Claims”.
was also alleged that in these steps, the Respondent provided legal services to
Respondent denied that she provided legal services to Client E.
Particulars allege that in relation to all named purchasers, the Respondent did
not provide legal services competently in that
she failed to advise:
to the correctness or otherwise of the Effectiveness Claims having regard to
each individual’s circumstances;
in order to sustain an equitable mortgage, established by a deed, there needed
to be an actual debt
the execution of the documents in the Asset Protection Plan Legal Documents is
not all that is necessary to sustain an equitable
mortgage without the need for
any valuable consideration;
to the circumstances in which a caveat might lapse or be removed, the bases on
which the interest asserted in the caveat might
be challenged and the costs that
might be incurred to protect the structure put in place if challenged by
creditors and
to the risks which might impact on the accuracy or achievability of the
Effectiveness Claims including risks associated with
Conveyancing
Property Law Act 1958
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Respondent denied these particulars.
proof of the Particulars, the Council relied on the documents provided to the
purchasers and which accompanied the Asset Protection
Plans which asserted that
the documents “will be effective in protecting your wealth” and
“A separate bank account
in the name of your Trust in which you store all
your cash and savings will render them untouchable by your creditors” and
“by creating a trust and having all your finances in a separate bank
account in the name of your Trust it will render them
untouchable by your
creditors” being representations made in the documents to Client C, Client
B and Client D.
E, while she purchased the MWC Package did not complete the questionnaire and
thus did not receive the Asset Protection Plan
Legal Documents. However, Client
E received a letter from the Respondent in which she asserted: “with my
support you'll have
a time tested, proven, airtight system that will protect any
assets that are important to you” and “once you have my
Wealth Control system in place, any asset you value will be protected against
any threats or action from anyone seeking to
attack you or your wealth, without
affecting any structures you already have in place, or having any adverse tax or
borrowing ramifications
for you” and “
Your assets will only be
once we have put your protection in Place
(emphasis in
the original)
relied on other assertions contained in document authored by the Respondent and
sent to Client E along similar lines referring
to “an invisible forcefield
around those assets”.
the Council relies on a document sent to Client E being part of the information
she received in the MWC Package which is
entitled “Bulletproof your
Wealth”. The document has information under a number of headings including
should you listen to me? I am a practicing (sic) barrister with over 20 years
legal experience in commercial and debt related
to protect your equity and property quickly and easily without having to pay
stamp duty or excessive transfer cost and
still retain the ultimate
control” – “What we need to do then to protect ourselves is to
create a trust whereby
we essentially control that entity and that entity then
registers an interest on the title to our property. This protects our equity.
are still the owners of the property however our trust holds an unregistered
second mortgage and registers this interest on the
title and that sucks up all
the equity in the property”.
“Registering
a Caveat” – “If we grant an equitable or unregistered mortgage
to our trust and the trust then
registers a caveat on the title, we can prevent
anyone else registering or claiming an interest in our equity”.
it all together: What This Means for us and Our Asset Protection Strategy”
– “The caveat (noting
an 'equitable' or unregistered mortgage) will
sit there compounding and will soak up all remaining equity so that there is
else for others to take.”
Did the Respondent
provide legal services to Client E?
Council submitted that while Client E did not complete the questionnaire and
thus did not receive the Asset Protection Plan, she
was provided with documents
containing representations about the Asset Protection Plan promoted by MWC and
the Respondent in particular
the document entitled “Bulletproof your
wealth” which asserted that the advice should be taken because of the
Respondent’s
asserted expertise as a lawyer. The Council’s
submissions also note that the document is marked “Copyright ©
content of the Bulletproof your wealth document which clearly contains legal
information and the assertion of expertise and experience
amount, in the
Tribunal’s view to the provision of legal services.
the legal services not competently delivered?
proof of this part of the ground, Council relies on the evidence of an expert,
Ms Scott Atkins who prepared two reports in this
matter. Mr Atkins is a lawyer
and a partner of the firm Norton Rose Fulbright Australia and is Australian
Chair of that firm. His
expertise is in insolvency and restructuring. His first
report addresses the question of the competency of the legal services provided
by the Respondent to the named purchasers of the MWC
Atkins considered the documents and advice given to Client C and observed that
DGI, the Respondent and MWC to whom he referred
as the DGI Service Providers
were aware that Client C was “under financial pressure” at the time
she sought the purchase
of the MWC Package yet so far as he could ascertain no
enquiries were made about what those pressures were. She was sent the Asset
Protection Plan Legal Documents.
said that Client C was not informed of the terms of
Conveyancing Act
Bankruptcy Act
Bankruptcy Act
and the impact that those provisions may have on her position
including the potential for her creditors to seek to avoid the transactions.
Neither was Client C advised as to the “vulnerability” of the
equitable mortgage which secured a “fictitious debt”.
None of the
documents or advice given to Client C informed her of the costs she might incur
in defending the caveat or the procedures
for the lapsing of the caveat and the
requirement that legal proceedings be taken in order to maintain it.
Atkins said that “on the contrary” the documents and other material
given to Client C assured her that by adopting
the plan “... her assets
would be protected...” and her creditors would be “sealed
Atkins concluded the Respondent failed to provide legal services to Client C
competently first in the provision of the documents
and the representations as
to the effectiveness of the MWC Package to prevent or defer creditors from
obtaining access to her assets
and secondly in considering and acting on
information provided by Client C, what further information should have been
sought from
her in the circumstances and personalising the documentation
provided to her as part of the WMC Package and in determining what advice
have been given to her at the time about the effectiveness of the MWC Package in
preventing or deterring creditors from obtaining
access to her
D purchased the MWC Package in October 2019 and a little later purchased another
DGI product to do with debt management. However,
Client D had, before buying the
product approached DGI to get advice about debt management saying he was in
financial stress. He
was advised by a “product consultant” that it
was important to complete the MWC to “protect all of the unencumbered
assets”. It was in an email to Client D from a person from DGI that he was
told “...the Master Wealth Control service
will protect you in financial
distress. It is when you’re being actively pursued by creditors in the
form of caveats being
lodged on your assets that it becomes too late to protect
your assets.
D purchased the package and completed the questionnaire and revealed he had
assets in Western Australia. Caveats on all the
titles were lodged in accordance
with the Asset Protection Plan.
Atkins notes that at the time Client D purchased the package, DGI was aware that
he had debt issues with Westpac which held a first
mortgage over one of his
properties at that time and before the Asset Protection Plan documents had been
sent to him. Nevertheless,
the documents sent to him made no reference to his
financial position nor any information about the
Conveyancing Act
Bankruptcy Act
and their potential application to his
circumstances including the potential that the transactions may be set aside. Mr
Atkins further
said that given Client D had informed DGI that he was in dispute
over debt with Westpac, his attention should have been drawn to
the limited
operation of the recommended equitable mortgage and caveat regime contemplated
by the Asset Protection Plan, Nor was
Client D apparently advised that the trust
he established might be challenged nor of the vulnerability of the equitable
that did not secure an actual debt. As with Client D, there is no
reference to the costs that might be incurred in trying to defend
the regime or
the procedures and costs of maintaining a caveat.
Atkins noted that however the documents and other materials made available to
Client D assured him that by adopting the Plan his
assets would be fully
Atkins concluded that the Respondent failed to provide competent legal services
to Client D in the documents and other materials
which represented their
effectiveness against the actions of creditors and in failing to consider and
act on the information that
he provided to personalise the documents and to
advise him that the plan would not achieve his desired outcome with his
B purchased the MWC Package and submitted a completed questionnaire which noted
that her only real property interest was in
the United Kingdom and that it was
subject to a mortgage. When she submitted her questionnaire, Client B enquired
application of the Plan because of her property in the
UK. She was sent the Asset Protection Plan Legal Documents which Mr Atkins
were essentially the same as those sent to Client C and Client D, but she was
told that in relation to the UK property she will
need the assistance of a
lawyer in the UK to register the Caveat or similar instrument.
B also asked about whether there would be any tax consequences from implement
the plan and she was told that there would not
none and it will be “...
business as usual ...” in relation to her existing tax arrangements.
B did not execute any of the Legal Documents.
did, however, obtain a private tax ruling which told her that there would indeed
be tax implications. Neither could Client B obtain
the assistance of a lawyer in
the UK to help her with the UK property. Apparently caveats cannot be registered
on land titles in
Atkins concluded that while the giving of assets to the trust was not central to
the operation of the MWC Package, Client B had
been advised on her specific
question that there would be no adverse tax consequences for her. Further it was
apparent that those
giving her advice had not considered whether the
“Vestey Trust” system could be applied in other jurisdictions
Mr Atkins was not prepared to be critical of DGI in circumstances where
there was no representation that it would apply internationally.
However, he
concluded that the failure to advise Client B of the vulnerabilities and the
risk of challenge to the Legal Documents
was a failure to competently provide
services in the making of representations and the provision of document which
asserted the effectiveness
of the MWC Package.
Edid not purchase the MWC Package but on her enquiries was sent documents
including the document “bulletproof your wealth”,
which as we have
said claimed that the instigation of the Asset Protection Plan and associated
Legal Documents would provide an “airtight
system that will protect any
assets that are important to you”. As with the documents provided to the
other named purchased,
Mr Atkins noted that there is no reference in the
documents to the risks of potential challenges to the arrangements including the
“fictional debt” secured by the equitable mortgage and, assuming as
he had been asked, that the provision of the documents
to Client Ewas the
provision of legal services, concluded that they were not competently
Council contends that in not providing legal services competently, the
Respondent breached Rule 4.1.3 of the Conduct Rules which
provides that a legal
practitioner must “deliver legal services competently, diligently and as
promptly as reasonably possible”.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the Ground has been made out and that the
Respondent has breached Rule 4.1.3. Here, the
Council submitted and the Tribunal
accepts that the breach of the Rule was both substantial because of its
seriousness and it was
consistent in that it was conduct repeated over a number
of occasions and periods of time. And, as such represents professional
misconduct.
Tribunal accepts that submission and finds the conduct amounts to professional
misconduct.
ground alleges:
6. Between about November 2017 and March 2021, the Respondent engaged in
professional misconduct within the meaning of s 297 of the
Uniform Law by reason
of her promotion and sale of the MWC Package to each of Client B and/or Client C
and/or other customers, directly
and through her role in the MWC and/or the DGI
Group, in circumstances where she:
a. made a misleading and deceptive representation that the MWC Package, once put
in place, is effective in preventing creditors from
obtaining access to
customers' assets; and
b. intentionally encouraged or advised Client B and/or Client C and/or other
customers who purchased the MWC Package to enter into
voluntary transactions for
the purpose of delaying, hindering or defeating claims that could be made by
existing or future creditors
and thereby engage in transactions which might
constitute void or voidable transactions at law.
particulars of this Ground relate to two booklets which the Council alleges were
created by the Respondent and which were provided
to Client C and Client B in
around November 2017 and April 2018 respectively. The first booklet is titled:
“Individualised
Asset Protection Plan”. The second booklet was
called “Asset Protection Booklet” was provided MWC to customers
purchased the MWC Package. The Council relies on the statements in both
documents in proof of this ground.
lengthy, we will set out in full the relevant parts of both documents on which
the Council relies to prove this Ground.
Individualised Asset Protection Plan said:
a. the objective of the asset protection plan is stated to be "to prepare you
for what might happen if some unknown event takes you
by surprise. You want to
block off any avenue of recourse a potential future creditor may have against
you, leaving the equity in
your assets fully protected. We want to separate you
as an individual from your wealth (so there is nothing for creditors to
b. the objective of the asset protection plan is to "reverse engineer things to
look at where you are open to attack from creditors";
c. by implementing the asset protection plan the client will "seal off that
d. "the result [of implementing the asset protection plan] is that anyone
looking at your equity as an avenue of claiming a debt
from you will find it
impossible to recover";
e. in subscribing to the service, client/subscribers identify their assets that
require protection (both real and personal property)
and are in turn provided
with an "Individualised Asset Protection Plan" that outlines the steps that
should be taken to "protect
all your equity in your present and future property
wealth quickly and easily through a trust, equitable mortgage and caveats".
f. "Your Primary Exposure: Your Property Holdings
The fact is, the real wealth which is exposed at present is the equity in your
property, which is the current market value less debt.
This equity is open to an
attack from creditors. Anyone preying upon you can easily run Land Titles
own real estate. Obviously we don't want this to
be a "sitting duck" for creditors. We therefore need to protect that equity.
Your Secondary Exposure — Your Personal Goods and Chattels
Other assets that are exposed to claims by creditors are your personal goods,
chattels and effects — anything that is owned
in your name! This includes
electrical and computer items, shares, cash, cars and your interest in your
person earnings income. All
of this can be protected easily and quickly through
the asset protection trust mechanism."
Asset Protection Booklet relevantly states:
a. "What we want to do with our asset protection is, in effect, mortgage all of
your equity to a trust and that trust will then register
a caveat on the title
to each of your properties to represent that mortgaged interest. The caveat
(noting an 'equitable' or unregistered
mortgage) will sit there compounding and
will soak up all remaining equity so that there is nothing else for others to
take. In addition
any of your personal property of value would be assigned and
transferred to the trust. You will not have any bank accounts in your
all of your banking will be done through the trust."
b. "we are trying to set up hurdles and barriers between yourselves and your
assets and potential future creditors by creating an
asset protection trust. We
want to divorce you as an individual from your wealth (so there is nothing for
creditors to get!). In
order to protect our wealth we are putting it in a safe
place and removing ourselves from the picture whilst we control everything
behind the scenes."
c. Once the MWC package is implemented "[t]hat's it! Once you have completed all
the steps there is nothing more to do unless you
add further property or assets
to your portfolio", and states, "Congratulations! You have invested your time
and resources into safeguarding
your future and your assets are now fully
protected. You can now get on with living your life and building your wealth
with the peace
of mind that comes with being bullet proof."
d. "this documentation will afford you protection in your equity in your assets.
It will not extinguish a debt. What it will do is
make it very difficult for
creditors to enforce payment against you and protect your future
acquisitions"
e. "if a creditor is looking at you as a target for acquisition of wealth they
will firstly run a land title search — your
kryptonite will be your
property. Beyond that they can legally intercept your income, earnings, personal
goods and chattels and other
wealth but there is no public register for such
information so they will have to work hard to attack this wealth."
f. "Okay, so how does this help you if you are holding property in your own name
or under a company name where you or the company
may be a target to creditors or
others who wish to attack your wealth? As I said you don't want to have to sell
and hide the money
under your pillow, nor do you want to have to incur stamp
duty just to change ownership over to a safe entity like a trust. Don't
there is a little known secret that those in the know use to transfer their
exposed equity in real estate over to a trust
an give themselves the ultimate
vehicle for control of that asset."
g. "Any other creditor who comes along and tries to attack your wealth or your
equity will be in the same position as Westpac was
in our example - they can
take whatever is left after our trust (who registered earlier and has an
indefeasible interest) has been
paid out in full to its satisfaction."
h. "Similarly with your furniture, clothing and jewellery - whether under
finance or not - you have some equity in it all and by
mortgaging those items to
the Trust, creditors cannot seize them";
i. "This is what the very rich aim to do: have layers and layers of protection;
companies within trusts within other companies. It
becomes so convoluted and
expensive to examine, analyse, prove and undo. Donald Trump famously once told
his creditors "you can sue
me but I will hold you up in court for years and cost
you more in legal expenses to fight me then what I owe you. I have the best
lawyers and have tied everything up so tightly you will never ever unravel
j. "This is how the wealthy operate; through "structures", such as companies and
trusts. They own nothing themselves and are not
exposed to any risk in that
k. "Wherever there are assets protection structures there will always be
creditors or others trying to attack them. No asset protection
system can spruik
itself as being impenetrable. Having said that, what we are trying to do is make
it difficult for creditors to
get to you. The more they have to prove, the more
expensive it becomes and the more difficult the exercise. They effectively give
up when it comes to throwing good money after bad.
The onus or burden of proof is on the creditor to show that what you have set up
is somehow liable to be set aside by a court and
available for them to take as
creditors. This becomes very costly and difficult and can be an uphill battle
because they have nothing
to base their allegations on and you have all the
requisite documents. Yes, they can get a court order that you produce documents
but they need grounds for this and cannot just go on a fishing expedition hoping
to dredge up something.
In reality it is impossible to mount a challenge without ammunition and there is
no way to get ammunition without some compelling
evidence in the first place. It
also becomes very difficult and costly for them to attack a registered interest
on a title because
of the concept of indefeasibility of title. Any challenge is
a very expensive exercise and the legal cost alone to challenge such
protection structuring would probably outweigh the debt that they are chasing.
Put simply, it is a case of commerciality, and
the legal system is such that it
just becomes un-commercial for creditors to challenge such asset protection
structures."
Respondent admits that the Individualised Asset Protection Plan booklet contains
the words quoted but does not admit the contended
effect or words not quoted.
She further admits that the Individualised Asset Protection Plan booklet was
provided to Client B in
the relevant period and she admits that the booklet
“Your Guide to Asset Protection” was written by her and was provided
to customers who purchased the MWC Package.
to the contents of the Asset Protection booklet, the Respondent said that there
was more than one version of that booklet and it
contains more than the words
quoted, but otherwise admits the words quoted. She did not point to what other
words were in the booklet
and whether or in what way they should be
considered.
Council relies on the representations in both booklets. Both booklets were sent
to Client B in February 2018 and Client C on 5
June 2018 as a letter and each
was signed by the Respondent with the signature: “Dominique E Grubisa
BA(Hons) LLB. LLM”
thrust of the Council’s argument lies both in what the words in the
booklets say and what they don’t say.
Council contends that the words do not say:
simply executing an equitable mortgage and lodging a caveat would not, as a
matter of law achieve an indefeasible interest in
the customer’s assets in
favour of the trust
an equitable trust to be effective, it must secure a genuine debt
the absence of a genuine debt, an equitable mortgage is liable to be set
caveat may be challenged and
not provide information about the circumstances in which transactions may be set
aside or avoided.
Council contends that the words in the booklets conveyed
the MWC Package once put in place was effective in preventing creditors from
obtaining access to the customer’s assets
clear import of all of the language in the documents was that the scheme would
work to “soak up all the remaining equity”
leaving nothing for
creditors to take and further that by mortgaging the customer’s chattels,
creditors cannot have access
to them. This was said to be notwithstanding the
caveat expressed in paragraph (i). in the Guide to Asset Protection that
asset protection system can spruik itself as being
impenetrable” and in (c) that beyond the customer’s property,
can “legally intercept your income, earnings, personal goods and
chattels and other wealth ...”
Did the Respondent make a
misleading and deceptive representation?
Self Care IP Holdings Pty Ltd v Allergan Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] HCA 8
the High Court set out the principles necessary to determine whether conduct was
misleading or deceptive, where the plurality said:
80. The principles are well established. Determining whether a person has
breached s18 of the ACL [Australian Consumer Law] involves
, identifying with precision the "conduct" said to
contravene s18,
, considering whether the identified conduct
was conduct "in trade or commerce";
, considering what meaning
that conduct conveyed; and
, determining whether that conduct
in light of that meaning was "misleading or deceptive or ... likely to mislead
or deceive"
81. The first step requires asking: "what is the alleged conduct?" and "does the
evidence establish that the person engaged in the
conduct?". The third step
considers what meaning that conduct conveyed to its intended audience
As in this case, where the pleaded conduct is said to amount to a
representation, it is necessary to determine whether the alleged
representation
is established by the evidence. The fourth step is to ask whether the conduct in
light of that meaning meets the statutory
description of "misleading or
deceptive or ... likely to mislead or deceive"; that is, whether it has the
tendency to lead into error
. Each of those steps involves
"quintessential question[s] of fact".
82. The third and fourth steps require the court to characterise, as an
objective matter, the conduct viewed as a whole and its notional
effects, judged
by reference to its context, on the state of mind of the relevant person or
class of persons. That context includes
the immediate context –
relevantly, all the words in the document or other communication and the manner
in which those words
are conveyed, not just a word or phrase in isolation
– and the broader context of the relevant surrounding facts and
circumstances.
It has been said that "[m]uch more often than not, the simpler
the description of the conduct that is said to be misleading or deceptive
likely to be so, the easier it will be to focus upon whether that conduct has
the requisite character". That said, the description
of the conduct alleged and
identified at the first step should be sufficiently comprehensive to expose the
complaint, because it
is that conduct that will ultimately, as a whole, be
determined to be or not to be misleading or deceptive.
84. Where the conduct was directed to the public or part of the public, the
third and fourth steps must be undertaken by reference
to the effect or likely
effect of the conduct on the ordinary and reasonable members of the relevant
class of persons. The relevant
class of persons may be defined according to the
nature of the conduct, by geographical distribution, age or some other common
habit or interest. It is necessary to isolate an ordinary and
reasonable "representative member" (or members) of that class, to objectively
attribute characteristics and knowledge to that hypothetical person (or
persons), and to consider the effect or likely effect of
the conduct on their
state of mind. This hypothetical construct "avoids using the very ignorant or
the very knowledgeable to assess
effect or likely effect; it also avoids using
those credited with habitual caution or exceptional carelessness; it also avoids
considering
the assumptions of persons which are extreme or fanciful". The
construct allows for a range of reasonable reactions to the conduct
ordinary and reasonable member (or members) of the class.
endnotes removed
proving this aspect, the Council relies on the opinion of Mr Atkins contained in
a second report dated 9 August 2022. Mr Atkins
commented on the
“vulnerability” of aspects of the MWC Package to legal challenge as
to their effectiveness. The matters
to which he referred were similar to those
he raised in considering the competence of the legal services delivered by the
Respondent.
Mr Atkins observed, merely executing an equitable mortgage and lodging a caveat
will not, at law, create an indefeasible interest
in favour of the trust. Mr
Atkins pointed out that the documents do not explain that for the equitable
mortgage to be effective,
it must secure a genuine, rather than fictional debt.
In this regard, Mr Atkins’ opinion was that if valuable consideration
given and a genuine debt created, it would have undermined the purpose of the
scheme because the debt within the trust may be
available to unsecured
creditors. In any event, in the absence of a genuine debt, the equitable
mortgage is vulnerable to challenge.
to the caveat, Mr Atkins said that to be enforceable, it must be lodged pursuant
to a recognised caveatable interest having regard
to the relevant state or
territory law. Where a caveat is lodged not pursuant to a recognised interest,
and where the equitable mortgage
is not enforceable, the caveat is liable to be
challenged and removed from the title of the property. Again, Mr Atkins pointed
the need to maintain a caveat to prevent it lapsing and the costs and
procedures necessary to do that. Nor were the costs of meeting
a challenge to
the equitable mortgage and caveat or, indeed, any part of the scheme, mentioned
in the documents.
Atkins also pointed to the scheme’s vulnerability to challenge pursuant to
both the Conveyancing and Bankruptcy Acts. In
his opinion, in relation to both
acts, their provisions could be enlivened to have the transactions avoided.
Atkins concluded:
6.23 Having regard to the matters described above. 1 am of the
(1) substantial aspects of the MWC Package (including the security arrangements)
are vulnerable to challenge and are liable to be
set aside; and
(2) [The Respondent] did not address directly with client/subscribers the
possibility of a challenge to the recommended transactions;
particularly the
possibility of challenges under
section 37A
Conveyancing Act
sections 120
Bankruptcy Act
and their potential
to avoid these transactions.
6.24 I am of the view that the qualifying statements to which I have referred at
paragraphs 5,6 and 5.8 above, do not sufficiently
inform the customers of these
risks to the represented effectiveness of the asset protection plan in
preventing creditor's from obtaining
access to a person's assets
then to the circumstances necessary to the determination of the issue of whether
the Council has established that the Respondent
made a misleading and deceptive
representation about the effectiveness of the MWC Package.
was the conduct alleged against the Respondent? Here the Council contends that
it is in the assertions and claims in the two
booklets, “Your Guide to
Asset Protection” and the “Individualised Asset Protection
Plan” to the purchasers
of the MWC Package.
Respondent admitted her authorship of the “Your Guide to Asset
Protection” and while she does not admit that the other
booklet the
“Individualised Asset Protection Plan” written by her, it was
provided to Client B. Whether or not the Respondent
wrote the document or
collaborated in it, it was provided to clients who purchased the MWC Package
under her name as a solicitor
and carried with it her clear imprimatur, such as
referring to her being a practicing (sic) barrister with over 20 years legal
experience”
in answer to the hypothetical question, “why should you
listen to me”.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that the Respondent engaged in the conduct
alleged and that it was in the course of her promotion
and sale of the MWC
Package to the customers named in the complaint.
Tribunal is further satisfied that the statements contained in the booklets
overwhelmingly convey to the reader that once having
put in place the MWC
Package strategy, they would have created an impenetrable shield around their
assets preventing their creditors
from accessing them. Such is the force of
those statements that the Tribunal concludes that the two qualifying statements
had minimal impact on the purchaser given the overall impression
conveyed. In coming to that view, the Tribunal notes that those
qualifications
appear within the body of a large quantity of text all of which focussed on the
effectiveness of the plan which includes
words such as:
Once the MWC package is implemented "That's it! Once you have completed all the
steps there is nothing more to do unless you add
further property or assets to
your portfolio",
"Congratulations! You have invested your time and resources into safeguarding
your future and your assets are now fully protected.
You can now get on with
living your life and building your wealth with the peace of mind that comes with
being bullet proof."
representations that once the documents necessary to the scheme are in place,
the client’s assets are protected absolutely
are clearly misleading and
deceptive as Mr Atkins’ evidence provides and the Tribunal accepts that
the execution of the documents
in the MWC Package will not create such an armour
plate defence against the creditors of the purchasers of the MWC Package.
in the information provided to the purchasers of the MWC Package are the
frailties of the reliance on the equitable mortgage
securing a fictional debt
and caveat discussed nor, importantly, whether the Asset Protection Plan Legal
Documents when executed
could not be vulnerable to being set aside either under
Conveyancing Act
Bankruptcy Act
Tribunal thus concludes that the Council has established the first element of
Did the Respondent by her conduct and representations
encourage or advise the purchasers of the MWC Package to enter into voluntary
transactions for the purpose of delaying, hindering or defeating claims by
present or future creditors which transactions might be
void or voidable
transactions?
proof of this aspect of the Complaint, the Council relies on the evidence of Mr
Atkins who addressed the question of the effectiveness
of some of the documents
that purchasers of the MWC Package were encouraged to execute.
his report, he referred in particular to
Conveyancing Act 1919
which states:
(1) Save as provided in this section, every alienation of property, made whether
before or after the commencement of the
Conveyancing (Amendment) Act 1930
intent to defraud creditors, shall be voidable at the instance of any person
thereby prejudiced
to the operation of
Conveyancing Act
, Mr Atkins noted that while
that section does not contain a requirement that the person making the
transaction be or become insolvent
or bankrupt but noted that the alienation of
property with the relevant intention, that is to defraud creditors, could render
transaction void by reason of the provision.
term “creditors” has been defined to include both present and future
creditors and as to “intention” the
High Court in Marcolongo v Chen
[2011] HCA 3
said “defraud” in
includes hindering or
delaying creditors and at. [32] said it necessary to show an intention to hinder
delay or defeat creditors
in order to amount to an intention to
determination of the intention of the person alienating property is a finding of
fact and the Court may look at the surrounding
facts and circumstances from
which this intention can be inferred. For example whether the property was
disposed of without consideration
and when the owner is under financial pression
and a consideration of the time when the transaction took place proximate to
leading to a conclusion that the owner was under financial pressure.
Cannane v J Cannane Pty Ltd (in liq)
[1998] HCA 26
Indonesia Ltd v Grellman
[1992] FCAFC 188
(1992) 107 ALR 199)
Atkins also considered
sections 120
Bankruptcy Act 1966
which relevantly says:
120 Undervalued transactions
Transfers that are void against trustee
(1) A transfer of property by a person who later becomes a bankrupt (the
transferor) to another person (the transferee) is void against
the trustee in
the transferor's bankruptcy if:
(1) the transfer took place in the period beginning 5 years before the
commencement of the bankruptcy and ending on the date of the
bankruptcy;
(2) and the transferee gave no consideration for the transfer or gave
consideration of less value than the market value of the property.
121 Transfers to defeat creditors
Transfers that are void
(1) A transfer of property by a person who later becomes a bankrupt (the
transferor) to another person (the transferee) is void against
the trustee in
the transferor's bankruptcy if:
(a) the property would probably have become part of the transferor's estate or
would probably have been available to creditors if
the property had not been
transferred; and
(b) the transferor's main purpose in making the transfer was:
(i) to prevent the transferred property from becoming divisible among the
transferor's creditors; or
(ii) to hinder or delay the process of making property available for division
among the transferor's creditors.
Showing the transferor's main purpose in making a transfer
(2) The transferor's main purpose in making the transfer is taken to be the
purpose described in paragraph (1)(b) if it can reasonably
be inferred from all
the circumstances that, at the time of the transfer, the transferor was, or was
the provisions of
Bankruptcy Act
require bankruptcy to
occur before being enlivened, it seems to the Tribunal that if it was,
would operate in relation to a transfer of property for no consideration, as is
contemplated in the MWC Package.
, the operation of the section provides an irrebuttable presumption
the person was
insolvent or about to become insolvent. Of course, there is a temporal element
between when the transaction took place
and when the person became insolvent
leading to bankruptcy.
the determination whether a transaction is void for the purposes of the
Bankruptcy Act
requires a consideration of the facts and circumstances
surrounding the transfer.
Atkins said, and the Tribunal agrees that the effect and force of the MWC
Package documents involves and encourages purchasers
to divest themselves of
real and other property through the transfer or property, the creation of and
equitable mortgage and the
lodging of a caveat, in order to stop their creditors
or future creditors from having access to those assets. Thus the transfers
well fall within the terms of
Conveyancing Act
and/or 120 and 121 of
Bankruptcy Act
both because of the nature of the transactions and because
the very purpose of the transactions being encouraged is to defeat or
purchasers’ creditors from having access to their assets.
4.1.2 of the Conduct Rules provides that a solicitor must “be honest and
courteous in all dealings in the course of legal
5 of the Conduct Rules provides that a solicitor “must not engage in
conduct, in the course of legal practice or otherwise”
5.1.1 demonstrates that the solicitor is not a fit and proper person to practise
5.1.2 is likely to a material degree to—
(i) be prejudicial to, or diminish the public confidence in, the administration
of justice, or
(ii) bring the profession into disrepute.
the Respondent’s conduct not only acted to provide a wholly misleading
picture of the effectiveness of the proposed scheme
but also recommended a
scheme which could render the purchasers of the MWC Package vulnerable to legal
challenges because of the
ineffectiveness of or the intention behind the
executed documents.
conduct could properly be regarded and being prejudicial to diminish the
public’s confidence in the administration of justice
and to bring the
profession into disrepute.
the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that this aspect of Ground 6 is made out.
Grounds 10 and 11
grounds concern the Respondent’s failure to comply with the Uniform Law in
relation to the issuing of bills for services
to the clients of DGI Law (Ground
10) and failed to disclose the legal costs payable to the customers of MWC
(Ground 11)
the Council allege the Respondent’s conduct amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
10. Between 26 November
2017 and 21 August 2020, the Respondent engaged
in unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of s 296 of the
Law by reason of DGI Lawyers' failure to issue clients, namely each of
Client B and/or Client C and/or Client D, with a bill that
includes or is
accompanied by a written statement setting out the avenues that are open to the
client in the event of a dispute in
relation to legal costs and any applicable
time limits in respect of those avenues.
the Council asserts that the Respondent did not issue clients of DGI Lawyers a
bill of costs that complied with the provisions
of s192 of the Uniform Law.
192 of the Uniform Law says:
A law practice must ensure that a bill includes or is accompanied by a written
statement setting out—
(a) the avenues that are open to the client in the event of a dispute in
relation to legal costs; and
(b) any time limits that apply to the taking of any action referred to in
paragraph (a)
Council relies on the provisions of s35 of the Uniform Law which provides that
the principal is taken to have breached the provision
where the principal
knowingly authorised or permitted the contravening conduct or ought reasonably
have been in a position to influence
the conduct of the law practice but did not
was not disputed by the Respondent that no bill was provided to Client C, Client
D and to Client B but disputes the date on which
it was issued, namely says that
it was issued on 1 December 2017, not 30 November 2017 as the complaint asserts.
also admitted that the lawyers at DGI Lawyers were acting under her supervision
at the relevant time.
the Respondent admitted that the invoices itemise the total price paid and
payable for the MWC Package and did not distinguish
between costs paid for the
MWC Package and the legal services delivered as part of that package. She
further admitted that the invoices
do not contain any statement complying with
s192 of the Uniform Law.
the Respondent denied that she was required to comply with the requirements of
s192 and contended that the invoice for the
purchase of the MWC Package included
the provision of legal services which included the preparation and review of the
Asset Protection
Plan Legal Document. She further denied that she provided legal
services to purchasers of the MWC Package.
to whether the provision of the MWC Package included the provision of legal
services, the Council noted that in correspondence
between the
Respondent’s then solicitors and the Law Society on 15 February 2021, she
admitted that all legal work and legal
services” relation to the MWC
Package were undertaken by DGI Lawyers and the Respondent. Relying on that
concession, the Council
submitted that the words “all” legal work
and services must include the provision of the Asset Protection Plan Legal
Documents. The Council relied on a number of similar concessions made on the
Respondent’s behalf to the Law Council to the
same effect, namely that all
legal work and legal services provided under the Asset Protection Plan was done
by DGI Lawyers. The
Council further contends that based on those concessions it
was reasonable to conclude the price of the purchase of the MWC Package
the provision of legal work and services.
Tribunal finds that the conclusion is well open on the evidence, and notes that
in a letter dated 8 November 2021 from the Respondent’s
then solicitors to
the Law Society it was noted that the costs of the MWC Packages was “all
inclusive” and continued
to note that the customers were not charged for
the time spent by the Respondent or DGI Lawyers “...outside the services
in the Master Wealth Control Package.”
the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that DGI Lawyers under the supervision of
the Respondent provided legal services to purchasers
of the MWC Package which
required compliance with s192 and but did not.
Tribunal finds this Ground made out.
11. Between 26 November 2017 and 21 August 2020, the Respondent engaged in
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning
of s 296 of the Uniform
Law by reason of DGI Lawyers' failure to disclose legal costs payable by
customers of MWC, namely each of
Client B and/or Client C and/or Client D
174 of the Uniform Law requires a solicitor to provide clients with information
which discloses the basis on which legal costs
will be calculated and an
estimate of the total legal costs, except where the total legal costs do not
exceed an amount specified
in the Uniform Rules which is referred to as the
“lower threshold”, at the relevant times, that threshold was $750.
the “higher threshold” obtains, namely $3,000, an alternate
form for disclosure is available.
we have noted, the Respondent admitted providing legal services in relation to
the MWC Packages which were passed on to the purchasers
of the Package as an all
inclusive sum. However, DGI Lawyers were obliged to comply with s 174 and the
Respondent was in a position
to ensure that the law practice complied. The DGI
Lawyers did not comply and the Respondent did not compel their compliance.
Tribunal is comfortably satisfied that this Ground is made
12 contends:
12. The Respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of s 296 of the Uniform Law by reason of Grounds
10 and 11 taken
individually or collectively.
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is defined in the Uniform Law as:
S 296. For the purposes of this Law, unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of a lawyer occurring in connection with
the practice of law
that falls short of the standard of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to expect
of a reasonably competent lawyer.
298 sets out a non-exhaustive list of conduct which is capable of constituting
unsatisfactory professional conduct which includes
conduct which contravenes the
Uniform Law.
Tribunal concludes that the conduct amounts to unsatisfactory professional
Council submitted and the Tribunal finds that in respect of both Grounds 10 and
11, the Respondent contravened the Uniform Law
and, of itself demonstrates a
finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
13 contends that having regard to all of the proven grounds, the Respondent is
guilty of professional misconduct.
Tribunal agrees.
Tribunal has determined that but for the substance of Grounds 10 and 11, the
Respondent’s conduct as demonstrated in the
Grounds has, in a number of
ways amounted to such a serious departure from a reasonable standard of
competence and diligence or was
such that it would justify a finding that the
Respondent is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice.
being the case, the Tribunal may make any order it sees fit pursuant to s299 or
302(1) of the Uniform Law including recommending
that the solicitor’s name
be removed from the Roll.
is important to note that not every finding of professional misconduct will
result in a recommendation that a solicitor’s
name be removed from the
Roll of Solicitors.
is well established that the purpose of the Tribunal’s orders are not
punitive but rather as was said in
Law Society of New South Wales v
(1993) 4 LPDR 24 at [28], Sheller JA that:
The primary consideration is to protect the public by preventing a person unfit
to practice from holding himself or herself out to
the public as a legal
practitioner in whom members of the public might repose confidence. The Tribunal
must also act so as to deter
the offender in the future and any other
practitioner minded to behave in like manner”.
too as Spigelman CJ observed in
New South Wales Bar Association v
[2001] NSWCA 284
The public must have confidence in the legal profession by reason of the central
role the profession plays in the administration
of justice. Many aspects of the
administration of justice depend on the trust by the judiciary and/or the public
in the performance
of professional obligations by professional people.
Tribunal’s function has also been described as “educative” in
that it publicly marks “the seriousness
of what the instant solicitor
has done” (Mahoney JA in
Law Society of New South Wales v
[1994] NSWCA 69
considering whether the Tribunal would recommend the Respondent’s name be
removed from the Roll of Solicitors, we are mindful
that it is a serious step
and should only be taken in very serious circumstances, such as when the conduct
of the practitioner is
inconsistent with the privileges of further legal
the Tribunal must consider whether in recommending the removal of a lawyer from
the local roll, whether the unfitness to practice
law is temporary or of
indefinite duration. “That is because, in relation to deficiencies
identified as being temporary, the
public interest may be able to be protected
by lesser measures, such as a temporary suspension from
Stanoevski v The Council of the Law Society of New
South Wales
[2008] NSWCA 93
Tribunal has concluded that in this matter, no order short of a recommendation
that the Respondent’s name be removed from
the roll of solicitors is
appropriate.
coming to that conclusion, we take into account that the grounds establish
conduct which represents very serious and persistent
departures from a
reasonable standard of competence and diligence. That conduct included
incompetent legal advice, misleading the
Law Society, arranging and approving of
investigators attempting to obtain privileged information from another solicitor
by deception
and failing to appreciate and act on clear potential conflicts of
interest, amongst other things. Compounding this conduct is the
Respondent’s apparent inability to appreciate the seriousness of her
conduct which, as the Council submitted gives the Tribunal
no confidence that
she would, if she were to remain practising, not act in the same way.
with the Respondent’s failure to recognise the very serious breaches of
the Uniform Law also seem to the Tribunal
to demonstrate a lack of insight into
her conduct and its effect on her clients and the profession generally. To quote
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v Sideris
[2026] NSWCA
159 at [97]:
The Respondent’s conduct was only consistent with either the absence of
any understanding or appreciation of the rule or a
wilful defiance of it.
is obvious given that the Respondent did not appear nor were any submissions
made on her behalf, that the Tribunal does not have
any evidence which might
operate in mitigation or explanation for her conduct.
the Tribunal concludes that taking into account each of the proven grounds, the
conduct and its objective seriousness,
the Respondent is not, in our view, a fit
and proper person to continue to practise and thus recommend that her name be
removed from
60 of the NSW CAT Act provides that each party to proceedings in the Tribunal
pay their own costs. However, clause 23 to Schedule
5 of the CAT Act provides
Despite section 60 of this Act, the Tribunal must make orders requiring a
respondent lawyer whom it has found to have engaged in
unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct to pay costs (including costs of
the Commissioner, a Council and the
complainant), unless the Tribunal is
satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist.
submitted that no exceptional circumstances are present in this case and in the
Tribunal’s view entirely appropriate
that an order be made that the
Respondent pay the Council’s costs of and incidental to the
proceedings.
make the following orders:
(1) The Tribunal finds
that the Respondent is guilty of professional misconduct and unsatisfactory
professional conduct and pursuant
to s302(1)(f) of the Legal Profession Uniform
Law, the Tribunal recommends that the Respondent’s name be removed from
maintained by the Supreme Court of New South Wales pursuant to s22 of
the Legal Profession Uniform Law.
(2) Pursuant to clause 23 of Schedule 5 of the
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) the Respondent is to pay the Law Council’s costs
of the proceedings as agreed or assessed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the New South Wales Civil and Administrative
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
which deals with voluntary
alienation of property with the intent to defeat creditors being a voidable
transaction
which deals with a
transfer of property by a person who later becomes bankrupt being void if the
transfer took place in the period
5 years before the commencement of the
bankruptcy and where no consideration or consideration less than the market
value of the property
which renders void a transfer of property by a person who later becomes bankrupt
if the property would probably have become part
of the transferor’s estate
or would probably have been available to creditors and the main purpose in
making the transfer was
to prevent the property becoming available to
creditors.)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (623 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter