URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2015/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v Obusan [2015] NSWNMPSC 4 (22 October 2015)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 171
RONNIE OBUSAN
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NMW0001282880
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
HCCC v Ronnie Obusan
[2015] NSWNMPSC 4
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant) represented
by Mr Patrick Griffin SC, instructed by Ms Jaimee Dinihan, solicitor, of Health
Care Complaints Commission
Ronnie Obusan
– represented by Ms Linda Alexander, NSW Nurses and
Midwives’ Association
FILE NUMBER:
Ms Belinda Baker (Chairperson)
Ms Anita Bizzotto (Nurse Member) Ms Valerie Gibson (Nurse Member) Mr David Bell
(Lay Member)
DATE OF HEARING:
12 – 14 October 2015
DATE OF DECISION:
22 October 2015
DATE OF ORDERS:
22 October 2015
A suffers from Borderline Personality Disorder and Complex Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder. She has attempted suicide on a
number of occasions. Following one such
suicide attempt, she was hospitalised in the Pialla Unit of the Nepean Hospital
for a period
of some 9 months from 2012 until early 2013. The events related
with these proceedings are said to have occurred during Patient A’s
admission at the Pialla Unit.
Respondent was a psychiatric nurse employed in the Pialla Unit from 2009 to
December 2012. In summary, it is alleged that the
Respondent engaged in
inappropriate behaviour towards Patient A, including that he danced with Patient
A and that he called her “
[Patient A]”,
[Patient A]” and “
A]”. It is further alleged that on either 27 or 28 October 2012, the
Respondent touched Patient A’s bare stomach,
kissed her and made
inappropriate statements to her, including that he would miss her when he went
on holidays. The Respondent denied
all of the allegations.
the reasons outlined below, the Committee was comfortably satisfied that the
complaint was established and that the Respondent
is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. Consequential orders were made.
complaint alleges that the Respondent, being a registered nurse under the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
”), is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of s.139B of the
National Law
, in that he engaged in conduct that
demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed or care exercised,
by him in the
practice of nursing is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training
experience.
particulars of the complaint are that:
“1. Between 21 April 2012 and 28 October 2012 on more than one
occasion, the practitioner failed to observe appropriate professional
in that he asked patient A to dance.
one occasion between approximately 21 April 2012 and 28 October 2012 in the
courtyard of the Pialla Unit, the practitioner failed
to observe appropriate
professional boundaries in that he:
(a) Asked Patient A to dance;
(b) Danced with Patient A in the presence of other patients.
approximately 21 April 2012 and 28 October 2012, on more than one occasion, the
practitioner failed to observe appropriate
professional boundaries in that he
said in the presence of Patient A words to the effect:
(a) There’s lovely
[Patient A]
(b) There’s beautiful
[Patient A]
(c) There’s sexy
[Patient A]
27 October 2012, the practitioner failed to observe appropriate boundaries in
(a) He rubbed Patient A’s bare stomach around her naval ring;
(b) He kissed Patient A;
(c) When Patient A said to the practitioner ‘Ronnie you can’t do
this’, he said to Patient A words to the effect:
(i) “I’ll be going on holidays for two weeks and you might not be
here when I get back”;
(ii) “Please
please, I’m going on holidays”;
(iii) “Don’t
say anything about this... I’m married”;
would miss her when he was on holidays.
SUPPRESSION ORDERS
Chairperson of the Committee made Suppression Orders in relation to the name of
Patient A, and two further Patients (Patient B
and Patient C) in accordance with
provisions of Clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the
National Law
. Only patients
A and B are referred to in these reasons. Their names are indicated in the
schedule annexed hereto and marked “A”
and any information that may
identify either of them is not to be published. Annexure A will only be attached
to the original Reasons
for Decision held by the Registry and must not be
reproduced.
APPLICABLE LAW
139B of the
National Law
provides as follows:
“139B Meaning of “unsatisfactory professional
conduct” of registered health practitioner generally [NSW]
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
of a registered health practitioner includes each of the
(a) Conduct significantly below reasonable standard
Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of
practitioner’s profession is significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or
experience.
(l) Other improper or unethical conduct
Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to
the practice or purported practice of the practitioner’s
profession.
phrase “significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience”
is not defined in the
National Law
. However, in
Re A Medical Practitioner and the Medical
Practice Act
(unreported, NSWMT, 3 September 2007), Deputy Chairperson Judge
Freeman stated (in relation to legislation in the same terms as s.139B
National Law
As a general principle, the use of the term ‘significant’
may in law be taken to mean not trivial, of importance, or
substantial
Standard of Proof Required
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
the civil standard, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Committee must be “
comfortably
” that the particulars of the Complaint have been
established:
Bannister v Walton
these matters, the HCCC bears the onus of proof.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
, Dixon J said at 362– 363:
“The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of
the consequences flowing
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue
has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not
produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences ...
This does not mean that some standard of persuasion
is fixed intermediate
between the satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt required upon a criminal
inquest and the reasonable satisfaction
which in a civil issue may, not must, be
based on a preponderance of probability. It means that the nature of the issue
necessarily
affects the process by which reasonable satisfaction is
principle applies to the quality or sufficiency of the
evidence available, as Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane and Gaudron JJ held in
Holdings Pty v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
(1992) 110 ALR
the strength of the evidence necessary to establish a fact or facts
on the balance of probabilities may vary according to the nature
of what it is
sought to prove. Thus, authoritative statements have often been made to the
effect that clear or cogent or strict proof
is necessary ‘where so serious
a matter as fraud is to be found.’ Statements to that effect should not,
however, be understood
as directed to the standard of proof
EVIDENCE AND SUBMISSIONS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
folders of documents were tendered by the HCCC, which included the complaint,
witness statements, clinical notes, together with
statements of a peer reviewer,
RN Warren Shaw
which commented on the appropriateness of the
Respondent’s alleged actions. The HCCC also tendered a plan of the Pialla
folder of documents was tendered on behalf of the Respondent. In that folder,
the Committee received a statement of the Respondent,
dated 10 September 2015,
the Respondent’s curriculum vitae, a character reference from Ms Sylvia
Ridge, Registered Nurse, dated
3 September 2015, and two documents relating to a
performance review dated 29 February 2012.
addition to the documentary evidence, the Committee heard oral evidence from RN
Julie Lang, RN Jillian Sherwood, RN Darryn Egan
(the NUM), RN Warren Shaw (the
peer reviewer)
Patient A and the Respondent. At the Committee’s
request, the HCCC also called Dr Brakoulias (Patient A’s treating
psychiatrist).
the hearing, the HCCC was represented by Mr Patrick Griffin SC, instructed by Ms
Jaimee Dinihan, solicitor of the HCCC. The Respondent
was represented by Ms
Linda Alexander, solicitor, of the Nurses and Midwives’ Association. The
Committee is very grateful to
both representatives for their assistance in this
difficult matter.
THE EVIDENCE
Patient A’s background
A has a very troubled background. She was sexually and physically abused when
she was very young. Both of her parents were
alcoholics. She married at 21 years
of age, and was subjected to sexual, emotional and psychological abuse from her
husband for many
years prior to their separation in 2009.
her difficult childhood and youth, Patient A worked hard, studied nursing at
university and was registered as a nurse in 1995.
From 2004 to 2011, Patient A
worked as a lecturer in a Bachelor of Nursing degree in a university in
Patient A was subjected to further violence in 2011. On the evening of 16
December 2011, she was walking through the university
grounds when she was
sexually assaulted by unknown males at knifepoint. She did not report the
assault to police, but confided the
assault to her academic advisor, who set up
a meeting with the head of campus security. The head of campus security reported
matter to police, but Patient A declined to make a formal police
A’s mental health significantly deteriorated in the months following this
assault. On 19 April 2012, Patient A saw her
General Practitioner. Patient A
told her general practitioner about the sexual assault in 2011. Patient
A’s general practitioner
prescribed her with an
antidepressant.
20 April 2012, Patient A’s doctor prescribed her with another
antidepressant and Xanax. That night, after Patient A’s
son had left for
the evening, Patient A consumed Vodka, Xanax and antidepressants in an attempt
to overdose. When Patient A’s
son returned home, he found Patient A blue
and not breathing. Patient A was then taken to Nepean Hospital and was
subsequently admitted
to the Pialla Unit.
A was in hospital from 20 April 2012 and was discharged on 22 February 2013.
During this time, she was discharged on at least
one occasion, but as she
attempted to take her own life again, she was quickly returned to the Pialla
Unit. She remained at the Nepean
Hospital until her discharge in February 2013.
Patient A informed the Committee that this was the longest period of time that
has been hospitalised.
The Respondent
Respondent was first registered as a nurse in 2008 after completing a Bachelor
of Nursing at the Australian Catholic University.
After completing his studies,
he commenced work in the graduate program at Nepean Hospital. As a part of this
Program, he worked
in the Pialla Unit from November 2009.
the end of the graduate program, the Respondent obtained full time employment in
the Pialla Unit. He has no formal training in
mental health. At all relevant
times, the Pialla Unit was divided into a subacute (or open) ward, and an acute
(or closed) ward.
The Respondent was at times rostered in either
Respondent was universally well regarded among the staff at the Pialla Unit. RN
Egan (the NUM) described the Respondent as “
staff members
”. The other registered nurses who gave evidence before
this Committee similarly described the Respondent as friendly, hardworking,
professional and enthusiastic.
The Allegations
A first reported the alleged conduct by the Respondent to her treating
psychiatrist (Dr Brakoulias), her case manager and
the psychiatric registered
medical officer on 30 October 2012.
29 October 2012, Patient A was observed to have slurred speech and disorganised
thoughts. She was then transferred to the closed
ward. Following this transfer,
Patient A was then reviewed by Dr Brakoulias, her case manager and the
psychiatric registered medical
officer on 30 October 2012. Discussions were had
of this discussion that Patient A made the disclosure. Patient A’s
clinical notes record the disclosure in the following
Reports she was behaved inappropriately
by one of the
male nursing staff two nights before yesterday. Reports about one incident she
has got witness. Says this is one of
the contributing factors for the
entry in the clinical notes, which was written by Dr Brakoulias, went on to
state that Patient A had no active suicidal, self
harm or suicidal thoughts. The
patient who had been said to have witnessed the incident (Patient B) was named
in the notes by her
patient number. The notes record that Patient A was
very reluctant to report the incident
”. It is stated that
Patient A was informed that it was the treating team’s duty to report the
incident to the NUM. The
notes state that Patient A also disclosed that she had
happy for this
”), but the treating team stated that this
also would be discussed with the NUM.
Brakoulias could not remember any further aspects of Patient A’s
disclosure. It is not clear whether Patient A provided any
further particulars
to the treating team, or, indeed, whether Patient A was asked to give any
further particulars of the inappropriate
conduct at this
A’s disclosure was immediately reported to the NUM, RN Egan, by Dr
Brakoulias. RN Egan asked RN Sherwood, who had a
” with Patient A, to speak to Patient A about the
allegations.
appears that RN Sherwood did not speak to Patient A until the following day (31
October 2012). By that time, Patient A had spoken
to another registered nurse,
RN Lang, about the incident. RN Lang first spoke to Patient A about the incident
during the evening
shift on 30 October 2012.
a statement dated 28 November 2012, RN Lang reported that Patient A had informed
her of the following matters:
(a) That on 27 October 2012, the Respondent had rubbed the back of Patient
A’s hand in a suggestive manner on finding out that
Patient A had self
harmed by making superficial scratches to her arms;
(b) Patient A had stated that the Respondent asked her if she wanted a dressing
applied, which she declined;
(c) The Respondent asked Patient A to lift her pyjamas up and then proceeded to
rub his fingers around Patient A’s abdominal
(d) On 28 October 2012, the Respondent again asked Patient A for her contact
number as he wanted help with his university studies.
Patient A gave the
Respondent her mobile number;
(e) Later in the evening, the Respondent returned to Patient A’s room and
requested a hug as he was going on 4 weeks’
leave. The Respondent then
asked Patient A to kiss him on the cheek, which she eventually did. After this,
Patient A stated that
the Respondent continued to ask her to kiss him on the
lips which she refused. He then left the room; and
(f) At approximately 2145, Patient A was lying on her bed when the Respondent
came into the room, stating that he was doing the level
3 observation checks.
The Respondent leaned over Patient A and started to attempt to kiss her on the
mouth. Patient A said “
you cannot do this
”. The Respondent
persisted several times, and started kissing her down her neck, constantly
”. After a short time he stopped and left the
A told RN Lang that the Respondent did not sexually assault her, and that she
did not wish to report it as she had “
had worse things happen to
A was interviewed by RN Sherwood and RN Egan on 31 October 2015. A statement of
RN Lehmann (who was present when RN Egan interviewed
Patient A) dated 29
November 2012 records that Patient A gave an account of relevantly identical
conduct to that which is set out
in the statement of RN
a statement dated 5 December 2012, RN Sherwood stated that she spoke to Patient
A on 31 August 2012. RN Sherwood stated that Patient
A disclosed that the
Respondent had been “
acting possessively towards her for a few weeks.
He didn’t want a male patient hugging her and told her to go and have a
now after a male patient hugged her. He was making comments about her
bellybutton ring like he wanted no-one to see it but him
.” Patient A
further stated that “
one night Ronnie
[the Respondent]
to lift up her shirt so that he could see her belly ring and made a comment
then proceeded to touch her
A further told RN Sherwood that “
Later in the night, Ronnie
Respondent]
had gone to her room and said that he was going to be away for
four weeks and asked if she would miss him. He kept on begging her
to kiss him
when she said no
.” Patient A told RN Sherwood that she felt guilty
Patient A’s evidence
a statement dated 23 July 2013, and in her evidence before the Committee,
Patient A gave evidence that:
(a) One night prior to 27 October 2012, she was in the courtyard of the Pialla
Unit. The Respondent and a number of patients were
present. Patient A said that
the Respondent asked Patient A to dance. Patient A said that she could not do
ballroom dancing (as requested
by the Respondent) but that she could do the Cha
Cha. She said that she then began dancing the Cha Cha with the Respondent and
other patients. In evidence, Patient A clarified that the Respondent was
dancing as a part of the group. The dancing did not involve
touching between her
and the Respondent;
(b) Patient A had on one occasion cut her brachial artery with a razor blade.
Patient A said that after that occasion, the Respondent
told her that he had
saved her life. Patient A said that she did not recall the Respondent being
there, but did recall being surrounded
by the treating team. Patient A said that
from that time onwards, the Respondent “
began acting more
”. He would say “
there’s lovely
there’s beautiful
[Patient A]; and
there’s sexy
[Patient A].”
(c) In her statement, Patient A said that the Respondent would also act
possessively
” towards her. She gave as an example a male
patient who had schizophrenia. She said that when the Respondent saw Patient A
speaking to the male patient, the Respondent would ask her to go and have a
shower. She said that there were also occasions where
the Respondent physically
stood between her and that male patient. In her evidence, Patient A clarified
” was not the correct word to describe the
Respondent’s actions;
(d) Patient A said that on one occasion as she was getting ready for bed, at
around 7:30pm, she was wearing a pyjama top that was
shaped like a vest which
exposed her belly ring. She said that the Respondent saw her at the door, saw
her belly ring and asked what
it was. Patient A said that the Respondent rubbed
the back of his hand on her stomach around her naval, and said, “
don’t want people to see that
.” Patient A said that the
Respondent then said that he would be down to check on her later;
(e) Patient A said that Patient B was on her bed at this time, and that when
this occurred, she turned around and asked if Patient
B had seen what had
happened. Patient A said that she got the “
impression that Patient B
did not want to have anything to do with what occurred
(f) Patient A said that the Respondent returned about half an hour later.
Patient A had not changed her pyjamas. The Respondent had
a clipboard containing
the patient check list. She said that the Respondent leaned over and said
the reason that I am back here is to check you off on this
(g) Patient A said that the Respondent had the clipboard in his hands. He
attempted to kiss her. She said that he touched his lips
on her lips, a
very soft peck
”. She said that she turned away and said that
could not do this
.” She said that he did not hurt her.
Patient A said that the Respondent then stated that he would be going away on
for two weeks and that she might not be here when she returned. The
Respondent said “
please, please, I’m going on
Don’t say anything about this...
I’m married
.” He also said that he would miss her because he was
going on holidays; and
(h) Patient A said that she had a vague recollection of the Respondent asking
her to assist him with his studies, but she could not
recall when that occurred,
and that she had a vague recollection of him asking for her phone number, but
that she could not recall
giving it to him.
A acknowledged in her evidence that her memory may have been mistaken as to
whether the incidents occurred over one night
or two; and as to whether the
Respondent kissed her once or more than once. She also said that she attempted
self harm so frequently
that she could not recall whether an attempt at self
harm had occurred at the time of any of the events during 27/ 28 October
30 October 2012, together with RN Sherwood, RN Egan spoke to Patient B, whom
Patient A had identified as having witnessed an incident.
In this conversation,
Patient B stated that she had not witnessed any incident in which a male staff
member had behaved inappropriately
with Patient A, nor had she witnessed a male
nurse being alone with Patient A.
in a statement dated 30 July 2013, Patient B provided an account which broadly
corroborated the surrounding circumstances
of one of Patient A’s
allegations. In that statement, Patient B stated that on one night, Patient A
had on satin pyjamas that
revealed her naval. Sometime between 6:30pm and
8:30pm, Patient B was lying on her bed in her corner of the room. Patient
bed curtains were drawn, but she said that she could see from the
light above the curtain that the door was open.
B stated that she could hear Patient A having a conversation with a male nurse.
Patient B did not know the male nurse’s
name, but described him as being
Asian in appearance, of slight build and quite short. She said that he had a
very recognisable voice.
Patient B stated that she wasn’t really listening
to the conversation, but that she did remember hearing the nurse say something
that at this time, she was preparing to leave the
room, and Patient A turned to
her and said “
Did you see what he just did?
” Patient B said
[Patient A]
I was just lying here with the curtain
.” Patient A said “
Are you sure you didn’t see
what he did? He put his hands on my belly button
”. Patient B said
No I didn’t see anything
B suffers from Bipolar Disorder. Patient B said that at the time that this
occurred, she was medicated but was feeling very
alert. Patient B recalled a
gentleman later coming to speak to her about the male nurse. Patient B said that
she told the gentleman
that she did not see anything. She said that this was
essentially true as
didn’t actually see the nurse
[Patient A].” Patient B said that she did not elaborate on
anything else to the gentleman because she was frightened and did
not want to
involve herself.
B also described the Respondent as a friendly nurse. She said that he was a
short bubbly man who always seemed positive and optimistic.
Patient B said that he never made her feel uncomfortable, but that she
deliberately kept her distance from the male staff
as she felt vulnerable during
her admission.
B was not called to give evidence before this Committee.
The Respondent’s evidence
Respondent has at all times denied the allegations made against him. He has at
all times maintained that:
(i) He has never danced with Patient A or asked her to dance;
(ii) He has never referred to Patient A as the “
[Patient A]” or “
[Patient A]”;
(iii) He has never rubbed Patient A’s stomach around her naval;
(iv) He has never kissed Patient A;
(v) Patient A has never said to him that he
(vi) He has
never said to Patient A that he’ll be going on holidays and that she might
not be there when he returned; he has
never said “
please please,
I’m going on holidays
”; that he has never said
Don’t say anything about this I’m married
he has never said that he would miss Patient A when on holidays.
Respondent gave evidence that when he had first started working in the Pialla
Unit, he was told by RN Lahner (who was the NUM
at the time) that he should not
nurse or interact with a patient of the opposite sex alone. He was told that
this was to prevent
staff members from being the subject of a false allegation.
The Respondent explained in evidence that he now understands that this
was not a written policy, but said that it was the practice in the Pialla Unit
at the time that he was there. RN Egan (the
NUM) confirmed in evidence that this
was the practice at the Pialla Unit, but RN Egan said that the practice could
not always be
maintained, in view of staffing levels.
Respondent also said that in 2011, he had been the subject of a false complaint
by a patient. He had no recollection of the particulars
of this complaint, but
said that he was suspended from work in connection with it. The Respondent said
that when he returned to work
after the complaint was withdrawn, he was told by
RN Egan that he should avoid being alone with female patients. RN Egan confirmed
this. The Respondent said that because of these instructions, he did not
interact with female patients without another staff member
to the allegation that he had danced with Patient A on an unspecified date prior
to October 2012 (Particular 2), the Respondent
said that he did remember an
occasion when he went to the courtyard of the subacute area to do a check of the
patients. He said that
there were a number of patients dancing to music (or
moving to music). He said that Patient A was one of the patients who was
He said that as part of the checking process, he would have noted
against each patient’s name what they were doing at this
Respondent gave evidence that whilst he was performing this check, he was in the
doorway of the recreation room, from where he
could see the patients. The
Respondent was adamant that he was not in the courtyard. The Respondent said
that while he was checking
the names of the list, he may have moved his body
with the music. The Respondent said that the entire check would have only taken
a minute, or less than a minute. The Respondent said that this occurred during a
daytime shift.
Respondent said that on 27 October 2012, he worked an evening shift as the team
leader. Although he was not rostered as the team
leader, he said that he had
been asked to perform the role of team leader by RN Sherwood. (In her oral
evidence, RN Sherwood did
not recall whether this had occurred, but accepted
that it may have occurred.)
Respondent said that as team leader, he was responsible for allocating the
duties of other team members, that he was responsible
for medications, answering
the telephone, speaking with relatives and signing patients in and out for
leave. In evidence, the Respondent
said that he did not leave the nursing
station for the entire shift. The Respondent also stated that he worked with at
other registered or enrolled nurse in the nurses’ station, and
that those nurses also did not leave the nurses’ station
progress notes for Patient A on 27 October 2012 record that shortly before
8:40pm that evening, Patient A opened a wound. She
was attended by an enrolled
nurse who provided appropriate clinical care. The Respondent said that, as team
leader, he should have
been told about this, but that he did not recall being
told about Patient A’s injuries. He denied attending on Patient A in
respect of her injuries on 27 October 2012.
Respondent said that he worked another evening shift on 28 October 2012. The
Respondent said after handover at the beginning of
this shift, he noticed that
Patient A was looking unwell and teary. He said that Patient A’s eyes were
red. In his evidence
before the Committee, the Respondent said that he noticed
this as he was passing Patient A in the corridor. He said that he did not
to Patient A at this time. The Respondent said that he asked RN Sherwood (a
female nurse) to look after Patient A because she
” with Patient A. He said that he had no further contact with
Patient A during that shift.
28 October 2012, the Respondent was assigned to the open ward, together with two
other nurses – RN Piyush Patel and RN Sherwood.
He accepted that his
responsibilities on 28 October 2012 included taking observations of the
patients. On 28 October 2012, Patient
A was required to be sighted every 20
minutes. The Respondent said that all three nurses shared the responsibility for
making checks
of the patients, including Patient
Respondent said at around 7:30pm, RN Sherwood went to the main Hospital to
replace a nurse (RN Moreblessing) who had been supervising
a patient in the ICU.
The Respondent said that RN Sherwood did not return to the Pialla Unit, but that
RN Sherwood was replaced for
the remainder of the shift by RN Moreblessing. He
said that he assumed that RN Sherwood would have handed Patient A’s care
to RN Moreblessing, but that he had no knowledge as to whether this had
Respondent’s signature appears on the check sheet for Patient A at 8:40pm
and 9pm. The Respondent denied having sighted
Patient A at the time that he
signed those observations. He said that after supper (which ended at around
8:30pm), he took the supper
trolley from the recreation room to the kitchen. He
also went to collect the supper trolley from the closed ward. He then washed
the dishes. During this time, the Respondent said that he also went to the
toilet. He said that he had left RN Patel in the recreation
room. He thought
that RN Patel was playing table tennis with the patients.
Respondent said that he saw RN Patel when he returned to the nurses’
station shortly before 9pm. The Respondent said that
he noticed that the last
checks had not been done for the patients. The Respondent said that he asked RN
Patel whether the observations
had been done. He said that RN Patel
”. The Respondent then ticked off the list for the
patients, including Patient A. The Respondent acknowledged that it was
poor practice
” to tick off the patients when he had not
physically sighted them.
Respondent said that he then briefly left the nurses’ station to move his
car (he explained that his car was in an unsafe
location, and that he wanted to
move it for his wife, who was also employed as a registered nurse at Nepean
Hospital). However, before
he had walked very far, he remembered that his wife
was not working that evening. The Respondent then returned to the nurses’
station, and ticked off the patient checklist for 9pm. He acknowledged that this
poor practice
”, as he had not physically sighted the
patients at that time.
Respondent said that the next shift commenced work at 9:30pm, but that the
nursing staff members from the following shift typically
arrived at around
twenty-eighth of October 2012 was the Respondent’s last shift in the
Pialla Unit. After that shift, the Respondent went
on holiday for 5 weeks. When
he returned, he was informed that he had been suspended. He did not return to
the Pialla Unit. The Respondent
has since obtained employment as a registered
nurse outside of the mental health environment.
The evidence of Dr Brakoulias
Brakoulias gave evidence at short notice pursuant to a Summons issued by the
Committee. The Committee is grateful for the assistance
Brakoulias did not recall the content of the disclosure that Patient A made to
him on 30 October 2012. However, he stated that
he did remember that Patient A
was lucid at the time that she made the disclosure, and that he had not had any
reason to doubt the
truth of Patient A’s account.
Brakoulias gave evidence that Patient A has a diagnosis of Borderline
Personality Disorder combined with a history of associated
alcohol abuse. He
said that Patient A also suffered from complex Post Traumatic Stress Disorder,
but that this was not a formal DSM
diagnosis. Dr Brakoulias explained that
Patient A satisfied the diagnostic criteria for Borderline Personality Disorder
her frequent attempts to self harm; impulsivity; mood instability and
her unstable sense of self.
Brakoulias outlined the medications that Patient A had been prescribed as at
October 2012. He said that she was prescribed Venlafaxine,
Olanzapine,
Dicloefenac; Glucosamine; Diazepam and Paracetamol. He stated that those
medications would not have affected Patient
A’s ability to recall the
events in question.
Brakoulias was asked whether anything happened on 30 October 2012 that would
have impacted on Patient A’s recollection of
events of 27/ 28 October
2012. He said that there was nothing. Dr Brakoulias also said that Patient A was
not under the influence
of any drugs or alcohol on 30 October 2012 (he said that
if Patient A had been under the influence of such drugs or alcohol, he would
have reported it). Dr Brakoulias observed that the clinical notes indicated that
Patient A may have consumed alcohol or another drug
such as Phenergan on 29
October 2012. He said that if this had occurred, it would not have affected
Patient A’s account as
given to him on 30 October 2012. Dr Brakoulias was
asked about “
false memories
”. Whilst Dr Brakoulias said that
he was not an expert in this area, he said that he did not consider that this
description
applied in this context.
Brakoulias said that, in his view, a patient with Borderline Personality
Disorder was no more likely to lie than any other member
of the community.
However, he acknowledged that a patient with Borderline Personality Disorder may
have particular needs for approval
and affirmation, and that a patient with
Borderline Personality disorder may make an unfounded allegation as a cry for
In short, whilst a patient with Borderline Personality Disorder is no
more likely to tell an untruth than any other member of the
community, such a
patient may have an additional motive to lie when compared with other members of
the community.
Brakoulias conceded that it was “
” that Patient A had
lied in the allegations that she made on 30 October 2012. Dr Brakoulias
acknowledged that Patient A had
lied on many occasions in the past. However, he
stated that those lies concerned Patient A herself – such as whether she
medication or implements to harm herself in her possession. He said that, to
his knowledge, Patient A had never lied about other
Brakoulias was also asked about Patient B. He said that he did not recall
Patient B, and was not sure whether he was her treating
psychiatrist. Dr
Brakoulias said that, in his view, patients with Bipolar Disorder were no more
likely to lie than other members
of the community. As he did not recall Patient
B, Dr Brakoulias was unable to comment further on her
Peer Reviewer
Shaw (the Peer Reviewer) provided a report and evidence that if the allegations
made by Patient A were correct, they amounted to
a significant falling short of
the standard reasonably expected of a registered nurse of the Respondent’s
experience.
Shaw’s evidence in this respect was uncontentious. It was accepted by both
parties that if Patient A’s allegations
were accepted, it followed that
the Respondent
was guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct; whereas if the
Respondent’s account was accepted, it would follow that the
Respondent was
not guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Other incidents
both the oral and documentary evidence before the Committee, reference was made
to previous complaints made against the Respondent
of a sexual nature, one by a
former patient and one by another nursing staff member of the Pialla Unit. Both
allegations were withdrawn
by the complainants in question. The Committee was
informed that the former patient was known to police to make false allegations.
The other nursing staff member subsequently withdrew her complaint, and admitted
that it was false. Mr Griffin advised the Committee
that the HCCC did not seek
to place any weight on either incident in the determination of the present
Mr Griffin frankly acknowledged in his oral submissions on behalf of the HCCC,
the present matter is a very difficult case. The
allegations made by Patient A
are denied in full by the Respondent. There are no eyewitnesses to the events in
as Mr Griffin pointed out, there is some corroboration of the circumstances
surrounding some of Patient A’s account.
Most importantly, there is the
statement of Patient B. Although Patient B did not directly name the Respondent
male nurse who she
heard speaking to Patient A, Patient B gave a description of
a man who met the Respondent’s description. Moreover, the account
Patient B broadly corroborates Patient A’s account in that she (i)
confirmed that a male nurse was speaking to Patient
A near the doorway; (ii)
confirmed that Patient A was wearing pyjamas that exposed her naval; (iii)
confirmed that Patient A and
the male nurse were speaking about Patient
A’s pyjamas; and (iv) confirmed that after this interaction, Patient A
immediately
reported to Patient B that the male nurse had touched her naval, and
that Patient A had asked Patient B whether she had seen
is also apparent from the evidence that the Respondent had the opportunity to
engage in the acts alleged by Patient A. On 27 October
2012, the Respondent was
the team leader. In this capacity, he was not paired with another nursing staff
member. The Respondent gave
evidence that he was in the nurses’ station,
accompanied by two other RNs for the entire evening shift. The Committee
that it is very unlikely that the Respondent and two RNs would have
remained within the nurses’ station for the whole of the
evening shift.
The Committee also observes that the clinical notes describe Patient A as having
opened a wound
” at some time before 8:40pm on 27 October
2012. The nurse who attended Patient A in respect of this wound was an enrolled
As the Respondent accepted, the enrolled nurse should have notified the
Respondent of Patient A’s wound. The Respondent would
have had an
opportunity to attend upon Patient A alone in response to that
notification.
his statement, the Respondent maintained that he worked closely with RN Patel
for the whole of the evening shift on 28 October
2012. This assertion was
supported by a statement of RN Patel dated 11 November 2012, in which RN Patel
stated that:
As per my knowledge I was with Ronnie all the time excepts
on my dinner
break and toileting times
that day we were checking patients together all the time
seen any inappropriate behaviours from Ronnie towards any other
.” (emphasis in original)
as outlined above, on 28 October 2012, the Respondent was alone for various
periods, particularly during the period from
8:30pm until 9pm. From 8:30pm, the
Respondent acknowledged that he had left RN Patel in the recreation room, that
he had attended
to washing up in the kitchen, that he collected a supper trolley
from the Closed Observation Ward, and that he went to the
Significantly,
the Respondent is marked as having signed the patient checklist for Patient A
for both the 8:40pm and 9pm checks. As
outlined above, the Respondent denied
having seen Patient A at the time that he made those observations. He said that
he ticked the
observation sheet on the basis that RN Patel had
” when he asked if the checks had been done. The
Respondent acknowledged that this was “
plan of the Pialla Unit was tendered in evidence before the Committee. Patient
A’s room was at the far end of the corridor.
As the door nearest to
Patient A’s room was a locked door, there was little
” traffic in the area. Whilst there was a risk of
being seen by other patients whose beds were in this area, there was no need
patients or other staff to travel through this area to attend the nurses’
station, dining room, recreation room or the
the other hand, as Ms Alexander pointed out on behalf of the Respondent, there
are inconsistencies in Patient A’s account.
In particular, the account
reported by Patient A to some of the nursing staff on 30 and 31 October 2012
differs in not insignificant
respects to Patient A’s statement and
evidence before this Committee. In particular:
(a) Patient A told RN Lang and RN Egan that the Respondent had attended on her
three times over the course of two nights; whereas
in her statement and initial
evidence before this Committee, Patient A described the events in question as
occurring during the one
(b) Patient A told RN Lang and RN Egan that the sequence of events on 27/28
October 2012 commenced shortly after she had attempted
to self harm on 27
October. Patient A said that after this attempt, the Respondent attended on her,
and that this was when the Respondent
touched her naval. No mention was made of
this event occurring after an attempt at self harm in her statement or evidence
this Committee; and
(c) Patient A told RN Lang and RN Egan that the Respondent had kissed her down
her neck, whereas in her statement and initial evidence
before this Committee,
Patient A described a short kiss on the lips.
to this matter is the creditability of each of the Respondent and Patient A. In
many respects, the Respondent’s evidence
was less than satisfactory. The
Committee acknowledges that English is not the Respondent’s first
language, and that, on many
occasions, the Respondent’s failure to
properly answer simply reflected his failure to understand the question that was
asked. The Committee also considered that on other occasions, the
Respondent appeared to be attempting to guess at what he would
have done (rather
than giving evidence as to what he had done), and that again, the
Respondent’s failure in this respect may
reflect language
difficulties.
on other occasions, the Respondent presented as attempting to mask his actions
on the day. For example, the Committee does
not consider that the
Respondent’s insistence that he was accompanied at all times by at least
one other registered nurse in
the nurses’ station on 27 October 2012 to be
credible. Similarly, the Respondent was adamant that RN Patel was with him at
” (even going so far as to say that he recalled RN
Patel being with him on the unspecified date when the Respondent saw Patient
dancing in the courtyard), yet in cross- examination, it became evident there
were significant periods of time on 28 October 2012
when RN Patel was not with
Respondent was also adamant that he had had “
no interaction
with Patient A at all during her admission, although he later stated that he had
performed a critical role in saving Patient
A’s life when she cut her
brachial artery. Even putting the incident concerning the brachial artery aside,
the Committee considers
that it is unlikely that the Respondent would have had
no interaction
” with one of the patients who had been under
his care for a period of some seven months.
the other hand, Patient A presented as an intelligent witness who was doing her
best to provide a truthful account of what had
occurred. In her evidence before
the Committee, she did not embellish her account of what happened (indeed, her
account was in many
respects more conservative than the account that she gave at
the time). Patient A did not present as a person who was motivated by
ulterior gain. She described the Respondent as a “
nurse. She explained that the Respondent had “
done the wrong
” and that was why she considered it her duty to report his
as outlined above, there were some inconsistencies in Patient A’s account
at the time when compared to her evidence
before the Committee, the Committee
considers that those differences can be explained by the effluxion of time. The
Committee also
observes that the statements of RN Lang, RN Egan and RN Sherwood
containing an account of Patient A’s contemporaneous disclosures
themselves made over a month after the conversations in question. In their
evidence before this Committee, neither RN Lang,
RN Sherwood nor RN Egan had any
recollection of exactly what Patient A had told them over 30 – 31 October
Committee bears firmly in mind the nature of these allegations. Whilst at the
lower end of objective seriousness (as reflected
in the commencement of these
proceedings in a PSC rather than a Tribunal), they are allegations of a most
serious nature, which,
if substantiated, will have substantial effects on the
Respondent’s practise and reputation. However, having taken into account
all the evidence and relevant factors, the Committee makes the following
conclusions:
(a) That Patient A presented as a very credible witness who had no reason that
the Committee could ascertain, to fabricate the allegations
levelled against the
Respondent. While Patient A had lied in the past about matters relating to her
own medical circumstances, the
Committee could find no evidence that she did so
(b) In comparison, the Respondent presented as an evasive witness who was
attempting to mask his actions on the dates in question,
and the extent of his
interactions with Patient A. In arriving at this conclusion the Committee took
account of the Respondent’s
lack of English language skills;
(c) Patient A's account was corroborated, in part, by Patient B. Particularly
noteworthy to the Committee in accepting this evidence
was: (1) the accuracy of
the description of the Respondent by Patient B; (2) the description of the
conversations described by Patient
B align with the conversations as recounted
by Patient A; and
(3) the lack of any motivation by Patient B to make false accusations about the
Respondent;
(d) On 27/28 October 2012, the Respondent had the opportunity to be alone with
Patient A; and
(e) Patient A's treating psychiatrist, Dr Brakoulias, presented information
Committee that she had no
particular propensity to lie about the Respondent.
view of the above, the Committee is comfortably satisfied that the evidence of
Patient A’s account was truthful, and that
the Respondent’s account
is not to be accepted.
Committee acknowledges that of the complaints, there is only corroboration for
the surrounding circumstances of particular 4(a).
However, for the reasons
outlined above, the Committee is comfortably satisfied that the evidence of
Patient A was truthful and that
the Respondent’s account should not be
accepted. Accordingly, the Committee is comfortably satisfied that each of the
alleged by Patient A occurred, and the Committee finds each of the
particulars of the complaint proven.
outlined above, it was accepted on behalf of the Respondent that if the
complaint was proved, it followed that the Respondent was
unsatisfactory professional conduct. The Committee agrees. The
Respondent’s knowledge, skill or judgment possessed,
or care exercised, by
him in the practice of his profession fell significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner
of an equivalent level of training or
experience. Moreover, the Respondent’s conduct was both improper and
unethical within
the meaning of s. 139B(1)(l) of the
CONSEQUENTIAL ORDERS
Relevant principles
the Committee is of the view that the HCCC has made out the complaint and that
the Respondent is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the
s. 139B(1) of the
National Law
, it is appropriate to proceed to a
consideration of the orders that should be made.
Committee’s powers on proof of a complaint are set out in s. 146B of the
National Law
. In determining appropriate consequential orders, the
Committee is required to consider the whole of the Respondent’s conduct:
[2002] NSWCA 111
must be borne in mind that the jurisdiction of the Committee is protective
rather than punitive. The protective role of the Committee
extends to the
maintenance of public confidence in the profession and maintenance of the
reputation of the profession:
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630;
[2014] NSWCA 307
Orders of the Committee may operate to have a general
deterrent effect, both for the Respondent and for other members of the
profession.
Appropriate orders
parties agreed that if a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct was
made, it would be appropriate for the Respondent
reprimanded.
conduct of the Respondent was of a serious nature. Patient A’s
circumstances as a patient suffering from Borderline Personality
Disorder within
a mental health facility placed her in a position of particular vulnerability.
The Respondent has breached his ethical
responsibilities and abused the trust
residing in him as a member of the nursing profession. He has shown no insight
and no remorse
for his actions.
Committee agrees that, in order for the public to be protected, it is
appropriate for the Respondent to be prohibited from working
in a mental health
facility; to be subject to mentoring conditions; and for his employers to be
made aware of these conditions.
THE COMMITTEE ORDERS:
The practitioner is hereby reprimanded.
The practitioner’s registration be subject to the following
conditions:
registrant cannot work as a nurse in a mental health facility or mental health
department whether in a public or private setting;
registrant must enrol in an ethical training program such as the tailor made
training program conducted by Davaar consultancy
or an equivalent program as
approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Council within three (3) months of the
registrant must successfully complete an ethical training program such as the
tailor made training program conducted by Davaar
consultancy or an equivalent
program as approved by the Nursing and Midwifery Council within six (6) months
of the decision;
cost of the program is to be met by the registrant;
registrant must engage in a mentoring relationship for a period of at least 12
months with a registered nurse (Division 1) who
does not have conditions on
his/her practice. The registered nurse mentor must be approved by the Nursing
and Midwifery Council of
NSW. Any cost of the mentoring relationship must be met
by the registrant;
registrant must:
(a) Provide the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW with the name, contact details and resume
of the registered nurse who has agreed
to act as a mentor and as specified in
these conditions;
(b) Authorise the mentor:
(i) To notify the Council of any breach of the conditions including repeated
failure to attend mentoring meetings;
(ii) To exchange information with the Council in relation to the
registrant’s compliance with the conditions;
(iii) To provide to the Council a copy of the Nursing and Midwifery Professional
Standards Committee decision, including orders made,
that has been signed by the
registrant and by the mentor indicating awareness of the decision and
registrant must submit a mentoring plan developed in consultation with the
mentor within 4 weeks of the mentor being approved
by the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW. The plan must detail:
(a) Specific objectives/ outcomes of the mentoring relationship. The objectives/
outcomes must relate to, but are not limited to,
the area of professional
boundaries;
(b) Specific education, professional development and learning activities planned
to achieve the specified objectives/ outcomes;
(c) Timeframe/s for completion of identified activities and outcomes/
objectives;
(d) Evidence which will demonstrate objectives/ outcomes have been met;
(e) Schedule of meetings with the mentor.
registrant must provide to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW a mentoring
report which is co-signed by the approved mentor
addressing:
(a) Progress towards or achievement of specified outcomes/ objectives;
(b) Any challenges/ issues affecting progress and a plan to deal with these;
(c) Any challenges to practice resulting from mentoring/ associated
mentoring report must be provided to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW
every 2 months for at least 12 months.
registrant must:
(a) Provide the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW with the name and contact
details of all nursing employers (including agency
placements) prior to
commencing work.
(b) Authorise each nursing employer:
(i) To notify
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW of any breach of the conditions or
unsafe practice; and
(ii) To exchange information with the Council related to compliance with
conditions.
(c) Inform all current and any future employers of the conditions before
commencing work/ employment as a registered nurse.
(d) Provide to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW a copy of the conditions
signed by the registrant and by, or on behalf of,
each employer indicating
awareness of the conditions and authorisation within one week of commencing
125 to 127 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
to apply should the practitioner’s principal place of practice be anywhere
in Australia other than in New South Wales, so
that the appropriate review body
in those circumstances is the relevant National Board.
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW is the appropriate review body for the
purposes of ss. 163-163C of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
where the practitioner’s principal place of practice is in
PUBLICATION
A copy of this Reasons for Decision document is to be
forwarded by the Registry to:
Respondent,
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW,
NSW presence of the NMBA via AHPRA (NSW Office),
Nepean Hospital, and
the Councils and Boards see fit.
Belinda Baker
Chairperson
22 October 2015
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.86 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (1.73 MB)
Plain text (ASCII) (54.7 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter