URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWRT/2002/32.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:11:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Weintroub & Weintroub v Ellison [2002] NSWRT 32 (13 February 2002)
Weintroub & Weintroub v Ellison
[2002] NSWRT 32
February 2002)
STRATA SCHEMES MANAGEMENT ACT 1996
APPLICATION NO : SB01/00674
SCHEME : SP56733
ADDRESS OF : 7-9 Birriga Road,
SCHEME BELLEVUE HILL NSW 2023
APPELLANTS : Weintroub &
RESPONDENT : Ellison
HEARING : 20 November 2001 at
KEYWORDS : By-law 17, in keeping with
Pursuant to
Strata Schemes Management Act
the following orders:
I allow the appeal.
The orders of the Adjudicator dismissing
the application are revoked.
I order that the respondent Mr Ellison is
to comply with by-law 17 and in particular is to trim and maintain the plants in
the southern
and western sections of the garden planter boxes of the lot to
ensure that they do not exceed 1.5 metres above the paved surface
Compliance with order 3 is required by 5
April 2002.
REASONS FOR DECISION
By an appeal lodged with the Tribunal on 15 October 2001 the appellants
sought to challenge the decision of the Adjudicator made on
24 September 2001 in
file SA01/00355 in dismissing their original application for orders against the
respondent in the following
"An order that the registered
proprietor of Lot 4 strata plan no. 56733 remove the existing trees and so
maintain the shrubbery and
landscaping in the southern and Western sections of
the garden play the box on level 3 that such shrubbery and
landscaping:
(a) is restricted to a height not exceeding 1.5m above
the paved surface and is thereby in keeping with the rest of the building;
(b) does not invade common property."
The grounds on
which the application was made are set out in the reasons of the Adjudicator in
summary as follows:
The applicants acquired the unit from the
developer in 1998. It is located on level 3. The unit’s sitting room
looks out across
the courtyard to an elevated northerly view across Sydney
Harbour and the surrounding district. When the applicants purchased the
the view from the lounge and courtyard provided views towards North Sydney, the
Harbour Bridge and towards the surrounding
district of Rose
Bay/Vaucluse.
At the time of purchase, the garden planter box
situated on the western side of Lot 4's courtyard had dwarf only landscaping
did not impede the full arc of view described above. Since that time, the
trees in the nature of pine trees have been planted in
the planter box and had
been allowed to grow to create the effect of a "tree wall", which the applicants
feel is intrusive and claustrophobic.
The applicants consider the
conifers and their height are out of keeping with the landscaping to similar
locations around the rest
of the building.
The applicants consider
there is an ongoing and unreasonable breach of by-law 17 and now a breach of
by-law 4 to the extent that the
conifers intrude beyond the horizontal and
vertical boundaries of lot 4.
The grounds of appeal are that:
The Adjudicator erred in law that she:
failed to address that
question which involved a comparison of the conifers planted in lot 4’s
planter boxes with the shrubs
and flowers planted in comparable planter boxes
elsewhere in the
wrongly considered
the by-law 17 issue resolved by the fact that lot 4 was restricted to a height
of 3m in this area of its balcony
and had planter boxes of a certain depth and
The Adjudicator should have found that on the
evidence the conifers in question were not in keeping with comparable areas
in the building in breach of by-law 17 and accordingly made the order
The Adjudicator should further have found that the
conifers risked damage to the planter boxes/common property.
Adjudicator should further have found also that the conifers invaded common
property (airspace) and for those further reasons
(both common law trespass and
breach of by-law 4(b) the orders as sought should have been
The Adjudicator should have exercised her discretion to have
THE HEARING
The Appellants were present at the hearing and were represented by Mr
Young of Counsel. Mr Ellison appeared.
APPELLANTS’ CASE
In addition to the material before the Adjudicator the appellants tendered
some 23 exhibits, as well as a video tape. They relied
on their own evidence and
that of Mr Con Harris the Architect for the original developer and Mr Andrew
Thomas a director of the company
that developed the scheme. The evidence before
me was in some part the same as the evidentiary material before the adjudicator.
The additional evidence was that given by Mr Harris and Mr Thomas.
RESPONDENTS’ CASE
Mr Ellison’s evidence was in similar terms to that before the
Adjudicator, with a number of additional photographs and the invoices
The background to the dispute is set out in broad terms in the
Adjudicators decision and is not repeated here. I have not summarised
evidence except to the extent that it is different to that before the
Adjudicator and is relevant to my determination.
The Legislation
Section 138
Strata Schemes Management Act
General power of Adjudicator
to make orders to settle disputes or rectify
(1) An Adjudicator may make an order to settle
a dispute or complaint about:
(a) an exercise of, or a failure to exercise, a
function conferred or imposed by or under this Act or the by-laws in relation to
strata scheme, or
(b) the operation, administration or management of a
strata scheme under this Act.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), an
owners corporation or building management committee is taken to have failed to
a function if:
(a) it decides not to exercise the function, or
(b) application is made to it to exercise the function and it fails for 2
months after the making of the application to exercise the
function in
accordance with the application or to inform the applicant that it has decided
not to exercise the function in accordance
with the application.
Adjudicator may not make an order under subsection (1) for the settlement of a
dispute or complaint:
(a) dealt with in another section of this Chapter, or
(b) referred to the Tribunal or only within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal,
(c) relating to the exercise, or the failure to exercise, a function
conferred on an owners corporation by this Act or the by-laws
if that function
may be exercised only in accordance with a unanimous resolution or a special
resolution (other than a special resolution
(d) that includes the payment by a person to another person of
(4) If a dispute or complaint arises from or relates to the
operation or application of a provision of a lease of a lot, or of the
property, in a leasehold strata scheme, the lessor of the strata scheme must
(a) commence other proceedings in connection with the settlement of the
dispute or complaint after having made an application under
this section for the
settlement of the dispute or complaint, or
(b) make an application under this
section for the settlement of the dispute or complaint after having commenced
other proceedings
in connection with the settlement of the dispute or
An application for an order under this
section may be made only by an interested
By-law 17 of the
Strata Schemes Management Act
17 Appearance of lot
(1) The owner or occupier of a lot must not, without the written consent
of the owners corporation, maintain within the lot anything
visible from outside
the lot that, viewed from outside the lot, is not in keeping with the rest of
the building.
(2) This by-law does not apply to the hanging of any washing,
towel, bedding, clothing or other article as referred to in By-law 10.
Young indicated that the Appellants’ claims were that the planting and
maintenance of the pines trees is such that there
is a breach by the Mr Ellison
of by-law 17. There is no dispute that when the premises were developed the
planter boxes on the lots
were planted with a variety of plants and low shrubs.
Mr Ellison removed the plants from his planter box and planted a number of
trees in the planter box located along the western and southern part of the
courtyard which forms part of the lot. The pine
trees have grown considerably
since planting and are at least three metres high from the paved surface of the
courtyard. The exact
height is in dispute but it is not necessary to determine
that issue. The photographs tendered by both parties and the video tendered
the applicants clearly establish that the pines trees form a dense hedge of
Part of the Appellants’ lot including the front
courtyard and living and dining room have a northerly aspect and are on the
level as and are opposite the planter boxes containing the pine trees. The
height and density of the pine trees are such as
to block the north eastern
views from the parts of the Appellants’ lot referred to above, which had
been part of the amenity
of the premises prior to the growth of the
There has been correspondence going back some years between the
parties and between the parties and the owner’s corporation
regarding the
planting. On 21 May 2001 the Strata Managing Agent wrote to Mr Ellison
advising that the executive committee resolved
at a meeting on 15 May 2001 that
the planting of the trees in the planter boxes was without the written approval
of the executive
committee. The committee is of the opinion that permission
should have been sought pursuant to by-law 17 and that permission has
been sought nor granted. Concern was expressed in relation to the size of the
trees and potential damage. Mr Ellison was
requested to remove the trees and
provide an indemnity in respect of future repairs. Mr Ellison’s solicitor
wrote to the Chairman
of the Executive Committee Mr Con Harris asserting that an
agreement had been reached in respect of the trees on the basis that Mr
provide an indemnity in respect to any damage, which was offered. The new
strata managing agent wrote on 7 August 2001 advising
that the executive
committee were not prepared to be involved in the dispute and that no resolution
had been made in relation to
any indemnity. The above correspondence shows that
the owners corporation had taken the view that the planting was in breach of
17 and that no written approval had been given to Mr Ellison in terms of
the by-law. This is supported by the oral evidence of Mr
Harris. I do not think
anything turns on the decision of the owner’s corporation not to take the
dispute any further.
Mr Harris, the Architect, gave evidence and
identified the landscaping plans for the building, which were part of the
development
consent for the premises. The landscaping plans were required to be
submitted to and approved by the Council and all landscaping
had to be completed
prior to occupation of the building and maintained to the satisfaction of the
Council. The plans identified
the plants proposed. Mr Harris’ evidence
was that the intention in respect of the planter boxes on the balconies of the
was for plants which would be low lying. No conifers were specified for
any of the planter boxes.
The evidence of Mr Thomas, of the Developer,
was in similar terms. The landscaping plans set out the proposals for planting,
intention being that the maximum height would be one to one and a half
metres high. Mr Thomas expressed the view that the conifers
as planted were
totally inappropriate for the site. He also stated that the intent of the
design of the balcony masonry construction
to a certain level then glass panels
topped by railings reflects the design intentions to give views from and across
the balconies.
In his oral evidence Mr Ellison focused on his inquiries
with the developer in respect of his concerns over the privacy of the lot.
There were changes to the original plans, the northern balcony of lot 3 was
originally attached to lot 4. He raised a concern that
there were no fixed
external structures to ensure the privacy of the courtyard. He was aware that
the airspace of the lot was to
extend to three metres above the courtyard
surface and therefore he would have scope to increase the privacy of the lot by
appropriate
plantings. The cypress plants were recommended as they would be
quick growing. As the plants have grown they have created an effective
from the neighbouring property which looks onto his courtyard and his neighbour
appreciates the privacy which it give to his
It has always been
his intention to keep the height of the plants within the airspace of the lot
and has employed a gardener to maintain
the garden. Within the scheme there are
a number of similar plants. Some at the back of the common property and some
other lot owners below him to create a similar screen. Other
substantial trees have been planted in the scheme.
Mr Ellison submits
that the removal of the plants would reduce the privacy and therefore the
amenity of the lot and this would have
the effect of reducing the sale price of
the property. He relies on two letters to that effect from real estate agents
residential property in the area.
The issue for determination
by me is whether the cypress trees as planted and maintained are in keeping with
the rest of the building.
A number of decisions have addressed this question in
dealing with structures, lighting, signs, security screen and other similar
items however the decisions do not address in any detail what is meant by the
term. In my view the by-law is intended to be quite
broad in its application
and is meant to prevent a lot owner from having within the lot something which
is not in harmony with the
particular features of the rest of the building,
whether they be architectural, structural or landscaping.
evidence before me I am satisfied that the planter boxes on the scheme are
planted with a wide variety of plants, and further
that there are a number of
plants on the lots which protrude above the balcony level. There are similar
trees on the scheme, and
there are plantings of the common property which
reflect some of the features of Mr Ellison’s planter boxes, in their use
repetition to create a formal effect and to create screens between
neighbouring premises. However the effect of the dense planting
of the cypress
trees, their height and amount of foliage is not repeated in any of the other
planter boxes on the scheme, and in
my view it is not in keeping with the rest
of the building in terms of the by-law. The balcony is light in colour and is
The balconies comprise the terraces and are large and open. The
balcony design, in the use of the glass panels continues a look
of openness and
transparency. The open and terraced appearance is defeated by the plants which
form high and dense barriers.
Having found that the plants as maintained
are in breach of the by-law the next question to determine is whether I should
orders as sought by the appellants. In my view
of the Act gives
an Adjudicator, and in his/her place the Tribunal a discretion as to whether to
make an order even if the legal
grounds for making the order have been
established. There are limitations on the extent of the discretion and in
certain matters
the conduct of the parties or matters consequential to the
conduct may be relevant in determining whether the orders should be made.
Ellison submits that the diminution in privacy and the loss in value are
relevant matters to consider.
I am not satisfied that Mr Ellison has
proven that there would be any loss in value of his premises as a result of the
the plants. I place little weight on the letters provided by him,
they were not formal valuations, the authors did not give oral
evidence and were
not cross-examined. I do accept that there will be some loss of privacy in
particular from the neighbouring strata
property. The design of the premises is
such that the courtyards are very open and provide very little privacy within
and between adjacent buildings and the street. I note Mr
Ellison’s evidence that the privacy aspect of the courtyard was of
to him when he purchased the premises but I am not satisfied these concerns or
his inquiries provide a reason why I should
not make an order.
do not think that compliance with the by-law can only be achieved by the removal
of the cypresses and I decline to make
an order that they be removed. I accept
that that may be the result if they cannot be pruned or trimmed so as to achieve
with the orders.
Orders made
accordingly
Residential Tribunal
February 2002
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (36.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter