URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSSB/2001/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Poole v Owners of Strata Plan 44218 [2001] NSWSSB 17 (10 September 2001)
Poole v Owners of Strata Plan 44218
[2001] NSWSSB 17
(10 September 2001)
STRATA SCHEMES BOARD OF NEW SOUTH
APPLICATION NO : SB01/00311
SCHEME : SP44281
ADDRESS OF : "..."
STRATA SCHEME NEWPORT BEACH
APPLICANT : M Poole
RESPONDENT : The Owners –
Strata Plan 44281
APPLICATION : For a penalty for contravention of an adjudicator’s
The application for a penalty is dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Mr M Poole the owner of lot 7 in the above strata scheme lodged an
application on 9 May 2001 for an order for a penalty to be imposed
on the owners
corporation for breaching orders made by an adjudicator on 2 June 2000. The
orders in question were as follows:
1. In accordance with
subsection 78(2)
Strata Schemes Management Act
the owners strata plan number 44281 is to levy all contributions from M
Poole as a lot owner in a share proportional to the unit
entitlement of his lot.
2. In accordance with its duties under
Strata Schemes
Management Act 1996
, the owner strata plan no. 44281 is to maintain the common
property garbage room in a clean condition and to ensure that waste water
emanating from the use or cleaning of the garbage room is properly disposed of.
3. The application is otherwise
By way of background, it is
common ground that in the past the owners corporation had not determined and
raised levies in accordance
with provisions of the
Strata Schemes Management
. The adjudicator in her decision sets out the background to the
present dispute.
"(i) Background
Strata plan number 44281 is located at Newport. The strata plan was
registered on 30 July 1993. The parcel then comprised 13 lots,
being in the
main commercial lots on "..." Road, with lot 13 being described as "a reserved
lot". Lot 13 then comprised 1759 square
The Schedule of Unit Entitlement appearing on the plan as registered
indicates that there is an aggregate unit entitlement of 3,328.
property search indicates that upon registration of the strata plan of
subdivision the aggregate of unit entitlements
By virtue of a strata plan of subdivision in respect of lot 13, strata plan
no. 50996 was created and registered on 11 October 1995.
A three-storey brick
residential building (with two parking levels below) has been constructed on lot
13. The residential complex
is located on "..." Avenue. The strata plan of
subdivision indicates that there is an aggregate unit entitlement of 10,000.
on 30 July 1993 exclusive use by-laws (by-laws no. 30 and 31 in strata plan
no. 44281) were registered. By-law 30 confers exclusive
use rights (including
the right to approve the installation and maintenance of advertising hoardings)
on the proprietors of lots
1 to 12 in relation to specified areas of common
property. By-law 31 confers exclusive use rights on the proprietors of lots 14
31 in respect of specified areas of common property.
It appears from the Land Titles Office search that two further strata plans
of subdivision have been created – plan numbers.
45644 and 50995
(subdivisions of lots 12 and 9 respectively).
The Certificate of Title indicates that the aggregate unit entitlement for
strata plan no. 44281 is 10,000 and, in particular, that
lot 7 has a unit
entitlement of 117.
The Applicant is the owner of lot 7 in strata plan no. 44281, which consists
of a commercial premises adjoining a common property
courtyard. The Applicant
has for many years run a café, known as ‘Munchies
International’, and uses part of the
adjourning courtyard for outdoor
seating. The café is open for business on Sundays and, at least on some
days of the week,
from early in the morning."
The owners corporation, according to its representatives, had
become dissatisfied with the management provided by the then Managing
engaged new Strata Managing Agents to manage the scheme in June 1999. On 19
November 1999. The Strata Managing Agents
sought a legal opinion in relation to
the way to which the schemes levies were being determined. It was noted that
the problem related
to the disparity and the level of outgoings between the
residential and commercial lots and the fact that the costs of maintaining
commercial areas was much higher. If the levies were raised in accordance with
the units entitlements there would be an inequity
created between the owners of
the residential and commercial area. The owners corporation had recognised that
one solution was to
split the scheme. However Mr Poole the present applicant
was not in favour of this course as an alternative steps were taken to
outgoings against obligations attaching to by-laws.
The adjudicator in
her decision observed that unless and until termination of the scheme takes
place, levies must be determined and
raised in accordance with
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
. The owners could not opt out of the
requirements of the
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
by resolving to
maintain the status quo. As a consequence of this finding the adjudicator made
an order that the owner of Lot 7 be
levied in accordance with his unit
entitlement. The adjudicator went on to observe that;
"differential financial contributions by lot owners (that is contrary to unit
entitlement) may only continue if they are the consequence
of valid exclusive
use by-laws (duly made and registered) or of other permissible arrangements,
such as properly authorised licence
agreements."
In the present application, Mr
Poole claims that the water levy notice of 28 February 2001 for his lot was more
than in the unit entitlement
proportion of 117/ ten thousandths.
evidence before the Tribunal, Mr Poole gave another example of his lot being
levied otherwise than in accordance with his unit
entitlement: the notice of
maintenance contributions dated 1 June 2001 in the amount of $181.79. He
produced letters dated 8 May
2001 from the managing agents for the owners
corporation and the above notice to show that the owners corporation was still
to levy contributions otherwise there in accordance with the Act.
For the owners corporation, the Treasurer Mr Rhodes and the Chairperson
Mr Quaglia gave extensive evidence about the system of levies
which had existed
before the order was made and steps taken by the owners corporation after the
adjudicators order. In particular
reference was made to the special by-laws
made by the owners corporation and duly registered (Mr Poole did not dispute
was the case. However he maintained that he had received legal advice
that the by-laws were invalid). The by-laws provide as follows:
"Special By-Law No 3
3. Notwithstanding any other by-law the proprietors of the Commercial Lots
are jointly entitled to the special privilege to use the
Commercial Equipment on
the following conditions:
the Body Corporate
is responsible for maintaining and keeping in a state of good and serviceable
repair and replacing the Commercial
the Body Corporate
must comply with eh requirements of any Governmental Agency in relation to eh
Commercial Equipment;
the proprietors of
Commercial Lots must promptly reimburse the Body Corporate for all money
expended by it under this by-law; and
this by-law may
not be amended, added to or repealed without the written consent of each of the
proprietors of the Commercial Lots.
Special By-law No 4
4. Notwithstanding any other by-law the proprietors of the Residential Lots
are jointly entitled to the special privilege to use the
Residential Equipment
on the following conditions:
the Body Corporate
is responsible for maintaining and keeping in a state of good and serviceable
repair and replacing the Residential
the Body Corporate
must comply with the requirements of any Governmental Agency in relation to the
Residential Equipment;
the proprietors of
Residential Lots must promptly reimburse the Body Corporate for all money
expended by it under this by-law; and
this by-law may
not be amended, added to or repealed without the written consent of each of the
proprietors of Residential Lots.
Special By-Law No 5
5. Notwithstanding any other by-law the proprietors of the Commercial Lots
are jointly entitled to the exclusive use and enjoyment
of Exclusive Use Area A
on the following conditions:
the Body Corporate
is responsible for maintaining and keeping in a state of good and serviceable
repair Exclusive Use Area A including
any maintenance or repair of a structural
the proprietors of
the Commercial Lots must promptly reimburse the Body Corporate for all money
expended by it under this by-law including
any expenditure related to structural
maintenance or repair;
the proprietors of
the Commercial Lots must indemnify the Body Corporate from and against claims,
demands and liability of any kind
which may arise in respect of damage to any
property or death of or injury to any person arising out of the exercise of the
conferred by this by-law; and
this by-law may
not be amended, added to or repealed without the written consent of each of the
proprietors of the Commercial Lots.
Special By-law No 6
6. Notwithstanding any other by-law the proprietors of the Residential Lots
are jointly entitled to the exclusive use an enjoyment
of Exclusive Use Are B on
the following conditions:
the Body Corporate
is responsible for maintaining and keeping in a state of good and serviceable
repair exclusive Use Area B including
any maintenance or repair of a structural
the proprietors of
the Residential Lots must promptly reimburse the Body Corporate for all money
expended by it under this by-law
including any expenditure related to structural
maintenance or repair;
the proprietors of
the Residential Lots must indemnify the Body Corporate from and against claims,
demands and liability of any kind
which may arise in respect of damage to any
property or death of or injury to any person arising out of the exercise of the
conferred on them by this by-law;
this by-law may
not be amended or added to without the written consent of the proprietors of the
Residential Lots.
Special By-Law No 7
7. Notwithstanding any other by-law the proprietors of the Commercial Lots
are jointly entitled to the exclusive use and enjoyment
of Exclusive Use Areas
C, D and E on the following conditions:
the Body Corporate
is responsible for maintaining and keeping in a state of good and serviceable
repair Exclusive Use Areas C, D and
E including any maintenance or repair of a
structural nature;
the proprietors of
the Commercial Lots must promptly reimburse the Body Corporate for all money
expended by it under this by-law in
respect of expenditure relating to
structural maintenance or repair;
the proprietors of
the Residential Lots must promptly reimburse the Body Corporate for all money
expended by it under this by-law
in respect of expenditure relating to
structural maintenance or repair;
the proprietors of
the Commercial Lots must indemnify the Body Corporate from and against claims,
demands and liability of any kind
which may arise in respect of damage to any
property or death of or injury to any person arising out of the exercise of the
conferred on them by this by-law;
this by-law may
not be amended, added to or repealed without the written consent of each of the
proprietors of the Commercial Lots."
According to the evidence given, the owners corporation’s position was
that since the order was made the charges for expenditure
relating to
maintenance and repair of the common property which is the subject of the
exclusive use by-law for the commercial lots
is recovered by the owners
corporation from the commercial lot owners as a reimbursement under the by-law.
A letter referred to
by Mr Poole dated 8 May 2001 from Bright & Duggan had
been sent in error. In fact this was simply a request for reimbursement
the exclusive use by-law. While I note Mr Poole’s assertion that his
legal advice was that the exclusive use by-laws
were invalid, I am not persuaded
that this is the case. I accept the submission of the owners corporation that
the charges which
were sought to be recovered from the Lot owners in respect of
the common area termed ‘exclusive use area A’ are validly
Certainly I am not satisfied that the owners corporation, since the
adjudicator’s order was made, has contravened
that order.
Mr Poole gave evidence that in relation to the maintenance of the common
property garbage room since the adjudicator’s order
was made. He also
tendered photographs. He was particularly concerned about the floor of the room
having no drain as there was
no way for the waste liquids from the various
bottles to drain out. He produced engineers reports to show what was needed for
room. He expressed concern about the disposal of the waste water from the
garbage room and the fact that the cleaner disposed of
this water around the
garden area. This caused flying pests which affected his business.
Mr Rhodes and Mr Quaglia in reply for the owners corporation, rejected that the
garbage room was kept in anything other than a clean
condition. The waste water
resulting from the use or cleaning of the garbage room was properly disposed of.
A statutory declaration
from J Gould (cleaner) and a letter from the
Environmental Officer at Pittwater Council dated 12 July 2001 were produced.
stated that during course of discussions with the owners corporation
the matter of the communal garbage room had been raised with
the council. It
had been advised that liquid wastes generated from the cleaning of the room were
collected and disposed of within
the adjoining communal sanitary facilities.
This method of disposal was considered satisfactory as the waste was directed
into Sydney
Waters’ Sewerage Treatment network. The letter went on to
state that at the time of inspection 28 June 2001 the garbage room
satisfactory clean state. However it was agreed that the room required
continual cleaning especially in the hotter month
of the year due to the
likelihood of pests being attracted in an around the area.
In addition B Rhodes advised that the electronic fly zapper located on the
interior wall of the room would be repaired and that the
entry door to the
garbage room would be replaced with a new door incorporating ventilated levers
together with a fly screen protection.
On the evidence before me I am not satisfied that the owners corporation has
contravened the adjudicators order. Indeed I am satisfied
that the common
property garbage room is being maintained in a clean condition and the owners
corporation has taken steps to ensure
that waste water emanating from the use or
cleaning of the garbage room is properly disposed of.
The application for a penalty is dismissed.
John Bordon
Residential
10 September 2001
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (45.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter