URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSSB/2001/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vebada Pty Ltd v Owners SP 34754 [2001] NSWSSB 8 (14 August 2001)
Vebada Pty Ltd v Owners SP 34754
[2001] NSWSSB 8
(14 August 2001)
STRATA SCHEMES BOARD OF NEW SOUTH
APPLICATION : SB01/00024
APPELLANT : Vebada Pty Limited, Owner
RESPONDENT : The Owners Strata Plan 34754
SCHEME : SP34754
ADDRESS OF : "..."
STRATA SCHEME WOOLLOOMOOLOO
Appeal, Exclusive Use By-laws
Legislation:
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
Houghton and Anor v
(No 155) Pty Limited (1998) NSW Titles Cases 80-048
Thomas v The
Owners Strata Plan
17043, RT 99/112
1. Pursuant to
Strata Schemes Management Act
the appeal is upheld. The orders of the adjudicator in matter
SA00/00534 made on 19 December 2000 are set aside.
2. I order that
special by-law 8 made on 15 March 1999 be revoked.
REASONS FOR DECISION
By an appeal lodged with the registry on 17 January 2001 Vebada
Pty Limited ("the appellant") sought to appeal the decision of an
Adjudicator
dated 19 December 2000 in file number SA00/00534. The orders made by the
Adjudicator were as follows:
"Pursuant to
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
it is ordered
that special by-Law 8 be repealed and that repealed by-Law 4 be
By its original application the appellant sought the
following orders:
"Sections: 157,157 and 169
1. That special by-Law 8 be repealed.
2. That the first respondent and the second respondent remove their personal
property from the common property within the garage.
3. That special by-Law 8 be varied so as to afford to the owner of Lot 1 the
right to park a motor vehicle in the common property
Order number 2 was not pressed on the appeal. The owners of lots 2 and 3 had
removed their personal belongings from the common property.
1. Strata Plan 34754 was registered on 18 May 1989.
2. The plan comprises three lots. Lot 1 is on the ground floor and operates as
a retail shop. At the rear of Lot 1 is the ground
floor common property
referred to in these reasons as the "garage area". Lot 2 is on the first floor
and lot 3 is on the second
floor and roof.
3. Access to the garage area is from via a roller door which opens onto
"...’. The appellant has no access to the garage area
from its lot.
4. On 15 March 1999 special by-laws 7 and 8 were made. The by-laws were
registered. They provide as follows:
Special By-Law 7
Special By-Law 4 contained in registered dealing No. 261 6607 is
Special By-Law 8
The Owners for the time being of Lots 2 & 3 shall be entitled to the
exclusive use and enjoyment of the part of the common property
(the common
property) as is shown on the attached plan and described herein, subject to the
following terms and conditions:
The Common Property
(a) The Owner/s of Lot 2 shall be entitled to the exclusive use of the area
marked "A" on the attached plan.
(b) The Owner/s of Lot 3 shall be entitled to the exclusive use and enjoyment
of the area marked "B" on the attached
Terms & Conditions
1. The Owner/s for the time being of Lot 2 shall be entitled to park motor
vehicle/s in the common property marked "A" but only in
such a manner as to not
impede pedestrian access through the common property.
2. The Owner/s of Lot 3 shall, in utilising the common property marked "B",
ensure that at all times pedestrian access via the pedestrian
door located on
the western side of the common property is freely available.
3. The Owner/s for the time being of Lots 2 & 3 shall be jointly
responsible for the proper maintenance and keeping in a state
of good and
serviceable repair of the garage door located on the northern boundary of the
common property.
4. The Owners Corporation shall continue to maintain all other common
property the subject of this exclusive use grant other than
5. The Owner/s for the time being of Lots 2 & 3 shall be responsible for
the control and administration of any remote control
devices and or keys used to
operate the garage door.
6. The Owner/s for the time being shall ensure that the occupant of Lot 1
shall at all times have a key to permit access to the common
property via the
pedestrian door and shall not unreasonably hinder or restrict the access of the
occupant of Lot 1 to the common
5. The plan which formed part of by-law 8 was sheet 2 of the strata plan with
handwritten notations as to which areas comprised
"A" and "B".
6. Special By-laws 3 and 4 were made on 30 March 1990 and were registered. They
provided as follows:
Special By-Law 3
The Special By-Law 2 as passed at the First Annual General Meeting held
26/9/89 be deleted.
Special By-Law 4
The Proprietor/s for the time being of Lot 2 shall be entitled to the
exclusive use and enjoyment of that part of common property
as is necessary for
enclosing the common property area as marked on the attached plan as well as the
rights to park one motor vehicle
in the said area subject to the following terms
and conditions:
Terms and Conditions
(a) The Proprietor/s of Lot be responsible for the proper maintenance and
keeping in a state of good and serviceable repair any additions
and any common
property associated thereto,
(b) The proprietor/s for the time being of Lot 2 shall indemnify the Body
Corporate against any costs incurred as a result of the
failure of the
proprietor/s of Lot 2 to obtain prior approval from Local Council for the
proposed additions and in the event of any
demand being served upon the Body
Corporate by any statutory authority, the proprietor/s of Lot 2 shall either
remove any such additions
and/or take all any necessary action to comply with
any such notice at their
rights conferred and obligations imposed by this by-law continue to operate for
the benefit of, and (subject to Section70(3))
are binding upon, the proprietor
or proprietors of Lot 2,
the extent that this by-law imposes the responsibility for the proper
maintenance and keeping in a state of good and serviceable
repair the additions
and common property associated thereto, the Body Corporate is discharged from
its obligations under
Section 68(1)
, (b) of the
7. Special by-Law 3 repealed special by-law 2 which had been made on 26
September 1989, but had not been registered until 30 March
1990. That by-law
provided as follows:
Special By-Law 2
The Proprietor/s for the time being of Lot 2 shall have the exclusive use
over that part of common property for the parking of one
motor vehicle and
access thereto, such common property being on the ground floor and immediately
adjacent to that part of Lot 3,
which is defined as a carspace. The
Proprietor/s for the time being of Lot 2 shall maintain, repair, clean, replace
and reinstate
if necessary the whole or part of the said carparking lot as may
be reasonably required by the Body Corporate from time to time or
any statutory
of Local Government Authority.
The appellant was represented by Mr D Le Page, solicitor.
The respondent was represented by Mr C Grace, solicitor.
The submissions before the Adjudicator formed part of the evidence in the
hearing before me they are not summarised by me. Ms D
Mullins a director of the
appellant gave evidence on behalf of the appellant.
Ms Mullins’ evidence was in summary as follows:
Shares in Vebada Pty Ltd were purchased by her around 10 years ago. The company
operates a furniture showroom. At the time of the
purchase she was aware that
the owners of lots 2 and 3 parked their vehicles in the garage area. She owned a
large motor vehicle
and would not have been able to drive the vehicle into the
garage area. She had no access from the street into the garage area.
became aware that she may have some rights to use the area after she obtained
advice from her solicitor. She was prompted
to obtain the advice after being
told by Mrs Malone the former owner of lot 2 that she should not be in the
garage area as it was
private property.
Sometime after this the proposal to make by-law 8 was put to the meeting of the
owners corporation. A representative of the strata
managing agent said that
by-law 4 had been incorrectly lodged. She suggested to the managing agent and
to the other owners they
should look at rearranging the garage area so she also
could park her vehicle there. She received a letter of 23 December 1998 from
the agents noting in summary the following:
i. the plan referred to in special by-law 4 was not included for
registration.
ii. The unit entitlements for lots 2 and 3 are such that if they agree with a
by-law it can be passed.
iii. It would not be possible to park three vehicles without one vehicle having
to be moved to allow access to the third.
iv. Amended by-laws for dealing with exclusive use of the parking area are to be
put to the owners corporation for
consideration.
The owners corporation was aware that Ms Mullins or the appellant would
challenge special by-law 8 if made.
On October 1999 she instructed Vebada’s solicitors to write to Ms Malone
and Ms McInnes, the owner of lot 3 stating that by-law
8 was unfair in that it
conferred on two of the lot owners privilege with respect to the common property
to Vebada’s detriment,
without offering sufficient compensation. Consent
to repeal of the by-law was sought. No reply was received to the letters.
The minute book of the Owners Corporation was tendered to show that neither the
owners corporation, Vebada Pty Limited or Mrs Mullins
received any consideration
with respect to by-law 8.
When she first purchased the company Ms Mullins previously parked in the Domain
Car Park. Now she parks in the street. It can be
difficult to find parking in
the street and it can be a dangerous area to walk in, especially at night. It
would be more convenient
for her to park on the common property
RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE
The submissions on behalf of the respondent in the adjudication are not
summarised by me. Evidence on behalf of the respondent was
give by Mr J McIlroy
who purchased lot 2 in December 2000. He lives at the premises with his wife
and two small children. They
own a Toyota Prado. Since purchasing the lot he
has parked his vehicle on the common property in accordance with the terms of
by-law 8. It can be difficult to park the vehicle as the access through
the lane is narrow.
It was his evidence that he would not have purchased the lot without the benefit
of the by-law, and if he cannot park his vehicle
there, he will probably sell
the lot. The premises were purchased at auction. The registered by-laws,
including special by-law 8,
were attached to the contract for sale.
He was made aware at the auction that there was a dispute about the rights
conferred under by-law 8 and that the original application
had been lodged with
the Tribunal by Vebada a day or two before the auction. The price he paid
reflected the access to the car park.
It was not possible for him to obtain
advice from his solicitor in respect of the announcements at the auction.
SUBMISSIONS
The submissions on behalf of the appellant were in brief summary as follows:
Section 61(1)
of the Act requires the owners corporation to act in the
interests of all owners. The decision of the Court in
Jacklin and ors
The Proprietors Strata Plan 2795
(1975) I NSWLR 15, although
dealing with the provision in place prior to that contained in the Act made it
clear that this section
imposes on the owner corporation a duty to control,
manage and administer the common property for the benefit of each owner. That
duty is to be viewed in light of various cases, particularly corporate law
matters where it has been determined the majority may
not neglect or destroy the
interests of the minority.
2. Reliance was placed on the decision of the Court of Appeal in
(No155) Pty Limited (1998) NSW Title Cases
[80-048] which confirmed that the principles referred to above applied in strata
The facts in that case are similar to these here, in that one lot owner
in effect lost the benefit of the use of the common property
to another lot
owner against his interests.
3. The right to use the common property is a valuable right and the common
property itself is a valuable asset. Valuation evidence
is not required to
establish these facts.
4. The Tribunal should follow the decision of Mr Bordon, Member, in
The Owner Strata Plan
RT99/112. If
the Tribunal finds there has been a fraud on the minority then the appellant
should be entitled to relief under
section 157
of the Act.
Submissions on behalf of the Respondents were in brief summary as follows:
1. The minutes of the meeting of the owners corporation showed that the
Appellant supported the making of the original by-laws giving
exclusive use to lots 2 and 3.
2. The appellant is estopped from now seeking to challenge the by-law by virtue
of that agreement by their acquiescence and delay,
particularly having regard to
the changes in ownership of lot 2. The price paid by Lot 2 reflects the benefit
of the use of the
common property.
3. If by-law 8 is repeated then by-law 4 should revive. That by-law is not
The matters raised in reply by Mr LePage were in summary as follows:
1. Special by-law 2 is invalid for uncertainty. The common property the subject
of the by-law is not specified.
2. Special by-law 4 is also invalid for uncertainty. The by-law refers to a
plan as annexed to the by-law. A search of the Register
shows that no plan was
registered as part of the by-law.
3. The Tribunal is not a court of equity, and not bound to apply the principles
of estoppel. In any event even if the appellant
"did not object" to the making
of special by-law 2, that is not equivalent to consent. There was no consent to
by-law 4 purportedly
conferring exclusive parking rights. If the principles of
estoppel do apply then there is no evidence of any act or representation
appellant which induced the former owner of lot 2 to alter her position.
Section 157
of the Act provides as follows:
157 Order revoking amendment of by-law or reviving repealed
(1) an adjudicator may make one of the following orders if the adjudicator
considers that, having regard to the interest of all owners
of lots in a strata
scheme in the use and enjoyment of their lots or the common property, an
amendment or repeal of a by-law or addition
of a new by-law should not have been
made or effected by the owners
corporation:
(a) an order that the amendment be revoked,
(b) an order that the repealed by-law be revived,
(c) an order that the additional by-law be
(2) an order under this section, when recorded under section 209, has effect as
if its terms were a by-law (but subject to any relevant
order made by a superior
(3) when making an order under this section in relation to a by-law referred to
in section 51, an adjudicator may direct the payment
by the owners corporation
of compensation to the owner of the lot, or owners of the lots, referred to in
the by-law.
(4) a payment ordered to be made in accordance with subsection (3) is
recoverable by the owner or owners as a debt.
(5) an application for an order under this section may be made only by a person
entitled to vote on the motion to amend or repeal
the by-law, or make the
additional by-law, that is the subject of the application or the lessor of a
leasehold strata scheme.
The matter for determination by me is whether by-law 8 should have been made
having regard to the criteria in section 157(1) of the
This is the issue raised in the original application. In determining this issue
it is not necessary for me to make a determination
as to the validity or
otherwise of by-laws 2 and 4. These by-laws have been repealed by other by-laws
the making of which is not
challenged by these proceedings. I note the
arguments put by the parties as to the validity of these two by-law but make no
in respect of the same.
By-law 8, by its terms, allocates sections of the common property for exclusive
use by lots 2 and 3. The owners of lot 3 did not
participate in the appeal and
did not seek to uphold the by-law to the extent it conferred rights to exclusive
use on them.
The appellant’s submission in support of the appeal focused mainly on the
obligation of the owners corporation under section
61 of the Act. That
61 What are the key management areas for a strata
(1) An owners corporation has the control, management and administration
of the common property of the strata scheme for the benefit
of the owners.
(2) The owners corporation has responsibility for the following:
(a) maintaining and repairing the common property of the strata scheme as
provided by Part 2,
(b) managing the finances of the strata scheme as provided by Part 3,
(c) taking out insurance for the strata scheme as provided by Part 4,
(d) keeping accounts and records for the strata scheme as provided by
(3) Other functions of an owners corporation are included in Part 6.
The appellant submits that the Tribunal should have regard to equitable
principles in the application of provisions of the Act, as
decided in the
case. The use of the words "the interest of all owners" in
section 157 clearly contemplates such an approach. As in the
cases the owners corporation have in making by-law 8 appropriated
the use of the common property to particular owners to the exclusion
in circumstances where such owners could demonstrate an interest in using the
common property. I agree with Mr LePage’s
submission that the right to
park on the common property is a valuable right, and it is not necessary to have
valuation evidence
to substantiate the same. By-law 8,
appropriates for the benefit of Lot 2 the right to park on the common property
in effect to the exclusion of the other lot owners
who show now, and who
expressed at the time of the making of the by-law an interest in making use of
the common property. By virtue
of the allocation of the unit entitlements lots
2 and 3 can pass special resolutions over the objections of lot 1. This
appropriation
of use of the common property was done without compensation or
consideration passing between the owner of Lot 2 and either the owners
corporation or the appellant.
Mr Grace, on behalf of the respondent, argued that the appellant was estopped
from now objecting to the by-law by virtue of the history
of the matter.
It is not clear the extent to which the principles of estoppel would apply to
applications under the Act. It is likely that the
Tribunal can have regard to
such principles in application of the provisions of the Act, but the rights
conferred under the Act would
prevail. The submission based on estoppel rests
principally on the length of time for which a by-law has been in place which
for the benefit of lot 2 a right to park on the common property. It was
also submitted that the appellant consented to the earlier
I am not persuaded that the evidence shows that the appellant consented to the
making of the by-law. Not objecting to something
is not the equivalent of
consent. In any event even if Vebada had consented to the terms of the by-law
at the particular time there
is nothing to say that they must be held to that
position. Section 157 is broad in its terms, it contemplates that a
position may change over time, as it has here. It is not
appropriate to speculate on whether Vebada had any interest in making use
common property prior to Ms Mullins becoming director. Initially Ms Malone had
no interest in using the common property for
parking, she had a motor vehicle
which could not be parked on the common property because of the difficult
access. The circumstances
changed when she started to drive a smaller
There may be matters where a party has changed their position as a consequence
of the registration of a by-law and that change of
position may be a relevant
consideration in making a determination under section 157 or in the exercise of
the discretion as to whether
an order should be made. There is no evidence that
there has been such a change of position on the evidence before me. I do not
consider that the sale of lot 2 by Ms Malone to Mr McIlroy constitutes a matter
by which there can be said to be a change of position
which would affect the
appellant’s rights. Mr McIlroy was on notice of the dispute at the time
of the auction and proceeded
with the purchase. He may have purchased the
premises with the benefit of the by-law in place, but the by-law is subject to
provisions of the Act, including the right to challenge the same as
conferred by section 157 of the Act.
I do not consider that there has been any delay by the appellant in bringing the
application such as to affect my discretion to make
the orders.
I consider that by-law 8 is not in the interests of all owner of lots as
referred to in section 157 of the Act and the by-law should
be repealed. Orders
are made accordingly.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (58.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter