URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/1093.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:59:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hy-Tec Industries Pty Ltd �e" Maxi Concrete Contract Determination 2025 [2025] NSWIRComm 1093 (27 October 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Hy-Tec Industries Pty Ltd – Maxi Concrete Contract Determination
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 1093
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Date of Orders:
28 October 2025
Decision Date:
27 October 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Commissioner Muir
(1) Pursuant to
section 313
Industrial Relations
, the contract determination known as the Hy-Tec Industries Pty Ltd -
Maxi Concrete Contract Determination2025 is made in the terms
Appendix A to this Decision, with an effective date of 1 November
(2) Pursuant to
section 320
Relations Act 1996
, the Hy-Tec Industries Pty Ltd - Maxi Concrete Contract
Determination Serial C9335 is rescinded, effective 1 November 2025;
(3) The documents marked “NW1”,
“NW3”, “NW4”, “NW5” and “NW6”
to the affidavit of Nigel Ward sworn on 7 October 2025 and filed in
these proceedings, shall be subject to a confidentiality order.
In accordance
Rule 2.6(3)
Industrial Relations Commission Rules 2022
, access to these
documents shall not be granted to any person other than the parties to these
proceedings, without leave of the Commission.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW – Contracts of Carriage –
application for variation to contract determination – consent
– new determination made – previous determination rescinded
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Cases Cited:
General Carriers Contract Determination 2017
[2017] NSWIRComm 1013
Butchers, Wholesale (Cumberland) Award
1971 AR 425
Transport Industry Courier
and Taxi Truck Contract Determination 2017
[2017] NSWIRComm 1013
Industry – General Carriers Contract Determination
[2016] NSWIRComm
Transport Industry - General Carriers Contract Determination Application by
Australian Road Transport Industrial Organisation, New
South Wales Branch for
removal of Special Fuel Price Surcharge
[2010] NSWIRComm 133
Principal judgment
Hy-Tec Industries Pty Ltd (Applicant)
Transport Workers’ Union
of NSW (respondent)
Representation:
N Ward (Solicitor) (Applicant)
B Ryan (TWU) (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/182583
Publication Restriction:
The documents marked “NW1”, “NW3”,
“NW4”, “NW5” and “NW6” annexed to the
affidavit of Nigel Ward sworn on 7 October 2025 and filed in these proceedings,
shall be subject to a confidentiality order. In accordance
Rule 2.6(3)
Industrial Relations Commission Rules 2022
, access to these documents shall not
be granted to any person other than the parties to these proceedings, without
leave of the Commission.
7 October 2025, Hy-Tec Industries Pty Ltd (
) filed an application
Application
) for the Industrial Relations Commission (
to make a new Contract Determination (
New Determination
), and to rescind
an existing Contract Determination (
Current Determination
) covering the
with the Application on 7 October 2025 were written submissions by Australian
Business Lawyers & Advisors (
Submissions
filed on 7 October 2025 was an affidavit of Nigel Ward (
Ward Affidavit
CEO and Director of ABLA.
Transport Workers’ Union of New South Wales (“
via their representative, Bailey Ryan , Legal Officer, supported the
application.
Background to the application
background to the applications and the nature of the controversy between the
parties was summarised ABLA’s Submissions:
1. BACKGROUND
1.1 Hy-Tec Industries Pty Ltd (Hy-Tec) is a concrete and quarrying company
1.2 Hy-Tec operate 7 concrete plants in Sydney at Glendenning, Alexandria, Emu
Plains, Mulgrave, Preston’s, Rosehill Plant
and Smeaton Grange.
1.3 Hy-Tec delivers concrete utilising a mixed fleet of Contract Carriers,
Hy-Tec vehicles driven by Hy-Tec employees and third-party
fleet operators.
1.4 Contract carriers make up the majority of the fleet.
1.5 Hy-Tec engages 48 Contract Carriers under the Hy-Tec Industries Pty Ltd
– Maxi Concrete Contract Determination, Serial
Determination
1.6 On or around 17 June 2024, Hy-Tec commenced negotiations with the Contract
Carriers, seeking amendments to the Current Determination
as well as the
introduction of new common law contracts.
1.7 On or around 13 May 2025, Hy-Tec filed a Notification to the Industrial
Registrar of an Industrial Dispute, seeking the assistance
of the Commission
pursuant to section 332 of the Act ....
1.8 The parties participated in multiple conferences before the Commission;
Commissioner Muir.
1.9 Following these conferences, and with the assistance of the Commission, the
parties reached an agreement.”
The evidence
Ward Affidavit set out, save as to matters already set out above in [5],
“1. I am the CEO and a Director for Australian Business Lawyers &
Advisors (ABLA) which is an incorporated legal practice.
2. I have held this position for 15 years.
3. Prior to this I:
(a) held the position of EGM HR for Boral Ltd 's Australian Construction
Materials Group and the position of ER GM for Boral Ltd
for 9 years;
(b) operated my own consulting business; and
(c) held the position of Director IR for the then Employers Federation of NSW.
5. Since that time, I have drafted/negotiated Contract Carrier arrangements in
all States and Territories in Australia.
6. This has been in diverse parts of the transport industry including; concrete,
quarrying, brick cartage, roof tile cartage, masonry
cartage, general freight,
cement tankers, gas tankers, couriers, floats, bitumen cartage, furniture
removal, road trains and livestock.
7. As part of this I have developed an expertise in designing and building
Contract Carrier cost and rate models having produced
several hundred such
models since 1984.
8. I was the designer and architect of the cost and rate models used for the
Transport Industry - General Carriers Contract Determination 2017
12. Hy-Tec engages 48 Contract Carriers in total. 39 of these Contract Carriers
operated under term contracts that expired on 30
September 2025; (
Term Contracts
). Hy-Tec continues to engage these Contract Carriers on the
same terms as contained in the Expired Term Contracts. These contracts
for a qualified right of assignment.
13. The remaining 9 Contract Carriers operate under term contracts that did not
expire on 30 September 2025 and are non-assignable
Ongoing Term
14. Both the Expired Term Contracts and Ongoing Term Contracts are contracts of
carriage pursuant to section 309 of the Act.
15. All Contract Carriers work under the Hy-Tec Industries Pty Ltd - Maxi
Concrete Contract Determination, Serial C9335 (
Current Determination
17. The majority of Contract Carriers engaged by Hy-Tec operate '8-wheeler'
vehicles, although a small number of Contract Carriers
operate smaller
'6-wheeler' vehicles (three) and these vehicles are being phased out with those
Contract Carriers moving to an 8-wheeler
when their vehicle is due to be
18. Under the Current Determination, the Contract Carriers have their cartage
rates calculated on the basis of a cost and rate model
19. The Current Model calculates volume-based cartage rates based on utilisation
(which is common practice in the concrete industry).
This means that the lower
the volume carted the higher the cartage rate and vice versa.
20. Cartage rate utilisation is determined on a plant basis rather than a
network basis.
21. On or around 17 June 2024, Hy-Tec commenced negotiations with the Contract
Carriers to negotiate a new cost and rate model to
replace the Current Model,
replacement to the Current Determination as well as new contracts to replace the
Expired Term Contracts.
22. During negotiations, the Contract Carriers were represented by four elected
Contract Carriers (including the Transport Workers
Union of NSW (
Sophia Nasser Legal Officer of (the Contract Carrier Representatives) the
23. Hy-Tec were represented by me, along with Mr David Cilento, General Manager
NSW and Mr Robert Wood, Manager Logistics.
24. In or around November 2024, Hy-Tec provided Ms Nasser with an updated rate
and cost model that was proposed to replace the Current
Model. Ms Nasser was
required to execute a non-disclosure agreement, given the commercial sensitivity
of the cartage rates. Several
versions of this updated model were subsequently
provided to the TWU (the
25. In early 2025, Hy-Tec proposed a series of drafts for a new contract
determination in response to negotiations. These were provided
to the Contract
Carriers' Representatives on or around 3 February 2025, 17 February 2025, 27
February 2025, 11 March 2025, 19 March
2025 and 14 April 2025.
26. At a negotiating meeting on or around 1 May 2025, the TWU indicated that it
did not take issue with the cost inputs that were
included in the proposed cost
and rate model, but that the rates it was generating was not acceptable to the
Contract Carriers for
a variety of reasons (including the rates paid by Hy-Tec's
competitors).
27. On or around 13 May 2025, Hy-Tec filed a Notification to the Industrial
Registrar of an Industrial Dispute, seeking the assistance
of the Commission
pursuant to section 332 of the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
28. The parties participated in multiple conferences before the Commission ...,
over the following four months.
29. Following these conferences, ... the parties have reached an agreement that
(a) a requirement for Contract Carriers engaged under an Expired Term Contract
to enter into a new contract (
New Contract
(b) a request for the Commission to rescind the Current Determination and make a
new contract determination by consent (
New Determination
(c) a new cost and rates model (
New Determination
31 . The parties have agreed to the terms of a proposed New Determination
(annexed to this affidavit and marked "
") and are requesting that the
Commission makes it on a consent basis.
32. The proposed terms of the New Determination are based on the Current
Determination with agreed changes. The New Determination
continues to apply to
single vehicle Contract Carriers (clause 1 and 2.1) and includes necessary terms
for the orderly engagement
of the Contact Carriers:
(a) Provision of vehicle including maximum age (clause 2);
(b) Maintenance of vehicle including de-dagging (clause 9);
(c) Painting of Vehicle (clause 8);
(d) General Operation matters (clause 5);
(e) Periods of driver leave and authorised withdrawal of the vehicle from
performing work (clause 2.6);
(f) Drivers (clause 6) and training (clause 20);
(g) Insurance (clause 12);
(h) Uniforms (clause 10) and safety equipment (clause 11);
(i) Compliance (clause 13), liability (clause 21) and contract administration
including heavy vehicle chain of responsibility (clause
(j) Environmental protection (clause 18) and WHS (clause 19);
(k) The Contract Carrier fleet is effectively represented by the TWU and there
are established internal process for the functioning
operation of the role of
TWU Delegate and also a Hy-Tec Contract Carrier Executive made up of Hy-Tec
Contract Carrier representatives.
In this context, various safeguards protecting
Contract Carrier interests by requiring consultation with Contract Carriers, the
Hy-Tec Executive etc:
(i) introduction of larger vehicles (clause 3);
(ii) introduction of midi vehicles (clause 4);
(iii) fleet changes (clause 7);
(iv) annual cost input review and periodic fuel cost review (schedule 4);
(v) quarterly utilisation reviews (schedule 2); and
(vi) disputes (clause 15).
33. The New Contract Determination has increased various surcharges paid to
Contract Carriers (such as waiting time) and changed
the operation of some
(unloaded km) and introduced new surcharges (re-used concrete).
34. Special rules apply to the residual 6-wheelers in the fleet, and these are
set out in clause 23 and Schedule 7.
35. The proposed terms of the New Determination also provide for the
introduction of Midi-Trucks, a new size of vehicle not currently
Hy-Tec's fleet, subject to consultation between the parties (clause 4 and
36. The parties have agreed to an effective operative date of 1 November 2025
for the New Determination. ...
37. The New Model (annexed to this affidavit and marked "
described in the New Determination as the Hy-Tec Concrete Cartage Cost Model, is
based on the Current Model and continues to
calculate volume-based cartage rates
based on plant utilisation. The New Model works on a true cost recovery plus
profit margin basis,
and factors in all of the relevant costs that a Contract
Carrier is likely to incur in running their business plus an agreed margin
(a) ordinary time labour and overtime labour;
{b) labour related on-costs;
(c) business administration costs;
(d) vehicle finance;
(e) profit (increasing with increased utilisation);
(f) vehicle ‘on-costs’ such as registration and stamp duty; and
(g) insurances.
38. The parties have agreed on the various cost inputs and their starting
39. The vehicle asset price has been set in the New Model and New Determination
until 2035 at an agreed value (Schedule 4, clause
40. The value for labour in the New Model currently exceeds the relevant minimum
award rate set out in the Road Transport and Distribution
Award 2020 and this
value is held until the award 'catches up (Schedule 4, clause 1.1 (e)).
41. Schedule 2 of the New Determination provides for a quarterly plant-based
utilisation review utilising the "median rule" (Schedule
2, clause 1.4).
42. Schedule 4 of the New Determination provides for an annual cost input review
and quarterly fuel cost input reviews.
43. By way of example, on commencement of the New Determination the New Model
provides cartage rates for 8-wheeler vehicles based
on 7000m3 utilisation and
paid as a volume based load fee adjusted for km to deliver the load to the
customer as set out in and marked
" to this affidavit.
44. On commencement of the New Determination the 8-wheeler surcharges will be as
set out in the Surcharge Scheule a copy of which
is annexed to this affidavit
and marked "
45. By way of example, on commencement of the New Determination based on
Schedule 7 of the New Determination, 6-wheeler vehicles
will be paid, based on
5400m3 utilisation and paid as a volume based load fee adjusted for km to
deliver the load to the customer
as set out in and marked annexure "
to this affidavit.
46. On commencement of the New Determination the 6-wheeler surcharges will be as
they operated immediately before the New Determination
commences except that the
surcharges for waiting time, returned concrete and unloaded km will be the same
as set out in "
47. The New Model and the rates it creates are based on objective agreed costs
associated with a Contract Carrier providing their
services and are absent any
gender bias providing equal remuneration for both male and female Contract
Carrier Drivers.”
(Emphasis in original. Footnotes omitted.)
Submissions
remainder of ABLA’s Submissions, save as to matters set out above at [5],
2. CHANGES SOUGHT
2.1 By consent, the parties seek to vary the Current Determination. The parties
consider that the most appropriate way to do so is
for the Commission to make
orders to the following effect:
1. that, pursuant to
section 320
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Hy-Tec Industries Pty Ltd – Maxi Concrete Contract Determination be
rescinded; and
2. that, pursuant to
section 316
Industrial Relations Act 1996
contract determination be made replacing the Hy-Tec Industries Pty Ltd –
Maxi Concrete Contract Determination.
3. THE COMMISSION’S JURISDICTION
3.1 The current proceedings were commenced pursuant to
section 332
Industrial Relations Act 1996
) on 13 May 2025.
3.2 On 9 April 2025, this section was varied by
Industrial Relations
Amendment (Transport Sector Gig Workers and Others) Act 2025
. The amended
section includes the following:
Compulsory conference with respect to disputes
(1) If subsection (2) or (3) applies or the Commission has reasonable cause
to believe that it applies, the Commission may summon
a person to a compulsory
conference—
(a) to confer, or
(b) to give evidence, or
(c) to produce documents or exhibits,
in an endeavour to bring the interested parties to a settlement which will
determine the matter in relation to which the subsection
(1C) The Commission must first attempt to settle the industrial dispute by
conciliation.
(2) This subsection applies if an association registered under this chapter
or a bailor or a principal contractor becomes aware of
an industrial dispute
that relates to a contract of bailment or a contract of carriage, including a
contract of bailment or a contract
of carriage that has been terminated.
(4) At a compulsory conference, the Commission is to investigate the merits
of the matter concerned, irrespective of whether or not
industrial action is
taking place.
(5) If the Commission considers that all reasonable steps have been taken to
resolve the industrial dispute by conciliation, the Commission
may do one or
both of the following—
(a) make a contract determination expressed to be an interim determination made
under this subsection,
(b) make another order or exercise another function the Commission considers
appropriate to resolve the dispute.
(6) An interim determination made under subsection (5)(a)—
(a) may be expressed in the terms the Commission considers appropriate,
including terms to restore or maintain the conditions existing
between the
parties immediately before the occurrence of the events giving rise to the
industrial dispute, and
(b) remains in force for the period specified by the Commission in the interim
determination.
(7) An interim determination or an order the Commission makes under
subsection (5)(b) may apply to one or more parties to the industrial
including a person involved in the contractual chain that relates to the
(8) The Commission must not exercise a function under subsection (5) if, in
the Commission’s opinion, the exercise would interfere
with the reasonable
commercial arrangements of the parties to a contract or arrangement in a
contractual c
3.3 The proceedings arose from a dispute of the type outlined in section 332(2),
namely a dispute related to the contracts of carriage
between Hy-Tec and the
Contract Carriers.
3.4 The parties attended a compulsory conference as required by section 332(1)
and the Commission investigated the merits of the
case as required by section
3.5 The Commission can be satisfied that all reasonable steps have been taken to
resolve the dispute, given:
(a) the extensive conciliation that has taken place, both with and without the
assistance of the Commission; and
(b) the fact that the parties have indicated that they will consider the dispute
resolved if the Commission rescinds the Current
Determination and makes the New
Determination.
3.6 Accordingly, pursuant to section 332(5)(b), the Commission may
exercise another function [it] considers appropriate to resolve the
3.7 The functions of the Commission are set out at section 146 of the IR Act and
are as follows:
(a) setting remuneration and other conditions of employment,
(b) resolving industrial disputes,
(c) hearing and determining other industrial matters,
(d) inquiring into, and reporting on, any industrial or other matter referred
to it by the Minister,
(e) functions conferred on it by this or any other Act or law.
3.8 On the basis that:
(a) the parties to the dispute agree that replacing the Current Determination is
an appropriate way to end the dispute; and
(b) the terms of the New Determination are agreed to and are being sought by
it is appropriate for the Commission the exercise its functions contained in
Chapter 6 by way of rescinding and making the contract
determinations as sought
by the parties.
3.9 Section 320 of the Act provides for variation or rescission of
determinations in the following terms:
320 Variation or rescission of determinations
The Commission may vary or rescind a contract determination and, when it
rescinds a determination, it may replace that determination
determination.
3.10 Section 313 of the IR Act sets out the jurisdiction and powers of the
Commission with respect to making contracts of carriage.
It provides:
313 Jurisdiction of Commission with respect to contracts of carriage
(1) The Commission may inquire into any matter arising under contracts of
carriage and may make a contract determination with respect
to remuneration of
the carrier, and any condition, under such a contract.
(2) The Commission must, when making a contract determination under this
section, consider including provisions relating to the following—
(a) rates of remuneration, including—
(i) payment of allowances instead of annual or other holidays, sick leave or
long service leave, and
(ii) payment methods and periods, cost recovery, ensuring a fair return on
financial risk and capital investment and the value of
entitlements that would
otherwise apply to employees,
(b) record keeping,
(c) training and skill development, including relevant industry
accreditation,
(d) adequate consultation and dispute resolution,
(e) ensuring access to proper representation by an association of contract
carriers, including workplace rights inductions and workplace
(f) the attraction and retention of contract carriers.
(3) The Commission constituted by a Presidential Member may, in relation to
contracts of carriage, inquire into any matter in a contractual
chain and make a
contract determination in relation to remuneration and other conditions in the
contractual chain.
(4) The Commission must not exercise a function under subsection (3) if, in
the Commission’s opinion, the exercise would interfere
with the reasonable
commercial arrangements of the parties to a contract or arrangement in a
contractual chain.
3.11 Sections 313(3) and 313(4) are not relevant to present proceedings.
3.12 Section 146 states that when exercising its functions, the Commission:
must take into account the public interest in the exercise of its functions
and, for that purpose, must have regard to:
(a) the objects of this Act, and
(b) the state of the economy of New South Wales and the likely effect of its
decisions on that economy.
3.13 The objects of the IR Act are set out in section 3 and are as follows:
(a) to provide a framework for the conduct of industrial relations that is
fair and just,
(b) to promote efficiency and productivity in the economy of the
(c) to promote participation in industrial relations by employees and
employers at an enterprise or workplace level,
(d) to encourage participation in industrial relations by representative
bodies of employees and employers and to encourage the responsible
and democratic control of those bodies,
(e) to facilitate appropriate regulation of employment through awards,
enterprise agreements and other industrial instruments,
(f) to prevent and eliminate discrimination in the workplace and in
particular to ensure equal remuneration for men and women doing
work of equal or
comparable value,
(g) to provide for the resolution of industrial disputes by conciliation and,
if necessary, by arbitration in a prompt and fair manner
and with a minimum of
legal technicality,
(h) to encourage and facilitate co-operative workplace reform and equitable,
innovative and productive workplace relations
(i) to encourage strategies to attract and retain skilled staff where there
are skill shortages so as to ensure effective and efficient
delivery of
4. EXERCISE OF THE COMMISSION’S DISCRETION
Transport Industry – General Carriers Contract Determination
[2016] NSWIRComm 3
, Kite AJ considered the approach the Commission should adopt
when faced with applications to vary a contract determination.
4.2 His Honour referred to the TWU submissions which stated:
The parties’ outlines of submissions indicate substantial agreement as
to the general principles to be applied by the Commission,
(a) the Commission is vested with a broad discretion to make contract
determinations under
Industrial Relations Act 1996
(b) that discretion is fettered by the objects set out in section 3 of the
Act and the mandatory considerations set out in section
[146(2)] of the Act;
(c) the determination making process should, in broad terms, abide by the
principles applicable to award making processes including
that the object of the
exercise is to set fair and reasonable conditions of work.
4.3 His Honour also made reference to the decision of Haylen J in
Industry - General Carriers Contract Determination Application by Australian
Road Transport Industrial Organisation, New
South Wales Branch for removal of
Special Fuel Price Surcharge
[2010] NSWIRComm 133
which stated:
There was no dispute between the parties that there was a general and wide
discretion provided by s 320 of the Act to vary a Determination.
It was broadly
accepted that, in exercising that power to vary a Determination, the Commission
may be guided by similar considerations
contained within s 10 and s 17, namely,
that the Determination should set fair and reasonable rates and that in making a
the public interest is to be considered provided there is a
substantial reason for making the variation.
4.4 In considering the approach that he intended to take, Kite AJ stated that
It has long been recognized that Industrial Tribunals are in a different
position to the general courts. The duty of the Commission
is to make an award
or determination which prescribes fair and reasonable rates and conditions. In
doing so the Commission is not
bound by the rules of evidence or to act in a
formal manner but “is to act according to equity, good conscience and the
substantial
merits of the case without regard to technicalities or legal
forms.” See s 163 (1)(c) of the Act.
There must be information before the Commission which allows it to be
satisfied that the determination or award, if made, will provide
reasonable rates and conditions. The assessment of the adequacy of that material
will vary according to the nature of the
including the degree of consent, before the Commission: see In re Butchers,
Wholesale (Cumberland) Award
1971 AR 425
especially at 437- 440.
I intend to approach the matter in that light.
4.5 The following factors may assist the Commission in its consideration of
whether the changes sought will provide “
just and reasonable rates and
Significant History
4.6 The proposed changes to the Current Determination have been the subject of
discussions dating back over 15 months.
4.7 Preceding the many conciliations before the Commission were many months of
negotiations between the parties.
Depth of Conciliations
4.8 The Commission is entitled to be informed by the depth of the negotiations
and conciliations that have resulted in the changes
4.9 As well as including both Contract Carriers and Hy-Tec management, both
sides have been represented by individuals with significant
industrial and legal
knowledge who are experienced in negotiating contract determinations and other
terms of engagement for contract
4.10 This has ensured the commercial viability of the Proposed Rates and their
fairness to the Contract Carriers.
Witness Statement of N Ward
4.11 The Commission should rely on the statement of evidence filed by Mr N Ward
in these proceedings.
4.12 The Affidavit of Mr Ward sets out:
(a) comprehensive details of the New Determination; ...
(b) that the New Determination operates alongside a cost and rate model called
the Hy-Tec Concrete Cartage Cost Model (Annexure NW-3)
which provides for full
cost recovery plus a profit margin for the provision of cartage services by
Contract Carriers;
(c) that the New Determination and the Hy-Tec Concrete Cartage Cost Model
operate on the basis of plant-based utilisation cartage
rates which are reviewed
on a quarterly basis;
(d) that the New Determination and the Hy-Tec Concrete Cartage Cost Model
operate on the basis of an annual cost input review and
a quarterly fuel cost
(e) that the New Determination and the Hy-Tec Concrete Cartage Cost Model
operate to provide comprehensive surcharges some of which
are new, varied and/or
increased in value;
(f) that the Contract Carrier fleet is effectively represented by the Transport
Workers Union of NSW (
) and that established and effective TWU
representative arrangements are in place for Contract Carriers which included a
Carrier elected negotiating Committee for the negotiations leading to
the New Determination and the Hy-Tec Concrete Cartage Cost
(g) that the New Determination provides various safeguards involving the TWU,
Hy-Tec Delegate or Hy-Tec TWU Executive;
(h) that special arrangements are in place for 6-wheeler vehicles that are being
phased out; and
(i) the Hy-Tec Concrete Cartage Cost Model operate to provide comprehensive
surcharges ... some of which are new, varied and/or increased
Appropriateness of Rates
4.13 The proposed rates have been calculated with a detailed cost and rate model
that factors in the fixed and variable costs and
profit that a Contract Carrier
could reasonably be expected to incur when completing a contract of carriage
covered by the New Determination.
4.14 It is well established that the use of a cost and rate models that factor
in cost recovery and profit is an appropriate method
for fixing fair and
reasonable rates of remuneration for contract carriers.
Transport Industry – General Carriers Contract Determination
[2017] NSWIRComm 1013
, Newall C stated:
[19] ...The parties - and I will return to this again later, the importance
of this approach - rather than simply haggling out some
figures that they could
live with, have adopted the approach of developing a quite sophisticated cost
and rate model which is now
exhibit 5 in these proceedings. I have not seen an
exercise of that complexity undertaken by any industry in advancing a new
for the structure of rates and conditions at any time whether in this
Commission or in my experience in other industrial tribunals.
[20] I accept what has been said to me that this model has been developed
with the investment of significant time and resources. Its
value it seems to me
to lie in this: not only does it provide a proper justification for the rates
that are advanced in the present
contract determination application, but it
provides a platform for dealing with disputes if there any during the life of
the determination
and further, for dealing with variations to the determination
going forward. Based on that model and based on the reports and input
into developing the model I am satisfied, as I have said, that the new rates do
set a fair and reasonable safety net of
cartage rates for contract
[21] I accept, as it was submitted to me by the NSW Business Chamber, one of
the employer group representatives, that the rates reflect
proper cost recovery
principles and therefore they allow contract carriers to be properly remunerated
including covering costs. On
the other hand, they do not impose unfair costs on
principal contractors or provide any kind of windfall gain. They are properly
calculated rates factoring in cost recovery and, as was pointed out in
submissions today, a margin.
[29] The parties have decided to take the step of developing, indeed
investing in, this model and approaching their differences and
resolving them in
what is for industrial proceedings a particularly sophisticated way. It is a way
which allows the parties to resolve
not just this immediate difficulty, but the
next round and perhaps the one after that. There is now a model which everyone
understands
and about which everyone agrees which is based not just on haggling
and horse trading, but on proper modelling, proper expert reports,
verifiable evidence. That model allows the parties to see exactly where they
stand and to factor in variations in the future.
4.16 Commissioner Newall’s comments apply equally to the cost and rate
model that has been prepared in the current proceedings
and has been used to
create the Proposed Rates (and is to be used to regularly review and recalculate
rate throughout the life of
the New Determination).
Section 313
4.17 Section 313 now requires the Commission to consider the inclusion of
various content. This is a “consideration”
only. In this case the
parties have formed the view that the content of the New Determination is
satisfactory to their needs and
to the extent that some of the considerations in
s 313 (2) have not been included is because the parties have formed the view
in the context of the consent arrangement negotiated [they] are
unnecessary.
4.18 The current context of an enterprise-based contract determination made by
consent should be contrasted with an industry-based
contract determination. In
the current context the Commission’s “consideration” (which
gives rise to a possible
exercise of discretion) may be more limited and rely on
the views of the parties advancing the consent position.
4.19 This said for completeness certain matters open for consideration have been
(a) Payment for leave has been dealt with in the Hy-Tec Concrete Cartage Cost
Model and the taking of leave is dealt in the New Determination;
(b) The Hy-Tec Concrete Cartage Cost Model includes all ordinary and overtime
labour costs (plus on-costs) relevant to the payment
of employees;
(c) The Hy-Tec Concrete Cartage Cost Model operates on the basis of an agreed
asset value modelling a commercial lease arrangement;
(d) Hy-Tec Concrete Cartage Cost Model provides for agreed levels of profit
increasing as utilisation (productivity) increases;
(e) The New Determination includes extensive consultation and dispute resolution
provisions as is evidenced from paragraph 32 (k)
of Mr Ward’s
(f) Hy-Tec currently has in place acceptable local arrangements for TWU
representation, and the TWU effectively represent contract
carriers as is
self-evident to the Commission from the extensive conciliation process involved;
(g) That the parties are consenting to the arrangements should allow the
Commission to be comfortable that the general scheme of
arrangement [supports]
the retention of the contract carriers in the fleet.
State of NSW Economy
4.20 The rescission of the Current Determination and making of the New
Determination is unlikely to have any significant impact upon
the state of the
economy of New South Wales.
4.21 The Proposed Contract Determination would apply to a single, private sector
business and a (relatively) small fleet of Contract
4.22 While the proposed changes will result in a cost increase for Hy-Tec and
increase in remuneration for the Contract Carriers,
the changes are unlikely to
materially affect the economy of NSW in any real way.
5. CONCLUSION
5.1 The Commission can be content that the proposed rescission of the Current
Determination and making of a new contract determination
as set out in the New
Determination are within jurisdiction and it is proper to exercise discretion to
make the variations sought.”
(Emphasis in original.)
Submissions are fulsome. In the Commission’s opinion ABLS’s
Submissions are comprehensive as to the matters
which need to be considered, and
which may be considered, in determining whether to make a contract
determination.
on those submissions, and in consideration of the TWU’s consent to the
making of the New Determination, the Commission
adopts those submissions as the
basis on which the New Determination is made, effective 1 November 2025.
Accordingly,
it is also appropriate to rescind the Current Determination effective on the
Commission orders that:
(1) Pursuant to
section 313
Industrial Relations Act 1996
contract determination known as the
Hy-Tec Industries Pty Ltd - Maxi Concrete
Contract Determination 2025
is made in the terms stated in Appendix A to
this Decision, with an effective date of 1 November 2025:
(2) Pursuant to
section 320
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Hy-Tec Industries Pty Ltd - Maxi Concrete Contract Determination
C9335 is rescinded, effective 1 November 2025; and
(3) The documents marked “NW1”, “NW3”,
“NW4”, “NW5” and “NW6” annexed
affidavit of Nigel Ward sworn on 7 October 2025 and filed in these proceedings,
shall be subject to a confidentiality order.
In accordance
Rule 2.6(3)
Industrial Relations Commission Rules 2022
, access to these documents shall not
be granted to any person other than the parties to these proceedings, without
leave of the Commission.
Commissioner
Industries Pty Ltd - Maxi Concrete Contract Determination 2025 (94.2 KB,
28 October 2025 - Change to paragraph [4] to correct name of
respondent’s representative
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (309 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter