URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2000/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jonsson v Arkway Pty Ltd [2000] NSWFTT 2 (24 November 2000)
FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL
of New South Wales
[2000 NSWFTT 2]
Jonsson v Arkway Pty Ltd
CM2000/4593
Respondent:
Arkway Pty Limited
File number:
CM 2000/4593
Hearing dates:
Decision made without hearing, with consent of the parties
Submissions closed:
30 August 2000
Date of Decision:
24 November 2000
Gabriel Fleming
Senior Member
Primary Legislation:
Consumer Credit (New South Wales)
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code
Fair Trading Tribunal
Matter for Decision:
Transfer to the Supreme Court
REPRESENTATION
Mr Batley, Solicitor, Legal Aid Commission
Respondent:
Mr Haney, Shakespeare Hanley Solicitors
The Tribunal has jurisdiction in this matter.
The application to transfer these proceedings to the Supreme Court is
The parties are to submit draft orders as to the progress of this matter to
the Tribunal on or before 20 December 2000.
The matter is to be listed for a telephone directions hearing on 21 December
Reasons for Decision:
THE APPLICATION
1 On 4 May 2000 by Ms Jonsson (‘the Applicant’)
lodged an application in the Commercial Division of the Fair Trading
(‘the Tribunal’) against Arkway Pty Ltd (‘the
Respondent’). The Application states that in 1995
the Applicant entered
into a mortgage with the Respondent in relation to a house and land in Uralba in
New South Wales. The mortgage
made provision for the loan of the principal sum
of $110,000 to the Applicant with repayment of this principal plus interest.
mortgage was subject to variation on 4 October 1995, 4 April 1996, 12 May
1998 and 8 September 1999.
2 The Applicant claims that she did not intend to enter into a
mortgage and has had no benefit from the loan. She seeks an order
re-opening of the transactions on 12 May 1998 and 8 September 1999 pursuant to
the Consumer Credit (NSW) Code (‘the
Code’). She also seeks orders
for the imposition of the civil penalty on the Respondent in respect of those
transactions.
The Applicant claims that these transactions did not comply with
the disclosure requirements of the Code and are also unjust.
3 The Respondent has challenged the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
to hear this claim. In summary, the Respondent claims that the Code
apply to the to the transactions between it and the Applicant and as a result
the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear and
determine this application.
4 The Respondent has also submitted that the Tribunal should
transfer this matter to the Supreme Court of NSW. On 30 May 2000 the
issued a Statement of Claim against the Applicant in the Supreme Court. That
claim is currently not proceeding (pursuant
to Section 22 of the Fair Trading
Tribunal Act 1998) subject to a direction from the Tribunal that this
application be transferred
to the Court (section 23 of the Fair Trading Tribunal
5 This decision concerns both the issues of jurisdiction and
transfer. With the consent of the parties the Tribunal has determined
issues on the basis of documents without holding a hearing (Section 31(2) of the
Fair Trading Tribunal Act 1998).
The Relevant Law
6 The Consumer Credit (NSW) Act 1995 (‘the Act’)
confers jurisdiction on the Tribunal in relation to matters under the
Credit (New South Wales) Code (‘the Code’). The Code commenced
operation in NSW on 1 November 1996.
7 Section 8 of the Act provides for the jurisdiction of the Fair
Trading Tribunal as follows;
8 Conferral of judicial
(1) The jurisdiction that is expressed to be exercisable by "the
Court" under the Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Code and the Consumer
(New South Wales) Regulations is exercisable by the following:
(a) in the case of any jurisdiction prescribed by the regulations
for the purposes of this paragraph only the Commercial Tribunal,
[to be read as
the Fair Trading Tribunal from 1 March 1999 in accordance with the Fair Trading
Tribunal Act 1998 Schedule 4, section
(b) except in the case referred to in paragraph (a) either the Fair
Trading Tribunal or any court.
(c) (Repealed)
(2) The jurisdiction conferred on a court by this section (other
than the Fair Trading Tribunal) is subject to the court's general
limits (so far as they relate to the amounts, or the value of property, with
which the court may deal), but is not
subject to the court's other
8 The Fair Trading Tribunal has exclusive jurisdiction in
proceedings brought under section 69, 83(1), 89, 100-104 or 162 of the Code
(Consumer Credit (NSW) Special Provisions Regulation1996). In all other matters
the Tribunal has concurrent jurisdiction with ordinary
9 The Consumer Credit Code forms an Appendix to the
Credit (Queensland) Act 1994
and is incorporated into New South Wales Law by
section 5 of the Consumer Credit (NSW) Act 1995. It represents uniform
legislation
that applies to all consumer credit lending, without monetary limit,
throughout Australia. The Code deals comprehensively with all
consumer lending, from pre-contractual disclosures to the form of credit
documentation, changing and enforcing credit
contracts, civil penalties, related
insurance contracts and remedies for non-compliance.
10 Section 4 of the Code defines ‘credit’ as
For the purposes of this Code, "credit" is provided if under a
(a) payment of a debt owed by one person (the debtor) to another
(the credit provider) is deferred; or
(b) one person (the debtor) incurs a deferred debt to another (the
credit provider).
11 Section 5 of the Code states that “ for the purposes of
this Code, a "credit contract" is a contract under which credit is
provided, being the provision of credit to which this Code
12 Section 6 of the Code details the credit contracts to which the
Code applies. It provides as follows;
Provision of credit to which
this Code applies
6. (1) This Code applies to the provision of credit (and to the
credit contract and related matters) if when the credit contract is
entered into
or (in the case of pre-contractual obligations) is proposed to be entered
(a) the debtor is a natural person ordinarily resident in this
(b) the credit is provided or intended to be provided wholly or
predominantly for personal, domestic or household purposes; and
(c) a charge is or may be made for providing the credit;
(d) the credit provider provides the credit in the course of a
business of providing credit or as part of or incidentally to any other
of the credit provider.
(4) For the purposes of this section, investment by the debtor is
not a personal, domestic or household purpose.
13 Section 7 of the Code sets out the provision of credit to which
the Code does not apply. It does not specifically refer to a transaction
as is in these proceedings. Section 8 of the Code provides as
Mortgages to which this Code applies
8. (1) This Code applies to a mortgage if
(a) it secures obligations under a credit contract or a related
guarantee; and
(b) the mortgagor is a natural person or a strata
corporation.
(2) If any such mortgage also secures other obligations, this Code
applies to the mortgage to the extent only that it secures obligations
credit contract or related guarantee.
(3) The regulations may exclude, from the application of all or any
provisions of this Code, a mortgage of a class specified in the
regulations.
14 Section 11 sets out the presumptions in favour of application
of the Code to all consumer credit transactions. It provides as
Section 11 Presumptions relating to application of
11. (1) In any proceedings (whether brought under this Code or not)
in which a party claims that a credit contract, mortgage or guarantee
which this Code applies, it is presumed to be such unless the contrary is
established.
(2) Credit is presumed conclusively for the purposes of this Code
not to be provided wholly or predominantly for personal, domestic
or household
purposes if the debtor declares, before entering into the credit contract, that
the credit is to be applied wholly or
predominantly for business or investment
purposes (or for both purposes).
(3) However, such a declaration is ineffective for the purposes of
this section if the credit provider (or any other person who obtained
declaration from the debtor) knew, or had reason to believe, at the time the
declaration was made that the credit was in fact
to be applied wholly or
predominantly for personal, domestic or household purposes.
(4) A declaration under this section is to be substantially in the
form (if any) required by the regulations and is ineffective for
the purposes of
this section if it is not.
15 Section 176 (5) of the Code deals with ‘imputed knowledge
of a credit provider’ and provides that ;
176(5) A credit provider is not, for the purposes of
this Code taken to know or have reason to believe something because an officer
agent or employee of the credit provider does so, unless the knowledge or reason
to believe that thing is acquired by the officer,
agent or employee acting in
that capacity and in connection with the transaction concerned.
16 The Respondent submitted to the Tribunal that Section 65 of the
Code is relevant to this matter. It provides that parties to a
credit contract
or mortgage may, by agreement, change its terms as follows;
65. (1) If the parties under a credit contract,
mortgage or guarantee agree to change its terms, the credit provider must,
30 days after the date of the agreement, give to the other party under
the agreement a written notice setting out
(a) particulars of the change in the terms of the credit contract,
mortgage or guarantee; and
(b) any information required by the regulations.
Maximum penalty 100 penalty units.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a change which defers or
otherwise reduces the obligations of the debtor for a period not exceeding
days or to an agreement to increase the amount of credit under a credit
(3) If the parties under a credit contract propose to increase the
amount of credit under the contract by agreement, the credit provider
before the agreement is made, give to the debtor a written notice containing the
information required by the regulations.
Maximum penalty 100 penalty units.
(4) This section does not apply to a change made under Division
17 The Applicant seeks relief pursuant to Sections 70 and 71 of
the Credit Code and Part 6-‘Civil Penalties for defaults of
Providers’. Section 70 provides that the Tribunal may re-open a credit
contract regulated by the Code if the Tribunal
is of the opinion that, in the
circumstances at the time it was entered into, it was ‘unjust’.
‘Unjust is defined
to include ‘unconscionable, harsh or
oppressive.’ Section 71 sets out the orders which the Tribunal may make
if it reopens
a transaction for unjustness.
18 Schedule 2 of the Code contains ‘Miscellaneous Provisions
Relating to Interpretation’. Clause 7 of Schedule 2 provides
interpreting
“a provision of this
Code, the interpretation that will best achieve the purpose or object of this
Code is to be preferred to
any other interpretation”.
Clause 8 then defines and prescribes the appropriate use of
‘extrinsic material’ in the interpretation of the Code.
19 The Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Regulation 1995 similarly
reflect uniform regulation throughout Australia (‘the Regulations’).
They contains ‘Savings and Transitional Provisions” (Part 11). The
parties have referred the Tribunal to the following
relevant provisions of the
Regulations;
Definitions
41 In this part-
“pre-Code credit contract” means a contract for the
provision of credit of a kind to which the Code applies-
(a) made before the commencement of the Code; or
(b) made after the commencement of the Code if the offer by the
credit provider or debtor to enter into the contract was made before
commencement of the Code.
42.Application of Code-Pre-Code contracts other than continuing
credit contracts
42 (1) The Code does not apply to the provision of credit under a
pre-Code contract (other than a continuing credit contract ) or
to the contract
and related matters.
42 (2) To avoid doubt, this section has effect even though credit is
provided after the commencement of the Code.
42 (3) This section is subject to section 52 of this
44 Application of Code –mortgages and
44 (1) The Code applies to a mortgage or guarantee made before the
commencement of the Code to the extent that it secures obligations
credit contract, or related guarantee, to which the Code applies or to the
extent that it guarantees obligations under a
credit contract to which the Code
44 (2) However-
(a) part 3 of the Code (except sections 54(2)and 56) does not apply
to such a mortgage or guarantee; and
(b) part 5, division 2 of the Code does not apply to any enforcement
action under such a mortgage or guarantee that was commenced
before the Code
commences to apply to the credit or related guarantee concerned.
44 (3) The remainder of the Code applies only to anything done or
omitted to be done in respect of such a mortgage or guarantee after
commences to apply to the credit contract or related guarantee
52 Variation of Existing pre-Code non-continuing credit contracts
to increase credit
52 Section 65(3) of the Code applies to a pre-Code contract that is
not a continuing credit contract, despite section 42 of this Regulation.
Facts/Evidence Relevant to Jurisdiction
20 The Applicant filed a Statutory Declaration dated 14 July 2000.
In reply the Respondent filed an Affidavit of Ms Haney dated 1
August 2000. The
Tribunal sets out first the facts established by the documents in evidence and
the evidence of Ms Jonsson and Mr
Haney as to the relevant
21 Ms Jonsson is a forty five year old woman who at all relevant
times has been resident in Newports Lane Uralba.
22 On 1 March 1995 Mortgage No 154077Y over Fl 1331106 (‘the
first mortgage’) was executed by Ms Jonsson personally and
by Ms Haney for
the Respondent, apparently securing an advance of $200,000 to be repaid on 1
March 1996 with interest payable by
equal monthly instalments at the rate of 17%
pa (or 13% pa if paid within 7 days of due date). The property which is the
of the mortgage is Ms Jonsson’s home in Newport Lane Uralba. The
alleged advance was also secured by a Queensland Mortgage
No. 700645606 over Lot
238 on RP 89455 (‘the Queensland mortgage’) being a property in
Broadbeach Queensland.
23 The moneys advanced by the respondent to the applicant (and
secured by the mortgages) were used to purchase the Broadbeach Waters
At all times Ms Jonsson has resided at Uralba.
24 On 4 October 1995 the Applicant and Respondent executed a
document entitled Variation of Mortgage No. 617128F (the 1995 variation),
increasing the principal sum under the first mortgage to $215,000. The
Queensland mortgage was similarly varied.
25 On 4 April 1996 the Applicant and Respondent executed a second
Variation of Mortgage No. 2079518 (the 1996 variation) extending
repayment of principal to 1 March 1997.
26 On 12 May 1998 the Applicant and Respondent executed a document
entitled Variation of Mortgage No. 3992765A (the 1998 variation)
principal sum to $75,000 and extending date for repayment of the principal to 1
March 1999.
27 The Respondent's submissions of 24 June 2000 makes reference to
a variation of the mortgage on about 8 July 1998 increasing the
principal sum
from $75,000 to $90,000. No document reflecting this transaction is in
28 On 8 September 1999 the Applicant and the Respondent executed a
document entitled Variation of Mortgage No. 6208342K (‘the
1999 variation)
reducing the rate of interest to 15.5% pa (or 11.5% pa if payment paid within 7
days of the due date) and extending
the due date for repayment of principal to 1
March 2000.
29 The Respondent submitted that there were no other variations to
the mortgage and that there is currently due a principal sum of
$90,000 plus
of Ms Jonsson
30 Ms Jonsson set out her evidence in her Affidavit dated 14 July
2000. The most relevant parts of that Affidavit are set out as
“. . . 3. Between about 1981 and 1990 I was
involved in a number of business ventures with my father. These included:
a) Approximately, 1981 -1983, Mobil service station at
Collinsville, Queensland,
b) 1985-1987, 1 was manager and licensee of the Lobster Pot
Hotel/Motel, Ballina, a business owned by my father's company;
c) 1988-1990, 1 was manager and licensee of the Glen lnnes New
Tattersalls Hotel/Motel, the business was owned by my father's company.
4. In all these business arrangements, my father controlled the
finances and took care of documents. From time to time he would ask
documents and I would do as he requested. I did not usually read the documents.
I usually accepted a short description
of the document from my father.
5. To the best of my knowledge and recollection I gave a mortgage
over my home at Uralba in connection with the Hotel/Motel business
lnnes. I believe that Shakespeare Haney acted on instructions from my father in
arranging this mortgage.
6. In about 1994 1 received confirmation from Shakespeare Haney
that the mortgage over my home had been discharged. I was concerned
no more involvement in my fathers business affairs but my home had continued to
be at risk. My then husband and I went
to the offices of Shakespeare Haney and
saw Mr Haney. I told Mr Haney to the effect:
"We have not had any business dealings with Dad since 1990 and do
not want our home to be used as security". I also told him to the
"Contact us if Dad wants to use the place as security". Mr Haney replied to the
effect: "I'll contact you".
7. In about early 1995, my father told me that he wanted to buy a
house for my mother.
8. I have no recollection of signing any documents in connection
with the purchase of the property at 8 Crestview Key, Broadbeach,
Queensland.
9. From time to time my father asked me to sign documents of
various kinds. Sometimes he represented to me that a document had to
to resolve some outstanding issue from our shared businesses in 1990 and before.
I do not remember signing any documents
at my father's request in early 1995.
However, I have seen some documents which appear to bear my signature and which
are dated I
March 1995.
[Paragraphs 10-and 11 state that Ms Jonnsson has no memory of
signing the Mortgage dated March 1995 although the signature appears
13. Annexed and marked "C" is a contract for the purchase of a
property at Broadbeach Waters entered on 20 February 1995. This contract
the purchaser as my mother, Mrs Davis. The signature of the purchaser on the
document is the signature of my father, Mr Davis.
I am informed and believe that
this document is from the conveyancing file opened in my name by Shakespeare
Haney in 1995 and forwarded
to my NSW Legal Aid solicitor in May 2000. 1 first
saw this document in June 2000 when my solicitor at NSW Legal Aid showed it to
14. Annexed and marked "D" is a letter from John Reid Real Estate to
Shakespeare and Haney. I am informed and believe that this letter
is from the
conveyancing file opened in my name by Shakespeare Haney in 1995 and forwarded
to the NSW Legal Aid solicitor in May
The letter noted that the contract was in my mother's name, but
named me as the purchaser and noted the writer's understanding that
contracts have been changed into Mrs Davis's daughter name, and that you will
forward the new contract when fully signed to
the Vendors solicitor'.
15. Annexed and marked "E" is a copy, of the contract naming me as
purchaser. This contract is signed by my father in the following
manner: "Mr
Davis for Purchaser". I had not seen this document until my NSW Legal Aid
solicitor showed it to me in June 2000.
16. I never gave instructions to Shakespeare Haney about the
purchase of the Broadbeach property. I never received any correspondence
Shakespeare Haney about the purchase of the Broadbeach property. Most of the
letters addressed to me in the file are addressed
as follows-. "Mrs Jonsson c/-
Mr Davis, PO Box 643 Beenleigh, QLD 4207". Annexed and marked "F" and "G"
respectively is a letter
from Shakespeare Haney dated 9 February 1995 and a copy
of the letter. Both these document's are in the conveyancing file. To the
of my recollection I never received an original letter in the terms of annexure
17. I never authorised Shakespeare Haney to accept instructions from
my father on my behalf. In fact I told Mr Haney not to allow
anything to be done
in my name without informing me.
18. At some point, my father informed me that the Broadbeach
property was in my name. I am not sure whether this occurred before or
property was purchased. When he did tell me, it was in words to the following
effect: "It's in your name because when I
drop of the twig, you'll look after
At about that time, my father had told the family that he had
19. Annexed and marked "H" is a variation of mortgage bearing my
signature and dated 4 October 1995. My signature is purportedly witnessed
Haney. I do not recall signing this document. However, I am certain I did not
sign this document in Mr Haney's presence. I
have never signed a document in Mr
Haney's presence. I have only attended Mr Haney's office on the one occasion
referred to in paragraph
20. Annexed and marked "I" is a copy of an undated form bearing my
signature which purports to authorise Shakespeare & Haney to
sign documents
in connection with an advance of $215,000 to me. I have no recollection of
signing this document.
21. Annexed and marked "J" and "K' respectively are variations of
mortgage dated 4 April 1996 and 12 May 1998. I do not recall signing
documents. However, I am certain that I did not sign them in the presence of Mr
22. I did not become aware of my involvement in these transactions
nor that there was a mortgage over my home until about June 1998.
I separated
from my husband in about October 1997. In about June 1998 his solicitor wrote to
me proposing a property settlement.
23. In the course of negotiations about the property settlement I
learned that there was a mortgage in favour of Arkway Pty Ltd over
24. Hakan claimed an entitlement to division of property including
the Broadbeach property. I disputed that I had any interest in
the property. I
had not contributed any money to its purchase, to the best of my knowledge all
the loan repayments were made by my
father. I thought of it as my mother's
25. In about August or September 1998, 1 received letters from La
Trobe Home Loans of Australia alleging that I was in default in
payment of loans
through them. My father told me to the effect that La Trobe had a mortgage over
the Broadbeach property. I had
no knowledge of these loans before this and I do
not recall signing any loan documents. My father told me that he had put the
property on the market because he could not pay the debt.
26. In about November or December 1998 my husband applied for
interim orders in the Family Court in Lismore to restrain me from dealing
the proceeds of any sale of Broadbeach.
27. On 22 December 1998, 1 agreed to orders in terms of the document
annexed and marked "L". My then solicitor advised me to consent
to the orders. I
did as I was advised, but I regarded it as unfair that my husband should get any
part of my mother's house.
28. Following the sale of Broadbeach in about January 1999, the La
Trobe mortgages were discharged and approximately $31,000 paid
to my solicitor.
Of this money, $8,000 was paid towards an Esanda vehicle lease taken out by my
father in my name. My husband received
$28,000, $5,000 of which came from an
advance on my Visa card. $5,000 was sent to my solicitors in a cheque payable to
To the best of my knowledge this money was used by my solicitors to
pay part of their bills.
29. In about December 1998 my father told me he could not keep up
the loan repayments and he gave me a payment book. I was afraid
that if I did
not make the payments I would lose my house. I commenced making payments in
January 1999. 1 made the following payments-
4 January 1999 $ 975.00
29 January 1999
$ 975.00 8 March
1999 $ 975.00 1 April 1999
$ 975.00 5 May 1999
7 June 1999 $ 875.00 5 July
1999 $ 875.00 15 October
1999 $ 875.00
12 November 1999
$ 875.00 2 December 1999 $ 875.00
30 December 1999
$ 875.00 31 January
2000 $ 875.00 29 February 2000
30. In about June 1999 1 executed a form of variation of mortgage. A
copy of the document is annexed and marked "M". My then solicitor
advised me to
sign the variation form. I had been unable to refinance the loan and he advised
me to the effect that if I did not
sign it I would lose my house. He told me
that signing the document would save me money because it was a lower interest
did not tell me that by signing the document I might lose other rights
in relation to the earlier transactions. I am informed and
believe that the
executed variation was sent by my solicitor to Shakespeare Haney in September
31. Between about 1995 and 1997 my father entered other transactions
in my name. Some of these transactions involved forgery of my
signature. The
debt to Esanda referred to in paragraph 28 above arose from a transaction
entered by my father in my name and from
which I received no benefit.
32. Between 1995 and 1998, 1 occasionally signed documents at my
father's request. Annexed and marked "O" is a number of documents
signature. I do not have all the documents. Those I do have, I found
unexpectedly at my home. I understood that they related
to a lease of
advertising billboards. I signed them at my fathers request in about November
1995. They had been faxed to me by my
father with a request that I sign them and
forward them to a Mr Vaggelas. I have been advised that the documents appear to
to the purchase of property in Queensland. I do not know what happened to
this transaction, but I do not believe that the purchase
was completed.
33. At all times, I believed that the Broadbeach property was to be
my mother's home and that my father would pay the loan for the
have knowingly given a mortgage over my home at Uralba.
34. I did not expect to receive any benefit from the Broadbeach
property. Following the, sale of the property, the only "benefit"
I received was
payment of my solicitor's fees.
Evidence of Mr Haney.
31 Mr Haney is a Director of the Respondent and the Principal of
the Shakespeare Haney Solicitors which is acting for the Respondent.
his evidence in his Affidavit dated 14 August 2000. The most relevant parts of
that Affidavit are set out as follows:
2. The Respondent is a trustee company noted with the
Queensland Law Society for first mortgage investment purposes. The Respondent
holds its mortgage as trustee for the persons who have contributed moneys in the
3. The Respondent had in or about April 1992 previously advanced
seventy two dollars ($72,000.00) to the Applicant on security of
her property at
Uralba (the New South Wales Property).
4. This earlier mortgage had been arranged by the Applicant's
father, Mr Davis, for whom my firm, Shakespeare Haney, had acted for
and at all times he had acted as agent for the Applicant.
5. The earlier mortgage was repaid in full in 1994. I seek leave to
refer to paragraph 6 of the Affidavit of the Applicant sworn the
14th July 2000
and say that I deny that at any stage the Applicant attended my office and told
me that she did not want to have any
further business dealings with her father
or for her home to be used as security and for her to be contacted if her father
to use it as security.
6. In or about 'January 1995 1 received an executed Contract of Sale
between Mr O’Hea and Ms O'Hea as Vendors and Ms Jonsson
as Purchaser for a
property situate at Broadbeach Waters (the Queensland property).
7. I acted for the Applicant in relation to the conveyance and the
Respondent engaged McIvor Coghlan, Solicitors to act on its behalf
in relation
to an advance of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) which was being made
to the Applicant as finance for completion
of the Contract of Sale.
Correspondence in relation to that conveyance was sent to the Applicant care of
her father as was the usual
practice when I had previously acted on behalf of
the Applicant on instructions from her
8. As appears from the Queensland Bill of Mortgage being exhibit "B"
to the Affidavit of the Applicant the Queensland property was
the primary
security for the advance of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). The New
South Wales Mortgage being exhibit A
to the Applicant's Affidavit is collateral
security to the Queensland Mortgage . The reason that collateral security was
was because the Queensland property was not sufficient security to
ensure the Respondent kept within its required loan to value ratio
9. In relation to paragraph 16 of the Applicant's Affidavit I say
that exhibit "F" refers to the enclosure of a Form Q Declaration
Queensland Stamp Duty Form on a contract which is sworn where a person is
applying for concessional stamp duty on a Contract
where the property being
purchased by that person is to be their principal place of residence. Given
that the Applicant was not
residing in the Queensland property it is possible
this letter never was sent as a Form Q was not applicable to her.
10. In relation to paragraph 17 of the Applicants Affidavit I say
that the history of instructions I had received from the Applicant
father was that her father, Mr Davis acted as her authorised agent. I deny that
the Applicant ever told me not to allow anything
to be done in her name without
informing her.
11. In relation to paragraph 19 of the Applicant's Affidavit I say
that if the document to the Applicant's Affidavit has her signature
witnessed by
me then I am certain that that was the case as it is not my practice to be
witnessing people's signature if they have
not signed the document in my
12. In relation to paragraph 28 of the Applicant's Affidavit I say
that it is apparent that whilst the Applicant is denying she had
an interest in
the Queensland property it is clear that she received the benefit of at least
thirty one thousand dollars($31,000.00)
from the sale of that property which was
a contribution towards the property settlement with her then husband. If these
not been paid to her then they, would have been applied in reduction
of the moneys owing under the Respondent's Mortgage.
13. In relation to paragraph 29 of the Applicant's Affidavit I say
that I have checked the Respondent’s records and confirm
that the payments
referred to have been made by the Applicant. At no stage during this period when
the Applicant was making these
payments did she ever dispute the debt or query
the Mortgage or otherwise give the Respondent notice of any problem which she
existed in relation to the debt.
14. In or about March 1999 I caused a Variation of Mortgage to be
sent to the Applicant care of her father together with a bill of
relation to the extension of the loan for a further twelve (12) months. A copy
of my letter and account dated 3rd March,
1999 is exhibited hereto and marked
15. Following the failure of the Variation of Mortgage being
returned to me on the 18th May 1999 1 wrote to the Applicant directly
return of the Variation of Mortgage documents.
[Paragraphs 16-22 of Mr Haney ‘s affidavit refer to
correspondence between the parties from June to July 1999 concerning the
mortgage documents. This includes correspondence from Baker Mannering and Hart,
Solicitors for Ms Jonnsson, and a facsimile from
Greater Building Society in
relation to refinancing of the loan.]
22. By letter dated 6th September, 1999 Baker Mannering and Hart
provided to me the Variation of Mortgage duly executed by the Applicant.
produced and shown to me and marked "TJH 9" is a true copy of a letter from
Baker Mannering and Hart to Shakespeare Haney dated
6th September, 1999.
23. Despite the Applicant obviously obtaining legal advice in
relation to this matter at no stage did Baker Mannering and Hart ever
me either verbally or in correspondence any concerns in relation to the
Applicants liability under the Mortgage or dispute
the Respondents entitlement
to money claimed under it.
24. In relation to paragraph 33 of the Applicant's Affidavit I say
that the Respondent had no knowledge of the true dealings as between
Applicant and her parents and at all times it was the Respondents view that the
Queensland property was an investment property
which had been bought by the
25. In relation to paragraph 34 I say that it is clear from the
terms of paragraph 28 of the Applicant's Affidavit that she received
of a least thirty one thousand dollars ($31,000.00) following the sale of the
Queensland property. This payment is inconsistent
with the Applicant denying she
had any interest in that property.
Furthermore, the terms of the property settlement between the
Applicant and her former husband can only be consistent with the Applicant
having an interest in the Queensland property and her being entitled to the sale
proceeds of that investment property.
The Applicant’s Submissions
32 The Applicant filed written submissions on 29 June 2000 and 22
August 2000. The Applicant contends that the transaction on 12
May 1998 was a
provision of "credit" within the meaning of Section 4 of the Consumer Credit
Code. The effect of the transaction
being to defer payment of a debt allegedly
owed by the Applicant to the Respondent as at 1 March 1997 (the due date for
of the principal amount under the mortgage as varied on 4 April 1996).
33 The Applicant submits that the mortgage dated 1 March 1995 as
varied on 12 May 1998 secures obligations under a credit contract.
The variation
of mortgage dated 8 September 1999 was a provision of credit in that payment of
the alleged debt from the applicant
to the respondent which fell due on 1 March
1999 was deferred. The provision of credit made on 8 September 1999 with effect
1 March 1999 is secured by the mortgage as varied.
34 The Applicant submits that, pursuant to Section 11 of the
Consumer Credit Code, the Code is presumed to apply to the mortgage and
provision of credit (with effect from 1 March 1997) on 12 May 1998 and the
mortgage and the provision of credit (with effect
from 1 March 1999) on 8
September 1999.
35 The Applicant submitted that;
“Acceptance
of the respondent's ingenious argument . . . that the debtor must have a
conscious purpose in order for the Code
to apply would severely undermine the
legislature's intention to provide protection to consumers when it enacted the
Code. . . The
Code contemplates two classes or types of purpose for credit and
no other. They are, on the one hand, "personal, domestic or household"
and, on the other hand, "business or investment" purposes. . . . The Code does
not permit of an interpretation that, where
there is "no purpose", it is
effectively a business or investment purpose and the Code does not apply.
Parliament's intention is
made clear by the enactment, in section 11 of the
Code, of a presumption that the Code applies.
36 The Applicant referred the Tribunal to Clause 7(l) of Schedule
2 to the Code which provides that;
"in the interpretation of a provision of this Code,
the interpretation that will best achieve the purpose or object of this Code
to be preferred to any other interpretation."
37 The Applicant submitted that the correct interpretation of
section 6. is that the Code applies unless it is established that the
has the conscious purpose of using the credit predominantly for a investment
purpose. Alternatively, the Applicant's understanding
that she was helping
provide a home for her mother should be seen as a "personal" purpose.
38 The Applicant argued that the transitional provisions in the
Consumer Credit Regulation recognise the possibility that a pre-Code
could secure obligations which are regulated by the Code. Section 44(l) of the
Regulation provides:
"The Code applies to a
mortgage or guarantee made before the commencement of the Code to the extent
that it secures obligations under
a credit contract, or related guarantee, to
which the Code applies or to the extent that it guarantees obligations under a
contract to which the Code applies."
39 The Applicant referred to the terms of the mortgage which
recognise that the liability of the mortgagor to the mortgagee could
arise under
more than one contract. (Clause 3 of the mortgage). The Applicant submits that
the transactions on 12 May 1998 and
8 September 1999 were provisions of "credit"
within the meaning of section 4 of the Code and that on each occasion a
liability from
the Applicant to the Respondent which was immediately due and
payable was deferred. Therefore the Code applies in full to each provision
credit after 1 November 1996 and it applies to the mortgage except to the
limited extent excluded under section 44(2) of the Regulation.
The Respondent’s
Submissions on Jurisdiction
40 The Respondent filed written submissions on the question of
“Prima facie, given that the applicant's
residence has at all material times been the Uralba property, the provision of
from the respondent to the applicant has been for an investment by the
applicant, ie the purchase of the Broadbeach Waters property.
No other purpose
for which the credit was provided has been suggested by the applicant.”
41 The Respondent relies on Section 6(4) of the Credit Code, to
the effect that investment by a debtor is not a personal, domestic
or household
purpose. Accordingly the Respondent argues that the Credit Code does apply to
these transactions. Further:
“. . .the relevant purposes referred to in
s6(l)(b) of the Credit Code are the purposes as agreed by the parties or,
alternatively,
the purposes as known by the credit provider. . . .This is
confirmed by the provisions of s 11(3) of the Credit Code which essentially
provide that a business declaration under that section is ineffective where it
is shown the credit provider knew or had reason to
believe the credit was in
fact to be applied wholly or predominantly for personal, domestic or household
42 The Respondent submits that;
“. . .the relevant purposes for s6(l)(b) of the
Credit Code are those as agreed by the parties or, alternatively, the purposes
as known by the credit provider is confirmed when one has regard to the overall
purposes and objects of the Credit Code. The Credit
Code regulates the provision
of certain credit and, inter alia, imposes various obligations on a credit
provider. The Credit Code
provides for offences and the imposition of penalties
on the credit provider for breaches of its provisions. If it was the case that
the relevant purposes under s6(1)(b) were only those of the debtor or known by
the debtor, a credit provider could unwittingly, and
through no fault of its
own, breach the provisions of the Credit Code, commit offences and incur
penalties when it is unaware, of
the debtor's purpose,- or ulterior purpose for
the use of the credit”.
43 In submissions in reply to the Applicant’s submissions
the Respondent argued that the "personal, domestic or household purposes"
referred to in s6(l)(b) of the Credit Code refer to purposes of the debtor only
and not any other person”. Ms Jonsson, says
the Respondent, “knew
and understood that the purpose of the credit provided . . was for the purchase
by the applicant of
an investment property at Broadbeach Waters.
44 The Respondent argued that
“. . assuming for the
purposes of this application that the affidavit of the applicant sworn 14 July
2000 is true and correct
and accepted in its entirety, then the evidence of the
applicant is that:
(a) the provision of the loan, the execution of the various
mortgages and variations of mortgages all occurred without her knowledge
(b) all transactions were at the instigation of her father and for
his purposes
(c) - none of the moneys lent were for the applicant's benefit or
Accordingly, on the applicant's own evidence, the loan could not be
said to be for the personal, domestic or household purposes of
the applicant as
required by s6(l)(b) of the Credit Code.”
45 The Respondent also submitted that contract law governing the
contract provides that “.. where an original contract is varied,
original contract is not rescinded or determined (see Tallerman & Co. Pty
Ltd v Nathan's Merchandise (Victoria) Pty Ltd
[1957] HCA 10
(1957) 98 CLR 93).
46 The Respondent argues that the Credit Code does not apply to
these transactions because the Code came into operation on 1 November
does not have retrospective effect. It is argued that the mortgage of 1 March
1995 is a pre-code contract not subject to
the Code, regardless of whether that
contract is varied after the commencement of the code. In the alternative the
Respondent submitted
that the provisions of the Credit Code may only apply to
the actual contracts of variation and those variations. The Credit Code
apply to the mortgage or those obligations which they secure which still subsist
and have not been varied.
47 This is subject to the requirements of Section 65(3) of the
Code which “. . will only apply where it was proposed to increase
amount of credit under the contract. None of the variations of mortgage or 1
March 1997 or 1 March 1999 increased the amount
of credit at all. The variation
of mortgage of 1 March 1998 did not increase the amount of credit beyond the
original amount of credit
of $200,000. In the circumstances, s65(3) does not
apply and the Fair Trading Tribunal has no jurisdiction.”
AND REASONS ON JURISDICTION
48 There are two primary issues for resolution of the Tribunal
disclosed in the above evidence and submissions. They may be stated
Are the original Mortgage and related credit contract
of March 1995, the Variation of Mortgage and related credit contract of 12 May
1998 and the Variation of Mortgage and related credit contract of 8 September
1999 regulated by the Consumer Credit Code?
If the answer to the above is yes, then, does the
‘purpose’ of those transactions exempt them from the provisions of
Consumer Credit Code? In other words was the credit ‘provided or
intended to be provided predominantly for personal, domestic
or household
Application of the Code to Pre-Code
49 The Tribunal finds that Section 11(1) of the Code places the
onus is on the Respondent to establish, by evidence, that the Code
apply to the credit contracts in dispute in this matter, namely the mortgage of
1 March 1995 and the variations of mortgage
of 12 May 1998 and 8 September 1999.
50 The original mortgage of 1 March 1995 secured the provision of
$200,000 in credit from the Respondent to the Applicant. The mortgage
(No 154077Y) contains the credit contract as ‘Annexure A’ to the
mortgage. The variations of the mortgage dated
12 May 1998 and 8 September 1999
were similarly each in the form of a single mortgage document which incorporated
the credit contract
by reference to the original mortgage. The variation to the
terms of the credit contract was stated at Point ‘G’ on
the face of
the ‘Variation of Mortgage’ document.
51 The Tribunal finds that the original mortgage (No 154077Y)
secures obligations under a credit contract which is a ‘pre-code
contract’ as defined in section 41(a) of the Regulations, being a contract
for the provision of credit of a kind to
which the Code applies, made before the
commencement of the Code. On normal principles which preclude retrospective
application
of legislation the original mortgage is not subject to the Code.
Similarly Section 44 must be read to have no application to the
mortgage of 1 March 1995. However the variations of the mortgage dated 12 May
1998 and 8 September 1999, which incorporate
the terms of the original mortgage
by reference, are post-Code transactions which may attract the application of
52 Section 42 of the Regulations provides that the Code does not
apply to a ‘pre-code contract’ and consequently, the
credit contract
of 1 March 1995 is not a contract ‘to which the Code applies’.
However Section 42 must be read subject
to section 52 which provides that
section 65(3) of the Code applies to a pre-code credit contract ‘despite
section 42 of the
Regulation’. Section 65(3) requires that where the
amount of credit is to be increased by a variation, the credit provider
written notice of certain prescribed matters to the debtor where a credit
contract, mortgage or guarantee is changed by agreement.
53 As a general principle the Code does not have retrospective
effect to pre-code contracts. However the Code and the Regulations
as to their application to variations of a pre-code credit contract. Lanyon, in
her commentary on the Code contained
in ‘Australian Consumer Credit
Law’ (Butterworths , Vol 1 at 15799) notes that;
variation contract made after the Code commences could be regulated by the Code
since it may itself be a credit contract within
ss5 and 6. If so, the credit
provider would have to comply with ss14 and 15. This may be very difficult,
especially identifying
the amount of credit and the annual percentage rate. For
all these reasons, it is anticipated that credit providers will prefer
refinance pre-Code contracts rather than to vary them.”
54 The Tribunal is of the view that section 44(3) has a role in
the regulation of variations to a pre-code mortgage which are secured
credit contract regulated by the code. In this matter the variations executed
on 12 May 1998 and 8 September 1999 were variations
of both the mortgage
contract and the credit contract. The variation of the mortgage contract was
referable to the terms of the
original mortgage.
55 The clear weight of authority is to the effect that a variation
of a contract is determined by the intention of the parties. A
variation will
generally leaves the balance of that contract on foot, as of the date of the
original contract, unless the contract
as a whole or in part is expressly
rescinded (Taylor J in Tallerman & Co Pty Ltd v Nathan’s Merchandise
(Victoria ) Pty
[1957] HCA 10
(1957) 98 CLR 93
at 144). It might be argued that the
variations of 12 May 1998 and 8 September 1999 were merely changes to the terms
on which the
credit was provided and the debt deferred. The deferral of the
debt remaining as the date of the original contract of 1 March 1995.
Tribunal rejects this argument.
56 The Tribunal is satisfied that the ‘variation’ of
the credit contracts of 12 May 1998 and 8 September 1999 were transactions
which the Code applied by virtue of sections 4, 5, 6 and 8; (subject to the
Tribunal’s determination in relation to the
‘purpose’ of the
provision of credit). They concerned a fresh provision of credit which was
secured by the existing
mortgage which deferred payment of a debt. The Tribunal
is strengthened in this view because of the particular circumstances in
matter. On the evidence before the Tribunal it appears that at the time of each
variation the date for repayment of the debt
under an earlier variation of the
mortgage and credit contract had already passed. As at 12 May 1998 repayment of
the principal
owing under the contract had been due since 1 March 1998. The
terms of the loan were spent and the Respondent was in a position
to take action
against the Applicant for recovery. Similarly, as at 8 September 1999 repayment
of the principal had been due since
at least March 1999, and possibly July 1999
( if the variation referred to by the Respondent which is not in evidence before
Tribunal was in fact executed). The Tribunal finds that the purported
‘variations’ to the credit contracts on the dates
constituted the ‘provision of credit’ within the meaning of that
term in the Code as at those dates.
57 The Regulations do not otherwise provide for the application of
the Code to a variation of a pre-code mortgage (being a mortgage
which secures
obligations under a credit contract, section 8 of the Code). Section 44 of the
Regulations applies to the Mortgage
of 1 March 1995 to the extent that it
secures obligations under the credit contracts of 12 May 1998 and 8 September
1999 (section
58 The exceptions in Regulation 44 are of significance in
understanding the application of the code to a pre-code mortgage and related
credit contract. Part 3 of the Code (except sections 54(2) and 56) which
regulates the form of regulated mortgages and other matters
prohibited by the
Code does not apply to a pre-code mortgage. Part 5 Division 2 of the Code,
which concerns the ending and enforcement
of credit contracts, mortgages and
guarantees also does not apply.
59 The end result of this reasoning is that if a pre code credit
contract, mortgage or guarantee is varied after the commencement
of the Code it
is subject to Section 65(3) and, where the amount of the credit under the
contract is increased, the debtor must be
given the prescribed notices. Where
that variation amounts to a provision of credit pursuant to the Code then the
variation to the
pre-code credit contract will itself be regulated by the Code.
In addition if, after commencement of the Code, (1 November 1996)
anything is
‘done or omitted to be done’ in respect of a mortgage related to the
provision of credit which was entered
into prior to this time, then the Code
will apply.
60 The application of this interpretation to the facts of this
case is as follow;
original mortgage of 1 March 1995 is a mortgage which secured the provision of
credit under a credit contract of the same date.
The mortgage was executed
prior to the commencement of the Code on 1 November 1996.
The Code only has application to the original mortgage of 1 March
1995 to the extent that it secures obligations under a credit contract
the Code applies (Section 44 of the Regulations).
The Code has no application to the credit contract of 1 March 1995
(Section 42 of the Regulations).
The variations of 12 May 1998 and 8 September 1999 are contracts for
the provision of credit which are regulated by the Code. They
are secured by
the mortgage of 1 March 1995 as varied.
The Code applies to ‘anything done or omitted to be
done’ in respect of the mortgage of 1 March 1995 (‘the related
mortgage’) as of the 12th May 1998 (Section 44(3) of the Regulations)
being the day the Code commenced to apply.
61 The containment of the mortgage and credit contract within the
one document is confusing to the extent that the terms set out in
the mortgage
document at Annexure A are the terms of the credit contract. However the
application of the Code in the restricted
way envisaged above does not affect
the form of the mortgage and credit contract as they were prior to 12 May 1998.
Whether or not
it is applicable to the form of the variations is a matter for
consideration in the substantive hearing of this application.
62 The Tribunal is of the view that this interpretation is
consistent with the principles of consumer protection and ‘truth
lending’ which are embodied in the Code. This is uniform legislation
which is intended to regulate all consumer credit
dealings in Australia in a
fair and consistent way
63 At the same time, this interpretation protects the credit
provider from any unfairness associated with giving legislation retrospective
effect. Clearly parties cannot comply with legislation which is not yet passed.
The exceptions in Regulation 44 relieve the credit
provider of obligations in
relation to the form of the mortgage documents and the Code provisions on the
ending and enforcement of
the mortgage. To require compliance with these
provisions when the mortgage was executed prior to the Code would obviously be
64 The application of the Code to later transactions provides for
the consumer protection principles embodied in the Code to have
effect as and
from its commencement.
of the Provision of Credit
65 The Respondent argues that the Code does not apply to the
transactions because the purpose of the provision of credit to Ms Jonnsson
investment. This is a matter for the Respondent to prove on the
66 The Code is unclear as to whether the relevant
‘purpose’ is that of the debtors actual purpose in obtaining the
or the purpose to which the credit provider believes the credit will be
put.(For a discussion of this point see A Duggan and E Lanyon
Consumer Credit
Law, Butterworths 1999 at 60). The Tribunal is of the view that it is inquiry
and determination of Ms Jonnsson’s,
(the debtors) actual purpose in
obtaining the credit which is relevant to the determination of this issue. It
may be inferred from
the wording of both section 6 and section 11 that it is the
debtors actual purpose in relation to the use of the credit which must
ascertained.
67 The words ‘personal, domestic household’ are not
defined in the Code and are to be determined in accordance with their
meaning. This phrase is however has a counterpart in section 52 of the Trade
Practices Act (Cth) in relation to ‘goods
and services’ and it is
well understood in that context (see State Bank v Sullivan
[1999] NSWSC 596
July 1999). It is essentially a question of fact in each case.
68 The Tribunal notes the words of Justice Gillard in Linkeholt
Pty Ltd v Quirk
[2000] VSC 166
(5 May 2000) where his honour was similarly
called upon to determine the ‘purpose’ of a credit transaction under
my opinion, it is appropriate to consider what the money was used for in order
to determine the purpose of the provision of the
credit. In considering the
question it is important to consider the substance of the transaction in the
context of its performance.
69 Section 11(2) of the Code provides a mechanism for the
conclusive rebuttal of the presumption that credit is provided for
domestic or household purposes’. This mechanism is the
completion of a declaration that the credit is not provided for this
which is made substantially in the form set out in the Regulations. Ms Jonnsson
did not complete a section 11 declaration.
70 Importantly, the procedure set out in section 11 enables a
credit provider to establish that a transaction is not for a purpose
the Code applies. Had the Respondent obtained a declaration of the kind
referred to in Section 11 then it would have been
able to rely on it as evidence
of the purpose of the transactions in this matter. The failure to obtain the
relevant declaration
is related to the Respondent’s belief the original
mortgage and subsequent variations were unaffected by the Code because the
original mortgage was executed before the Code came into effect on 1 November
71 The Respondent submits that Ms Jonnsson’s evidence admits
of ‘no purpose’ in that she denies her active involvement
transactions and refers to the action of her father in procuring the loans. The
Tribunal agrees with the submission of the
Applicant that the Code does not
contemplate a provision of credit which meets ‘no purpose’. It is
unlikely that such
a case would arise where a person genuinely borrowed a
substantial amount of money with no purpose in mind. There might however
claims that the that there purported borrower was subject to a fraud. In that
case there is clearly no ‘purpose’
in the person upon whom the fraud
is committed and who appears in the transaction as a borrower. The Code does
not expressly contemplate
this scenario in the terms of sections 6 and 11 but
rather distinguishes between purposes which are predominantly ‘personal,
domestic or household’ and those which are predominantly for
‘business or investment’. However section 11 does
not require the
‘true purpose’ of the borrower to be ascertained. A section 11(3)
declaration would, for example, not
be rendered ineffective because the
declaration was found later to be false in that the credit was used for a
different purpose.
Section 11 is an important evidentiary provision which
related to ‘any proceedings’ in which purpose is in issue. The
Tribunal does not accept that where, for instance, credit was provided to a
person on the basis of a fraudulent representation, the
Code would be presumed
not to apply. This is exactly the kind of transaction with which a law
concerned with consumer protection
seeks to address.
72 The Tribunal has found that the Code applies to the
transactions dated 12 May 1998 and 8 September 1999. Section 6 provides that
the relevant purpose of the ‘provision of credit’ is to be
determined at the time when the contract was entered into.
It is thus the
purpose of Ms Jonnsson at the time of those transactions which is relevant.
73 The Tribunal is not here determining the substantive merits of
Ms Jonnsson’s claim to have the transactions reopened although
much of the
evidence is common to both this and the issue of ‘purpose’ in
relation to the loan. It should also be remembered
that the evidence before the
Tribunal is by way of documents and was not tested by cross
examination.
74 The evidence before the Tribunal is that Ms Jonnsson at no time
lived in the in the property in Queensland which, together with
her own home in
Uralba, NSW, was security for the loan. The Tribunal accepts that she was
involved in a number of business transactions
with her father from 1981 to 1990.
It is clear that Ms Jonnsson knew of the loans in relation to the Queensland
property some time
in 1998 proceedings. While she has stated that she does not
recall signing the Variation of 12 May 1998, it bears her signature.
Queensland property was again brought to her attention in June 1998 in the
course of her divorce.
75 The Tribunal also accepts that Ms Jonnsson knew of the loans in
1999 prior to signing the Variation of Mortgage dated 8 September
made repayments in fear of losing her home in Uralba. The Tribunal also accepts
Ms Jonnsson’s evidence that she
believed at all times that the Queensland
property was the home of her mother
76 The Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s contention
that the provision of credit to the Applicant has at all times been
investment by the Applicant in the Queensland property. At all times the
Applicant’s mother resided in that property.
There is no evidence that
the Applicant rented the property or otherwise gained any commercial benefit
from it. The evidence before
the Tribunal is that Ms Jonnsson’s
involvement in the original mortgage was for the purpose of financing a home for
her mother.
To the extent that the evidence establishes Ms Jonnsson had any
purpose in relation to the variations of the mortgage in May 1998
and September
1999 it was to preserve her own home in Uralba. The Tribunal is of the view
that these are ‘personal’
purposes’ no ‘business or
investment purposes’.
77 Having carefully considered the evidence and submissions, the
Tribunal is not satisfied that the Respondent has established that
extended to Ms Jonnsson by the original mortgage and the transactions of 12 May
1998 and 8 September 1999 were not intended
to be provided wholly or
predominantly for personal domestic or household purposes.
78 Having made the above findings the Tribunal has jurisdiction to
hear this application.
The Relevant Law
79 Section 23 of the Fair Trading Tribunal Act 1998 provides as
Transfer of proceedings to other courts or
(1) If all parties so agrees or the Tribunal of its own motion or on
the application of a party so directs, proceedings instituted
in or before the
Tribunal must be transferred in accordance with the rules of that court, to a
court that has jurisdiction in the
matter and are to continue before that court
as it they had been instituted there.
Respondents Submissions on Transfer
80 The Respondent wants to proceed in the Supreme Court with its
proceedings for possession of the Uralba property. The Respondent
“. . . the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to
hear and determine proceedings for possession.. . . The matters alleged and
relief claimed under ss7O and 71 of the Code as set out in the application
could, if proved, give rise to defences or other similar
relief at common law,
in equity or pursuant to the Contracts Review Act in the Supreme Court
possession proceedings. The Tribunal
has no jurisdiction to hear or determine
such defences or provide that other relief to the applicant. . . Subject to the
of the Tribunal proceedings, the respondent will have to continue or
recommence proceedings for possession against the applicant
at the conclusion of
the Tribunal proceedings. Subject to possible but remote arguments of estoppel,
the respondent will be able
to raise those other defences or other relief in the
possession proceedings. In any event, as a practical matter, any argument as
estoppel would not be heard until the final hearing of the possession
proceedings.
81 The Respondent argues that transfer will not cause prejudice to
the Applicant and that she “will be able to raise all other
defences and
other relief in the Supreme Court which she presently is unable to raise in the
Tribunal.” At the same time it
argues ‘real prejudice’ to it
if the proceedings are not transferred in the event that it is successful in the
proceedings will then still need to be brought in the Supreme Court for
possession of the property, resulting in increased cost and
delay. It would
also, argues the Respondent, result in a “. . waste of judicial resources
for there to be two sets of proceedings
on essentially the same facts or
Applicant’s
Submission on Transfer
82 The Applicant submitted that at the time she made her
application to the Tribunal no issue arising under the application was the
subject of dispute in proceedings pending before a court. Under Section 22 of
the Fair Trading Tribunal Act the Supreme Court has
no jurisdiction to hear or
determine the issue.
83 The Applicant opposes the Respondent's application for transfer
of the matter to the Supreme Court. The Applicant argued that
the additional
cost, delay and inconvenience which this would cause were significant issues for
her. The Applicant also submitted
“ The Tribunal has
exclusive jurisdiction to determine the application for the imposition of a
civil penalty: section 8(l)
Consumer Credit Administration Act 1995
and clause 5
Consumer Credit (New South Wales) Special Provisions Regulation 1996. It also
has exclusive jurisdiction to order compensation
to the Applicant for breaches
of key disclosure requirements and/or other contraventions of the Code. . .
Therefore, the possibility
of two sets of proceedings would not be avoided if
the matter were transferred to the Supreme Court. . . .
Findings and Reasons on Transfer
84 This application was lodged in the Tribunal prior to the
commencement of other action in the Supreme Court. The Tribunal therefore
Section 22(3) of the Fair Trading Tribunal Act
85 The Tribunal is of the view that it is not relevant to the
transfer of these proceed that the Applicant is represented by a Solicitor
the Legal Aid Commission.
86 The Respondent referred the Tribunal to the defences available
to it pursuant to the Contracts Review Act (NSW) 1980. It should
be noted that
section 70 of the Code are based on the Contracts Review Act and are
substantially the same terms. The Tribunal does
not accept the Respondents view
that there are ‘defences’ to such an action which are only arguable
before the Supreme
Court nor that the relief available in the Tribunal is
limited. Section 71 of the Code, which sets out the orders which the Tribunal
might make on an application to re-open the transaction. The Contracts Review
Act does, however, provide specific remedies in relation
instrument’ which the Respondent may seek to activate in this
87 The Tribunal places significant weight on the fact that the
Applicant has chosen the Tribunal as the forum for resolving this dispute
does not consent to the transfer of these proceedings to the Supreme Court. The
Tribunal obviously, and intentionally, operates
differently to a court.
Proceedings are informal, expeditious and inexpensive (Sections 3, 27, Fair
Trading Tribunal Act 1998).
It is precisely for these reasons that Ms Jonnsson
has chosen to lodge this application in the Tribunal and the Tribunal has a
duty to determine the application.
88 Section 23 of the Fair Trading Act 1998 provides for the
transfer of matters to a Court of competent jurisdiction where both parties
consent to that transfer or the Tribunal of its own motion transfers the
proceeding. The Tribunal is of the view that this provision
is relevant where,
for instance, ‘new’ law is being tested or where the determination
of legal issues might affect a
large number of potential claimants. In other
cases, the consent of the parties is a crucial element in the Tribunal’s
consideration
of whether to transfer a matter pursuant to section 23. The
Tribunal also has specific power to refer a question of law to the Supreme
where this is deemed necessary (Section 62).
89 The legislature has vested both exclusive and concurrent (with
the courts) jurisdiction in the Tribunal under the Credit Code.
This allows the
Tribunal to develop a high level of expertise in matters under the Code, as was
the case with the Commercial Tribunal
of NSW. This matter is not one of such
complexity nor of effect on such a large number of litigants that it would
warrant transfer
to the Court. It would be expected that in matters under the
Credit Code it is desirable for matters to be heard in a forum which
inexpensive and informal. The Tribunal is such a forum. In addition the
procedural flexibility which the Tribunal has is demonstrated
by the use of the
power to determine matters ‘ on the papers’, without an oral
hearing, which has been used in this case.
90 On balance, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the
Respondent’s claim to disadvantage through ‘double litigation’
is sufficient to warrant transfer of this claim. The Application was already
before the Tribunal when proceedings were commenced
by the Respondent in the
Supreme Court. To transfer the matter to the Court on the basis that the
Respondent would be in a more
convenient position to pursue an action for
possession of the property is to pre-empt the outcome of these proceedings. It
also do so at significantly greater cost to the Applicant.
91 The Tribunal refuses the application to transfer the
proceedings to the Supreme Court.
92 The Tribunal has made further directions to facilitate the
progress of this application to hearing on the substantive claim. They
1. The Tribunal has jurisdiction in this matter.
2. The application to transfer these proceedings to the Supreme
Court is refused.
3. The parties are to submit draft orders as to the progress of
this matter to the Tribunal on or before 20 December 2000.
4. The matter is to be listed for a telephone directions hearing
on 21 December at 9am.
................................
Gabriel Fleming
Senior Member
HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THIS IS A TRUE AND ACCURATE RECORD OF THE REASONS FOR
DECISION OF THE FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL.
REGISTRAR/DEPUTY REGISTRAR
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (188 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter