URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSIRADRS/2020/253.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ARA v Allianz (Claims Assessment) [2020] NSWSIRADRS 253 (30 November 2020)
ARA v Allianz (Claims
Assessment)
[2020] NSWSIRADRS 253
NSW DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE (NSWDRS)
Miscellaneous Claims Assessment
Claimant was mostly at fault for causing the accident – contributory
negligence – greater than 61% - jogging stepped off
gutter on to road and
hit by a car – departure from the standard of care of a reasonable person
- version of events changed
over time - legal costs awarded - exceptional
circumstances
Legislation Cited
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Cases Cited
Smith v Zhang
[2012] NSWCA 142
AAI Limited t/as GIO v Moon
[2020] NSWSC 714
San v Rumble (no 2)
[2007] NSWCA 259
Professional Services review Committee No 295
[2007] FCA 388
ARA – Claimant
Allianz – Insurer
This decision has been edited to remove all Unique Personal
Identification including the name of the Claimant
MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
Issued in accordance with
section 7.36(5)
Motor Accident Injuries Act
7.441 of the
Motor Accident Guidelines
Determination of a matter declared under Schedule 2(3) of
the Act to be a miscellaneous claims assessment matter
Insurer’s claim number
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
Date of Accident
29 November 2019
DRS Reference
DRS Claims Assessor
Date of Decision
30 November 2020
Method of Assessment
Assessment undertaken on the papers
Teleconferences
24 June 2020 at 11.00am
11 November 2020 at 3.00pm
Legal Representative for Claimant
Mr Anthony Mastrogiannis of AM Lawyers
Legal Representative for Insurer
XYZ of Allianz Insurance
the purposes of
sections 3.11
Motor Accident Injuries
, the Claimant was mostly at fault for causing the accident.
Claimant’s costs are assessed at $14,619.55 inclusive of GST ($13,290.50
plus $1,329.05 GST).
Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
30 November 2020
REASONS FOR DECISION – MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS ASSESSMENT
Issued in accordance with
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
INTRODUCTION
was a pedestrian involved in a collision in the slip lane off Rocky Point Road
heading into Water Street, Sans Souci.
came into contact with a car which was driven by MJN and insured for compulsory
third party (CTP) purposes by Allianz.
diagram of the location of the accident was included in the Insurer’s
investigator’s report [R7] and is reproduced below.
MJN was driving north
along Rocky Point Road turning left into Water Street and ARA was jogging along
the foot path of Rocky Point
Road intending to cross Water Street. There is a
guard rail between the footpath and the road way marked by what looks like black
dots on the diagram below.
[Diagram 1]
photograph of the scene of the accident showing the slip lane and the guard rail
from the Investigator’s report is reproduced
[Diagram 2]
is no dispute that the Claimant was intending to cross the road and was to the
left of the leaning telegraph pole.
claim [A2] was for statutory benefits pursuant to Part 3 of the
Accident Insurance Act
2017. As ARA was a worker his statutory benefits
included weekly income support payments as well as treatment and care benefits.
Legislative Framework
3.1 of the Act provides as follows:
(1) If the death of or injury
to a person results from a motor accident in this State, statutory benefits are
payable in respect of
the death or injury as provided by this Part.
(2) Statutory benefits are payable (except as otherwise provided by this
(a) whether or not the motor accident was caused by the fault of the owner or
driver of a motor vehicle in the use or operation of
the vehicle, or
(b) even if the motor accident was caused by the fault of the person to whom
the statutory benefits are payable.
benefits are payable by the ‘relevant insurer’ in accordance with s
3.2 which provides as follows:
(1) The statutory benefits payable
under this Part are payable by the relevant insurer.
(2) The relevant insurer is (subject to this section and section 3.3):
(a) if the motor accident concerned involved only 1 motor vehicle with motor
accident insurance cover—the insurer of the motor
vehicle, or
(b) if the motor accident concerned involved more than 1 motor
vehicle—the insurer of the at-fault motor vehicle, or
(c) in any other case—the Nominal Defendant.
ARA is entitled to statutory benefits in accordance with s 3.1 regardless of
fault, ARA’s payments of statutory income
support benefits may cease 26
weeks after the accident if he is wholly or mostly at fault (or if he has only
minor injuries) in accordance
with section 3.11 as set out below.
(1) An injured person is not entitled to weekly payments of
statutory benefits under this Division for treatment and care expenses
more than 26 weeks after the motor accident concerned if:
(a) the motor accident was caused wholly or mostly by the fault of the person
(b) the person’s only injuries resulting from the motor accident were
minor injuries.
(2) A motor accident was caused mostly by the fault of a person if the
contributory negligence of the person in relation to the motor
accident (as
referred to in section 3.38) was greater than 61%.
is a similar provision with respect to the cessation of treatment and care
benefits at s 3.28.
Insurer’s decision making
a letter dated 7 January 2020 [A3], Allianz accepted liability for the claim
and, in accordance with s 3.2 of the Act, Allianz
as the ‘relevant
insurer’ has been paying ARA his statutory benefits.
a liability notice dated 16 March 2020 [A4], Allianz advised ARA his statutory
benefits would come to an end pursuant to s 3.11
and s 3.28 of the Act because,
in the view of Allianz, ARA was ‘
at fault in causing his
sought an internal review of that decision and on 7 April 2020, XYZ for Allianz
decided [A5] that while liability to pay ongoing
benefits continued to be
denied, the reasons for denying liability were varied as XYZ said ARA was
at fault because he was guilty of contributory negligence which
she assessed at 75%.
has never been any issue about the seriousness of ARA’s injuries. With
fractures around his eye socket, he has been determined
as having more than
‘minor injuries’.
Referral to the Dispute Resolution Service and matter
has referred to the Dispute Resolution Service (DRS) what he describes as a
‘merit review matter’ however, what has
been referred is the dispute
‘miscellaneous claims assessment
matter’ under Part 7, subdivision 3
of the Act and as listed in Schedule 2 of the Act section 3(e). The parties have
that I must also consider the issue of the degree of contributory
negligence under s 3.38 for the purposes of reducing ARA’s
weekly income
benefits which is also a miscellaneous claims assessment matter listed in
Schedule 2 at 3(g).
has referred the dispute to me for assessment and I have conducted two
preliminary conferences. During the course of those preliminary
conferences the
parties have confirmed significant concessions as follows:
Insurer has conceded (in its submissions) that its insured, MJN, breached his
duty of care to the Claimant; and
Claimant (at the second preliminary conference) concedes that there must be a
finding of contributory negligence against him.
the only issue for me to determine is the degree of the Claimant’s
contributory negligence. If it is greater than
61% then all of the
Claimant’s statutory benefits must cease. If ARA’s contributory
negligence is 61% or less then his
statutory benefits will be reinstated
although his weekly income statutory benefits will be reduced by the amount of
contributory
negligence I assess.
of the limited issues in dispute between the parties, I determined that I would
assess the claim on the papers and not proceed
to an assessment conference
hearing. The parties did not object to that course of events.
REVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE Emergency service personnel records
NSW Ambulance Service attended the scene of the accident and took ARA to St
George Hospital. Their report [R3] states:
O/A [on attendance] 69
year old male pt [patient] sitting on chair. Driver of Hilux 4WD states he was
travelling at approx. 20kmph
along street, when Pt ran out suddenly and crossed
the road, hitting the front passenger side door of his vehicle – as
stopped Pt bounced off and fell to the ground. Driver states he got out
to assist Pt and Pt appeared quite vague, then seemed to
recover. Pt agreed with
the above statement and states when he fell after running into car he put his
hands out and hit head on the
Police report [R4] dated 5 March 2020 records as follows:
6.10am on Friday the 29/11/2019 a Toyota was travelling north on Rocky point
road and was turning in Waters st, Sans Souci.
As the driver turned left into
the waters st a pedestrian ran across the road and into the side of the Toyota
causing the pedestrian
to fall and cut his head.
retained an investigator from the firm Quantumcorp who interviewed the attending
police officer identified in the above report,
Constable Poynter of St George
Police Station and the transcribed record of interview contains the following
statement from the Claimant
(the date of which is not recorded) which was read
from the Constable’s notebook:
of November 2019 I was running on the footpath of Rocky Point
Road in a northerly direction. I was about to cross the street near
the pool. I
don’t know the pool name or the cross street. I just stepped off the
gutter when I was hit by a grey coloured four
wheel drive. I don’t know
the make or model. I hit the side of the car and fell down on the gutter.
Someone came and helped me up. The driver helped me. Someone called the
ambulance. I think it was the driver. I waited on the side
of the road till the
ambulance came and took me to hospital.
I only quickly looked and did not see the car turning.
record of interview with the Police Constable says that the notebook statement
was signed by ARA and she says ARA was in his hospital
gown so it appears the
statement was taken on the day of the accident (as ARA was discharged on the
same day he was admitted).
Poynter took a statement from the driver, MJN the day after the accident on a
‘from of demand’ which has also
been read to the investigator and
recorded in the transcript of interview as follows:
He said he was
travelling north along Rocky Point Road, Sans Souci and he was turning left into
Water Street. As he was half way around
the corner he heard a loud thud on the
left-hand side of his car. A jogger who he now knows as ARA ran into the side of
He stopped immediately and gave assistance to him. He couldn’t
see him because he was wearing a dark grey top and light grey
pants so he
blended into the pavement.
The Claimant’s evidence
his application for personal injury benefits (claim form) dated 10 December
2019, ARA gave this description of the accident:
I was jogging
along Rocky Point Road Sans Souci, heading North. I was about to cross Water St
when motor vehicle ... performed a left-hand
turn, side swiped me and caused me
to fall to the ground on the footpath / kerb.
has provided a statement dated 5 May 2020 [A6]. He says:
had left home for his daily run wearing blue shorts and a light t-shirt [7];
was carrying a small radio but was not wearing headphones [7];
details his route [8] and says he intended to cross the slip lane to the traffic
island then the second slip lane and continue
on Rocky Point Road towards home
says when he was 20 metres from the kerb next to the slip lane he started
looking to his right towards Rocky Point Road to check
for traffic and ensure it
was safe to cross. He says he ‘looked several times, every few
metres’ and he has attached
photographs showing how he looked [10];
did not see any vehicles and thought it was safe to cross [11];
said ‘when I reached the kerb ... there was a sudden flash of movement
before me. This was a vehicle that had suddenly turned
into the slip lane ... I
felt a force like a gust of wind from the vehicle’[12];
he felt this ‘gust-like force’ he was standing on the edge of the
kerb ‘in my running motion’ [13];
vehicle was ‘very close to the kerb’ although he cannot say exactly
how close but closer than a random vehicle he
photographed and attached to his
‘wind gust-like force’ that he felt ‘caused my senses to
deteriorate and my balance to falter. My head and torso
lent forward and there
was an impact with the vehicle. I must have turned my face at the last moment
because the impact was to the
right side of my face.’[15]
Claimant attached a sketch of the vehicle and marked essentially the
‘B’ pillar, that is the middle of the cab of
the vehicle between the
front doors and the back doors [16];
vehicle moved past him and the impact with the vehicle caused ‘my feet to
leave the kerb’ and he twisted and collapsed
to the ground [17];
Claimant remembers getting into the ambulance [21] and having a conversation but
does not recall being asked how the accident
happened [22] and he does not agree
with what is in the ambulance report about him agreeing with the driver [23];
Claimant says he does not recall speaking with police or being interviewed and
he does not have a copy of any statement he gave
to the police [27];
had an MRI of the brain which ‘concluded that I suffered a traumatic brain
injury.’[30]
does not admit saying to the ambulance or police that he ran onto the road but
admits he was in the process of crossing the road
but his feet had not left the
kerb and he had not stepped on to the roadway. He said he ‘checked for
turning vehicles’
but did not see any with a left-hand indicator activated
and believed it was safe to cross the road [40].
are inconsistencies in the statements (which he does not identify) [43].
Other material and evidence relied upon by the Claimant
have been provided with a letter from the Claimant’s solicitor to the
Insurer’s investigator dated 5 February 2020 [A13].
It appears to be in
response to a series of questions, which I do not have. It has been prepared by
the Claimant’s solicitor
presumably on instructions from the Claimant.
This document is of limited assistance to me as I cannot determine the context
of the answers. I do note however the Insurer’s submissions
document some of the questions and answers which include the following
information:
first time the Claimant saw the Insured vehicle was when the Claimant collided
with it and it appeared suddenly and without warning;
Claimant was on the kerb and the left side of the vehicle hit the right side of
the Claimant’s face;
Claimant had been looking but did not see the car and had no time to avoid the
collision however the driver had an unimpeded view
and could have and should
have avoided the collision and should have waited for the Claimant to cross or
beeped or braked or swerved
to avoid the collision.
are medical records including:
discharge summary dated 29 November 2019 which noted ‘multiple right
orbital fractures’. There is also a CT scan of
the Claimant’s brain
which revealed no injury [A8];
eye outpatient department appointment slip [A9];
dated 29 January 2020 of the Claimant’s brain which showed findings
suggestive of a traumatic brain injury [A10];
referral for an ultrasound of the Claimant’s thumb [A11];
medical certificates and certificates of capacity [A12]; and
Hand Therapy report [A13].
Claimant’s expert
Claimant obtained a report from Mark Byrnes, senior forensic consultant with
Jameison Foley dated 14 October 2016. It appears
from the list of documents
provided to Mr Byrnes [page 7] that he had all of the relevant documents other
than the medical records
referred to in paragraph 27 above.
summarizing the evidence, Mr Byrnes records details of the site [page 13],
includes a number of site photographs [pages 14 –
19] and identifies the
weather conditions [20]. He includes details of MJN’s vehicle and the
Claimant [pages 21 – 23].
Byrnes notes at [9.1 and 9.2] that without corroborating testimony (presumably
from independent witnesses) and presumably without
any corroborating evidence
such as dash cam footage, CCTV footage or physical evidence, he is reliant on
the information he has been
provided. He notes the ‘area of
conflict’ is 6 metres from the Rocky Point Road kerb and ‘in close
to the southern kerb of Water Street.
Mr Byrnes had the statement from ARA, he appears to have discounted ARA’s
evidence about the wind or gust like force of
MJN’s vehicle causing the
accident because Mr Byrnes does not engage with and mention this at all.
Byrnes describes and classifies the collision at [9.3] as:
‘cross path collision’ where ARA is crossing the path of MJN’s
‘dart out’ type collision where a pedestrian runs out ‘in
totally insufficient time for a reasonably alert driver
to react to avoid
‘partial impact’ collision there ARA and MJNs’ vehicle do not
reach the same speed and separate soon after contact.
Byrnes accepts that the Claimant was ‘in the process of stepping from the
kerb’ when he collided with the Toyota’s
B pillar ‘causing him
to rotate to his left and heavily impact the footpath pavement’. This
appears to explain the right
sided facial fractures and deals with the
Claimant’s theory that he turned his face at the time of the impact.
Byrnes identifies the importance of sight distance at [9.4] and notes ‘the
sight distance afforded to the Defendant was significantly
impaired due to the
geographical features of the carriageway and the roadside furniture’.
Byrnes also notes at [9.4] that when ARA ‘rounded the corner of the
footpath and was preparing to step from the kerb ...
the Toyota would not have
been sighted, due to it being outside his field of view. The Toyota would not
have been sighted until immediately
prior to the eventual point of
impact’. Figure 14 indicates that the extreme of peripheral vision is 110
degrees on either
side when looking straight ahead.
Byrnes identifies the critical speed of the curve from Rocky Point Road through
the slip lane into Water Street. He says the maximum
speed at which a vehicle
can safely travel without losing control is in the order of 32 kms per hour [at
9.7] and notes that the
assumption he has made is that MJN was travelling at
between 20 and 30kms per hour which is consistent with MJN’s stated speed
of 20 kms per hour.
Byrnes analyses the speed of the Claimant as he was jogging as a 60 plus year
old (the Claimant was 69 at the time of the accident).
Byrnes accepts the Claimant’s evidence that he was ‘in the process
of stepping off the southern kerb’ when he
collided with the passenger
side of MJN’s vehicle at the B pillar and that therefore ‘it is
reasonable to assume the
Toyota was not travelling in the centre of the
carriageway, with the nearside wheels of the Toyota on or very close to the lip
of the southern kerb and channelling’ at [9.9].
[Diagram 3]
Byrnes took video and extracted stills of four vehicles rounding the corner into
Water Street. Vehicles 1 and 4 appear to me to
be closer to the lip line than
the others and vehicle 4 appears to be a similar vehicle to MJNs’ but Mr
Byrnes has not commented
further on this.
Byrnes then goes on to look at the reaction time of MJN (1.8 seconds) at [10.2],
the total stopping distance at 20 kms per hour
[12 m] to 30 kms per hour [17 m]
and concludes:
It was considered reasonable to assume that the
Defendant, due to the restricted sight distance of the curve, was not afforded
time nor distance to avoid the subject collision (in its subject form).
11 of the report contains Mr Byrnes’ findings which are as follows:
were two factors that caused the accident [11.1]:
Claimant stepping off the kerb ‘into’ the side of the Toyota and
vehicle being where it was, on or in close proximity to the lip line.
accident could have been avoided if [11.3]:
Claimant had come to a complete stop before stepping off the kerb, rotating his
whole body 170 degrees to the right and identifying
the approach of the Toyota
and of course delaying his arrival at the ‘area of conflict’; and
driving more towards the centre of the road increasing the distance between the
Claimant and his vehicle which would have had
him away from the area of conflict
before the Claimant got to it.
is no suggestion MJN was travelling beyond the critical speed of the curve which
was 30 kms per hour [11.4i] and if he was travelling
at 20 kms per hour this is
a reasonable speed in the circumstances [11.4v];
the Claimant’s evidence that he was in the process of stepping off the
kerb (but presumably had not yet stepped onto
the road) MJN’s vehicle must
not have been in the centre of the road and was on or close to the lip line
sight distance was significantly impaired because of what was on the footpath,
the curve of the road, the surface of the
footpath being lower than the road
surface and the Claimant may have blended in with the shrubbery at the side of
the footpath [11.4iii];
Claimant’s sight distance was also significantly impaired for the same
reasons and because he was facing in a generally
north-westerly direction in
preparation for crossing the road, he would have need to rotate his whole body
at least 170 degrees but
would still have had an impeded vision of what was
coming around the corner.
Insured’s statement
gave a statement to the Insurer’s investigator’s dated 24 January
2020. It says:
has been driving since he was 16 although I cannot tell when that was because
all identifying factors have been deleted from the
statement [7] he drives the
Hilux every day of the week [8] and he is familiar with it;
weather was fine and dry ‘but it wasn’t very bright’ he has
automatic headlights and front led lights which
are on all the time [11];
thinks the speed limit was 70 kms per hour on Rocky Point Road and 50 in Water
Street [13];
was familiar with the location as he drives there two or three times a week
the time of the accident he was travelling from home to a café at the
intersection of Rocky Point Road and Water Street
was travelling about 20 kms per hour and ‘did not see the pedestrian at
all before the collision’. MJN says the Claimant
was wearing grey running
gear and was carrying a radio ‘and he ran into the front passenger side
door of my car’ [20].
were no vehicles in front of him before he turned left and after he completed
his turn into Water street he heard a bang, saw
the Claimant’s face in his
passenger side window and that he had fallen back onto the road. [20];
did not see any pedestrians and was looking straight ahead at the time of the
collision [22];
force of the collision was minor [23];
whole of his car was in Water Street 4 – 5 metres front the intersection
Claimant was semi-conscious after the accident [26] and was not saying anything
[27] ‘after a while as he started to come
to he said he was sorry and that
it was his fault. He said this on numerous occasions.’
Insurer advised at the second preliminary conference that Allianz did not intend
to introduce any further evidence. Despite this,
Allianz sent me on 25 November
2020 a file note from Nick Palmer of Quantumcorp dated 16 November 2020. Mr
Palmer had spoken with
MJN about where he was driving on the roadway and where
the Claimant was on the roadway after the collision. He noted that the police
took photos of blood stains.
do not have the police photographs although I note that in February 2020
Quantumcorp reported that they were applying under the
Government Information
(Public Access) Act
2009 (‘GI(PA) Act’) for the police records.
SUBMISSIONS AND FINDINGS Claimant’s submissions
Claimant relies on submissions dated 5 May 2020 and says that his version of
events should be preferred [10] and that he was on
the kerb in the process of
crossing Water Street at the time of the collision [11].
Claimant’s submissions deal in great detail with whether MJN was primarily
negligent and caused this accident, that is whether
he breached his duty of care
to the Claimant or not. For example, the Claimant says [at 12] that MJN was
negligent because he:
to keep a proper lookout;
at an excessive speed in the circumstances;
too close to the kerb;
to brake or swerve or take other evasive action
13 – 16 also deal with the issue of primary negligence and the primary
liability of MJN which has of course been
admitted by the Insurer.
paragraph 16 the Claimant takes issue with the statement of the police taken
five weeks after the accident noting that there is
no signed statement or
verified transcript of the interview, that the police officer was inexperienced
and her memory could be called
into question. The Claimant also takes issue with
the lack of copies of the notebook or the ‘form of demand sheet’
Claimant says his evidence should be preferred because there are inconsistencies
in the Ambulance report, the statement of MJN,
facts in his statement and the
Transcript is implausible and doubtful:
says he did not see the Claimant until he hit the car therefore anything he says
before the impact should be
has never said ARA was on the roadway when the accident occurred and therefore
it should be accepted that he was not on the road;
statement in the hospital discharge summary (that the Claimant was crossing the
road when he was hit on the right-hand side) is
unreliable because the Claimant
did not have a Greek interpreter;
the Claimant had been on the road his injuries would have been greater;
is wrong as to the colour of the Claimant’s clothing;
is inconsistent by saying he heard a loud bang but then saying the
Claimant’s injuries occurred when he
fell, not on impact with the car;
were no skid marks which suggests MJN took no action to avoid the collision;
Insured driver’s evidence as to the Claimant’s admission of fault
should not be accepted because it is self-serving;
Claimant’s alleged agreement with MJNs version of events as recorded in
the ambulance report is unreliable because of the
shock of the event and the
nature of the Claimant’s injuries;
evidence of the police is unreliable because the interview was given five weeks
after the accident;
absence of a copy of the notebook is concerning.
Claimant ‘acknowledges’ that pedestrians have a duty to take care
and that he was complying with that duty by regularly
looking ‘to his
right’, wearing bright clothes and turning his face at the last moment to
avoid impact.
Claimant says that motorists have a duty of care and the insured driver breached
his duty of care and that the cause or the main
cause of the accident was the
position of MJNs’ vehicle on the roadway being too close to the kerb.
Claimant’s contributory negligence should be assessed at no more than 15%.
Insurer’s submissions
Insurer’s submissions [R1] refer to the assessment of relative culpability
and identify the following actions of the Claimant
that are relevant at [4]:
Claimant’s failure to observe the presence of any oncoming vehicles before
stepping off the kerb;
to cross at a designated pedestrian crossing and
to take reasonable care for his own safety.
Insurer also submits:
emergency personnel’s records are valid and contemporaneous evidence [5];
Claimant’s responses to the questions from the Investigator, the evidence
from the police and MJN suggests ‘the Claimant’s
actions could not
be considered to be completely reasonable in the circumstances’ [13].
Insurer cites another Claims Assessor’s decision of
Insurance Limited
[2018] NSWDRS C 061 where a collision appears to have
occurred near a pedestrian crossing and liability was apportioned equally
the Claimant and the Insured [14].
Insurer accepts its insured failed to keep a proper lookout and had he done so
he may have been able to take some evasive action
in an attempt to avoid the
collision [15].
Claimant should have turned his mind to whether he could be seen, he should have
been cognisant as to the type of intersection
and should have crossed at a
designated pedestrian crossing [16].
Claimant exposed himself to a high risk of injury which was foreseeable and
avoidable [17].
receipt of the expert’s report, the Insurer lodged further submissions
which summarise the main features of the report
that support the insurer’s
position namely:
speed of MJN’s vehicle being 20 – 30 kms per hour and a reasonable
view was significantly impaired; and
had insufficient time to act and avoid the collision;
concedes that the Claimant ‘had not entirely entered the roadway at the
time of the collision’ and asserts that if
MJN was travelling in the
centre of the roadway there would have been 0.8225 metres on either side of his
vehicle bearing in mind
the measured width of the road and the measured width of
the vehicle. Driving off centre was reasonable and not a significant causative
Evaluation of the Evidence
accept the evidence in the ambulance report as evidence of what was said to the
ambulance personnel by the two protagonists. While
issue could be taken with
particular individual words the general thrust of the report is that the
Claimant collided with the Allianz
insured vehicle as he was jogging and in the
process of crossing the road.
Claimant took issue with the transcript of evidence from the police officer and
the absence of a copy of the police notebook or
MJN’s form of demand
sheet. Firstly, there is no evidence before me that the Claimant has sought a
copy of the recording of
the interview and been refused. He could have done
this, listened to the recording and compared it to the transcript.
Quantumcorp report dated 13 February 2020 indicates that a request had been made
for copies of the notebook and the ‘form
of demand’ pursuant to the
GI(PA) Act but that no copies have been provided to me. The Claimant could also
have requested this
material from the police pursuant to the GI(PA) Act but
presumably has not. I do not propose to wait for the production of these
documents noting that pursuant to
section 6.19
Motor Accident Injuries
the Insurer can make a fresh decision about liability at any time upon
presentation by the Claimant of this additional information.
would be no motivation in my view for the police officer to misread the notebook
or the ‘form of demand’ and whilst
copies would be desirable, the
Police officer’s transcript of interview is the best evidence available to
me now of what was
said, when and by whom.
accepted the records of the police and the ambulance I will treat them with
caution noting that the Claimant was apparently
in shock, was injured and that
the Insurer does not dispute that his injuries include facial fractures and a
brain injury. But when
both are read together and giving the Claimant the
benefit of the doubt, they paint a consistent picture of the Claimant out
and running into the side of MJN’s vehicle which was not speeding
as it turned the corner into Water Street.
accept the Claimant’s submissions and do not accept as reliable any of the
evidence in the transcript of interview with Constable
Poynter other than her
recitation of the contents of her notebook and the ‘form of demand’
or statement completed by
MJN. Constable Poynter was not present when the
accident happened and was not present when the Claimant was taken to hospital or
when the Insured was at the scene. Her view as to how this accident happened,
the speed of MJN’s vehicle and what the Claimant
may or may not have done
is not the best evidence relevant to the dispute before me and merely her
opinion and interpretation of
what she has been told.
Claimant’s version of how this accident happened has varied over time. To
the ambulance he agreed that he was running and
hit MJN’s vehicle. He told
the police he was running and hit the side of MJN’s vehicle and that he
had looked but did
not see MJN’ vehicle. In his claim form he said MJN
side swiped him which suggests there was an impact caused by MJN. In his
lengthy statement he says MJN’s vehicle created a gust of wind which
caused him to lose his balance and fall forward.
Claimant’s statement says at [45] ‘this statement has been read and
translated to me in Greek. I fully understand
it.’ The statement is dated
and signed. There is however no interpreter or translator’s attestation
clause and there
is no detail of the name of the interpreter or what their
qualifications are. The Claimant says in the statement that he understands
has been read to him but he has not stated that what is contained in that
statement is true and correct. This is most unusual
however as the Insurer has
not challenged the statement on that basis, I will not take any further issue
is not clear why the Claimant requires a Greek interpreter in any event. The
Claimant’s statement says he has been employed
in a customer service role
with XXX City Council for 31 years accepting deliveries and distributing them to
employees and using a
computer. The cover sheet of the application for personal
injury benefits completed by the Claimant provides space for indicating
interpreter is needed but this is left blank. The NSW Health Department
Discharge summary [A8] records the claimant does
not require an interpreter and
the language spoken at his home is English.
statement of the Claimant given to his solicitor suffers from its age (six
months after the accident). For example, ARA says that
have’ turned his head before the impact. This is language suggestive of
reconstruction rather than actual recall.
Secondly there is a fundamental
assertion which is difficult to resolve in that the Claimant says he looked
several times to his
right to check for traffic as he approached the
intersection with the slip lane and Water Street yet at no stage did he see
vehicle when MJN’s vehicle must have been there because ARA
ran into it. This could be reconciled by the photographs ARA has
provided of him
looking which show him looking to the right but not turning and looking in the
direction of where MJN was coming
from. Mr Byrnes was of the view ARA was facing
northwest (rather than north) and would have needed to turn his body 170 degrees
order to see MJN approaching.
evidence from the Insured driver contains a significant admission, that at no
stage did he see ARA before the impact. I agree
with the Claimant’s
submission that therefore he cannot give evidence as to what the Claimant did or
did not do immediately
before impact. I accept his evidence as to what happened
after the accident and what the Claimant said after the accident including
alleged admission of fault however that admission is of course not determinative
of the issues that I have to deal with.
Claimant objects to the lateness of the additional information from MJN
(provided on 25 November 2020) and the reliability of
it. The issue of where
MJN’s vehicle was on the roadway has been in issue between the party since
this application was lodged.
There is no explanation as to why it has taken this
long for XYZ to have her investigator speak with MJN to address this matter.
information from MJN is clearly relevant to the issues in dispute and therefore
I will consider it however it is so general,
contained in a file note and note a
signed statement and not at all contemporaneous that I do not consider it
reliable or of great
assistance to me.
Findings of fact
am comfortably satisfied that ARA did not stop before attempting to cross the
slip lane. There is nothing in his statement to suggest
he did stop and on the
contrary all of his evidence points to him jogging up Rocky Point Road and
proceeding to cross the slip lane
because he says he was of the view it was safe
to do so. In paragraph 13 of his statement he says he was standing ‘in his
motion’ but he does not say for example he was standing still.
am satisfied that ARA had left the kerb but had not yet set foot on the roadway
at the time of the accident. He was, it would appear,
‘mid-stride’.
MJN of course never saw the Claimant before the impact and there is no evidence
such as the blood stains
in the police photographs to shed light on where he
might have ended up and where he had come from. I also note that the
latest submissions concede ARA was not yet wholly on the roadway
at the time of the impact.
am satisfied that MJN did not collide with ARA but that ARA collided with the
middle of the cab of MJN’s car, at the ‘B’
Pillar on the basis
that both parties agree to the point of the collision.
am satisfied that MJN was not speeding and was not out of control as he had not,
on the basis of his evidence that he had been travelling
at about 20 kms per
hour and the Claimant’s expert evidence that he was not driving at more
than the critical speed for the
curve of 32 kms per hour. I note the expert is
of the view MJN’s speed was reasonable [at 11.4v].
accept the evidence of Mr Byrnes, the Claimant’s expert [at 10.5 of his
report] that MJN did not have enough time or distance
to avoid the accident.
accept the conclusion of Mr Byrnes that MJN was driving on or in close proximity
to the lip line which was not towards the centre
of the road. I note the
photographs of the four vehicles Mr Byrnes photographed at the location of the
accident and that not all
four of them drove in the middle of the lane.
am satisfied on his evidence that MJN did not see the Claimant before the
collision and I am satisfied on the Claimant’s evidence
that he did not
see MJN before the collision. On the basis of the Claimant’s own expert I
am satisfied that both the view of
MJN by ARA and the view of ARA by MJN were
substantially impaired.
am satisfied that the area where this accident happened is an area where it
would be expected that people might be. There is evidence
of a leisure centre or
swimming pool close to where this accident happened and MJN was on his way to a
café opposite this
pool in Water Street.
do not accept the Insurer’s submission that the Claimant should have used
a designated pedestrian crossing because there is
no evidence that there was a
pedestrian crossing in the vicinity of where this accident occurred. The aerial
photograph in the Claimant’s
expert’s report and all the other
photographs tendered in this dispute do not show any crossing at all anywhere
this accident happened. If there is no available pedestrian crossing
or traffic-controlled intersection it is, in my view, reasonable
for a person to
cross the road albeit safely.
WHAT IS THE DEGREE OF ARA’s
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE?
the Insurer has conceded MJN breached his duty of care to ARA and because ARA
has conceded there must a finding of contributory
negligence made against him,
the only issue for me to determine is the degree of ARA’s contributory
negligence.
suggest the degree of contributory negligence should be assessed at 75%, ARA
considers it should be assessed at 15%.
parties have referred to cases but findings of contributory negligence will
depend on the particular facts and circumstances of
an individual case and are
therefore not often of great assistance.
Smith v Zhang
[2012] NSWCA 142
contains observations about the
law of negligence in motor accident cases and at [17] Justice McFarlane said:
Apportionment in this context requires consideration of the degree
of departure from the standard of care of the reasonable person
relative importance of the acts of the parties in causing the damage"
Podrebersek v Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
other words, I have to undertake an analysis of the relative culpability of each
of the parties.
was not speeding. He was travelling at what the expert says was a reasonable
speed and driving upon the roadway although not,
as I have found in the middle
of the lane. He was driving a silver car which had LED lights at the front
turned on. He is required
to look out for other motor vehicles on the roadway as
well as other road users such as ARA on the roadway. He did not at any time
ARA near the roadway. If he had should he have anticipated the reckless
manoeuvre of a ‘dart out’ pedestrian and
reduced his speed from
out. Does it demonstrate
a significant lack of care to drive close to the kerb
and not in the middle of the lane? In my view it does not. While the Road Rules
state a car should drive in the middle of the lane, driving to one side or the
other particularly while rounding a curve does not
in my view suggest negligence
or a lack of care. I note the photographs of the four vehicles taken by Mr
Byrnes when he was preparing
his report suggest that the location of the
vehicles on the roadway as they were taking the corner varied.
was jogging, he was attempting to cross a roadway and he should anticipate that
there will be cars on that roadway. Because of
the damage a vehicle can do to a
human body, it is reasonable in my view, and common sense that a pedestrian
should check that it
is in fact safe to cross a road before commencing the
crossing and moving off the kerb. While ARA says he looked to his right several
times he either did not do so or he did not look carefully enough because MJN
was there and ARA ran into him. It is of course significant,
in my view, that
ARA ran into the side of MJN’s Hilux vehicle almost halfway down the
length of the vehicle.
my view, ARA’s departure from the standard of care of a reasonable person
was significant and considerably reckless. While
Mr Byrnes considers there were
two causal factors in this accident, the Claimant stepping off the kerb without
looking and the position
of MJN’s vehicle towards the edge of the road, in
my view the real cause of this accident was ARA’s failure to stop at
kerb, look carefully and appreciating the fact that MJN’s vehicle was
directly in front of him before making his move and
leaving the kerb.
note the Insurer’s allegation that ARA’s contributory negligence
should be assessed at 75%. I am satisfied that ARA’s
contributory
negligence should be assessed at more than 61% and that he is therefore mostly
at fault in causing his accident. I consider
the allegation of 75% contributory
negligence from the Insurer realistic in the light of the Insurer’s
admission. Were it not
for the concession on the part of the Insurer I would
have found it difficult to have found any fault on the part of MJN in the light
of the evidence from the Claimant and MJN and the opinions contained in the
careful and thorough report from Mr Byrnes.
COSTS AND DISBURSEMENTS
Is the Claimant entitled to any costs?
AAI Limited t/as GIO v Moon
[2020] NSWSC 714
Justice Robertson found that
in miscellaneous claims assessment statutory benefits disputes, an award of
costs does not follow the
event. Therefore, even though ARA has not been
successful in the matter before me, he is entitled to his costs of prosecuting
note the Insurer concedes the entitlement to costs.
Claimant entitled to costs on an unregulated basis?
Claimant seeks the regulated sum of $1,660 for each of the three disputes
referred to DRS for assessment.
the alternative the Claimant seeks costs outside the regulations pursuant to s
8.10(4) of the Act on the basis that there are exceptional
circumstances in the
claim. The Claimant argues I should consider:
totality of DRS disputes for which the regulated fee is payable rather than
against the individual category of disputes;
cases under the
Motor Accidents Compensation Act
and the interpretation
of s 153 in particular
San v Rumble (no 2)
[2007] NSWCA 259
DRS decision of Assessor Watson in
[2019] NSWDRS CA 198;
facts and circumstances of this case and the disputes before me namely:
are two parties and no witnesses;
is no physical evidence;
police did not attend the scene and the Insured driver gave his statement 12
– 13 hours later;
accident investigation was not undertaken by the police;
relied on unqualified police evidence as to the cause of the accident;
Claimant sustained serious injuries including a head injury;
refused to concede complexity;
position on liability changed from a whole denial of liability to a partial
denial albeit contributory negligence
greater than 61%;
Claimant has been required to consider each change and respond;
had to be briefed on 30 June 2020;
have been two teleconferences;
expert’s report was required; and
absence of a face to face hearing does not obviate the exceptional nature of the
claim, there is a large volume of material.
Insurer opposes the assessment of costs on the exceptional basis because it says
there is no unusual degree of complexity or unusual
situations where the maximum
costs may not be adequate and says it was not necessary to brief counsel or
retain an expert.
Claimant referred to
San v Rumble
[2007] NSWCA 259
which dealt
with the term ‘exceptional case’ in section 153(1) of the
Accidents Compensation Act
and considered this required something
‘unusual or out of the ordinary’ due to qualitative or quantitative
factors but
not ‘unique, unprecedented or very rare’.
note the case of
Ho v Professional Services review Committee No 295
where ‘exceptional circumstances’ were said to include
a matter where there was one exceptional matter, a combination
of exceptional
matters or a series of unexceptional factors which, when considered together
render something exceptional
there is the case of
AAI Limited t/as GIO v Moon
[2020] NSWSC 714
referred to by the Claimant where Justice Robertson foreshadowed (at 99) cases
may be exceptional because ‘they involve
an unusual degree of factual or
legal complexity or for some other reason, and this requires the incurring of
more substantial legal
costs by a claimant’.
has, at all times denied liability to pay any benefits after the first 26 weeks.
Allianz had, before the dispute was referred
to DRS denied any fault on the part
of its insured however in its internal review decision, also issued before the
matter was referred
to DRS, it had admitted primary negligence or fault on the
part of its insured. After the dispute was referred to DRS, the Claimant
conceded in his submissions and confirmed at the second preliminary conference
that there should be a finding of contributory negligence
made against him. This
reduced considerably the degree of difficulty in the assessment.
the accident occurred was generally agreed in that it has never been disputed
that MJN was not speeding or that ARA was jogging
along Rocky Point Road or that
he ran into the side of MJN’s vehicle. What was in dispute was where on
the roadway MJN was
driving and whether this had anything to do with causing the
accident. This was not, in my view, a complex factual issue particularly
there was no evidence from MJN about it.
Insurer undertook a series of investigations including taking a lengthy
statement from its insured and the police officer and
obtaining records from the
emergency personnel and the Allianz investigator took photographs and drew
diagrams which have been helpful.
dispute has proceeded before me with two teleconferences and on each occasion,
ARA has been represented by a firm of solicitors
who, on their letterhead say
they are personal injury accredited specialists.
considering all the above matters and the facts and circumstances of ARA’s
statutory benefits claim and the dispute before,
I am not of the view that there
is anything unusual or out of the ordinary about this claim or that it involves
anything unique,
unprecedented or very rare. It was not a complex matter. It
therefore follows that there are no exceptional circumstances of this
warranting the assessment of costs over and above those provided for in the
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation
How much should
I award for costs?
Claimant’s submissions claim the regulated fee for each of the three
disputes referred to me for assessment:
dispute pursuant to section 3.11 about whether ARA’s weekly income
benefits should cease;
dispute pursuant to section 3.28 about whether ARA’s treatment and care
benefits should cease; and
dispute pursuant to section 3.38 about whether ARA’s weekly income
benefits should be reduced for his contributory negligence
and if so by how
Claimant says this equates to $4,980.00 plus GST of $498. The Insurer’s
submissions agree to this sum.
Insurer’s submissions appear to take issue with the legal work associated
with obtaining the report of Mr Byrnes from Jameison
Foley however it is not
clear whether the Insurer objects to the fee charged by that firm being the sum
of $8,310.50 plus GST of
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation
provides at cl 20 that certain costs
are not regulated and that includes ‘fees for accident
investigators’ report or
accident reconstruction reports’. I have
been greatly assisted by the report of Mr Byrnes in that it has raised the issue
of line of sight, measured speeds and distances, provided the photographs of the
four vehicles taking the same corner and considered
the mechanism of accident
and injury and provided opinions which I have adopted. I will on that basis
allow it as reasonable and
am satisfied that in respect of the cause of the motor accident on 29 November
2019, ARA was mostly at fault in causing his accident.
As a result, pursuant to
s 3.11(1) and s 3.28(1) he has no entitlement to statutory benefits beyond the
first 26 weeks after the
accident and therefore, in accordance with s 3.38(1)
there is no need to consider the reduction of his weekly income benefits for
contributory negligence.
accordance with s 8.3(4) and s 8.10(3) I permit ARA to recover from Allianz the
reasonable and necessary costs associated with
the statutory benefits claim as
agreed and as assessed by me at $4,980 plus GST of $498.00 and the costs of the
Jameison Foley report
in the sum of $8,310.50 plus GST of $831.05.
DRS Claims Assessor Cassidy
Dispute Resolution Services
30 November 2020
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (4.86 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter