URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Pacific National Executive Services Pty Ltd [2025] NSWIC 3 (12 March 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Pacific National Executive
Services Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 3
Hearing Date(s):
2-3 December 2024
Date of Orders:
12 March 2025
Decision Date:
12 March 2025
Taylor J, President
The application is dismissed.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — Claim for breach of contract pursued
as a statutory remedy — Whether
Fair Work Act 2009
a civil penalty for a failure to pay a contractually obligated payment for work
done — Statutory interpretation —
Conflicting first instance
authority — Truck Act provisions.
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL
LAW — Industrial action — Whether employer industrial action was
employer response action —
Lockout notified to commence at the same time
that employee industrial action was notified to commence — Interpretation
notice of industrial action — Whether employer industrial action as a
matter of fact responded to employee industrial action
requirement.
Legislation Cited:
Fair Work Act 1994
Fair Work Act 2009
Relations Act 1984
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Industrial Relations Act 1999
(Qld), ss 391-393
Minimum Conditions
of Employment Act 1993
(WA), ss 17B-17D
Truck Act 1900
Victorian Workers’ Wages Protection Act 2007
Fair Work Regulations 2009
(Cth), reg 1.05
Cases Cited:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
Association of Professional Engineers, Scientists and
Managers, Australia v Wollongong Coal Ltd
[2014] FCA 878
Association of
Professional Engineers, Scientists and Managers, Australia v Bulga Underground
Operations Pty Ltd
[2019] FCA 1960
Augusta Ventures Ltd v Mt Arthur Coal Pty
(2020) 283 FCR 123
[2020] FCAFC 194
Australian Education Union v
Victoria (Department of Education and Early Childhood Development)
[2015] FCA 1196
Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union v
McCain Foods (Aust) Pty Ltd
(2021) 310 IR 1
[2021] FWCFB 4804
Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Pacific National Executive Services Pty Ltd
[2023] FWC 2771
Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Pacific
National Executive Services Pty Ltd
[2024] FWCFB 46
Communications,
Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union v
Pinnacle Career Development Pty Ltd
[2010] FCA 1350
(2010) 190 FCR 581
Construction Forestry Mining & Energy Union v Mammoet Australia Pty
(2013) 248 CLR 619
[2013] HCA 36
Coote v Mainline Access Pty Ltd (No 3)
(2019) 344 FLR 1
[2019] FCCA 383
Dimkovski v Majorsite Property Group Pty
[2024] FedCFamC2G 683
Esso Australia Pty Ltd v Australian Workers Union
(2015) IR 304;
[2015] FCA 758
Euro Car Parts Pty Ltd v Cannon
(2024) 332 IR
[2024] FCA 828
Fair Work Ombudsman v Priority Matters Pty Ltd
Masson v Parsons
(2019) 266 CLR 554
[2019] HCA 21
Betezy.com.au Pty Ltd
(2013) 238 IR 307
[2013] FCA 908
Qantas Airways Ltd v
Flight Attendants’ Association of Australia
(2020) 282 FCR 243
(2019) 269 CLR 507
[2019] HCA 35
Sabapathy v
Viveganantham
[2024] FedCFamC2G 666
Stratton Finance Pty Ltd v Webb
[2014] FCAFC 110
Wilkinson v Wilson Security Pty Ltd (No 3)
(2024) 332 IR 387
[2024] FCA 705
Wollerman v Fortrend Securities Pty Ltd
[2025] FCA 103
Texts Cited:
Creighton & Stewart's Labour Law (6th ed, 2016, Federation
Explanatory Memorandum,
Fair Work Bill 2009
Dictionary, 9th ed (2023)
Principal judgment
Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union (Applicant)
National Executive Services Pty Ltd (Respondent)
Representation:
L Saunders (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
J Cooper (Industrial Officer RTBU)
(Applicant)
Seyfarth Shaw (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/270493
Introduction
workers were locked out by Pacific National Executive Services Pty Ltd (Pacific
National) in October 2023. Their union, the
applicant, claims they were entitled
to be paid for the period they were locked out under their contracts of
employment and can pursue
such a claim before this Court as a contravention of
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth). Whether that is so depends on four
(1) Whether
Fair Work Act
creates a statutory
obligation to pay wages due under a contract of employment where the
employer’s obligation to make payment
is disputed.
(2) Whether employer industrial action is
employer response action
defined (which relieves the employer of the obligation to pay the employees
during the period of that action) if it was notified
to start at the
as the industrial action notified to be taken by the union.
(3) Whether on the facts of this case the lockout commenced only in response to
the commencement of industrial action by the employees
or commenced regardless
of whether they had commenced to take industrial action.
(4) Whether the employees who did not attend work did so in response to the
employer response action, or because they were taking
industrial action. If the
latter, whether they are then entitled to be paid.
23 July 2024, the Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union (RTBU) filed an
Application for Recovery of Money and/or Civil Penalties
against the respondent,
Pacific National. It applies to this Court for an order under
Fair Work Act
against Pacific National to pay some of its employees
compensation for wages that the RTBU contends they were entitled to but not
, an “eligible State or Territory court” may order an
employer to pay an amount to an employee if the court is satisfied
employer was required to pay the amount under the
Fair Work Act
employer has contravened a civil remedy provision by failing to pay the amount.
The Industrial Court of NSW is such an eligible
State or Territory
addition to compensation, the RTBU applies to this Court for an order to impose
a pecuniary penalty upon Pacific National for its
contravention of
of the Act, an “eligible State or Territory
court” may order a person to pay a pecuniary penalty if it is satisfied
they have contravened a civil remedy provision.
RTBU’s claims for compensation and penalty rest on the submission that
Pacific National was required to pay its employees’
wages pursuant to
Fair Work Act
, which is a civil remedy provision
Factual Background
proceedings fall to be determined on the basis of a statement of agreed facts,
as well as a small number of additional facts
led by Pacific National which were
not put into dispute by the RTBU.
or around 12 July 2022, Pacific National began bargaining for a proposed
enterprise agreement, known as the Pacific National Service
Delivery and
Planning Enterprise Agreement, New South Wales 2024
(Proposed Agreement).
The RTBU was a bargaining representative for the Proposed Agreement.
9, 10, 11 and 12 October 2023, the RTBU notified Pacific National that its
members would take protected industrial action in support
of their claims for
the Proposed Agreement.
(1) On 9 October 2023, the RTBU notified Pacific National that its members would
engage in an indefinite overtime ban, starting from
12.01am on 13 October
(2) On 10 October 2023, the RTBU notified Pacific National that its members
would engage in four further indefinite bans, starting
from 12.01am on 14
October 2023.
(3) On 11 October 2023, the RTBU notified Pacific National that its members
would engage in eight further indefinite bans, starting
from 12.01am on 17
October 2023.
response, Pacific National issued employees with notices via email, stating that
employees who engaged in the partial work bans
would not be entitled to any
payment and that Pacific National refused to accept the performance of any work
by employees unless
they were prepared to perform all of their normal duties,
pursuant to
Fair Work Act
12 October 2023, the RTBU notified Pacific National that its members would take
protected industrial action, through “stoppage
of work in the form of 288
consecutive 15 minute stoppages” commencing on “0001hrs on 18
October 2023 until 0001hrs on
21 October 2023”. It did so following a
protected action ballot which authorised “protected industrial action in
form of an unlimited number of stoppages of work of 1 minute to 72 hours in
duration”. The RTBU contended that the notified
consecutive 15-minute
stoppages were a legitimate form of industrial action distinct from a single
72-hour stoppage. It contended
that a single 72-hour stoppage notified to
commence from 12.01am on 18 October until 12.01am on 21 October would have to
exactly from 12.01am, whereas the notified consecutive 15-minute
stoppages identified times at which each discrete stoppage could
12.01am on 18 October until 12.01am on 21 October.
17 October 2023, Pacific National gave written notice of a lockout of any
employee who would be covered by the Proposed Agreement
and who participated in
the action notified on 12 October 2023. The exact text of Pacific
National’s notice is of some importance.
It read (with emphasis from the
“On 12 October 2023, the Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Union (
issued a notice to Pacific National of protected industrial action (
by its members.
The nature of PIA notified by the RTBU is a stoppage of work, commencing at
Wednesday 18 October 2023
and concluding at
21 October 2023
, specifically as follows:
“Stoppage of work in the form of 288 consecutive 15 minutes
stoppages.” (
‘The Stoppage’
Pacific National has considered the significant impact of The Stoppage on our
operations and the current status of the negotiations
for the proposed
Pacific National Service Delivery and Planning New South Wales Enterprise
Agreement 2023
). As such, Pacific National has decided it
must respond to The Stoppage.
Employer Response Action
Therefore, pursuant to
section 414(5)
Fair Work Act 2009
Pacific National hereby gives notice that if any employee engages in The
Stoppage, in response, Pacific National will be engaging
in Employer Response
Action, commencing at
Wednesday 18 October 2023
concluding at
Wednesday 25 October 2023 (Period)
During that Period, each employee who engages in The Stoppage will not be
permitted to perform any work (that is, they will be “locked
If this applies to you, you should not attend your place of work, and you will
not be paid for the Period.
For clarity, if you do not engage in the Stoppage, you may continue to attend
work during the Period.
This decision has not been taken lightly and has been taken due to the nature
and the extent of The Stoppage, the flow on effect
on operations and the current
status of the negotiations for the Agreement. Our preferred option is and
continues to be to focus
on the negotiations for this Agreement and deliver what
matters for our people, customers and shareholders.”
was an agreed fact that pursuant to this notice, Pacific National locked out
various employees at various times from 12.01am on
18 October 2023 to 12.01am on
25 October 2023. Notably, the period of the lockout was 48 hours longer than the
period of the RTBU
notified action.
National has identified 53 employees that it locked out. The RTBU’s claim
for payment under s 545(3) is in respect of
those 53 employees.
her affidavit, which was not challenged, Ms Sandra Deparis, Senior People &
Culture Manager at Pacific National, gave evidence
that she asked two employees
on the evening of 17 October whether they were intending to participate in the
stoppage notified by
the RTBU on 12 October to commence at one minute after
midnight. On being told that they would, she informed them that they if they
they would be locked out by Pacific National for 7 days as advised by a memo
sent earlier that day. At about 12.01am she observed
those two employees leave
their desk. She asked both employees if they were leaving the office due to the
RTBU’s notified protected
industrial action and they both said they were.
She then sent them a letter confirming that they would be subject to the
She also stated that she called employees who had not attended their
shifts after 12.01 am on 18 October and, if the employee confirmed
were participating in the stoppage, sent them a letter confirming that they were
subject to the lockout. Her evidence included
copies of the letters sent by
Pacific National and text messages that Pacific National had sent to employees
who had not attended
their shifts to ask whether they were absent because of the
work stoppage.
the period that an employee was locked out, Pacific National did not accept
performance of work by these employees and did
not pay these employees the wages
they would otherwise have earned, but for the lockout.
23 October 2023, the RTBU applied to the Fair Work Commission under s 418,
seeking that Pacific National stop and not engage in
its industrial action.
1 November 2023, in
Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Pacific
National Executive Services Pty
Cross DP dismissed the
application on the basis, amongst other matters, that he was not satisfied that
the lockout was unprotected
industrial action.
RTBU applied for permission to appeal against this decision. On 5 February 2024,
a Full Bench of the Fair Work Commission handed
down its decision in
Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Pacific National Executive
Services Pty Ltd
Permission to
appeal was refused, on the basis that the appeal did not raise a question of
importance and general application, because
the issue raised by the RTBU that
employer response action must be genuinely responsive to employee claim action
had already been
addressed in
Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union v
McCain Foods (Aust) Pty Ltd
It was therefore not in the public interest to allow an appeal of a decision of
the Commission under
Fair Work Act
. The Full Bench did
however consider that Cross DP’s decision could have been affected by
error, but that this did not justify
permission to appeal as the error arose
from “the peculiar circumstances related to the
In particular, the
Full Bench held that Cross DP’s decision was contrary to the decision in
“It appears that the Deputy President focussed on the intention of Pacific
National that its lock out be responsive to the
employees’ intended
industrial action, rather than focussing on whether the lock out actually was
responsive to action taken
by employees. As the lock out commenced at the same
time that the employees’ action was due to commence, we do not see how
could be responsive to that action.
The employees were unable to commence
industrial action due to the lock out.
The Deputy President’s approach
is a departure from the approach taken by the Full Bench in
RTBU asks this Court seeks to similarly conclude that the employees were unable
to commence industrial action because of the lockout,
and that accordingly
Pacific National’s industrial action was not
in response
employee action.
addition to the agreed facts the RTBU sought to rely on an affidavit from Amanda
Perkins, an organiser at the RTBU, filed on 4
October 2024. The affidavit stated
that members had communicated to Ms Perkins, in respect of the employee claim
action taken on
18 October 2023 to 21 October 2023, that teams were making their
own arrangements as to what industrial action would be taken, with
planning to participate in all 288 stoppages and others only intending to
participate in some. Following an objection
from Pacific National, that evidence
was rejected on the basis that it was hearsay evidence from unidentified
Section 323
Court only has power to order the relief sought if the employer was required to
pay the amount under the
Fair Work Act
or a fair work
instrument.
were not payments said to arise under a fair work instrument. Rather it was
accepted that if payments were due, they arose pursuant
to individual contracts
of employment.
RTBU contends such contractual payments were required to be paid in full, in
money, and at least monthly, pursuant to
Court’s power to grant the relief sought accordingly depends on whether
the RTBU is right in its contention that
Fair Work Act
imposes a statutory obligation to pay the contractual sums claimed.
Fair Work Act
imposes a statutory obligation to pay
the contractual sums claimed (assuming they were in fact payable) depends on two
related questions.
First, whether
itself imposes a statutory
obligation to pay amounts within the meaning of
Second, whether
, by requiring payment “in full” and “in
money”, does more than proscribe “in kind” compensation,
by so doing creates a civil penalty for any failure to pay a contractually
obligated payment for work
to the first issue, I am assisted by the decision of Halley J in
Parts Pty Ltd v Cannon
respondent contended that
does not create a standalone payment
obligation under the
Fair Work Act
for the purposes of
therefore there was no amount the company was required to pay under the
. Reliance was placed on the reasoning of the plurality in
Airways Ltd v Flight Attendants’ Association of
”) at [67]-[68]. Halley J rejected that argument, coming to the
conclusion that there was nothing in the reasoning of the plurality
contradicted the conclusion of Bromberg J in
Australian Education Union v
Victoria (Department of Education and Early Childhood
Development)
Australian Education Union
”) at [265], namely that while
operates upon an existing obligation on an employer to pay, it
itself imposes a statutory obligation to pay that requires the amount
question to be paid in full, in money and at least monthly. I agree with that
conclusion and adopt it.
second issue is not so easily addressed. There is conflicting first instance
authority on the issue and as yet no considered appellate
is in the following terms:
323 Method and frequency of payment
(1) An employer must pay an employee amounts payable to the employee in relation
to the performance of work:
(a) in full (except as provided by
section 324)
(b) in money by one, or a combination, of the methods referred to in subsection
(c) at least monthly.
, titled “Permitted deductions”, allows an employer to deduct an
amount from
an amount payable to an employee
in accordance with
in certain limited circumstances, for example, where the deduction
is authorised in writing by the employee and is principally for
employee’s benefit.
National contends that
is only contravened where an employer fails
to make payment for work done by the employee “in full” in the sense
unauthorised deductions, applying Colvin J’s interpretation of
Wilkinson v Wilson Security Pty Ltd (No 3)
I accept Pacific National’s interpretation of
then the proceedings
will be dismissed, regardless of the Court’s findings on the issues
pertaining to employer response action.
That is so, since this Court can only
award the claimed relief pursuant to
(1) if the wages which the
RTBU contends its members were entitled to were required to be paid under the
Fair Work Act
and no provision of the Act is relied upon other than
For completeness, this Court has no jurisdiction to determine the claims
in the alternative as a breach of contract.
Construction Forestry Mining & Energy Union v Mammoet Australia Pty
”) the High Court considered whether providing
accommodation in accordance with an enterprise agreement was a
to an employee within the meaning of
prohibits payments during a period of protected industrial action. The appellant
relied in part on
to support an argument that accommodation was not a
“payment” because a payment had to be in money. In rejecting the
contention that a payment can only be in money, and could not be provided in
kind if authorised by
and (3), the High Court examined the intent of
“[Section] 323(1) addresses the same mischief addressed by “Truck
Acts” as they had by then come to exist in each
State, that is, that an
employee’s entitlement to payment for work might be compromised by an
employer requiring the employee
to accept some form of payment in kind of less
value than the payment of money
State and Territory “
to which the High Court
referred obliged employers to pay their employees in full and in money, rather
than “in kind”
(eg at the company store); the word
“truck” in this case being used in respect of its now rarely used
alternative meaning,
namely to exchange or
While s 323(1), by
requiring payment “in full” and “in money”, at least
proscribes unauthorised deductions
for in kind payments, there is divergent
authority from the Federal Court as to whether it proscribes more generally any
to make a required payment in relation to the performance of work, such
that it can be used to bring contract underpayment claims.
first case to consider this question was
Murrihy v Betezy.com.au Pty
”). Jessup J determined that an employer’s
non-payment of commission entitlements to its employee constituted a
contravention
commission agreement in that case stated that the employee’s commission
ought to have been paid monthly, which corresponded
with the least frequent
basis of payment provided for at subsection 323(1)(c). Jessup J noted that the
respondents had not put in
issue whether the failure to pay commission
entitlements gave rise to a contravention of s 323(1). His Honour then noted
clearly was such a contravention” and concluded that
“there was, therefore, a contravention of the section at the end
month during which a commission entitlement
application of s 323 to such underpayments was not put in issue, Jessup J
nevertheless turned his mind to whether s 323
could be applied to ground a
claim that was based on non-payment of a contractually promised bonus payment,
concluding:
“A significant innovation introduced by the FW Act was the imposition of
an obligation upon a ‘national system employer’
(such as each of the
respondents was) to pay its employees amounts payable to them in relation to the
performance of work in full
at least monthly: s 323(1) of the FW Act. Thus the
legislation picks up, amongst other things, entitlements arising under contracts
of employment and gives statutory consequences to an employer’s failure to
make good on them. In this respect, s 323(1) is
a civil remedy
provision.”
issue was next considered in
Association of Professional Engineers,
Scientists and Managers, Australia v Wollongong Coal Ltd
determined an application to strike out a claim that rested on s 323 to
claim non-payment of contractual entitlements.
Consistently with the approach of
Jessup J in
, his Honour held that s 323 provides “
the enforcement of, an obligation to pay amounts which have become payable
as well as the more specific obligation to pay such amounts in full, in money
and at least monthly (subject to the statutory exemptions
which accompany the
obligation)” (emphasis
Wollongong Coal
, the respondents contended for a limited application of
s 323(1), relying upon the above quoted passage from
Buchanan J held a broader interpretation of the obligation in s 323 was
“[28] ... It is certainly apparent, as the respondents contend, that ss
323 and 324 of the FW Act are intended to provide for
matters dealt with in the
Truck Acts – i.e. payment in money (not in kind), without unauthorised
deductions, and with specific
and reasonable periodicity.
[29] However, that conclusion does not suffice to exclude the possibility that
s 323 of the FW Act has an additional role to play.
[30] The ordinary language of s 323 is apt to identify, and provide for the
enforcement of, an obligation to pay amounts which have
become payable, as well
as the more specific obligation to pay such amounts in full, in money and at
least monthly (subject to the
statutory exemptions which accompany the
obligation). It does so by permitting the imposition of a civil penalty for
contravention
of the obligation.”
Wollongong Coal
were subsequently cited with approval
by Bromberg J in
Australian Education Union
“The right to receive monies deducted without authority will have vested
with an employee as at the time that those monies
were payable. In that
situation, the employee would have a legal claim to the recovery of the
underpayment. That claim may be statutory,
contractual or both. Section 323(1)
operates upon an existing obligation on the employer to pay. But it also imposes
a further statutory
obligation to pay in full, in money and at least monthly
(except as provided for by s 324):
Association of Professional Engineers,
Scientists and Managers, Australia v Wollongong Coal Ltd
[2014] FCA 878
(Buchanan J); and
Murrihy v Betezy.com.au Pty Ltd
[2013] FCA 908
(2013) 238 IR
(Jessup J).”
the question was not put in issue in
Australian Education
and was only determined at a threshold level in
, all three decisions were made by judges with significant experience in
industrial law.
is other Federal Court authority that either proceeds on the basis that a
failure to pay an amount due is a contravention of
s323(1) or is otherwise
consistent with that view.
Stratton Finance Pty Ltd v
a Full Court of the
Federal Court effectively approved declarations of contraventions of s 323 that
related to the failure by an
employer to pay the full amount due to an employee
in respect of accrued but untaken annual leave on termination of employment. The
applicant contended that the plural in the word “amounts” in s
323(1) meant that it was necessary to group all breaches
of the section as one
breach. The Full Court rejected this argument, stating: “The simple and
common sense reading of the provision
is that the employer must pay any amount
or amounts payable to the
Association of Professional Engineers, Scientists and Managers, Australia v
Bulga Underground Operations Pty
Wigney J similarly
proceeded on the basis that non-payment of a long service leave entitlement
(which the employer contended was
not payable) would, if it was indeed required
to be paid, amount to a contravention of s 323(1). The respondent in that case
not put that in issue, an approach which Wigney J characterised as an
“apparent concession [that] was properly
Qantas Airways Ltd v Flight Attendants’ Association of Australia
(2020) 282 FCR 243
[2020] FCAFC 227
Qantas Airways
plurality (Jagot and Wheelahan JJ) considered the phrase “amounts payable
to an employee in relation to the performance
of work” in
s 789GDA(2)(b) and held that it had the same meaning as the same phrase in
s 323(1), stating: “It means the
amounts which are required to be
paid to the employee in accordance with the applicable contract or industrial
instrument.”
Earlier the
plurality noted that the various constructions of s 789GDA contended for in
that case each correctly assumed that whatever
amounts were payable to the
employees were amounts required to be paid pursuant to s 323 “in full, in
money and at least monthly”,
stating it was “correct” that,
pursuant to s 323, “the employer is subject to an obligation to pay the
Augusta Ventures Ltd v Mt Arthur Coal Pty
White J proceeded
on the basis that s 323 required the employer to pay an employee amounts
otherwise payable in relation to the performance
of work in full and at least
monthly, and cited the authors of
Creighton & Stewart's Labour
(6th ed, 2016, Federation Press) at [15.59]:
“Once an employee has accrued wages, the employer is obliged to make the
payment. If the wages are due under an award, enterprise
agreement or statute,
then, in the absence of any provision to the contrary, this obligation is
absolute in character.”
there are two recent decisions that confirm the broader interpretation of
s 323(1). The first is that of Halley J in
Euro Car Parts
where the interpretation of s 323(1) was in issue and determined on a final
Euro Car Parts Pty Ltd, the employer, appealed against an order
from the Magistrate’s Court granting relief under s 323(1) for
alleged failure to pay Cannon, its employee, his salary in full between 2017 and
2020. One of its grounds of appeal was that
the Industrial Magistrate did not
have jurisdiction to require Euro Car Parts to make payments to Cannon under
Fair Work Act
, as any obligations the company had to pay
Cannon only arose from a contractual basis, and not under
dismissed this ground of appeal:
“[75] In my view, the conclusion that
imposes a further statutory
obligation to pay an amount due in full, whether the amount was payable under
statute or contract or
otherwise, is consistent with the natural and ordinary
meaning of the text of
, its interrelationship with
and a beneficial
construction given the remedial and protective objectives of the civil penalty
provisions in the FW Act in promoting
the public interest in compliance:
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v Pattinson
[2022] HCA 13
; 314 IR 301 at
, [31] and [42].
[82] ... The source, as in the origin of the obligation to pay, together with
the specific amount to be paid and the time for payment,
other than at least
monthly, may well be found in a contract, not a discrete provision of the FW
Act, but that does not preclude
the imposition of a statutory obligation in s
323 to pay the contractual amount in full, in money and at least monthly.”
J concluded by finding that while the source of the obligation to pay may be
founded elsewhere,
323 of the FW Act
nonetheless
imposes a further statutory obligation to pay an amount in full, in money and at
least monthly, consistent with the observations
of Jessup J in
and Bromberg J in
Australian Education Union
, as well as the remedial and
protective objectives of the
second recent decision is that of O’Callaghan J in
Wollerman v Fortrend
Securities Pty Ltd
in which the interpretation of s 323(1) was not put in issue. His Honour
applied Jessup J’s decision in
that s 323(1) is a civil
remedy provision that “picks up, amongst other things, entitlements
arising under contracts of employment
and gives statutory consequences to an
employer’s failure to make good on
in contrast to the authorities summarised above, is Colvin J’s decision in
which Pacific National relied upon, which takes a narrower
approach to the effect of s 323. It was handed down shortly before
but was not considered in
Euro Car Parts
. It has since been adopted in
Dimkovski v Majorsite Property
Group Pty Ltd
[2024] FedCFamC2G 683
Sabapathy v Viveganantham
[2024] FedCFamC2G 666.
Colvin J disagreed with Buchanan J’s conclusion
Wollongong Coal
. His Honour agreed with the submissions of the
respondent in
Wollongong Coal
and interpreted s 323 as follows:
“[100] Section 323(1) is expressed as an obligation concerning the manner
in which an employer “must pay” the amounts
described. Its focus is
upon the manner of payment of “amounts payable to the employee” not
upon the extent to which
there is an obligation which means that there are
amounts which are payable. In effect, its operative prescription concerns the
in which payment should be made of particular types of payment obligations
which it describes but otherwise assumes that those amounts
have been identified
as payable. The requirement that it imposes is that such amounts be paid in
full, in money and at least monthly.
[101] Arguably, there is an ambiguity as to whether the reference to
“amounts payable to the employee in relation to the performance
work” includes amounts that are in dispute such that there is a
contravention of the provision if it is subsequently determined
that they are
amounts that are payable. However, as has been explained, there are other
provisions in the
Fair Work Act
which express obligations of that kind.
Whether there is an obligation to make a payment and, consequently, whether
there has been
a failure to perform that obligation is addressed by other
provisions of the
Fair Work Act
. Relevantly for present purposes, as has
been explained,
makes it a contravention for a person to contravene a term
of a modern award. Where a term of a modern award requires an amount to
is still contravened if the employer disputes the existence of that
requirement but the employer's position is not vindicated. The
existence of such
provisions is an important matter of context; as are the terms of the
Explanatory Memorandum as explained by the
High Court in
[102] In those circumstances, in my respectful view,
is concerned to
ensure that the payments that are made by an employer to its employees for work
done by them are made with appropriate
frequency, are made without deduction and
are not paid in kind. Although the section refers to amounts
“payable” to an
employee, the operative requirement concerns the
ways in which an employer “must pay”. That is to say, the obligation
that is imposed concerns the manner of payment where payment is being made of
“amounts payable ... in relation to the performance
of work”. It
concerns how payments in the category of payments as described are to be made.
Consequently, if an employer is
making a payment to an employee of an amount
that is not “payable in relation to the performance of work” then
does not apply.
[103] So, an employer and an employee may be in dispute as to whether an amount
is payable in relation to the performance of work.
In such a case the point has
not been reached where the employer is to make payment for the purposes of
Or, an employer may have formed their own view as to what is payable but
that view may be incorrect because the amount is too low.
Likewise, in such a
case, as to the extent of the employer’s error, it is also the case that
the point has not been reached
where the employer is to make payment for the
purposes of
Therefore, in such cases, in failing to pay those amounts,
the employer cannot be said to have breached the terms of
because the
statutory provision is not directed to whether there is an obligation to make
payment; rather, it is concerned with the
manner of payment where an employer is
making payment for work done by the employee.
[104] On the other hand, where an employer has identified an amount to be paid
but withholds payment or pays only part or defers
payment so that the obligation
to pay monthly is not performed, then there is a contravention of
[105] Conceivably, issues may arise as to whether an employer who wilfully
ignores whether there is any payment obligation or fails
to undertake any
genuine consideration as to the amounts due to the employee or defers
identifying the amount to be paid is, by that
conduct, failing to pay as
required by
In such a case, the failure to pay will not be because of
some explicable failure to identify an amount as being payable. Rather
be because the obligation to pay at least monthly is not being met because, in
such circumstances, the payment obligation
is being unilaterally deferred by the
employer. Therefore, it may amount to a failure to pay by failing to form a view
is payable. However, no case of that kind was advanced by Mr
Wilkinson in the present case so that aspect can be left for when the
squarely arises.”
, Colvin J cited the decisions in
Wollongong Coal
, but did not refer to the other decisions noted above, such as
the plurality in
Qantas Airways
at [7], which, as Halley J noted in
Euro Car Parts
, support a broader interpretation of
, namely that it
creates “an obligation to pay the employee
can be seen in the quote above from
Colvin J ultimately
concluded that the “amounts payable to the employee in relation to the
performance of work” that their
employer “must pay” in full,
in money and at least monthly under
do not include amounts that
have not been paid because an employer and employee are “in dispute”
as to whether they are
payable nor those amounts that remain payable due to the
employer’s error. I find this analysis to be unsatisfactory and prefer
conclusions reached in
Murrihy, Wollongong Coal
and by the plurality in
Qantas Airways
, and adopted in
Euro Car Parts
is unlikely that a statutory obligation to pay a sum in full at least monthly
depends upon whether and to what extent those amounts
“disputed”. Such a test introduces a subjective element into the
application of
It is noted that Colvin J was prepared to conceive that an
employer who “wilfully ignores” a payment obligation “or
to undertake any genuine consideration as to the amounts due to the
employee” may fail to pay as required by
This reasoning exposes the
difficulty with the approach – it accepts that a failure to pay at all can
be a contravention of
but makes that conclusion contingent on the extent
to which the employer has given “genuine consideration” to the
Such an approach would make the application of
dependent on a view
as to how much effort an employer has made to ensure it complies with its
payment obligations. This conclusion
seems at odds with the words of the section
which introduce no such subjective notions and would see
differently to all other civil penalty provisions in the
Fair Work Act
which require strict compliance with payment obligations in the Act and
under fair work instruments.
I reject the notion that
does not apply to a failure to pay in full due to
error. Neither intention nor error are relevant to proof of a contravention of
, which is simply made out by proof that wages and entitlements have not been
paid as required.
narrower view of
has also been expressed by Manousaridis J of the Federal
Circuit Court in
Coote v Mainline Access Pty Ltd (No 3)
He held that
did not create a statutory obligation to pay amounts that
an employer is otherwise liable to pay under a contractual term. Manousaridis
reasoned that, as the wording in
requires an employer to pay an
employee amounts payable for the performance of work “
”, the provision should be interpreted to require that
an employer makes a payment to an employee, it must be the full amount payable
in the sense that there be no deductions not authorised
He reasoned that if the
intention of the legislation was to require the employer to pay amounts payable
for work performed, there
would be no need to add the requirement that the
payment should be “in
interpretation, he said, was supported by the fact that
permits a national system employee to apply to the Federal Court or
Federal Circuit Court to enforce a “safety net contractual
entitlement” (such as a term requiring the employer to pay wages for work
performed).
This, he concluded,
meant that an employer’s breach of a contractual term to make a payment
for work performed is not a breach
of a civil remedy provision.
the reasons that follow, in my view the words “in full” address more
than just unauthorised deductions.
statute is to be construed by considering the words read in their context, and
“context” encapsulates surrounding statutory
provisions, the
mischief that the statute is intended to remedy, the provision’s purpose
or policy, and extrinsic
examining the natural and ordinary meaning of the text, I acknowledge that the
context is consistent with the more limited
The words “in
full” are immediately followed by the words “(except as provided by
”, which confirms the section is, at least, directed to the
prevention of non-authorised deductions. The “mischief”
section is directed towards, as noted by the High Court in
least the mischief addressed by the former “
” provisions,
which are generally understood to have been directed to preventing payment
“in kind”, in the form
of deductions from pay to offset the
provision of meals, accommodation or other asserted benefits. There is nothing
in the Explanatory
Memorandum to suggest that s 323 was intended to introduce a
federal statutory regime for contractual underpayments in employment
of national
system employees. The existence of the separate safety net contractual
entitlement regime in ss 542 and 543 similarly
points away from that conclusion,
as Manousaridis J identified.
as submitted by the RTBU, s 323 was not modelled off of a set of
“standard” “
” provisions. It provided a simple,
national scheme which replaced the patchwork of obligations within the different
Territory “Truck
The different
” provisions (now repealed) were as follows:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
“Payment of
remuneration to an employee is to be made
in full without any deduction
for goods, board or lodging or any other services supplied by the employer in
payment (or part payment) of remuneration”, subject
to the permitted
deductions in
Truck Act 1900
“In every contract made with any
worker, the wages of the worker shall be made payable in money only, and not
otherwise; and
if by agreement, custom, or otherwise, a worker is entitled to
receive, in anticipation of the regular period of the payment of his
wages, an advance as part, or on account, the wages,
it shall not be lawful
for the employer to withhold the advance, or make any deduction in relation to
the advance
, on account of poundage, discount or interest, or any similar
Fair Work Act 1994
“If an employee does work for
which the remuneration is fixed by an award or enterprise agreement,
employer must pay the employee in full, and without deduction
remuneration so fixed”, subject to the permitted deductions in
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act 1993
(WA), s 17C(1): “To
the extent that an employee receives his or her pay in money
the employee is
entitled to be paid in full
”, subject to authorised deductions in s
Industrial Relations Act 1999
(Qld), s 391(1): “If an employer
employs an employee to perform work for a fixed rate,
the employer must pay
the employee the fixed rate without deduction
, other than a deduction
authorised by—(a) a relevant industrial instrument; or (b) this division;
or (c) the employee’s
written consent.”
Industrial Relations Act 1984
“If, under an
award or a registered agreement, an employee is entitled to be paid any sum by
his employer, that employer is
guilty of an offence if that sum is paid
otherwise than in money
without any deductions
other than those that may
be authorized by the employee.”
can be seen, the “
” provisions from the ACT, Queensland and
Tasmania only required wages to be paid “without deduction”. The
legislature,
when creating the national scheme in 323(1), deliberately chose to
include certain requirements from the patchwork of obligations
different “Truck Acts”, and those were that payment was to be in
full (except for deductions permitted under
s 324), in money, and at least
when interpreting the meaning of legislation, the text – specifically, the
“ordinary and grammatical sense
of the statutory words ... having regard
to their context and the legislative
starting point, and the end point. Legislation should be given its natural and
ordinary meaning unless it is plain
that Parliament intended some different
That is particularly
desirable in a statute that sets out minimum standards applicable to almost all
employees in Australia and is
to be read and understood by them and their
the context set out above confirms that s 323 is at least intended to make an
unauthorised deduction from pay a civil penalty
offence, a natural and ordinary
reading of the section gives it a wider effect. As Buchanan J concluded in
Wollongong Coal
and Halley J concluded in
Euro Car Parts
does not only prohibit deductions other than those permitted in s 324. The plain
meaning of the words “in full”
is that s 323 creates a
statutory obligation to pay the amount payable to an employee in relation to the
performance of work each
month. While the context, identified above, is
consistent with a narrower view of the effect of the section, it is not
inconsistent
with the section also having the wider effect identified. In other
words, the context does not require a departure from the natural
and ordinary
meaning of the words. The section not only addresses the mischief of
unauthorised deductions for ‘in kind’
benefits but extends to
preventing any short payment of moneys payable to an employee for the
performance of work.
am strengthened in this view by the observation that it avoids a practical
difficulty that would otherwise arise in determining
whether an underpayment
arose from an unauthorised deduction or otherwise. By its nature, a deduction
assumes as a starting point
acceptance of a full amount payable, with that
amount reduced to reflect a view that there is a basis to reduce that full
It will not however always be easy to characterise whether any
particular short payment is the result of a “deduction”
starting point of what is accepted to be the full amount payable, rather than
the result of an incorrect belief as to the
full amount due. Such an exercise is
one that almost inevitably will involve having to understand the
employer’s subjective
intention, to the extent it can be discerned. Take,
for example, a situation where the employer pays an employee less than the full
amount due for a week’s work, due to a belief that the employee left two
hours early one day without good reason, in circumstances
where the employee in
fact had an entitlement to leave early. Were two hours wrongly
“deducted” or did the employer simply
incorrectly pay the hours
which the employer considered had been worked? Is the answer different if the
employee in fact remained
at work at all relevant times but employer decided to
‘deduct’ two hours because of a view that the employee did no useful
work during the last two hours? Such issues do not arise on an interpretation of
s 323 that creates an obligation to pay whatever
sum is owing, such that any
short payment amounts to a contravention of s 323.
conclusion, while giving due deference to the considered views of Colvin J and
Manousaridis J in
, I prefer the conclusions of
Jessup J, Buchanan J and Halley J in
Murrihy, Wollongong Coal and Euro Car
respectively, which are consistent with the plurality in
: namely, that s 323 identifies and provides for the enforcement
of an obligation to pay wages “in full” and “monthly”,
and by so doing creates a civil penalty for a failure to pay a contractually
obligated payment for work done.
Accordingly,
if the employees who were locked out were in fact entitled to be paid wages for
the period of the lockout, then the failure
to pay those wages in full, in money
and within the month would have constituted a contravention of
turning to the next issue there is one further matter to address in respect of s
323(1). Pacific National’s written submissions
filed before hearing
contended that there were in any event no amounts “payable to the employee
in relation to the performance
of work” because the employees had not
performed any work to which the subsection could relate. This argument was
during the hearing, in my view correctly. Section 323 is not limited
to payments for work done but extends to amounts payable “in
relation to
the performance of work”. Hence, as noted earlier, amounts payable for
annual leave, long service leave and referable
to a period when an employee was
unable to work due to COVID-19
restrictions,
have all been held
to be amounts “payable to the employee in relation to the performance of
work”. The RTBU’s application
does concern amounts payable in
respect of the performance of work, notwithstanding it was work that the
employer prevented the employees
from doing.
Employer Industrial
RTBU’s case depends upon establishing that Pacific National’s
lockout was not
employer response action
as defined in s 411.
“Industrial
action” is defined in
Fair Work Act
19 Meaning of
industrial action
(1) Industrial action means action of any of the following kinds:
(a) the performance of work by an employee in a manner different from that in
which it is customarily performed, or the adoption
of a practice in relation to
work by an employee, the result of which is a restriction or limitation on, or a
delay in, the performance
of the work;
(b) a ban, limitation or restriction on the performance of work by an employee
or on the acceptance of or offering for work by an
(c) a failure or refusal by employees to attend for work or a failure or refusal
to perform any work at all by employees who attend
(d) the lockout of employees from their employment by the employer of the
provides that an employer locks out employees from their employment if the
employer prevents the employees from performing work under
their contracts of
employment without terminating those contracts.
2 of Chapter 3,
sets out when industrial action for a proposed
enterprise agreement is “protected industrial action”. An employer
will only be protected industrial action, pursuant to s 408, for a
proposed enterprise agreement if it is “employer response
for the agreement.
Section 411(1) defines “employer response action” as
411 Employer response action
Employer response action
(1) Employer response action for a proposed enterprise agreement means
industrial action that:
(a) is organised or engaged in as a response to industrial action by:
(i) a bargaining representative of an employee who will be covered by the
agreement; or
(ii) an employee who will be covered by the agreement; and
(b) is organised or engaged in by an employer that will be covered by the
agreement against one or more employees that will be covered
by the agreement;
(c) meets the common requirements set out in Subdivision B; and
(d) meets the additional requirements set out in this section.
416 provides that an employer who engages in employer response action can refuse
to make payments to the employees in relation
to the period of the action.
Further, the immunity provision in s 415 protects an employer that takes
protected employer response
action from civil liability in respect of an action
under any law that is in force in a State or Territory, except for an action
involving personal injury, wilful or reckless destruction of or damage to
property, or the unlawful taking, keeping or use of property.
for these proceedings, whether the lockout was employer response action as
defined turns on two issues: first, whether
organised or engaged
in as a response to industrial action
; and second, whether it met the
requirements of Subdivision B, in particular the notice requirements. These
issues are a restatement
of two of the questions listed in the opening paragraph
of this decision; first, whether on the facts the lockout commenced in response
to the commencement of industrial action by the employees; and second whether
employer industrial action is employer response action
if it is notified to
start at the exact same time as the industrial action notified to be taken by
Whether the lockout was action organised or engaged in
as a response to employee industrial action
leading decision on the interpretation of “employer response action”
in s 411 is
In that case Hatcher and Catanzariti VPP held that an employer lockout must be
taken in response to industrial action
that is happening
to constitute
protected employer response action. Employer response action is unprotected if
it pre-empts the taking of industrial
action by its employees, even if that
industrial action is being organised or threatened or is imminent or
In the facts of that
decision, the Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union (AMWU) was
bargaining for a new enterprise agreement
with McCain Foods (Aust) Pty Ltd
(McCain) covering food manufacturing workers at McCain’s site at Smithton,
Tasmania. On 16
July 2021, the AMWU sent five notices to McCain stating that it
intended to engage in “employee claim action”, in the
form of work
stoppages on 22 and 23 July 2021, starting at 7:00am on 22 July. On 19 July
2021, McCain notified AMWU that it intended
to take employer response action by
locking out AMWU members from 7:00am on 22 July until 7:00pm on 23 July 2021 (in
other words,
as in this case, employer action to commence at the same time as
the notified employee action). Hatcher and Catanzariti VPP described
“[implementing] its lockout before AMWU members undertook industrial
On 29 July 2021,
the AMWU sent a notice to McCain stating that it intended to take 1-hour
stoppages regarding the performance of
multiple types of work. However, no AMWU
members took industrial action that day. At 5:17pm, McCain notified that it
intended to
lock out AMWU members from 7:00pm that evening, asserting that the
uncertainty over AMWU industrial action was giving rise to unacceptable
risks. The foreshadowed lockout commenced at 7:00pm. AMWU filed an application
on 30 July 2021 for an order to stop unprotected
industrial action under s 418
Fair Work Act
. At first instance Clancy DP held that the employer
action was taken in response to industrial action that had been organised, even
if not taken, and as such was in accordance with s 411 of the
Fair Work Act
protected. Hatcher and Catanzariti VPP upheld the AMWU’s appeal against
Clancy DP’s decision, finding that McCain’s
lockout on 29 July 2021
would only be protected industrial action if it was in response to industrial
action in fact taken by its
RTBU contended that Pacific National’s lockout was not capable of being
employer response action
because it was action that was stated to
commence at the same time as the commencement of the employee action.
National’s lockout notice on 17 October 2023 stated: “Pacific
National will be engaging in Employer Response Action,
commencing on 0001hrs on
Wednesday 18 October 2023 and concluding at 0001hrs on Wednesday 25 October
RTBU contends that the recipient of the notice would reasonably understand that
the time of 12.01am notified by Pacific National
should be read as a precise
indication of the time at which the lockout would commence.
RTBU submitted that Pacific National’s action, so notified, entirely
occluded the period in which RTBU members could have
taken their notified work
stoppages. This is because an employee’s ability to engage in the work
stoppages necessarily depends
on the actual non-compliance with an existing
obligation and entitlement to attend work. Because the lockout was notified to
at 12.01am, the time at which the employees’ work stoppages were
notified to begin, it was submitted that Pacific National
had removed the
obligation for employees to attend work from that time, and so erased any
possibility of employees taking action.
As it could not be said that there was
any employee action to which the lockout was responding, the lockout was not
“a response”
to any industrial action and not “employer
response action” under s 411. Counsel for the RTBU freely
acknowledged this
argument would not have been available had the notice stated
that the lockout would start at 12.02am (1 minute later).
proper interpretative approach for a notice for industrial action is to
determine what the recipient of the notice would reasonably
have understood from
the terms used in the notice rather than what the author
Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal,
Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia v Pinnacle Career
Development
Career Development
”) said the following on the question of whether a
notice had adequately described the nature of the action to be engaged in
the day on which it would commence, pursuant to s 414(6):
“An assessment of adequacy must take account of all the circumstances and
examine expressions used in the context of whether
the concepts embodied in the
expressions are well recognised in workplace
relations.”
notice stated: “Pacific National hereby gives notice
employee engages
in The Stoppage,
in response
, Pacific National will
be engaging in Employer Response Action” (emphasis added).
my view the recipient of the notice would reasonably have understood from the
terms used in the notice that the lockout would start
at 12.01am but would only
occur, and would not start before, an employee commencing the industrial action
defined as The Stoppage.
follows that the notice did not prevent employees taking industrial action.
Indeed, it stated in effect that the lockout would
not occur unless employees
first took industrial action.
RTBU contended that Pacific National’s industrial action commenced, in
accordance with its notice, at 12.01am on 18 October
2023, and since the
employee action did not commence before 12.01am, then it could not have been in
response to employee action.
The RTBU contended that by commencing the lockout
at 12.01am, Pacific National removed the possibility of employees taking action.
In that regard the RTBU relied on the obiter comment of the Full Bench in
Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union v Pacific National Executive
Services Pty Ltd
“As the lock out commenced at the same time that the employees’
action was due to commence, we do not see how it could
be responsive to that
action. The employees were unable to commence industrial action due to the lock
out. The Deputy President’s
approach is a departure from the approach
taken by the Full Bench in
concur with the view in
employer response action
a lockout has to be in response to industrial action actually taken by its
employees, and as such the employer action cannot begin
before or at the same
time as the employee action which it is responding to begins.
the material before me Pacific National’s action did not commence before
or at the same time as the employee action commenced
but commenced after and in
response to that action. I reach that conclusion for the following reasons.
as noted, in my view Pacific National’s notice conveyed that its intended
action would only commence if an employee first
engaged in employee action.
I find as a matter of fact that the lockout did commence at or about 12.01am but
after employee action had commenced. The
evidence from Ms Deparis in that regard
was not put in contest. On the evening of 17 October, Ms Deparis and Michael
Patterson, Superintendent
of Service Delivery, had conversations with two
employees, Eoin Loughman and Justin Maguire, in which the employees stated that
intended to participate in the stoppage, and they were informed that they
would be locked out if they did so. Ms Deparis gave evidence
that “at or
Loughman, once she noticed that the
latter was leaving the office:
Are you leaving the office due to the PIA?
OK. In that case I have a letter for you which is similar to the
memo that we discussed earlier. Do you need any additional information?
letter provided to Mr Loughman was in nearly identical terms to Pacific
National’s written notice of the lockout on 17 October.
Relevantly, it
provided that:
“The nature of PIA notified by the RTBU is a stoppage of work, commencing
[sic] on Wednesday 18 October 2023 and concluding at
on 21 October 2023, specifically as follows:
“Stoppage of work in the form of 288 consecutive 15 minutes
stoppages.”
(“The Stoppage”).
Therefore, pursuant to
section 414(5)
Fair Work Act 2009
Pacific National hereby gives notice that if any employee engages in The
Stoppage, in response, Pacific National will be engaging
in Employer Response
Action, commencing at
Wednesday 18 October 2023
concluding at
Wednesday 25 October 2023
During that Period, each employee who engages in The Stoppage will not be
permitted to perform any work (that is, they will be “locked
If this applies to you, you should not attend your place of work, and you will
not be paid for the Period.”
Deparis had a conversation to the same effect with Mr Maguire and provided him
with a letter in identical terms.
Deparis further gave uncontested evidence that she called employees who had not
attended their shifts after 12.01 am on 18 October
and, if the employee
confirmed that they were participating in the stoppage, sent them a letter
confirming that they were subject
to the lockout. Her evidence included copies
of the letters sent by Pacific National and text messages that Pacific National
sent to employees who had not attended their shifts to ask whether they were
absent because of the work stoppage.
the basis of that evidence, I find that the employer response action commenced
at or about 12.01am after and in response to the
Whether the lockout met the notice requirements in
the plurality approved of the conclusion of Greenwood J in
Pinnacle Career Development
, to the effect that an employer can give
valid notice of “intended” employer response action in advance of
taking industrial action, which is to be distinguished from the taking
of the employer response action, which is valid subject to
what employee action
is occurring or not occurring.
action taken by an employer has to comply with the notice requirements in
to constitute “employer response action”.
Subsection 414(5)
an employer to give written notice of “the action” to all bargaining
representatives and take all reasonable
steps to notify employees of “the
action”. The article “the” in
indicates that notice
must pertain to the particular action that is proposed to be taken, and that
action which does not conform
with the notice cannot be said to have complied
with the notice requirements in Subdivision B.
Subdivision
B includes the notice requirements in
, and in particular at
subsections 414(5)
and (6) notice requirements for an employer response action.
Subsection 414(5)
states that before an employer engages in employer response
action, it must give written notice of the action to each bargaining
representative of an employee who will be covered by the agreement and take all
reasonable steps to notify the employees who will
be covered by the agreement of
the action. Under
, the notice has to specify the nature of the
action and the day on which it will start.
was not put in issue by the RTBU that it was open to Pacific National to give
notice of intended responsive employer action in
advance of employee industrial
action. The RTBU however contended that even if Pacific National had implemented
a lockout in response
to an employee engaging in a work stoppage, this action
was nevertheless invalid because it did not comply with the action as notified,
since the notice stated the lockout would commence at 12.01am, and if responsive
to industrial action starting at 12.01am, then the
lockout must have in fact
12.01am, which therefore made it action that was not
“the” action notified.
would have been a difficult question to resolve, had the employee industrial
notified to commence at 12.01am on 18 October 2023
had in fact commenced later
that day or indeed the next day.
the facts of this case, I have found that as a matter of fact the lockout
commenced after the employee action commenced, and did
so at or about the time
stated in the notice, namely 12.01am. While the evidence does not permit me to
find with precision that the
lockout commenced at 12.01am, as against at 12am or
12.02am, I do not consider that a sufficient basis to conclude that the action
taken was not the action notified.
National’s lockout was valid employer response action. The lockout was
notified to, and did in fact, take effect in
response to employee action being
taken and in accordance with Pacific National’s notice. On that basis the
application is
I found that the employer action was invalid I would have needed to address the
fourth issue listed in the opening paragraph of
this decision. Pacific National
contended that the RTBU had led no evidence establishing why the 53 relevant
employees who did not
attend work from 12.01am on 18 October 2023 to 12.01am on
25 October 2023 were, but for the lockout, entitled to the payments which
not made. Pacific National contended that the RTBU had not established that the
employees were otherwise ready, willing and
able to work, and would have
attended work but for the lockout. In that regard Pacific National relied on the
existence of the employee
industrial action, in the form of the consecutive 15
minute stoppages, and the effect of the no part-performance notices upon
who prior to the lockout had been engaging in the indefinite partial
I found that the employer response action was invalid, I would have determined
that the employees in question were entitled to
be compensated for their lost
wages for the period of the lockout and required the parties to confer to
determine appropriate orders
to reflect that finding. Absent agreement I would
have offered the parties the opportunity of further conciliation, failing which
I would have brought the matter back before me to determine the most appropriate
and efficient way to determine the orders to be
would have made such a determination notwithstanding the evidence of the planned
15 minute stoppages, since (had I otherwise upheld
the RTBU case), the lockout
would have had the effect of preventing the employees from being able to take
such action.
I would have made such a determination notwithstanding the evidence that there
was industrial action in the form of partial
work bans notified which some
employees had taken before the lockout, and evidence that the employer had
notified that if such work
bans had continued it would not pay the employees who
took such action. I take that view because the lockout notice intervened to
prevent the employees working, with or without work bans. If it was not valid
then I can see no reason why I would have reduced the
amounts payable on the
basis of the counterfactual, since the (in)valid action intervened to prevent
that counterfactual arising.
I am wrong about that there would have still been a need to determine
compensation for two reasons. First, I accept the RTBU’s
submission that
the furthest that the evidence about the partial work bans can be taken is that
it was open to the 53 employees who
participated in the stoppages to participate
in the bans. It did not indicate whether those employees had actually ever
participated in the bans or intended to do so. Had the RTBU been
successful, that issue could have been resolved in subsequent proceedings
determining the quantum of remedies. Second, the employer response action was
two days longer than the employee action, and there
would have been a need to
consider whether as a result there was at least compensation due for those two
application is dismissed.
26 May 2025 - Footnote 1 inserted at [3], and subsequent footnotes
renumbered. Paragraph numbering removed at level 3 headings, and
paragraphs renumbered.
Fair Work Regulations 2009
(Cth) reg 1.05.
[2024] FWCFB
(2021) 310 IR 1
FWCFB 4804.
[2024] FWCFB 46
[2024] FWCFB 46
Fair Work Act 2009
This is the issue
identified by Buchanan J in Association of Professional Engineers, Scientists
and Managers, Australia v Wollongong
[2014] FCA 878
(2024) 332 IR 456
[2024] FCA 82.
[2020] FCAFC 227.
(2015) 239 FCR 461
(2024) 332 IR 387
[2024] FCA 705.
[2013] HCA 36.
(2013) 248 CLR 619
[2013] HCA 36
Truck Act 1900
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Relations Act 1999
(Qld), ss 391-393;
Fair Work Act 1994
Relations Act 1984
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act 1993
ss 17B-17D;
Victorian Workers’ Wages Protection Act 2007
Macquarie Dictionary,
9th ed (2023).
(2013) 238 IR
[2013] FCA 908.
[2013] FCA 908
(2013) 238 IR 307
[2013] FCA 908
[2014] FCA 878.
Education Union v Victoria (Department of Education and Early Childhood
Development)
(2015) 239 FCR 461
[2015] FCA 1196
(2014) 245 IR 223
[2014] FCAFC 110.
[2014] FCAFC 110
[2019] FCA 1960
Qantas Airways Ltd v
Flight Attendants’ Association of Australia
(2020) 282 FCR 243
282 FCR 243
[2020] FCAFC 227
(2020) 283 FCR 123
[2020] FCAFC 194.
[2024] FCA 828
Wollermann v Fortrend
Securities Pty Ltd
[2025] FCA 103
, quoting Murrihy v Betezy.com.au Pty
[2013] FCA 908
(2013) 238 IR 307
Euro Car Parts Pty
Ltd v Cannon
(2024) 332 IR 456
[2024] FCA 828
, quoting Qantas Airways
Ltd v Flight Attendants’ Association of Australia
(2020) 282 FCR 243
[2020] FCAFC 227
Wilkinson v Wilson Security Pty Ltd (No 3)
(2024) 332 IR 387
[2024] FCA 705
Fair Work Ombudsman v
Priority Matters Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 833
(2019) 344 FLR 1
[2019] FCCA 383.
[2019] FCCA 383
(2019) 344 FLR 1
[2019] FCCA 383
(2019) 344 FLR 1
[2019] FCCA 383
269 CLR 507
[2019] HCA 35
Explanatory
Memorandum,
Fair Work Bill 2009
Alcan (NT) Alumina
Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
(2009) 239 CLR 27
[2009] HCA 41
Masson v Parsons
266 CLR 554
[2019] HCA 21
Fair Work Act 2009
Finance Pty Ltd v Webb
(2014) 245 IR 223
[2014] FCAFC 110
; Association of
Professional Engineers, Scientists and Managers, Australia v Bulga Underground
Operations Pty Ltd
[2019] FCA 1960
; Qantas Airways Ltd v Flight
Attendants’ Association of Australia
(2020) 282 FCR 243
[2020] FCAFC
Fair Work Act 2009
Manufacturing Workers’ Union v McCain Foods (Aust) Pty Ltd
(2021) 310 IR
[2021] FWCFB 4804.
Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union v McCain Foods (Aust) Pty Ltd
(2021) 310 IR 1
[2021] FWCFB 4804
Manufacturing Workers’ Union v McCain Foods (Aust) Pty Ltd
(2021) 310 IR
[2021] FWCFB 4804
Esso Australia Pty Ltd v Australian Workers Union (2015) IR 304;
[2015] FCA 758
(Jessup J).
190 FCR 581
(2010) 190 FCR 581
[2010] FCA 1350
[2023] FWCFB 46
Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union v McCain Foods (Aust) Pty Ltd
(2021) 310 IR 1
[2021] FWCFB 4804
, at [44]-[45], quoting Communications,
Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union v
Pinnacle Career
Development Pty Ltd
(2010) 190 FCR 581
[2010] FCA 1350
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (394 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter