URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDT/2012/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v PHUNG (No. 1) [2012] NSWDT 1 (10 July 2012)
DENTAL TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
NSW HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
VAN THIEN PHUNG
Inquiry into a Complaint against a
dentist pursuant to
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
Sections 145D, 165A
SUPPRESSION ORDER
HCCC v Phung (No. 1) [2012] 1
Hearing Dates: 14, 15, May 2012
Date: 18 May 2012 (Findings as to Complaints & Particulars,
Parties: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant);
Dr. Mark Van Thien Phung (Respondent)
The Tribunal finds the Respondent Dentist guilty of
Unsatisfactory
Professional Conduct
Professional Misconduct.
Mr. Peter Dwyer, Deputy Chairperson
Dr. George Wing AM (Dentist
Dr. Angie Lang (Dentist Member)
Dr. Catherine Berglund
(Lay Member)
Appearances: Mr. P. Griffin
of Counsel, instructed by Ms. P. Hooke, Solicitor, (HCCC) for the
Complainant;
Mr. G. Gregg of Counsel, instructed by Ms. F. Dransfield,
Solicitor, for the Respondent;
Catchwords:
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional
—patient with traumatic injury—failure in
diagnosis; fail develop treatment plan; incorrect diagnosis of
irreversible pulpal necrosis—failure to ensure specialist
referral—inadequate endodontic &
bridgework—charge excessive fees.
Legislation
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW);
Dentists (General) Regulation 1996
Cases cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Kalil v Bray
(1977) 1 NSWLR 256
(1995) 193 CLR 501
REASONS FOR DECISION:
FINDINGS—COMPLAINTS & PARTICULARS
Complaints dated 21 September 2011, were before the Tribunal, the first of
Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct
as defined by Section 139B (1) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
(“the National
Law”); and the second, of
Professional Misconduct
as defined by
Section 139E of the National Law;
Patient A” (“the patient”) was identified in a Schedule to the
Complaint. At the Complainant’s request
without objection by the
Respondent, the Tribunal directed pursuant to Clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the
National Law, that the patient’s
name not be published;
inquiry took place on 14 and 15 May 2012. To assist the parties to prepare for
further hearing as to any consequential, protective
orders, its decision with
respect to the complaints and the particulars was delivered in summary form, on
18 May 2012 with the Tribunal’s
full reasons for decision to be published
at a later date. The application and reasons for a two-stage process is
discussed below;
response to the Complainant’s application including by written submissions
and supported by the Respondent, the Tribunal
directed its Inquiry to be
conducted in two distinct stages—the first, to receive evidence and
submissions concerning the complaints
and the particulars thereof followed by
the Tribunal’s decision concerning those issues; and the second, if it
becomes necessary,
to hear evidence and submissions addressing any
consequential, orders. The basis of the Complainant’s application in
related to the need for it to adduce evidence relevant to any
consequential orders, at a second stage because such evidence had no
value to the Tribunal’s determination of the complaints and their
particulars and could be highly prejudicial to
the Respondent; The Tribunal was
satisfied and directed accordingly;
Respondent graduated with the degree of Bachelor of Dentistry in 1989 followed
by two years during which he practised in general
dental practice, working for
three dentists at three different locations. He commenced practice as a sole
practitioner in 1991 in
a Sydney suburb and continues in that practice. He gave
evidence before the Tribunal and his statement dated 6 January 2011 was in
19 December 2001, the patient then aged approximately 33 years, was injured at
work. When pushing tree branches into a chipper
a piece of wood was ejected from
the machine and struck him on the chin. In his statement in evidence without
objection, before the
Tribunal, he described how “...there was some blood
and tooth chips...” in his mouth and a small cut to his tongue; he
his mouth out with salt water and he continued working, finishing about four
hours later. He continued working until the Christmas
holiday break and went
described how his boss told
him to go see his (boss’s) dentist, the
Respondent. He described how when aged about 14 or 16, he had four wisdom teeth
and that he had not had any fillings. The patient did not appear before
the Tribunal at the inquiry. His statement dated 29 June
2010, was without
objection, admitted into evidence;
by his employer, the patient first attended the Respondent on 16 January 2002;
his final attendance at the Respondent’s
practice was in July 2003, in
total there were 55 consultations, paid for by a worker’s compensation
insurer. After examining
the patient during the initial consultation the
Respondent told him that if left alone, the teeth might have a chance of
At the patient’s second visit the Respondent made a diagnosis of
irreversible pulpal necrosis
as the patient’s pain had not subsided
and he thought the patient’s teeth could not recover from the trauma. The
told the Tribunal that it was at this consultation he told the
patient that he should see a specialist but he did not record this
patient records;
Respondent carried out endodontic treatment by way of
root canal therapy
crown and bridgework
on all of the patient’s 28 teeth; and a
number of such crowns were splinted in groups of two and three. The workers
compensation
insurer paid the Respondent $73, 640 for his
Eventually,
root canal therapies
had to be redone by Dr. Alan Nerwich. Dr.
Neil Peppitt, a consultant prosthodontist who gave evidence before the Tribunal,
that the 28
undertaken by the Respondent, needed
replacement;
litigation ensued in the New South Wales Supreme Court with judgment delivered
in December 2009; and the Court referred the
matter to the Complainant, the NSW
Health Care Complaints Commission;
Particulars of the complaints—the same for each of them—are as
Particulars of Complaints
to develop, and document in the dental record, a comprehensive treatment plan
for Patient A.
to adequately identify and diagnose the cause or causes of Patient A's pain and
the difficulty he was experiencing in sleeping.
Incorrectly
identified irreversible pulpal necrosis in relation to all or some teeth as the
cause of Patient A’s thermal sensitivity.
throughout the course of the treatment to refer Patient A to a prosthodontist
and/or endodontist for a specialist opinion.
Failed to advise Patient A of the option to seek a referral to a prosthodontist
and/or endodontist.
(b) In the alternative, if such advice
was provided, he failed to record such advice in Patient A's dental
relation to endodontic treatment:
(a) Failed to undertake
adequate or appropriate investigations prior to commencing treatment;
(b) Undertook treatment without clinical indication;
(c) Conducted treatment without sufficient knowledge to provide the
treatment proposed;
(d) Exhibited a lack of adequate care and judgment and/or failed to
exercise an appropriate level of skill in undertaking the endodontic
relation to crown and bridgework:
(a) Undertook treatment in
excess of what was necessary without clinical indication;
(b) Conducted treatment without sufficient knowledge to provide the
treatment proposed;
(c) Exhibited a lack of adequate care and judgment and/or failed to
exercise an appropriate level of skill in undertaking the crown
and bridgework
provided, in particular:
(i) Installed crowns which were poorly fitting due to large gaps between
crowns and/or overhanging margins;
(ii) Carried out grouping and splinting of crowns in groups of two or
three when it was not clinically indicated and contrary to
(iii) Failed to provide adequate occlusal support in the occlusal table
(iv) Caused or exacerbated temporomandibular joint dysfunction;
(v) Perforated crowns during adjustments.
excessive fees for the treatment of Patient
Admissions by Respondent
respect to the Particulars of both complaints, the Respondent by his Counsel,
made admissions at the commencement of the inquiry
later incorporated in a
Response to Notice of Complaint
placed before the
Tribunal—Particulars (as numbered above) 2, 3, 4, 5 (b), 6 (a), 7 (b), 7
(c) (i) & (ii), and 8 were admitted;
Respondent denied Particular 5 (a); and admitted Particular 5
to particular 1, Respondent said that on 16 January 2002 he conducted an
examination only and formed a preliminary diagnosis that
the patient should
adopt a “...wait and see approach...” to see if the symptoms
settled; but otherwise he admitted Particular
Respondent admitted Particular 6 (a) in that he failed to undertake adequate or
appropriate investigations prior to commencing
treatment—save for teeth 11
and 21.With respect to Particular 6 (b) he admitted that he undertook treatment
without clinical
indication save for teeth 11 and 21; and further said that all
teeth required treatment but that “...with hindsight...”
should not have treated the patient; (ii) rather than endodontic treatment it
would have been appropriate to apply a composite
resin filling to the cracked
teeth; and (iii) wait and see if the teeth recovered;
Particulars
6 (c) and 6 (d) were not admitted;
7 (a) was admitted except the Respondent said, he undertook necessary treatment
and with clinical indication, with respect
to teeth 11 and 21;
he admitted Particulars 7 (c) (i) and (ii) the Respondent did not admit that he
exhibited a lack of adequate care and judgment
and/ or failed to exercise an
appropriate level of skill in undertaking crown and bridgework he provided; he
did not admit Particulars
7 (c) (iii), (iv) and (v);
Notwithstanding
the Respondent’s admissions, the Tribunal must itself consider the
evidence carefully, in order to be satisfied
that the complaints are proved to
the standard articulated in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
; that is, comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities but
that having regard to the serious nature of the complaints and
the consequences,
such satisfaction cannot be produced by “
...inexact proofs,
indefinite testimony or indirect references
.” (Ibid). The onus of
proof remains throughout, on the Complainant;
The Complainant’s evidence included the patient’s Statement
(referred to above); Respondent’s statements and dental
records relevant
to his treatment of the patient; reports of ‘peer’ reviewer Dr.
Pearman; and, from the NSW Supreme Court
proceedings, ‘expert’
reports by Drs. Peppitt, Howe and Challoner; Drs. Pearman and Peppitt appeared
before the Tribunal;
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal;
Evidence of
Dr. Pearman
John Pearman a consultant dentist, has practised for 32 years and has extensive
post-graduate training and experience in occlusion,
implants and crown and
bridgework. Described by Complainant’s Counsel for the purpose of his
evidence before the Tribunal as
the Respondent’s ‘peer’ he had
reviewed the Respondent’s relevant patient records together with
radiographs
and study models. He provided three reports admitted into evidence
without objection. The Respondent did not require Dr. Pearman
cross-examination; he was called by the Complainant to provide the Tribunal with
an opportunity to ask questions of him, if necessary;
Pearman was critical of the Respondent’s misinterpretation of the
patient’s signs and symptoms which he believed,
led to “gross
mismanagement” of his problems leading to “...tragic and far
reaching consequences...” for
the patient. Dr. Pearman did not believe
that a comprehensive treatment plan was available at an early stage; and that
once the Respondent
irreversible pulpitis
and decided that
Root Canal Therapy
(RCT) was the only solution, an erroneous treatment
plan was undertaken and continued;
was Dr. Pearman’s opinion that following the patient’s traumatic
injury it was mandatory that a systematic examination
of his Temporomandibular
Joints (TMJs) be undertaken given his inability to achieve closure of his teeth
together. His condition
on presentation was multifaceted and required a period
of investigation and stabilisation before a definitive treatment plan could
formulated;
of the Respondent’s dental records, Dr. Pearman described them as sparse,
cursory and without sufficient support for
the extensive treatment plan
contemplated at an early stage, requiring multiple RCTs and full mouth
rehabilitation. He was unable
to locate any notes indicating the
Respondent’s intention to perform 28 endodontic procedures and full mouth
rehabilitation.
As such, it was Dr. Pearman’s opinion that the treatment
plan was not formulated, but rather “evolved”, responding
patient’s ongoing requests for endodontic treatment to a particular tooth;
the patient believing mistakenly this would
relieve his pain. Dr. Pearman
described this “evolving treatment plan” as “...absurd and
tragic treatment...”
given the “...irreversible path of endodontics
of questionable need and value followed by prosthodontics, which should not
been necessary.”;
Pearman expressed his opinion that early in his treatment the Respondent should
have realized that his diagnosis of the cause
or causes, of the patient’s
pain and sleeping difficulty was “...seriously deficient...” and
where the patient’s
recurring symptoms of thermal sensitivity and
sleeplessness should have caused the Respondent to question his early, perhaps
diagnosis of extensive
pulpal necrosis
(that is, death of the
tissue in the inner-most part of a tooth, containing nerves and blood
on his review of the patient’s records, it was Dr. Pearman’s opinion
that teeth 11 and 21 sustained small fractures
to the enamel in the work-related
injury; that having commenced endodontic treatment to those teeth with no
symptomatic relief, the
Respondent demonstrated a serious lack of experience and
judgment in failing to seek another opinion on the cause or causes, of those
Dr. Pearman’s opinion, a serious blow like that sustained by the patient
may lead to
irreversible pulpal necrosis
in possibly two or three teeth
directly affected by the trauma and would require endodontic treatment and
possibly, “...full
coverage restoration...” but for the Respondent
to claim that all of the patient’s 28 teeth sustained such
, “...is highly improbable if not ludicrous.” Dr.
Pearman described more reliable tests to identify
pulpal necrosis
describing also, Respondent’s diagnosis of multiple
pulpal necrosis
as “hasty” and which showed a distinct lack of experience,
knowledge and judgment; when such diagnosis was proving to
be inadequate with
the patient’s pain
continuing, he believed the Respondent should
have insisted on a second opinion. It was his further opinion from viewing the
records, that the endodontic treatment was undertaken at the
patient’s request rather than being based on sound, diagnostic
in effect, it was
Pearman was critical of the Respondent’s treatment records, with little
correlation between work performed and notes recorded.
He described the
Respondent’s failure to record the advice he claimed he gave the patient
as to the need for specialist opinion
as”...extremely serious.” It
was his opinion also, that the Respondent’s endodontic treatment was
a very poor standard” including his failure to use protective
rubber dam considered a mandatory requirement for performing
such treatment. He
noted that all of such treatment to 28 teeth later required retreatment by a
specialist endodontist; furthermore,
that so many teeth were treated without
adequate diagnostic evidence to substantiate irreversible RCT, demonstrates a
serious lack
of care and judgment;
those particulars of the complaints regarding the performance of crown and
bridgework, it was Dr. Pearman’s opinion
that the Respondent exhibited a
severe lack of appropriate experience, skill, knowledge, judgment and care; and
that according to
relevant radiographs showing no loss of bone support and the
absence of any evidence in the Respondent’s records, of tooth
mobility, he
queried any indication for the ‘splinting’ of crowns in groups of
two or three, undertaken by the Respondent.
Having reviewed the radiographs,
showing these splinted crowns
Dr. Pearman noted that their
‘grouping’ becomes more damaging due in his view, to their extremely
poor fit, making cleaning
almost impossible; and possibly leading to periodontal
respect to those particulars concerning adequate occlusal support, Dr. Pearman
told the Tribunal there was “...quite a
large discrepancy between the
comfortable jaw position and the position dictated by the crowns placed...[by
the Respondent which]...had
the potential to cause a lot of
problems.”;
Pearman described how the crowns were uniformly of an extremely poor fit, with
overhanging margins and frank gaps between the
tooth margins and crowns; with
the crowns made at inappropriate bite level and the occlusal plane of the
cemented crowns unstable,
this would make correct occlusion impossible, in turn
leading to exacerbation of a possibly, pre-existing TMJ dysfunction; however,
noted in evidence before the Tribunal that it was speculative whether or not the
patient had any such TMJ dysfunction;
considering the particulars of the complaints dealing with perforation of
crowns, Dr. Pearman conceded he had only seen reference
to this in a report of
Dr. Peppitt and had no first-hand knowledge of the perforated crowns. Responding
to a question from Tribunal
Member Dr. Wing, he accepted as a
“possibility” that the patient suffered TMJ injury caused by his
work-related injury;
Pearman described the fees charged by the Respondent as excessive
“...given the extremely poor standard of the endodontics
prosthodontics provided by...[the Respondent]...” whether justified or
was Dr. Pearman’s opinion that in continuing endodontic treatment whilst
the patient’s pain continued, the Respondent
fell significantly below the
standard required and reasonably expected, of a dental practitioner. It was his
opinion that the Respondent’s
entire treatment must demand the strongest
criticism from his peers;
Respondent did not challenge in any significant way, Dr. Pearman’s
evidence before the Tribunal;
Evidence of Dr.
Respondent did not require Dr. Peppitt for cross-examination; he was called by
the Complainant to provide an opportunity for the
Tribunal to ask questions of
him, if necessary;
noted above, Dr. Neill Peppitt practices as a specialist prosthodontist and
confirmed his specialised knowledge and experience
as to the practice and
appropriate standards of the ordinary skilled general dental practitioner
including in the period 2002-2003
based on relevant academic and other,
association with such practitioners. His reports were without objection,
admitted into evidence,
one of which included photographs of study models,
periapical radiographs and an OPG (orthopantogram) relevant to the patient.
on these materials he observed “...minimal, not severe
fracture...” of teeth 11, 21, 32 and 41; and the OPG confirmed
patient’s excellent dental health prior to his work-related accident and
Respondent’s subsequent treatment; that
his mouth was healthy with nothing
suggesting a need for the extent of the treatment provided by the Respondent;
noting the absence
of any previous fillings of any note; that periodontal bone
support was excellent and TMJs of normal condition;
his report Dr. Peppitt stated that he remained at a loss to understand how a
young man in excellent oral health exhibited in the
first OPG (on 4 February
2002) could have needed the extensive amount of dental treatment shown in the
second OPG (13 May 2005).
In his review of the dental literature he had never
encountered a case where trauma, relevantly a blow to the chin, necessitated
removal of the nerves from all teeth due to a diagnosis of
irreversible
; he was critical of the Respondent’s failure to refer the
patient to a specialist or someone experienced in managing facial
pain; in 25
years as a specialist prosthodontist with a sub-specialty of facial pain he had
not experienced nor read in the literature,
treatment such as that provided by
the Respondent;
Peppitt told the Tribunal how following the Respondent’s treatment, he had
provided treatment to the patient by way of pain
relief in TMJ dysfunction, the
nature of which was described in his reports before the Tribunal; although he
was not sure of the
cause and exacerbation of he patient’s TMJ dysfunction
“...but if I was to put on a retrospectoscope I think it probably
caused by the blow and then exacerbated by subsequent treatment.” He
described what he thought the Respondent was trying
to achieve by perforating
crowns, as in effect, making adjustments; he was of the opinion that the
Respondent’s tests to determine
‘pulp death’ seemed to
contradict such a diagnosis in that the responses to such tests indicated
his experience over 30 years in dentistry Dr. Peppitt told the Tribunal,
although patients sought pain relief, none had ever requested
professional and ethical practitioner his role was to inform patients and assist
them in making the best, informed decision,
trying to both ‘do no
harm’ and to keep such procedures simple; further, that if patients refuse
advice, they should
be told to seek other opinion. He emphasised that the
Respondent at the relevant time, was not a recent graduate and had been
for 10 years and as such, it was his opinion the Respondent should
have had the patient assessed at an early stage, by another practitioner;
with “...some very small Class 4 chips on a couple of teeth, some trauma
to the jaw and some discomfort...” it was
a fairly simple presentation and
not “...complex dentistry...”. It was Dr. Peppitt who referred the
patient to Dr. Allan
to a question from the Tribunal, Dr. Peppitt confirmed that upon graduation in
1989 there were no barriers to a dentist
performing prosthodontics, endodontics,
crown and bridgework; and that any dental practitioner can undertake any service
oral environment they feel capable of doing but “...it
doesn’t mean...they necessarily have the full training to do it
they should do.” Dr. Peppitt indicated a personal preference for newly
graduating dentists to undergo further training
perhaps in an
‘indentured’ way by way of practice under the supervision of
clinicians for a period, before going into
the private sector; but the current
system does not demand this;
was Dr. Peppitt’s opinion that the Respondent’s dental services
provided to the patient departed from the standard
of the ordinary skilled
dentist in 2002-2003 by his diagnosis of
irreversible pulpitis
teeth; and by his technical execution and standard of treatment which was
significantly below such standard such that the patient
now has a full mouth
construction that will probably preclude him from general dental care and
restrict him to specialist care, for
the rest of his
Evidence of Dr. Howe
reports by Dr. Andrew Howe, a consultant dentist, were without objection
admitted into evidence before the Tribunal. These reports
originally prepared
for earlier civil litigation, included an analysis of the Respondent’s
clinical notes and extracts from
his diary. He noted the reported circumstances
of the patient’s work-related injury;
was Dr. Howe’s opinion that the Respondent failed to fully examine the
patient; record his findings; and to outline a treatment
plan; nor did the
Respondent record any use of newer nerve susceptibility testing to determine
nerve death or loss of sensibility;
and it appeared to Dr. Howe that the
Respondent failed to diagnose TMJ dysfunction which was in his view, probably
exacerbated by
long appointments and many treatment sessions. He also noted
Respondent’s failure to use protective rubber dam during his endodontic
treatment of the patient; and also noted that the Respondent had fractured
instruments in two teeth and made no attempt to remove
Howe expressed his opinion that the Respondent’s treatment failed to meet
an acceptable standard including endodontic and
crown treatment; failures also
in diagnosis, treatment planning, record keeping, endodontic treatment and
complex restorative treatment,
all varying from the standard of the ordinary
skilled dentist;
summary, Dr. Howe stated in his report (Exhibit 34): “All of ...[the
Respondent’s]...treatment...would be described
as inexcusably bad and
completely outside the bounds of what any reputable practitioner might prescribe
or perform...[and such treatment]...was
obviously unnecessary and improper and
is in the nature of a gratuitous aggravation of any existing injury.” Dr.
Howe summarized
(Report, Exhibit 35): “ I feel that...[the
Respondent]...has not provided treatment that would be accepted in New South
by peer professional opinion, as competent professional practice.”
Evidence of Dr. Challoner
objection, a report by Dr. G. Challoner, dental surgeon, dated 15 March 2006,
originally prepared for the purpose of prior
civil litigation, was admitted into
evidence. He had examined the patient and received from him, the history of his
work-related
injury. He concluded that the blow to the patient’s mouth was
not sufficient to cause “...notable soft tissue injury...[nor]...was
any bone damage to his lower jaw...[nor was it]...sufficient to knock him off
balance or knock him out.”
reasons included in his report, Dr. Challoner was of the opinion that the
patient was not correctly treated by the Respondent;
and in turn, this created
“...an ongoing complex dental problem.” It was his opinion also,
that it was “...regrettable
that the patient was not assessed
independently prior to the treatment undertaken...[by the
Respondent].”;
Respondent’s
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal. He confirmed his graduation and
practice history, set out above. He told the Tribunal
that the patient’s
presentation was of a very traumatic nature; that he advised the patient that if
left alone, the teeth might
have a chance of recovery and not need treatment;
that the patient responded in effect, that he had already waited a month (prior
to his first consultation with the Respondent) without improvement in his teeth
and for this reason his employer referred him to
Respondent;
Respondent confirmed that he made a diagnosis of
irreversible pulpal
at the patient’s second attendance with a history that the
pain had not subsided. He told the Tribunal he carried out the endodontic
treatment because he thought the patient could not recover from the
injury-related trauma; that at that time he had dealt with
...” of prior cases of
irreversible pulpal
; that he had regarded the
patient as a difficult case based
on “...a very severe traumatic injury involving a lot of teeth...[and]...a
difficult patient
to manage”; and that he was confident in his ability to
perform the relevant endodontic treatment should he have to perform
the patient’s second or third visit, the Respondent told the Tribunal, he
asked the patient to see a specialist after “...a
teeth...” had been treated, telling him that he thought this was a very
serious problem...[involving]...a lot of
teeth...”. When asked during
cross-examination, about ever telling the patient—who claimed to be unable
to afford specialist
referral—that such specialist care would be covered
by the workers’ compensation insurer, the Respondent told the Tribunal
suggested to the patient in effect, that his employer may pay for such referral
as his employer had sent him to the Respondent.
The Respondent agreed that at
this time a second opinion from a prosthodontist or an endodontist would have
the Tribunal the Respondent explained his failure to record the above
conversation with the patient concerning specialist referral
as due to his
naivety in record keeping at that time. He disputed the patient’s
statement (in evidence without objection, before
the Tribunal) that during the
first two months of treatment the Respondent made no suggestion for him to see
another dentist for
a second opinion or to see a specialist dentist; and that
following the conversation as to the patient’s inability to afford
specialist referral, he did not consider again raising this with the patient. He
now agreed “...absolutely...” that
he should have tried to persuade
the patient to undertake such referral; and explained that in wanting to get the
patient free from
pain “...he put too much pain control in the philosophy
of treatment...” but that now, he accepted such approach as wrong;
with the benefit of this experience he would refer any such case for specialist
consultation. He accepted he was mistaken in
not making further attempts to
persuade the patient;
Cross-examined
to the Tribunal and specifically his
answer to Particular 6
and 21, that it would have been appropriate to apply a composite resin filling
to the affected teeth, the Respondent confirmed
in using such process he would
use a ‘sealant’ and to this extent he agreed with Dr.
Peppitt’s evidence on this
Respondent now conceded that the grouping and splinting of crowns as he did in
2002, was not best practice, which he did not realise
at the relevant time of
his treatment of the patient; it was only in 2005 following a complaint, when
made aware by the (then) NSW
Dental Board, that he realised that this was not
best practice;
Respondent told the Tribunal that in effect, the patient’s continuing
complaints of pain during the course of treatment
did not cause him to
reconsider his treatment because such continuing pain was occurring in the teeth
he had not treated; at no stage
throughout the 18 months of treatment did he
consider his treatment as unsuccessful; when he last saw the patient in July
2003—contrary
to the patient’s assertion in his statement that the
pain in his mouth and jaw had not resolved but was made worse with the
treatment—the patient “...was very happy with the treatment...He
could eat, he could sleep...he could do...normal
things...”;
Significantly,
in the Tribunal’s view—in the context of trying to understand the
rationale underlying his treatment of
the patient—when asked by the
Tribunal whether at any time the Respondent felt “overwhelmed by the
amount of treatment...actually
performed on ...[the]...patient” he
responded “Yes...Right away from the first few visit of—you know,
after a month
or two I felt overwhelming (sic). I feel—I really
overwhelmed, treatment like this, you know.”;
the issue of the fees he charged the patient admitted in his response as
excessive, he told the Tribunal he attributed
this to various difficulties he
encountered during treatment; he now acknowledged it was wrong to do so and he
should have adhered
to the appropriate structure;
Respondent relied on no expert or ‘peer review’ evidence in response
to that brought before the Tribunal by the
Complainant;
Findings: Particulars of
to the ‘peer review’ and other expert evidence before the Tribunal
in this inquiry, the Respondent’s conduct
as a registered dental
practitioner as particularised in the complaints, is considered by this Tribunal
with two members—as
required by the National Law—being registered
dental practitioners; and as such, the Tribunal is an ‘
’ adopting the description of another professional
disciplinary tribunal, by the NSW Court of Appeal in
Kalil v Bray &
1 NSWLR 256
regard for the Respondent’s admissions and having considered the evidence
before it, the Tribunal is comfortably satisfied
that Particulars 1; 2; 3; 4; 5
(b); 6 (a), 6 (b), and 6 (d); 7 (a), 7 (b), 7 (c) (i), (ii), (iii); and 8, have
been proven;
reaching the above findings the Tribunal has taken into account the
Respondent’s evidence and the exceptions to his admissions
(as described
to Notice of Complaint
). Concerning Particular 1,
it accepts that on 16 January 2002 the Respondent conducted an examination only
and formed a preliminary
diagnosis that the patient should adopt a
“...wait and see...” approach to see if symptoms settled. The
Tribunal also
accepts the exceptions in Particulars 6 (a); 6 (b); and 7 (a), but
only to the extent each relates relevantly, to teeth 11 and 21;
to Particular 5 (a), the Respondent’s evidence before the Tribunal was
that he did advise the patient of the option of referral
to a specialist
endodontist. In a statement in evidence before the Tribunal, the patient
asserted to the contrary; that he received
no such offer or advice from the
Respondent. In the absence of any evidence from the patient before it during its
inquiry, the Tribunal
prefers and accepts, the Respondent’s evidence
concerning this issue. Accordingly, the Tribunal is not satisfied that
5 (a) has been proven;
Tribunal is not satisfied that Particular 6 (c) has been proven, as the
Respondent, a registered dental practitioner, possessed
sufficient knowledge to
provide the proposed endodontic treatment;
is the Tribunal satisfied with respect to Particular 7 (c) (iv) that a lack of
adequate care or judgment; or failure to exercise
skill in undertaking the
relevant crown and bridgework, caused or exacerbated TMJ dysfunction.
Accordingly, Particular 7 (c) (iv)
is not proven;
respect to particular 7 (c) (v), the Tribunal is not satisfied that the
perforation of crowns during the Respondent’s adjustments
thereof, was
caused by any inadequate care or judgment; or failure to exercise skill as there
is insufficient evidence before the
Tribunal concerning the nature, extent and
degree of perforation of crowns during such adjustments. Accordingly, Particular
(v) is not proven;
Respondent admitted
unsatisfactory professional conduct
in terms of the
first limb (i) of Complaint 1 which in effect, reflects the definition in
Section 139B (1) (a) of the National Law.
He did not admit [in terms of the
second limb (ii) of Complaint 1] that he engaged in improper or unethical
conduct relating to the
practice of dentistry reflecting the definition in
Section 139B (1) (l) of the National Law;
considering the second limb [(ii)] of Complaint 1 referred to above, the
Tribunal notes as submitted by the Complainant’s
Counsel, that the words
” are not defined
in the National Law. The Tribunal notes definitions of
” suggested by Counsel; and also, as referred to by
Counsel, what the High Court of Australia said of the word
impropriety
(1995) 193 CLR 501
514-515. Accordingly, the Respondent’s conduct as found by the Tribunal,
was not in conformity with standards of professional
conduct and practice and as
. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that the second
limb of Complaint 1 has been made out to that extent. However, the Tribunal
not satisfied that such conduct was
light of the Respondent’s admissions, the evidence before it and its
findings of proven particulars of complaints, the Tribunal
is comfortably
satisfied to the requisite standard in
, that the complaint of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
respect of Complaint 2, given the extremely serious nature, extent and range of
the Respondent’s failures constituting
unsatisfactory professional
and the considerable implications thereof for the patient; and
accepting the peer and other, expert evidence before it, the Tribunal
satisfied that such
unsatisfactory professional conduct
constitutes
professional misconduct
as defined in Section 139E of the National Law as
it is of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of
the Respondent’s registration;
Accordingly,
the Tribunal finds the Respondent guilty of
professional
----------------------------------------
Deputy Chairperson.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (182 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter