URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Amelia (a pseudonym) [2025] NSWCATGD 5; (23 April 2025)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Amelia (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATGD 5
Hearing Date(s):
16 April 2025
Date of Orders:
23 April 2025
Decision Date:
23 April 2025
Guardianship Division
J D’Arcy, Senior Member (Legal)
The application for the appointment of a financial manager for Amelia is
dismissed because Jennifer does not have standing to bring
the application. The
Tribunal therefore has no jurisdiction to deal with this
application.
The Tribunal makes the following directions about
1. Any application for costs, together with submissions and
evidence in support of the application, is to be lodged with the Registrar
provided to the other parties by 22 May 2025.
2. Any submissions
and evidence in response to any such costs application are to be lodged with the
Registrar and provided to the
other parties by 4 June 2025.
submissions in reply are to be lodged with Registrar and provided to the other
parties by 11 June 2025.
4. Submissions on an application for costs
by each party are not to exceed four pages in length and must be presented in
font or larger.
5. The Tribunal may dispense with the
hearing and determine an application for costs on the basis of the written
submissions. If the
parties oppose this course of action they should make
submissions on this issue when complying with the directions.
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – financial management application – whether
applicant has standing to bring the application – whether
applicant has a
“genuine concern for the welfare of the person” – applicant
found not to have a “genuine
concern for the person”– the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction to decide the application.
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Guardianship Act 1987
Vexatious Proceedings Act 2008
Cases Cited:
[2007] NSWGT 15
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
004: Financial Management Application
Amelia (the
Jennifer (applicant)
Laura (attorney)
NSW Trustee and
Representation:
D Lagopodis as Solicitor for Laura
File Number(s):
NCAT 2018/00390205
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
Reasons for Decision concern an application for the appointment of the NSW
Trustee and Guardian as Amelia’s financial
manager. The applicant is
is 83 years old. She has four children, Laura, Elizabeth, Bethany and
Christopher. Her partner, James, died on 22 September
2014. Jennifer is one of
James’ three daughters.
lives in an aged care facility. She is reported to have been diagnosed with
dementia. Jennifer is not aware of Amelia’s
whereabouts.
31 August 2016, Amelia executed an enduring power of attorney appointing her
daughter, Laura, as her attorney and Laura’s
husband, Max, as her
substitute attorney. The copy of the instrument lodged with the Tribunal shows
that Laura accepted her appointment
on 31 October 2016 and that Max has not
accepted his appointment.
The hearing
the end of these Reasons for Decision are lists of the parties to the
application and the witnesses who attended the hearing. [Appendix
removed for
publication.]
Danny Lagopodis, solicitor, was granted leave to represent Laura. Jennifer was
unrepresented.
The background to the current application
19 December 2018, Jennifer lodged an application to review the enduring power of
attorney. In an interlocutory hearing held on
13 March 2019 the Tribunal
dismissed the application. The Tribunal found that the matters raised by
Jennifer were misconceived because
they were not relevant to the operation and
effect of the enduring power of attorney, and they did not go to a claim of
malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance and thus were without substance. The
application for costs was dismissed.
27 May 2019, Jennifer lodged a second application to review the enduring power
of attorney. In these proceedings Amelia had separate
representation and was
excused from the proceedings. On 4 September 2019, the Tribunal found that
Jennifer did not have standing
to bring the application and so dismissed the
application to review the enduring power of attorney. On 17 December 2019, the
made an order for costs against Jennifer.
19 December 2019, Jennifer made an application for miscellaneous matters, that
is, to set aside the decision of 4 September 2019.
On 23 December 2020 the
Tribunal dismissed the application.
On 6 May 2021, the Tribunal made an
order for costs against Jennifer.
26 September 2021, Jennifer lodged a financial management application seeking
the appointment of the NSW Trustee and Guardian as
Amelia’s financial
manager. On 10 November 2021, Jennifer sought to withdraw the application, and
the Tribunal dismissed it.
19 August 2024, Jennifer lodged a fifth application to the Tribunal seeking the
appointment of the NSW Trustee and Guardian as
Amelia’s financial manager
because she considered that the attorney had misrepresented and misused
Amelia’s finances
for her own benefit.
are other ongoing legal proceedings between the parties. They commenced on 11
January 2018 when an interim apprehended domestic
violence order was made
protecting Amelia from Jennifer. District Court proceedings ensued concerning
costs and an Involuntary Bankruptcy
Notice was issued to Jennifer, with the
amount to be paid by July 2023. Federal Court proceedings followed, and the
ordered amount
was eventually paid to Amelia.
recently Jennifer has filed a Motion in the District Court seeking a review and
setting aside all of the judgments amounting
to the Local Court costs and
District Court costs. The application has since been dismissed with
Jennifer’s submission
asserts that she has a special interest in the case and that her application is
bona fide and reasonable. She has known Amelia
since the age of five years and
provided support to her father and Amelia during his long illness. She got on
well with Amelia. She
and her family were ostracised by Amelia immediately
following her father’s death.
relied on the written submission by the separate representative for Amelia in a
previous hearing, in which the separate representative
([Amelia]) told me that it was important to her that the children of her late
partner and herself her own children benefit
from her estate if
anything happens to her.”
Jennifer asserted that this statement
clearly showed that she has standing.
referred to special interest requirements to demonstrate standing, stating that
special interest means that although the
applicant’s right has not been
infringed, his/her interest in the subject matter of the action is greater than
other members
of the public. An applicant must show he/she has been specially
affected in comparison with the public at large and that he/she has
affected to a substantially greater degree or in a significant different manner.
It is not necessary to show that the applicant
is uniquely affected. However,
Jennifer asserted that she has been uniquely affected by Laura’s
misrepresentation of Amelia
and hiding behind her name as a shield of protection
to bring false, vexatious and unauthorised legal actions against her. When asked
to provide the authority for this “special interest” test,
Jennifer’s partner, Peter, quoted Law Access.
contended that Laura has breached her fiduciary obligations as an attorney by
placing Amelia in a position where she would
have been personally liable for
orders made by the Federal Court.
stated that Amelia’s funds have been used to cover Laura’s legal
costs, placing her financial position at risk.
She has hidden behind
Amelia’s name for seven years and has misrepresented Amelia
“recklessly, falsely and vindictively”.
She has abused her position
as attorney and does not understand the responsibilities associated with her
role. Jennifer asserted
that the costs associated with the Federal Court
proceedings may have been withdrawn from Amelia account by Laura in breach of
obligations as attorney.
further asserted that the proceedings are not frivolous or vexatious or
otherwise misconceived or lacking in substance but
rather promote the welfare
and interests of Amelia. Amelia is a vulnerable elderly person, and her attorney
has taken advantage of
her situation by initiating legal actions through a false
and vexatious apprehended domestic violence order application and bankruptcy
notice. The attorney is the vexatious litigant, and she is using her
mother’s name to justify her actions.
submitted that she has had to defend herself against these false and vexatious
allegations for many years. She stated:
“I had no choice but to bring this application to NCAT as it is evident
that over the course of seven years the attorney has
continuously misrepresented
[Ameli]a, misused her funds and taken legal action against me personally using
her mother’s name
as a shield of protection to advance her own interests.
The attorney has attempted to bankrupt me, the attorney has threatened to
my house, and the attorney has attempted to exhort further money from me through
her solicitors after orders were paid in full.”
stated that Amelia should be afforded the full protection of the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (NCAT) in appointing
an independent financial manager to
protect Amelia from any further financial exploitation by the attorney.
Intervention is required
to ensure that her financial assets are not further
eroded. She concluded that the real issue is not about standing but the
demonstrated
misuse of Amelia’s funds and the breaches of Laura’s
role as attorney.
the hearing, Jennifer stated that she had known Amelia for 55 years
and Amelia had been in her life through all of her ups and
She claimed that she was in Amelia’s will and that Amelia was
interested in her and her sisters. She has had no contact
with Amelia for
the past nine years. She repeatedly asserted that Laura was abusing her
mother’s name in undertaking a personal
vendetta against her and to create
costs against her. She asserted that 50% of Amelia’s estate was to be
distributed to her
and her two sisters. She accused Laura of stealing from her
mother, of extorting money from her and of disrespecting her mother’s
to extract costs from her. She explained that she was only trying to defend
herself against Laura.
Mr Lagopodis’ submissions on behalf
Lagopodis made the following submissions:
The proceedings
are vexatious because Jennifer has repeatedly brought the same applications on
the same issue and the applications
are an abuse of process to harass and
intimidate Laura. Jennifer is using the Tribunal to pursue her ongoing personal
dislike and
vendetta against Laura.
Jennifer is
seeking ongoing disclosure of Amelia’s financial affairs; and she is not
accepting any court orders concerning Laura’s
conduct in initiating court
proceedings on Amelia’s behalf to protect her and to recover costs awarded
against Jennifer. It
is Jennifer who has brought all of the proceedings against
Laura, and she has no option but to defend them.
Jennifer does
not have standing to make the application for the following reasons:
(i) There is no close relationship with Amelia.
(ii) The motive behind her applications is to preserve her own inheritance.
(iii) It was Jennifer who initiated the original action and Laura was not
appointed as attorney until most of the events leading
to the apprehended
domestic violence order had occurred.
(iv) Jennifer does not accept any unfavourable decision and makes herself out to
be the victim.
(v) Jennifer’s lodgement of a caveat over Amelia’s regional NSW
property to prevent it being sold and the attorney using
the funds to pay the
residential accommodation deposit is significant because her refusal to lift the
caveat and cooperate resulted
in additional daily care fees of $5,000 payable by
(vi) Jennifer has relied on the outcome of the Federal Court case in which costs
were awarded in her favour to justify her claims
of impropriety and wrongdoing
by the attorney. There were no adverse findings made against Laura who was
appointed as her mother’s
(vii) Jennifer did not pay the claimed amount in the bankruptcy petition and
refused to negotiate and pay any additional legal costs.
Attempts were made to
recover costs from Jennifer, but she instructed barristers and solicitors to
contest any further claims for
costs and did not agree to negotiate the claim,
thus incurring over $30,000 in legal fees. Although the original
registrar’s
decision was made in favour of costs against Jennifer, she
sought a review and the decision was overturned. Any further action was
the best interests of Amelia, and it was decided not to pursue the matter.
(viii) Since the initial directions hearing for this application, Jennifer has
filed a Notice of Motion with the District Court seeking
a review and setting
aside all judgments amounting to Local Court costs and District Court costs.
These proceedings are frivolous
and vexatious and relate to a review of a court
judgment which is significantly out of time. The District Court had no
to determine the application. Jennifer’s application has
since been dismissed with costs.
Lagopodis concluded that Laura has always acted in the genuine best interests of
her mother who is an elderly vulnerable person
with dementia. There is no
evidence of exploitation or wasting of any funds of Amelia’s estate by the
attorney. She has always
made sound, measured and well considered decisions and
has been conscious of legal costs to fund any action on behalf of her mother.
Jennifer’s application should be dismissed under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Does Jennifer have standing to make the
financial management application?
Tribunal must first consider if the application for the appointment of a
financial manager by Jennifer is valid. If an application
is brought by a person
who is not authorised to do so, then there is no valid application, and the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction to
consider it. This is referred to as a person
having standing to bring the financial management application.
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) establishes who can make a valid
financial management application. It states:
25I Application to Tribunal for a financial management order
(1) An application for a financial management order may
be made by -
(a) the NSW Trustee, or
(a1) the person who is the subject of the
application, or
(b) any person who, in the opinion of the Tribunal,
has a genuine concern for the welfare of the person who is the subject of
application.
[2007] NSWGT 15
the Tribunal carefully considered the standing
provisions in the
Guardianship Act
and found that a “genuine
concern for the welfare of the person” requires that:
the applicant is
bringing to the attention of the Tribunal a fact situation in which the subject
person's interests may call for intervention
by the Tribunal;
the applicant is
sincere in seeing the situation as one that may call for the intervention of the
Tribunal in the interests of the
person; and
the application
is motivated by a desire to advance the welfare of the person. The interests of
the person must be the primary motivation
for the application.
Tribunal stated that the word “welfare” is used broadly in
Guardianship Act
, including financial as well as personal
Tribunal considered the standing provisions in the context of the purpose of the
Guardianship Act
to be a combination of protection, empowerment and
minimum intrusion on the lives of people with disabilities. On the one hand, it
is important that members of the community are encouraged to make applications
for people who may need the protection of the
Guardianship Act
other hand, an application is itself intrusive on the life and rights of the
individual. An applicant also becomes entitled
to access to a wide range of
often very personal and private information about the person subject of the
application. An interpretation
of the standing provisions will promote the
purpose of the
Guardianship Act
if it strikes a balance between
encouraging appropriate applications and discouraging applications that lack
substance or that are
not motivated by a desire to advance the welfare of the
person subject of the application.
Tribunal went on to set out a non-exhaustive list of the relevant factors to be
considered when forming an opinion about whether
the applicant has a
“genuine concern for the welfare of the person”, as follows:
applicant explains the reasons for the application and the kind of orders
sought, in the application and in other relevant
documents and evidence.
Whether the
applicant taken any reasonable steps to clarify and resolve the situation before
bringing it to the Tribunal.
The relationship
of the applicant and the person subject of the application. Is it a family
relationship, a friendship, a professional
relationship or, for example, a
neighbour? How longstanding and close is the relationship? Does the relationship
involve any professional
or other responsibility of the applicant for the
person? Has the relationship been marked by positive and/or negative action by
applicant towards the person?
The views of the
person in relation to the issue of genuine concern. Does the person now, or has
the person over time, expressed views
in relation to their perception of the
applicant and their relationship with the applicant?
applicant have a conflict of interest? Is this conflict more apparent than
What is the
nature of any conflict of interest? Does the applicant acknowledge the conflict?
How does the applicant reconcile or propose
to manage the
The Tribunal’s consideration
the hearing Jennifer made several assertions about Laura’s mismanagement
of her mother’s estate based on the long running
and acrimonious legal
actions between her and Laura. These actions appear to have commenced early in
January 2018 with Jennifer’s
refusal to pay the costs awarded against
her in the apprehended domestic violence matter in which an order was made
protecting Amelia
from Jennifer. The matters have escalated since that time and
have broadened to include matters in the Local, District and Federal
Courts over the past seven years. At the same time, Jennifer has unsuccessfully
pursued four applications in the Guardianship Division
and costs orders have
been made against her in two of those matters.
to the factors set out in
the Tribunal makes the following findings
the applicant is bringing to the attention of the Tribunal a fact situation in
which the subject person's interests may call
for intervention by the
Jennifer has made no specific assertions or presented any cogent
evidence about Laura’s alleged management of her mother’s
Jennifer has not brought to the Tribunal a fact situation calling for the
intervention of the Tribunal. She knows nothing
affairs and her statements about Laura’s alleged abuse of her
mother’s finances are based
on inference only. In her statement
accompanying her financial management application she referred to new evidence
concerning an
amount paid by her to Amelia which she alleged was not then paid
into Amelia’s account. She knows nothing about the payment
arrangements
between Laura and her solicitor and how the costs orders have been managed. In
her letter of 18 August 2024 accompanying
her application, Jennifer quotes at
length from a judgment from the Federal Court. However, that judgment makes no
adverse findings
That the applicant is sincere in seeing the situation as one
that may call for the intervention of the Tribunal in the interests of
Jennifer’s sincerity is undermined by the number of
applications she has brought to this Tribunal which have repeatedly been
unsuccessful and against Amelia’s wishes when she had the capacity to make
her wishes known.
the application is motivated by a desire to advance the welfare of the person.
The interests of the person must be the primary
motivation for the
application:
The Tribunal finds that the primary motivation for the current
application is not to promote Amelia’s welfare but rather to
another round of litigation with Laura and indirectly with Amelia, as evidenced
by her submission that:
“I had no choice but to bring this application to NCAT as it is evident
that over the course of seven years the attorney has
continuously misrepresented
[Amelia], misused her funds and taken legal action against me personally using
her mother’s name
as a shield of protection to advance her own
interests.”
relationship between the applicant and Amelia and the views of Amelia:
Jennifer has never stated that she has shared a close relationship with Amelia.
She referred to Amelia as being in her life, sharing
books with her and having
conversations about life in general. Jennifer stated that she provided support
to her father and Amelia
when James was ill. Against this evidence is the
evidence of Amelia’s general practitioner of 28 years who stated that
was very afraid of Jennifer and frightened of her reprisals. The separate
representative for Amelia, in her submission of 23 August
2019, quoted Amelia as
saying that she found Jennifer to be “intimidating.”
The Tribunal preferred the objective evidence of the general
practitioner and the separate representative to the self-serving evidence
Jennifer to find that while Jennifer may have known Amelia for a long period of
time, it was not a close relationship. It was
a relationship marked by negative
action considering that an apprehended domestic violence order was made
protecting Amelia from
Jennifer. Jennifer’s action in lodging a caveat
over Amelia’s regional NSW property at a time when it was being sold
pay for the residential accommodation deposit is not the action of a person with
a genuine concern for Amelia’s welfare.
relation to the statement by the separate representative in her written
submission to the Tribunal that Amelia had told her it
was important that the
children of her late partner and her own children benefit equally from her
estate, it is important to understand
this statement in context. In the
preceding paragraph of her submission the separate representative found Amelia
to be confused,
not understanding the effect of her late partner’s will to
make her sole beneficiary and confused about whether she and her
late partner
had made wills to share their estate between their children. She was very
confused about her present circumstances particularly
the sale of her house in
regional NSW. She could not tell the separate representative the day of the week
or the name of the nursing
Amelia’s impaired cognitive capacity at the time that she made the
statement relied
on by Jennifer, the Tribunal did not find this statement
supported Jennifer’s claim of having standing.
conflict of interest:
The Tribunal also found that Jennifer had a conflict
of interest in preserving Amelia’s estate with the intention that she and
her sisters will benefit from the estate after her death. Jennifer would not
perceive that she had a conflict of interest. She is
motivated by her own
interests, evidenced by her ongoing engagement in litigation against Laura and
Amelia over the past seven years.
Tribunal was unable to find any authority for the special interest test relied
on by Jennifer in the context of the current issues
considered all of the above factors, the Tribunal concluded that Jennifer did
not a genuine concern for the welfare of Amelia
and so did not have standing to
bring the financial management application. The Tribunal dismissed the
application. The Tribunal
has no jurisdiction to deal with the
application.
Vexatious Proceedings Act 2008
Lagopodis submitted that the Tribunal had power under
Proceedings Act 2008
to make a recommendation to the Attorney
General to make a vexatious proceedings order against Jennifer.
Vexatious Proceedings Act
8 Making of vexatious proceedings order
(6) A judicial officer, member or registrar of a court or
tribunal may make a recommendation to the Attorney General that he or
consider making an application for a vexatious proceedings order in relation to
a specified person.
Tribunal has not made any findings on this occasion that the proceedings brought
by Jennifer are vexatious and thus there is no
basis on which to make a
recommendation to the Attorney General for a vexatious proceedings
the conclusion of the hearing, Mr Lagopodis indicated that if the application
was dismissed, then Laura would consider bringing
an application for a costs
order against Jennifer. The Tribunal makes the following directions about
(1) Any application for costs, together with submissions and evidence in support
of the application, is to be lodged with the Registry
and provided to the other
parties by 22 May 2025.
(2) Any submission and evidence in response to any such costs application are to
be lodged with the Registry and provided to the
other parties by 4 June 2025.
(3) Any submissions in reply are to be lodged with Registry and provided to the
other parties by 11 June 2025.
(4) Submissions on an application for costs by each party are not to exceed four
pages in length and must be presented in 12-point
font or larger.
(5) The Tribunal may dispense with the hearing and determine an application for
costs on the basis of the written submissions. If
the parties oppose this course
of action they should make submissions on this issue when complying with the
directions.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (275 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter