URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2025/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Madelyn (a pseudonym) [2025] NSWCATGD 10; (15 August 2025)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Madelyn (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATGD 10
Hearing Date(s):
15 August 2025
Date of Orders:
15 August 2025
Decision Date:
15 August 2025
Guardianship Division
S L Handebo, Principal Member
A guardianship order for Madelyn made on 12 July 2024 has been reviewed and
is confirmed.
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – requested review of guardianship order –
26-year-old woman with schizophrenia – whether order should
– finding that the subject person continues to be a person “in need
of a guardian” despite improvement
in mental health – whether order
should be varied to include a passport and travel function – concerns that
subject person
may be taken overseas to participate in a forced marriage –
definition of “forced marriage” – insufficient
evidence that
subject person at risk of forced marriage – inclusion of passport and
travel functions would be unnecessarily
restrictive – guardianship order
not varied – existing guardianship order confirmed.
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship Act 1987
Cases Cited:
C S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and the Public Guardian (Supreme
Court (NSW), Windeyer J, 29 November 1999, unrep)
[2004] NSWADTAP
P v D1 & Ors
[2011] NSWSC 257
[2011] NSWSC 1075
Texts Cited:
Australian Government, Attorney-General’s Department, “Forced
https://www.ag.gov.au/crime/people-smuggling-and-human-trafficking/forced-marriage
18 August 2025
My Blue Sky
https://mybluesky.org.au/
accessed 18 August
Principal judgment
017: Requested Review of Guardianship Order
Madelyn (the
Andrea (applicant)
Public Guardian (appointed
018: Requested Review of Guardianship Order
Madelyn (the
Janice (applicant)
Public Guardian (appointed guardian)
Representation:
J Creswell, separate representative for Madelyn
File Number(s):
NCAT 2020/00277472
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
is a 26-year-old woman who, at the time of the Hearing, was residing with her
mother, Andrea, in Southwest Sydney. Prior to
moving to live with Andrea,
approximately one month prior to the Hearing, Madelyn was living in supported
accommodation in West Sydney
managed by a disability support service provider.
Madelyn is a participant of the National Disability Insurance Scheme
has been known to the Tribunal since 2021 when a guardianship order was first
made for her. The guardianship order for Madelyn
has been renewed and varied on
multiple occasions since this time. The most recent guardianship order was made
on 12 July 2024 when
the Tribunal reappointed the Public Guardian as
Madelyn’s guardian for a period of two years with the functions of
accommodation,
access, health care and services.
has previously been subject to a financial management order. On 7 May 2025,
this order was revoked by the Tribunal.
5 May 2025, the Tribunal received a request to review the guardianship order.
This application was made by Andrea, who sought that
the guardianship order be
20 June 2025, the Tribunal received a further request to review the guardianship
order. This application was made by Janice, Specialist
Support Coordinator, who
sought that the guardianship order be varied by including a passport and travel
Reasons for Decision relate to each of the requested reviews of the guardianship
order made on 12 July 2024.
Reasons for Decision should be read in conjunction with the Tribunal’s
Reasons for Decision for the orders made on 15
March 2024 and 12 July 2024,
portions of which are adopted herein.
23 July 2025, the Tribunal directed that Madelyn be separately represented in
these proceedings. Julianna Creswell (“Julianna”),
solicitor, has
accepted the appointment as Madelyn’s separate representative.
applications were listed for Hearing before the Tribunal on 15 August 2025. The
Hearing was conducted from the Tribunal’s
Sydney Registry with all
participants attending by telephone or video, save for Julianna who attended the
Hearing in person. The
Hearing was attended by Madelyn; Andrea; Janice;
Julianna; a Duty Guardian on behalf of the Public Guardian; Janice’s
Mr Z, a Behaviour Support Practitioner; Ms Y, a Support Worker, and; Ms
X, on behalf of Madelyn’s SIL provider.
the conclusion of the Hearing the Tribunal decided to initially reserve its
decision, identifying that a decision would be made
in relation to the
applications by no later than close of business the same day.
Tribunal decided to confirm the guardianship order made on 12 July 2024. The
effect of this decision is that the guardianship
order made on 12 July 2024 will
continue to operate without variation.
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE
was limited written evidence before the Tribunal in support of the current
applications.
from the contents of her application, Andrea did not submit any material to the
Tribunal in support of her application to have
the guardianship order
support of the application to vary the functions under the guardianship order,
Janice provided the Tribunal with the following
material, in addition to the
contents of her application and the covering email:
(1) Letter from an Occupational Therapist, dated 18 June 2025; and,
(2) Letter from Mr Z, Behaviour Support Practitioner, dated 18 June 2025.
the applications relate to requested reviews of a guardianship order the
Tribunal was not assisted by a Public Guardian Report
identifying the decisions
made by the Public Guardian under the existing order.
Tribunal heard oral evidence and submissions from each of the participants at
CONTEXT OF APPLICATION AND COMPETING PROPOSALS
application submitted by Janice was made in the context of concerns about the
risk of Madelyn being subject to a “forced
Janice’s application did not use the term “forced marriage”
the Tribunal adopts the term in these Reasons
for Decision consistent with the
terminology adopted by the Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department and
the terminology
of the Commonwealth Criminal Code.
to the Commonwealth Attorney General’s
“A forced marriage is when a person gets married without freely and fully
consenting, because they have been coerced, threatened
or deceived, or because
they are incapable of understanding the nature and effect of a marriage
ceremony, for reasons including age
or mental capacity.
Some types of coercion are obvious and easy to identify, including the use of
physical or sexual violence, or refusing to let somebody
leave a particular
place or location until they accept the marriage. Other types of coercion are
less obvious because they involve
psychological and emotional pressure. These
consequences of not marrying, such as bringing shame on their
proposals ultimately advanced at Hearing are summarised as follows:
(1) Madelyn and Andrea sought that the guardianship order be revoked.
(2) Janice, her Manager, and Mr Z sought that the guardianship order be varied
to include additional functions, namely relating to
possession of
Madelyn’s passport and decisions regarding international travel. This
position was supported by the Public Guardian.
(3) Ms X and Ms Y supported a continuation of the existing order, but did not
support the inclusion of the proposed additional functions.
(4) Julianna supported a continuation of the existing functions. She did not
offer a concluded view as to whether the proposed additional
functions should be
included, instead identifying arguments in favour and opposition to the
inclusion of such functions.
WHAT DID THE TRIBUNAL HAVE TO DECIDE?
reviewing the current guardianship order the Tribunal may confirm, vary,
suspend, revoke, renew or renew and vary the order.
Accordingly,
the questions to be considered by the Tribunal are:
someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order?
guardianship order continue, be revoked or be renewed?
What functions
should now be given to the guardian?
Who should be
the guardian?
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) (“the Act”) provides
that we may make a guardianship order for a person if we are satisfied that the
“a person in need of a guardian”. A person in need of a
guardian is “a person who, because of a disability, is
partially incapable of managing their person”: the Act,
disability must restrict them in one or more major life activities to the extent
that they require supervision or social habilitation:
the Tribunal is satisfied that a person is a person in need of a guardian, the
Tribunal is required to exercise a discretion as
to whether or not a further
guardianship order should be made.
Section 14(2)
of the Act outlines a number of
equally important factors for the Tribunal to consider and balance in the
exercise of its discretion.
These matters have no hierarchy or weighting and
each is a mandatory consideration. However, the Tribunal must undertake a
exercise for its consideration of the matters in
of the Act.
When undertaking this task the Tribunal may be guided by the principles that are
of the Act (see
[2004] NSWADTAP 3).
Tribunal has to be satisfied that any person appointed as a private guardian
meets the following requirements in accordance with
of the Act. He
or she must:
(a) have a personality generally compatible with the personality of the person
under guardianship;
(b) have no undue conflict of interest (particularly financial) with those of
the person; and
(c) be able and willing to exercise the functions of the order.
deciding whether a person is able to undertake the role of guardian, the
Tribunal must consider whether the proposed guardian is
able, having regard to
the circumstances, to exercise the functions in accordance with the principles
of the Act (
C S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and the
Public Guardian
(Supreme Court (NSW), Windeyer J, 29 November 1999, unrep)
[2011] NSWSC 1075
P v D1 & Ors
[2011] NSWSC 257
, the Supreme Court noted the importance
of a proposed guardian being able to demonstrate insight and explain plans for
as guardian objectively and without conflict of interest.
Tribunal is not able to appoint the Public Guardian as a person’s guardian
if there is a private person who can be appointed:
Is Madelyn someone for whom the Tribunal could make an
Tribunal’s Reasons for Decision dated 12 July 2024, and in particular
paras [35], [36] and [41] provide an accurate and
useful summary of the medical
and allied health evidence previously available to the Tribunal to ground the
findings that Madelyn
is a person in need of a guardian. Those paragraphs are
relied upon by the Tribunal and adopted for the purpose of these Reasons
was no medical or allied health evidence available to the Tribunal inconsistent
with the Tribunal’s previous findings.
Hearing it was reported that Madelyn has previously been subject to a Community
Treatment Order (“CTO”) from the Mental
Health Review Tribunal. It
was reported that following the CTO lapsing Madelyn continued treatment for her
mental health for a period
of time on a voluntary basis. This resulted in
Madelyn’s depot being titrated down to the minimum dosage, with Madelyn
ceasing this medication completely about “a month and a
bit” ago. It was advanced at Hearing that this evidences an improvement
Madelyn’s mental health since the last guardianship order was made.
Notwithstanding
the gains made by Madelyn in the management of her mental health concerns, all
participants in the Hearing, with the
exception of Madelyn and Andrea, were of
the view that Madelyn’s mental ill health had not yet improved to the
extent that
she is no longer a person in need of a guardian. As discussed in
more detail below, recent changes in Madelyn’s personal circumstances
likely necessitate further important decisions being made on Madelyn’s
behalf, and there remain concerns that due to the
functional and cognitive
impacts of Madelyn’s disability, she continues to require supervision or
social habilitation.
did not agree that she is a person in need of a guardian. She told the Tribunal
that she believes that she has been misdiagnosed
with schizophrenia, that she
would like a second (or subsequent) opinion of the accuracy of that diagnosis,
that she is capable of
making her own decisions, and that she would like the
guardianship order to be lapsed.
assertion that she has been misdiagnosed and would like another opinion is
consistent with the position she advanced
to the Tribunal in March 2024 and
again in July 2024. Despite asserting her intention to obtain another opinion,
it appears that
she has not yet done so.
not specifically commenting on Madelyn’s diagnosis, Andrea asserted that
Madelyn is “
quite capable to make her own decisions
Tribunal notes that previous Reasons for Decision make reference to
Madelyn’s family asserting that her “...
diagnoses are incorrect,
and her mental health and capacity are typical and sound and are unwilling to
even accept that she has anxiety
the Tribunal has had regard to Madelyn’s views and her assertions about
her own mental health, the Tribunal’s previous
findings were based on
objective medical and allied health reports, and there is currently no objective
evidence to support Madelyn’s
assertions.
may be in Madelyn’s interests for her to attend upon a psychiatrist for
the purpose of a review of her diagnosis, and for
a copy of any report to be
presented to the Tribunal for any subsequent review of the guardianship order.
Madelyn may also wish to
consider the appropriateness of attending upon a
neuropsychologist for an assessment of her capacity and/or an occupational
for an assessment of her functional capacity.
the absence of any further professional evidence to disturb the Tribunal’s
previous findings, the Tribunal is satisfied that
Madelyn continues to have a
disability, namely schizophrenia, the functional and cognitive impacts of which
make her at least partially
incapable of managing her person. The Tribunal
finds that Madelyn continues to be a person in need of a guardian, and
accordingly,
is a person for whom the Tribunal could make a further guardianship
Should the guardianship order continue, be revoked or be
The Issue of Forced Marriage
application seeks that the guardianship order be varied to include a passport
and travel function. Should such functions
be included, Madelyn’s guardian
would have authority to make decisions relating to whether or not Madelyn should
be permitted
to travel, and decisions about the issue of a passport and/or
possession of Madelyn’s passport pending any decisions about
her travel.
The inclusion of these functions would not necessarily prevent Madelyn from
travelling but would vest such decisions
with her guardian (with the potential
that her guardian may not approve requests for Madelyn to travel).
the background to this matter are allegations that Madelyn has previously been
removed from Australia to Libya with the intention
of being married, and that
the circumstances surrounding this may have been exploitative. These issues are
traversed more fully in
the Tribunal’s previous Reasons for Decision, and
do not need to be expanded upon herein. The Tribunal notes that Madelyn has
previously vehemently denied the accuracy of these allegations and maintained
that position in the current Hearing.
her letter dated 18 June 2025, the occupational therapist reports the
“I strongly support a travel function to be put in place for [Madelyn]
urgently. She has reported to multiple service providers
that her family plans
to travel overseas and that Madelyn may be wedded overseas. [Madelyn’s]
BSP ([Mr Z]) reported a discussion
with [Madelyn’s] mother around the
financial benefits of wedding her daughter. Therefore, the team is concerned
that the family
may want to wed [Madelyn] overseas for financial gain. At the
age of 16 [Madelyn] was overseas in Lybia and her family also considered
her at that time. Considering the abusive dynamics of the family described
above, [Madelyn] could be placed at significant
risk if travelling with them
In my opinion, [Madelyn] does not have the cognitive capacity to consent to
marriage. [Madelyn] is unable to differentiate between
a safe relationship and
attempts at manipulation. For example, in 2024 [Madelyn] began to engage in an
online relationship and was
pressured into engaging in unwanted online sexual
activity. She needed the help of her support worker to cease this relationship.
[Madelyn] could be at risk of marrying an individual who is seeking financial
gain and a visa to live in Australia. From my observations,
[Madelyn] cannot
differentiate between safe and manipulative conversations.”
his letter dated 18 June 2025, Mr Z reports the following:
“There is credible concern that [Madelyn’s] mother may be seeking to
take her overseas for the purpose of arranging a
marriage. [Madelyn] has
expressed intent to marry someone she met only recently, under circumstances
that suggest possible coercion
and exploitation. It has been reported that the
proposed partner may be seeking permanent residency in Australia and that this
may serve that purpose rather than being in Madelyn’s best
Clinically, [Madelyn] does not demonstrate the capacity to provide informed and
meaningful consent to marriage. She lacks the ability
to foresee or comprehend
the potential consequences of entering a legally binding relationship with
someone who may not have genuine
intentions or emotional commitment. She is
unable to understand or evaluate how this could affect her emotionally,
financially, or
legally in the long term.”
Tribunal outlined early in the Hearing that the basis of the concerns that
Madelyn may be removed from the country to be married
were not clearly
articulated in the material provided to the Tribunal and invited Janice to
address the Tribunal as to the circumstances
that gave rise to such
advised the Tribunal that Madelyn was reported to have had discussions with
various support workers about a new relationship,
and the possibility of getting
married. She advised that Andrea had also had discussions with Mr Z about the
issue. Following these
concerns a multidisciplinary team meeting was held to
discuss the concerns, resulting in the current application.
Z informed the Tribunal about his discussions with Andrea. He told the Tribunal
that it was not explicitly stated that Madelyn
would be taken overseas to be
married, however he was concerned about the discussion of marriage when Madelyn
had only known the
man for approximately four weeks (and who she has apparently
never met in person). He confirmed that his understanding is that Madelyn
travel overseas to meet this man, however any marriage would take place in
Australia (if it were to occur).
was provided an opportunity to comment on these concerns, however, her responses
related to her request for the guardianship
order to be revoked, and she did not
provide any comments on the issue of forced marriage.
Y expressed a view that Madelyn would be “more than capable” of
making decisions about getting married, should she
choose to do so. She asserted
her belief that the comments about Madelyn getting married were a joke and was
firmly of the belief
that Madelyn would not be pressured into getting married.
She told the Tribunal that Madelyn is very firm that she “
marry someone she doesn’t love
X essentially shared the views expressed by Ms Y, suggesting that there had been
a miscommunication about what had been discussed.
was very guarded in her discussion about this issue. It was evident that she was
extremely uncomfortable discussing the matter,
and she made repeated requests to
change the topic of discussion. It is unclear to the Tribunal whether
Madelyn’s reluctance
to discuss the issue was due to her desire for
location as Andrea. Despite Madelyn’s significant reluctance to
discuss the matter, she ultimately engaged with the Tribunal’s
(1) That she does not have a valid passport;
(2) She has no current intentions to travel overseas; and,
(3) She would like to travel overseas when she is more settled, perhaps in about
two years, because being able to travel (and particularly
to Libya) is of
significant cultural importance to her.
noted that the concerns about the risk of Madelyn travelling overseas to be
married are not new concerns, and that they have
been in the background for many
years. She told the Tribunal that from a cultural perspective the fact that
Madelyn is unmarried
may bring shame on Andrea and the family, and that although
there may not be any concrete plans for Madelyn to marry, there is an
expectation that that would be the next step for her.
told the Tribunal that she accepts Ms Y’s assessment that it is unlikely
that Madelyn would be married without her
consent. She described Madelyn as
“headstrong” and agreed that Madelyn would not agree to being
married unless she was
in love with the person. Julianna opined, however, that
she did not think that the comments about marriage were said in jest, but
they are indicative of the cultural expectation that Madelyn should marry.
further opined that neither Andrea or Madelyn would currently have the financial
ability or the wherewithal to fund a passport
or international travel. She
outlined that although there has been lots of talk about the issue, there is no
evidence of any concrete
steps to implement such arrangements.
outlined that there are factors weighing against the inclusion of these
functions. In essence, Julianna outlined that in
the absence of evidence of
material risk of Madelyn being removed from the country and being forced to
marry against her will, the
inclusion of these functions may have a negative
impact on Madelyn’s wellbeing. She has been making progress towards her
independence over a prolonged period of time, and the unnecessary inclusion
of additional functions may cause her “
to go backwards
Z contended that if there are no plans for Madelyn to travel in any event, there
is no detriment to her by including the additional
functions in a further order.
He requested that Madelyn explain how the inclusion of the functions would
negatively impact her; however,
the Tribunal did not allow the question.
Tribunal finds that there is insufficient evidence to find that Madelyn is at
risk of forced marriage, and in the absence of such
evidence, the inclusion
of passport and travel functions would be unnecessarily restrictive on
Madelyn, and inconsistent with the
Tribunal’s obligations under s 4 of
the Act. In support of this finding the Tribunal notes the
(1) Whilst it is accepted that there are cultural expectations for Madelyn to
marry, and that Andrea may have strong views that Madelyn
should be married, the
Tribunal accepts that Madelyn is headstrong and would be extremely unlikely to
marry someone on account of
such expectations.
(2) Madelyn has demonstrated consistently throughout the history of Tribunal
proceedings a willingness and ability to assert herself
against the views of her
family (see, for example, [20] of the Reasons for Decision dated 12 July 2024,
where Madelyn made her views
clear that she did not want Andrea involved in
decision making for her).
(3) It appears unlikely that Madelyn or Andrea would have the means to travel in
the foreseeable future.
(4) Having regard to the long-held concerns that Madelyn may be forced to marry,
these concerns have not crystalised despite there
being no orders in place
restricting Madelyn’s travel overseas.
(5) Mr Z’s oral evidence was to the effect that if the marriage were to
occur it would likely take place in Australia. The
Tribunal is satisfied that
there are appropriate protections under Australian law to prevent Madelyn being
married in Australia without
her consent, and to this end the inclusion of a
travel and passport function would not prevent a potential husband travelling to
Australia for the purpose of marrying Madelyn here.
(6) Whilst the imposition of the additional functions may have no practical
impact on Madelyn if she does not intend to travel in
any event, the inclusion
of these functions contrary to Madelyn’s express wishes has the potential
to negatively impact her
from a psychological wellbeing perspective.
these circumstances the Tribunal decided that the guardianship order should not
be varied to include the functions of travel and
accommodation.
Tribunal notes that this decision does not prevent a further application being
made to the Tribunal if evidence arises that there
is a real and material risk
of Madelyn being removed from the country for the purpose of participating in a
forced marriage.
the extent that Madelyn may be at risk of forced marriage and was unable or
unwilling to share her concerns during the Hearing,
the Tribunal notes that
there are resources available to assist with safety planning around forced
marriage, including information
produced by My Blue
. Assistance may be sought from
My Blue Sky during office hours by telephone (02 9514 8115) or SMS (0481 070
844). Assistance can
also be sought from the Australian Federal Police on 131
The Existing Guardianship Order
was limited evidence available to the Tribunal with respect to decisions made
under the existing functions under the guardianship
order made on 12 July
Tribunal has had regard to, and adopts herein, the Tribunal’s Reasons for
Decision with respect to the functions included
in the guardianship order made
on 12 July 2024, and in particular paras [44] – [78] of those Reasons for
respect to Madelyn’s accommodation, the Tribunal was informed that since
the making of the previous order Madelyn had transitioned
to her purpose-built
accommodation, however, has since left this accommodation and returned to live
with Andrea. The basis for Madelyn’s
decision to leave this accommodation
was reported difficulties with one of Madelyn’s neighbours, though the
factual basis for
these difficulties was in dispute at Hearing. It was asserted,
and the Tribunal accepts, having regard to the Tribunal’s previous
for Decision, that Madelyn’s accommodation with Andrea is unlikely to be a
suitable long-term arrangement for Madelyn,
and that there are reasonably
foreseeable decisions to be made on Madelyn’s behalf regarding her
accommodation.
respect to the services available to Madelyn, the Tribunal’s previous
Reasons for Decision identify particular difficulties
with respect to
Andrea’s interference with service delivery for Madelyn, and historically
decisions being made about the provision
of NDIS services which may not have
been aligned with Madelyn’s interests. At Hearing it was asserted that
Madelyn would benefit
from consistency of service provision, and that such
consistency would be jeopardized if the service function were to be lapsed.
Tribunal was informed that Madelyn’s current supports are the “most
stable supports in place” and such stability
is attributable to the role
of the Public Guardian in ensuring consistency of service delivery.
identified that Andrea has consistently attempted to cancel services in place
for Madelyn and/or change to other service providers.
Janice identified concerns
that Andrea still does not understand that the services available to Madelyn
under her NDIS Plan are for
Madelyn’s benefit, and not for her own
response to these concerns, Madelyn asserted that Andrea does now understand
these restrictions and further asserted that Andrea
has not attempted to make
changes to Madelyn’s services for a long time.
reply to Madelyn’s assertions, Janice informed the Tribunal that she had
been contacted by Andrea the previous week insisting
that services be changed.
Unprompted by the Tribunal, Andrea made comments (apparently directed towards
Janice) to the effect of
It is my plan. It is not your plan, it is my
.” Those comments were made using a raised voice and an
argumentative tone.
Tribunal accepts the assertions that the continuation of a services function is
necessary to ensure that Madelyn receives consistent
supports from appropriate
services, and that less formal arrangements would not appropriately safeguard
Madelyn’s interests.
appears from the Tribunal’s previous Reasons for Decision that the health
care function was included to permit the exchange
of health information and to
ensure that Madelyn is supported to access appropriate health care services.
This extends to any necessary
allied health supports. The continued inclusion of
this function will assist the Public Guardian to access necessary health
information
to inform ongoing decisions and would assist in supporting Madelyn
should she wish to explore the further assessments referred to
earlier in these
Reasons for Decision.
access function was previously allocated to ensure that Madelyn is appropriately
supported to manage the tumultuous relationship
she has with family members, and
in particular, Andrea, noting of course that the nature of these relationships
appears to fluctuate.
In the absence of clear evidence regarding the use of this
function during the term of the current order, and having regard to the
history reported in the Tribunal’s Reasons for Decision around the need
for the inclusion of this function, the Tribunal
considered that this function
should continue under a further order until such times as a more thorough review
of its utility can
be undertaken.
Tribunal notes that Madelyn and Andrea each hold strong views in opposition to
the guardianship order continuing. Madelyn asserted
throughout the Hearing that
deserves a normal life
I just want my
”, and other similar sentiments.
Tribunal acknowledges Madelyn’s significant progress whilst under
guardianship. Mr Z identified that last year there were
active discussions about
recommending that the order be revoked in recognition of Madelyn’s
significant progress towards independence.
At Hearing, Mr Z did not support the
order being revoked at this point in time. He identified that Madelyn is
currently in a position
of considerable instability, arising from the changes to
her accommodation and the fact that she is no longer being medicated for
schizophrenia.
from Madelyn and Andrea, none of the participants in the Hearing supported the
order being revoked at this point in time, with
a common theme emerging that to
do so at this point would jeopardise the progress made by Madelyn to date.
identified from her discussions with Madelyn that Madelyn does not believe that
the Public Guardian has made any negative
decisions on her behalf, however their
continued involvement limits Madelyn’s opportunities to demonstrate her
independence.
the Tribunal acknowledges Madelyn’s strong desire for the guardianship
order to be revoked, the Tribunal shares the concerns
identified by the
various professionals working with Madelyn that to do so at this point in time
could significantly jeopardise Madelyn’s
progress to date.
Public Guardian are obligated to act in a manner which promotes the principles
outlined in s 4 of the Act. In doing so, there
is scope for Madelyn to work
collaboratively with the Public Guardian regarding decision making, and
accordingly Madelyn may have
the opportunity to demonstrate her independence
notwithstanding the continuation of the existing order.
Tribunal has had regard to Madelyn’s existing family relationships. Having
regard to Madelyn’s complex family dynamics,
the Tribunal is satisfied
that the continuation of the existing order will promote Madelyn’s
existing relationships in a safe
and controlled manner.
Tribunal accepts Madelyn’s assertions that the inclusion of a travel and
passport function would impact her ability to maintain
her cultural and
linguistic environments. Having determined, however, that such functions should
not be included in the order at
this point in time, there is no
evidence before the Tribunal to suggest that the continuation of the
guardianship order in its existing
terms would impact Madelyn’s cultural
and linguistic environment.
were no proposals advanced at Hearing for a private guardian to be appointed as
Madelyn’s guardian, and accordingly the
Tribunal confirmed the appointment
of the Public Guardian. For completeness, however, the Tribunal notes that
Andrea has previously
been found by the Tribunal not to be a suitable person to
be appointed as Madelyn’s guardian, and there was no evidence presented
the Tribunal at Hearing that would disturb the Tribunal’s previous
findings on this issue.
Tribunal notes that the existing order is to continue until July 2026.
The Tribunal is satisfied that the length of the order
should remain
unchanged to provide an appropriate opportunity for Madelyn to demonstrate
stability in her personal circumstances,
and if she so chooses, to obtain
evidence in support of her assertions that she is not a person in need of a
all of the circumstances the Tribunal was satisfied that there should be no
change to the terms of the existing guardianship order.
Accordingly, the
Tribunal reviewed and confirmed the guardianship order made on 12 July
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
https://www.ag.gov.au/crime/people-smuggling-and-human-trafficking/forced-marriage
See paragraph [40] Reasons for Decision 12 July
https://mybluesky.org.au/
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (291 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter