URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2022/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Ndiweni [2022] NSWNMPSC 1 (29 March 2022)
Professional Standards Committee
Constituted Under Part 8 of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) to hold an Inquiry into a
Complaint in relation to:
Mr Thamsanqa Ndiweni
NMW0001785250
Date/s of Inquiry:
28 February, 1 and 2 March 2022
Committee members:
Mr Mark Paul
Mr Michael Hagarty Ms Valerie Gibson Ms Maryanne Maher
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Sarah McCarthy, instructed by Ashley Quadrio, Legal Officer
Appearance for Mr Thamsanqa Ndiweni:
Katherine Doust from NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association
Decision date:
29 March 2022
The Committee found unsatisfactory professional
conduct and determined to reprimand and impose conditions
Publication of decision:
A non-publication order to protect the identity of the
patient is in place.
Our Ref: 23368/22 – Professional Standards Committee – Thamsanqa
NDIWENI - NMW0001785250
STATEMENT OF DECISION
Overview of decision
the evening of 20 December 2019 Nurse Ndiweni commenced what was only his second
shift at SummitCare Wallsend. He had accepted
an offer from Caring for You
Nursing Agency to work at the aged care and nursing home facility. At handover,
one of the evening nurses
asked if he could change the indwelling catheter of an
82 year old male resident, who was due his six weekly change, and he replied
that he could. At about 2.00am the next morning he began to change the catheter
with the help of an Assistant in Nursing. When removing
the catheter he injured
the patient’s urethra, leading to bleeding.
a half hour later Nurse Ndiweni attempted to insert a new indwelling catheter,
but without success, and there was further
bleeding. Nurse Ndiweni did not seek
any guidance or assistance until he called the Executive of the facility about
an hour later
who advised him to call for an ambulance. When handing over to the
ambulance officers Nurse Ndiweni provided limited and incomplete
information.
The clinical notes he made that evening were also limited and incomplete.
first becoming registered as a nurse in Australia on 18 December 2012 Nurse
Ndiweni has practised almost exclusively as a
mental health nurse, as he does to
the present day. Nurse Ndiweni has only been responsible for inserting a
catheter twice before,
the last time being about three or four years
previously.
agreeing to work that shift, deciding to remove the indwelling catheter,
proceeding to do so, attempting to insert a new catheter,
handing over to the
ambulance officers and recording his clinical notes, Nurse Ndiweni is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
We have decided to reprimand
Nurse Ndiweni. We also place a restriction on his practice so that when he is
working outside of a mental healthcare setting, he
is not the sole registered
nurse on shift, and he is not the nurse in charge.
reviewing the evidence, setting out our findings, and giving our reasons it is
useful to review the scope of our inquiry
and the matters in dispute.
The complaint made by the Commission
inquiry and this hearing arise from a complaint made by the Health Care
Complaints Commission against Nurse Ndiweni dated 23
essence of the complaint was that Nurse Ndiweni was guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct in that his conduct was significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of his equivalent level of training or
experience and that Nurse Ndiweni’s
conduct was improper or unethical
conduct relating to the practice of nursing. The Commission relied on the
definitions of unsatisfactory
professional conduct set out in s139B(1)(a) and
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW).
conduct said to amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct, on either or both
grounds, was:
(a) Nurse Ndiweni’s
decision to change the patient’s indwelling catheter;
(b) his poor skill and
judgment when removing the patient’s IDC;
(c) failing to properly
respond in a timely manner to the patient bleeding from his penis;
(d) inappropriately
attempting to insert a new IDC when there was a risk of further bleeding and
urethral damage;
(e) exercising poor skill
and judgment when inserting a new IDC.
(f) Delaying for an hour
or so before calling for an ambulance;
(g) failing to provide
the NSW Ambulance officers with relevant information about the patient;
(h) failing to adequately
document his care, treatment, and management of the patient’s clinical
incident; and
(i) inappropriately
agreeing to work that shift.
commencement of the hearing the Commission sought to rely on an amended
complaint making minor changes to factual matters
and clarifying aspects of the
particulars, but all within the scope of the complaint as originally made. There
was no objection to
us proceeding on the amended complaint and we did so.
amended complaint contains particulars of each aspect of Nurse Ndiweni’s
conduct to support the allegation of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. The
particulars are conveniently set out in the
amended complaint at Annexure A. As explained below, Nurse Ndiweni admitted
almost all aspects of the amended complaint and the particulars.
Nurse Ndiweni’s response to the amended complaint
of the hearing Nurse Ndiweni had made a written response to the original
complaint in which he admitted most of the allegations
of fact, partially
admitted some, and denied only a few. But he asserted that his admitted conduct
did not amount to unsatisfactory
professional conduct. By s146A of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
we may rely on
Nurse Ndiweni’s admissions in writing, in finding the subject-matter of
the complaint made out and then deciding whether and
what action to take in
the Commission had presented its evidence in support of the amended complaint
Nurse Ndiweni admitted that his conduct did
in fact amount to unsatisfactory
professional conduct as alleged. In making that admission he did not accept the
factual basis of
every particular asserted by the Commission, but nevertheless
accepted that the conduct and particulars he did admit amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct. These admissions were made by his
representative in the proceedings, Ms Doust from the NSW Nurses
Midwives’ Association.
12. On the facts
admitted by Nurse Ndiweni we are of the view that the complaint of
unsatisfactory professional conduct is made out.
Additionally, and without
relying on Nurse Ndiweni’s admissions, we are satisfied that there is
sufficient evidence to establish
the facts to support the finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
13. Nevertheless,
there remained some particulars or aspects of the events which Nurse Ndiweni
continued to dispute. These matters
were pressed by the Commission as providing
a full and complete understanding of the events and to assist the Committee in
considering
whether it was appropriate to exercise any of the general powers
under s146B of the National Law.
turning to these factual disputes, we review the course of the hearing and
confirm the material provided to us for our
inquiry into the complaint.
The hearing
Health Care Complaints Commission was represented by Sarah McCarthy, instructed
by Ashley Quadrio of the Commission. Katherine
Doust from the NSW Nurses and
Midwives’ Association represented Nurse Ndiweni. The hearing was by video
conference and the
proceedings recorded.
hearing took place on 28 February and 1 and 2 March 2022. By the agreement of
the parties both stages of our inquiry (consideration
of conduct and what should
be done) proceeded at the same time.
February we heard from Deborah Armitage an expert briefed by the Commission to
provide an assessment of Nurse Ndiweni’s
Ms Armitage is a Nurse Manager Clinical Practice and Performance, Central Coast
Local Health District and holds a conjoint appointment
with the University of
Newcastle, and in our view was qualified to give an opinion. We found her
assessments of assistance in reaching
our conclusion.
Tuesday 1 March 2022 we heard evidence from Jacqueline Oliver who was the
Assistant in Nursing with Nurse Ndiweni on the night
shift when the events took
place. We wish to particularly thank Ms Oliver for making herself available. She
was thoughtful and careful
in giving her evidence.
then heard from Albert Gyamfi who is a Nurse Unit Manager of Morriset Hospital
and has been Nurse Ndiweni’s supervisor
both before the incident and to
the present day.
Wednesday 2 March 2022 Nurse Ndiweni gave evidence. It was at this time that he
confirmed his admissions as to the facts and
acknowledged the conclusion of
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
that day we heard submissions from Ms McCarthy and Ms Doust. We thank both for
focussing on the substantive issues and attending
to the matters that remained
in dispute following Nurse Ndiweni’s admissions and acceptance of his
unsatisfactory professional
Documents and materials
support of the complaint the Commission provided us with a folder of material
which we received without objection. It included:
(a) The amended complaint:
(b) the evidentiary
certificate from AHPRA confirming Nurse Ndiweni’s registration;
(c) the reports that
prompted the Commission’s investigations;
(d) statements from Ms Oliver;
(e) statements from the
NSW Ambulance officers who attended on the morning of 21 December 2019 to convey
the patient to hospital;
(f) materials relating to
Ms Armitage being engaged as an expert on behalf of the Commission and her
subsequent reports;
(g) information from
Nurse Ndiweni as part of the Commission’s investigation;
(h) materials relating to
proceedings under s150 of the National Law on 17 February 2020 and 8 February
(i) the clinical records
concerning the patient;
(j) SummitCare’s
policies and guidelines, and details of its own investigation (including CCTV
(k) Codes of practice and
in particular the Registered Nurses Standards for Practice by the Nursing and
midwifery Board of Australia;
(l) transcript of Nurse
Ndiweni’s call to NSW Ambulance; and
(m) the patient’s
records from his hospital admission. This folder of tabbed material was marked
23. Exhibit
B was received without objection being a letter from AHPRA providing information
Ndiweni had made when he applied for
registration on 23 February 2012. This material was provided to assist the
Committee consider
what protective orders might need to be made.
Commission also provided us with an email (partly redacted) from the family of
the patient with the message that his family
was still very much traumatised by
the events and feel that it left him with very little quality of life until his
death a few months
later. Though it is our task to assess
Nurse Ndiweni’s conduct at the time it happened, the message from the
family does give important colour and meaning to the
professional standards of
the nursing and midwifery profession - Exhibit C, received without
Ndiweni provided the Committee with a folder of material containing:
(a) his reply to the
[original] complaint;
(b) a “Reflection”
on the events;
(c) his curriculum vitae;
(d) a letter from Mr
Gyamfi of 10 November 2021;
(e) records of continued
professional development over the last three years;
(f) Nurse Ndiweni’s
12 month self-directed learning plan; and
(g) performance
development reviews for the three most recent years. The folder of tabbed
material was marked Exhibit
also received:
(a) a reference from
Aaron Tammekand, an Acting Nurse Manager at Morriset Hospital – Exhibit
(b) evidence of Nurse
Ndiweni’s awarding of a Master of Nursing from Charles Sturt University
dated 8 May 2022 – Exhibit
(c) a statement from
Nurse Ndiweni of 26 February 2022 – Exhibit 4. This statement was tendered
in response to Exhibit B being
by way of explanation;
(d) his continuing
professional development records for 1 June 2019 – 31 May 2020 –
Exhibit 5; and
(e) similarly for 1 June
2021 to 31 May 2022 – Exhibit 6.
Factual matters in dispute
Nurse Ndiweni had admitted in writing and when giving evidence most of the
particulars and facts in support of the complaint,
there remained only a few
areas of factual dispute for us to consider. It is convenient to refer to
relevant paragraphs of the amended
complaint, and we deal with each issue in
Particular 1(d)
allegation is that Nurse Ndiweni had not cared for or interacted with the
other than to change his IDC
”. Nurse Ndiweni says
that he had interacted with the patient before changing the IDC by introducing
himself, explaining what
he proposed to do, and seeking consent which was given.
He also says that he spent most of his time with the patient from the time
the removal of the IDC until the ambulance officers arrived to transport the
patient to hospital.
29. Whether
these interactions are encompassed within the phrase “other than to change
his IDC” is a moot point. We accept
Nurse Ndiweni’s description of
his interactions with the patient extending beyond the actual changing of the
Particular 1(e)
Nurse Ndiweni appropriately assess the patient’s suitability for the IDC
change? There is little disagreement about
what Nurse Ndiweni did by way of
assessment; the dispute is whether what he did was
“appropriate”.
Ndiweni acknowledges that he did not review the patient’s notes (and he
should have) but says he did assess the patient’s
suitability for an IDC
change. When questioned by Ms McCarthy and members of the Committee it became
apparent that Nurse Ndiweni’s
assessment of the patient’s
suitability for an IDC change was incomplete and not appropriate for the
circumstances. He made
no physical examination to assess contraindications or to
assess fluid retention and hydration.
Ndiweni did not make the decision to proceed entirely on his own. At the
handover at the commencement of the shift he had
been asked whether he could
change the patient’s IDC and he said he could. Usually, the IDC would be
changed every six to eight
weeks and it was about six weeks since the last
33. However,
there was no immediate necessity for the change, especially on a night-time
shift. The task would take some time (and
turned out to take longer) during
which he would not be able to give any attention to any of the other residents.
In our view it
was important that if Nurse Ndiweni was to proceed that he had
made a thorough and full assessment to ensure that the change had
to be made at
that time on the shift rather than being left for a few hours. Nurse
Ndiweni’s assessment was not appropriate.
Particular 1(i)
Nurse Ndiweni check the catheter or drainage bag for kinks?
Nurse Ndiweni initially said he checked the drainage bag for kinks by visual
inspection and the same with the catheter. Under questioning
he later said that
he had touched the drainage bag. Ms Oliver was there at the time and said that
Nurse Ndiweni made no attempt to
physically examine the catheter or drainage
bags. On balance we conclude that although Nurse Ndiweni made a visual
inspection, any
physical inspection of the catheter and drainage bag was
perfunctory and did not amount to a checking of the catheter or drainage
Particular 3(b)
Nurse Ndiweni remove the IDC with an inflated or partially inflated balloon, and
if so, how did that happen? The Commission
Nurse Ndiweni made no proper attempt to deflate the balloon. Nurse Ndiweni said
he did but acknowledged that when the IDC was removed
the balloon was partially
inflated. Removing an IDC with an inflated or partially inflated balloon risked
injury. A catheter should
not be removed without first fully deflating the
balloon and checking it has been deflated. The balloon is deflated by drawing
the water usually by a 10mm syringe.
evidence on this point is conflicting. Ms Oliver says she did not see Nurse
Ndiweni make any effort to deflate the balloon.
Nurse Ndiweni said he did use a
10mm syringe to draw off what he thought was all the water but as it turned out
that was not the
case. Nurse Ndiweni gave evidence that before commencing the
procedure he and Ms Oliver obtained the equipment they
would need which Nurse Ndiweni says included the 10mm syringe. CCTV footage
shows that Nurse Ndiweni and Ms Oliver entered the nearby
treatment room
together and leave together. A few minutes later Ms Oliver returns by herself to
the treatment room to obtain further
the catheter was removed both Nurse Ndiweni and Ms Oliver observed that it was
partially deflated. That suggests that an
effort was made to deflate the
balloon, although incompletely. At this stage of the procedure there were
moments when Ms Oliver was
out of the room. We think it is likely that it was
during one of these periods that Nurse Ndiweni attempted to deflate the balloon.
It is not alleged that Nurse Ndiweni deliberately removed the IDC without making
any effort to deflate the balloon. The essence of
the allegation is that he
removed the IDC without having ensured that the balloon was fully deflated, and
in our view that allegation
is made out.
Particular 3(c)
Nurse Ndiweni
Ms Oliver to hold the patient’s penis while he
changed the IDC? If Ms Oliver held the patient’s penis instead of Nurse
Ndiweni that would have risked Nurse Ndiweni not being able to accurately assess
the level of resistance on removal of the IDC.
is dispute about whether Nurse Ndiweni made an explicit request for Ms Oliver to
hold the patient’s penis or whether
she did so as part of the procedure
without that request. In his statement he denied asking Ms Oliver to do so and
said he did not
recall her holding the patient’s penis. He asserts that he
was able to assess the level of resistance, but he does not say
how he was able
to do so, or that he held the patient’s penis.
Oliver gives clear and specific evidence about holding the patient’s penis
when the catheter was removed by Nurse Ndiweni.
She remembers feeling what she
described as a marble sized bulge moving through the patient’s penis. That
is a specific recollection
which is entirely consistent with her holding the
patient’s penis. Whether there was an explicit or implied request, Nurse
Ndiweni allowed her to do so. Being the person in charge of the procedure he
should himself have held the patient’s penis so
as the assess the level of
resistance. We find the particular is made out; Nurse Ndiweni should have held
the patient’s penis
to assist in assessing the level of resistance.
Particular 8(b)
Nurse Ndiweni assess the angle of insertion when attempting to insert the new
IDC? Nurse Ndiweni says that he did so by holding
the patient’s penis at
90° to the patient’s body. Ms Oliver says she did not see Nurse
Ndiweni assess the angle
of insertion.
CCTV footage shows that Ms Oliver was away from the patient’s room and in
the treatment room for brief periods when
she and Nurse Ndiweni were preparing
for and carrying out the attempted insertion of a new IDC. During the procedure
Nurse Ndiweni
asked Ms Oliver to obtain additional equipment from the treatment
room. As she was not present in the room for all of the time it
is possible that
this was when Nurse Ndiweni assessed the angle of insertion.
43. Although not
determinative one way or the other as to our finding of unsatisfactory
professional conduct, we are of the view that
it is more likely that Nurse
Ndiweni did assess the angle of insertion, at a time when
Ms Oliver was not in the room to see him do so.
Particular 8(c) and
Nurse Ndiweni fail to use sterile water to flush the catheter and flushed
unsterile water into the catheter and bladder directly
rather than into the
Oliver said she saw Nurse Ndiweni insert a syringe in a cup of drinking water
that was adjacent to the bed and use that water.
Nurse Ndiweni says that there
were sachets of sterile water amongst the equipment they obtained from the
treatment room and that
is what he used. Nurse Ndiweni says he may have flushed
some water into the cup, he cannot recall precisely, but he is adamant that
only ever used sterile water. When questioned about the use of sachets of
sterile water corrected his statement to say he used
a plastic ampoule of
sterile water.
syringe used to inflate the balloon would be too small to flush the catheter and
bladder. Nurse Ndiweni’s evidence was
that he attended the treatment room
to get a new sterile 10mm syringe to use for inflation of the balloon. The CCTV
evidence confirms
this occurring. On returning to the patient, it is Nurse
Ndiweni’s and Ms Oliver’s evidence that the IDC had fallen out.
Nurse Ndiweni does not have a clear recollection of the events.
Ms Oliver was for brief periods out of the room and when she was in the room the
lighting was inadequate. She may not have had a
clear view of what Nurse Ndiweni
was doing on the other side of the bed. Her observation that Nurse Ndiweni
appeared to not be confident
uncertainty and perhaps affected her interpretation of what was happening.
Certainly, it
appears to be the case that the insertion of the IDC was
unsuccessful at least because the balloon was not successfully inflated
the catheter fell out.
on Ms Oliver’s evidence the decision to attempt to insert a new catheter
was Nurse Ndiweni’s and done
because he expressed the view that inserting a new catheter would assist with
stopping the bleeding
which continued to occur. That decision risked further
damage to the patient including further bleeding and urethral damage. Nurse
Ndiweni nevertheless decided to proceed. The attempt was unsuccessful and an
hour or so later led to the patient being admitted to
hospital. Nurse Ndiweni
did not seek any on-call advice about how best to respond to the incident until
have done so much earlier. That he went ahead
with an attempt to re-catheterise without seeking that on-call advice was
inappropriate
48. Further
if an attempt was to be made to insert a new IDC Nurse Ndiweni should have
ensured that he used lignocaine gel as a topical
anaesthetic. Nurse Ndiweni was
not confident about what he should be doing but he acknowledges that he believed
he should be using
lignocaine gel as he searched for it in the treatment room.
When he did not find it, he went ahead anyway. Ms Oliver gave evidence
patient appeared to experience pain during the procedure and in her view was
suffering from shock.
49. Attempting to
insert a new IDC in a male patient patient as presented to Nurse Ndiweni and
without lignocaine gel was unsatisfactory
professional conduct, in that it was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected.
Particulars 11(d) and
50. Paragraph
11 of the amended complaint alleges that Nurse Ndiweni failed to provide an
accurate and adequate clinical handover
to the ambulance officers as listed in
paragraphs 11(a) to (g). Nurse Ndiweni does not deny that he did not provide
that information
to the ambulance officers but says that in the context of the
information he did provide it was not unsatisfactory professional conduct
provide the information set out in particulars 11(d) and (e).
evidence of Ms Oliver and the statements of the two ambulance officers is that
Nurse Ndiweni did not specifically inform the
ambulance officers that there was
bleeding after the IDC was removed and again after the second fell out, and that
Nurse Ndiweni
had attempted to insert a new catheter after the first instance of
bleeding. Nurse Ndiweni believes that he provided enough information
ambulance officers. In our view it is more likely than not that Nurse Ndiweni
failed to provide the specific information particularised.
Rather he gave a
report of the outcome of events instead of being specific about what clinical
events had occurred.
find particulars 11(a) to (g) made out, and that Nurse Ndiweni’s conduct
with respect to the handover amounted to unsatisfactory
professional
53. Although
not in dispute as to the facts there are aspects of the allegations in
paragraphs 13 and 15 that require consideration
as to the basis of the finding
of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 13
the clinical notes Nurse Ndiweni agreed his notes were inadequate and his
conduct amounted to unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Ms Armitage, the
Commission’s expert, was shown a copy of some notes that
Nurse Ndiweni did make (Exhibit 1, Tab 34). She had not seen those notes before.
Her opinion was that the notes were inadequate and
fell below the standard
reasonably expected but not significantly below. She was prepared to give
allowance for the events of the
night and the time available.
our view, the clinical notes made by Nurse Ndiweni were inadequate and amounted
to unsatisfactory professional conduct in that
his conduct fell significantly
below the standard expected. Whilst he had some difficulty in accessing the
electronic record he does
not go so far as to say he was prevented from making
the notes that he wanted to make. In our view there were gaps in the notes that
he did make. The notes were more a matter of an outcome rather than a clinical
record of what had happened and the decisions he made,
and actions taken. In a
case like this where a patient is injured during a procedure it was more
important than usual to ensure that
the clinical notes were complete and without
if the clinical notes were not significantly below the standard, as in the
opinion of Ms Armitage, it was also alleged by
the Commission that the making of
the notes was “improper” conduct in that it breached Practice
Standard 1, paragraph
1.6, of the Registered Nurses Standards for Practice
(Tab 45). The standard requires that records be an accurate, comprehensive, and
timely documentation of assessments, planning, decision
making, actions and
evaluations. By reference to that professional standard the conduct was improper
in that the standard was breached
because of Nurse Ndiweni’s failure to
adequately document his care, treatment, and management of the patient.
not consider that it is necessary in the public interest to take any action in
respect of our finding as to clinical notes
other than to record our conclusion
that his recording keeping amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Since the events
of that night Nurse Ndiweni has undertaken training and
education on the importance of clinical notes. He continues to work in a
health hospital context and there is no criticism of his clinical notes. The
evidence is that Nurse Ndiweni is presently competent
with respect to clinical
Particular 15
Ndiweni admits that his decision to work the night shift at SummitCare Wallsend
was unsatisfactory professional conduct,
and we agree. Having worked the same
shift the night before he was aware that he would be the sole registered nurse
for about 142
residents, with only the help of an assistant in nursing in each
unit. He had not refreshed his clinical skills generally and in
relation to IDC
changes, and the work involved clinical experience outside his scope of
Ndiweni’s nursing practice has been overwhelmingly, almost exclusively, in
mental health nursing. He qualified in
the United Kingdom and obtained an
Advanced Diploma – Mental Health Nursing
which is not a generalist
nursing degree or qualification. Nurse Ndiweni said he made no assessment before
taking the shift of whether
he could do the work that might be required. He
seemed to accept that having provided his curriculum vitae the agency would not
him to any place if he was not qualified for the work. If so, that was an
abdication of his responsibility to make sure the work
was within his
professional capacity.
Ndiweni obtained registration in Australia early in 2012. The registration was
general and without restriction notwithstanding
that his training to date had
essentially been only in mental health nursing. We understand that since about
2012 or certainly after
Nurse Ndiweni’s obtained registration, AHPRA
introduced a policy of adding a notation on the registration if a person such
Nurse Ndiweni had been granted registration having qualified in a limited area
of nursing. Apparently, that policy only applied
to nurses seeking registration
after the introduction of the policy. We were not made aware of any reassessment
of existing registrations
such as Nurse Ndiweni’s. It is idle to speculate
whether had his registration carried that notation the agency would not have
him forward for the shift. In our view it was ultimately up to Nurse Ndiweni to
satisfy himself that he had the necessary skills
and then not to work outside
his scope of practice.
agreeing to work the shift Nurse Ndiweni was guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct in that it was improper to work
the shift given the number
of residents for whom he would be responsible, not having refreshed his clinical
skills and the work not
being within his scope of practice. That conclusion is
supported by the Registered Nurses Standards for Practice
published by the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia, and particularly the
obligations to maintain capability for practice and
to provide safe,
appropriate, and responsive quality practice – Exhibit A, Tab 45, page
Commission alleges that an aspect of the unsatisfactory professional conduct was
Nurse Ndiweni’s failure to seek approval
for secondary employment from his
then and still current employer. We do not see how that can be characterised as
an aspect of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. There is no allegation that
Nurse Ndiweni had deliberately or intentionally avoided seeking that consent in
an expectation that it would be refused. There is no evidence of any criticism
from his employer in not seeking that approval. Nurse
Ndiweni’s evidence
is that he was not aware of such a requirement and if he had been he would have
sought consent. He was not
challenged on that evidence.
have reached our conclusion without reliance on particular 15(d).
Overall assessment of conduct
Ndiweni should not have attempted to replace the IDC. He was inexperienced,
having replaced an IDC only twice before and
not for at least three of four
years. The IDC did not need to be replaced at that time and the change could
have been delayed at
least until the next shift. It was wrong to undertake a
procedure that could take him away for a considerable time from the care
other residents. He should have sought assistance immediately upon signs of
injury after the removal. Attempting to insert
a new catheter was inappropriate,
and if his motivation was to resolve the problem of the bleeding that was a poor
clinical decision.
Once the second catheter fell out and bleeding continued
Nurse Ndiweni should have called for an ambulance or at least other assistance.
He did not call the ambulance for over an hour. His handover and his clinical
notes were inadequate. Had Nurse Ndiweni given thought
to whether he should
accept the shift his professional obligation to work within his scope of
practice would have obliged him to
the admissions made by Nurse Ndiweni we find unsatisfactory professional
conduct. That conclusion is confirmed by our findings
on those few contested
particulars as explained above.
Exercise of powers
found the subject matter of the complaint proved our task is to consider whether
to exercise any powers under s146B of
the National Law. In doing so we give
paramount consideration to the protection of the health and safety of the
Ndiweni obtained an advanced Diploma in Mental Health Nursing from the
University of Nottingham, United Kingdom, in 2008.
Apart from the two days
working at SummitCare Nurse Ndiweni has worked as a mental health nurse, and
since 2018 to the present at
the Morriset Rehabilitation Service within Hunter
New England Local Health District.
arriving in Australia he obtained registration as a general nurse. The entry on
the AHPRA website does not contain the notation
of his prior registration in the
UK being only in mental health nursing. At the time of his registration, he made
certain disclosures
which are set out in a letter to the
Commission from AHPRA – Exhibit B. Nurse Ndiweni responded to those issues
in his statement of 26 February 2022, Exhibit 4.
It was acknowledged by the
parties, and it is our view that nothing arises from the information in Exhibit
B and Exhibit 4 that is
pertinent to our consideration of whether and what
protective orders ought to be made.
Mr Gyamfi’s evidence
assistance to the Committee is the evidence of Mr Gyamfi provided in his letter
of 2 November 2021, Exhibit 1, Tab 5, and in
person. Mr Gyamfi gave evidence
(a) Nurse Ndiweni is good
at his job as a mental health nurse and contributes to the working of the
(b) he is a safe practitioner;
(c) he has worked under
Mr Gyamfi’s supervision since about 2018;
(d) Mr Gyamfi first
became aware of the incident in January or February of 2020 when he was told by
Nurse Ndiweni that “a case
was coming up for hearing”;
(e) in the past when his
staff were the subject of disciplinary or similar proceedings, he found it
useful to undertake informal “management
and mentoring
(f) he commenced those
sessions for Nurse Ndiweni and has continued the sessions for the last wo
(g) Nurse Ndiweni used to
be in charge of a shift as he demonstrated good clinical skills and worked well
as a manager;
(h) because of the court
proceedings [which we understood as a reference to the proceedings under s150 of
the National Law] that had
to change, and he could no longer use him as a
manager on a shift;
(i) but for the
conditions imposed Nurse Ndiweni would be the supervisor on shift as, “He
is up to the task of being in charge”.
asked about any ongoing need for mentoring Mr Gyamfi said, “No we’re
reaching saturation and repetition, and
it’s becoming counterproductive.
And Nurse Ndiweni himself is capable of mentoring junior and new staff”.
Nurse Ndiweni’s
judgment had improved under the mentoring program and that
is the case even though he is working in a role that is below his capacities
“He has not been able to shine.”
Gyamfi believed that Nurse Ndiweni would not work outside his scope of practice
again, and he has not gone outside what he
has been restricted from doing by the
conditions.
Ndiweni has attained the qualification of Clinical Nurse Specialist on the basis
of a Master of Nursing – Mental Health
from Charles Sturt University.
Nurse Ndiweni is capable of leading a team, and has demonstrated significant
skills in Mental Health
73. Mr Gyamfi said
Nurse Ndiweni is particularly skilled at identifying when a patient is
undergoing a decline because of medical
Gyamfi’s observations of Nurse Ndiweni are consistent with the performance
development reviews – Exhibit 1, Tabs
10, 11 and 12.
Gyamfi was tested on one aspect of his report which appeared to imply that Nurse
Ndiweni was blaming junior staff for what
went wrong at SummitCare. He said he
was simply recalling two years later what he thought he had been told.
Consideration of protective orders
evidence does not suggest that Nurse Ndiweni has not taken responsibility for
what happened. He acknowledges he was too willing
to accede to the request at
handover that the patient’s IDC be changed and should have made his own
assessment. It is apparent
from Nurse Ndiweni’s evidence and the records
of his continuing professional development over the past few years that he has
clear understanding of the limits of his area of practice, and he understands
the professional obligation not to work outside his
scope of practice no matter
the circumstances. He now understands that practising in an aged care facility
is not an easy task and
must be treated as seriously and with as much attention
as any area of nursing.
77. Following
s150 hearings on 18 February 2020 and 8 February 2021 Nurse Ndiweni has
practised under conditions that he does not
undertake agency nursing and that he
does not work as the sole practitioner or be in
charge on any shift, ward, or unit, and with the obligation to keep the Nursing
and Midwifery Council informed about any change in
employment and to notify new
employers of the conditions. The decision we make in these proceedings will
replace those conditions.
Commission proposed a continuation of similar conditions when not working in
mental health care setting but supplemented by
a period of mentoring and a
reprimand. Ms Doust submitted that a reprimand was sufficient.
reprimand is warranted to demonstrate to the public and the profession and Nurse
Ndiweni that his conduct on the shift of 20
to 21 December 2019 was conduct
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a nurse of his
qualifications and experience
and was also improper as being contrary to the
Registered Nurses Standards for Practice (Tab 45) being a relevant expression of
the profession of nursing expects of its members.
are confident that Nurse Ndiweni is practising safely within his scope of
practice in a mental health care setting. Since the
events of December 2019 he
has not practised outside of mental health care nursing to any extent. Nurse
Ndiweni was working outside
his scope of practice at the time of the
unsatisfactory professional conduct. He may have been wanting to be helpful but
that lead him to undertake a task that was not necessary and to make
several clinical errors. He embarked upon a procedure for which
he had very
little experience. Despite being out of his depth and things going wrong he did
not seek assistance, with consequences
for the patient.
81. Notwithstanding
his satisfactory work within his scope of practice we continue to have doubts
of mental health
nursing. Although these events took place when Nurse Ndiweni was undertaking
agency nursing the substantive circumstance was one
of working outside his scope
of practice. We do not see the utility of imposing a condition preventing Nurse
Ndiweni undertaking
agency nursing.
our view it is necessary to protect the public by restricting the ways in which
Nurse Ndiweni practises when not in a mental
health care setting. If he is to
practice outside of a mental health care setting, he should not be the only
registered nurse, nor
be in charge.
not believe that Nurse Ndiweni requires any mentoring or further education.
Although not formally, but within a work context,
Nurse Ndiweni has been
mentored by his supervisor, Mr Gyamfi, for about two years. Ongoing mentoring is
likely to be counterproductive
especially given
Nurse Ndiweni’s extensive experience within his present scope of
Exercise of powers
exercise the following powers under s146B of the National Law: A reprimand.
imposition of conditions on registration:
(i) When working outside
of a mental health care setting, not to work as a sole registered nurse on any
shift, ward, or unit;
(ii) When working outside
of mental health setting not to be nurse in charge of any shift, ward, or
(iii) To advise the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW in writing at least seven days prior to the
changing of the nature or place
of practice;
(iv) Within seven days of
a change in the nature or place or practice the practitioner is to forward
evidence to the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW that he has provided a copy
of these conditions to the nurse’s employers;
(v) To authorise each
nursing employer:
notify the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW of any breach of the conditions;
exchange information with the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW related to
compliance with the conditions;
The appropriate review
body for the purpose of a review under s164-163C of the National Law is the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of
NSW when the practitioner has a principal place
of practice in NSW;
Sections 125 to 127 of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
2009 are to apply should
the practitioner’s principal place of practice be anywhere in Australia
other than NSW, so that the
appropriate review body in those circumstances is
the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia.
Non-publication order
85. Earlier
in the proceedings a non-publication order was made concerning the name of the
patient in accordance with clause (7)(1)(b)(iv)
under Schedule 5D of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
2009 and that
non-publication order is continued.
Publication
s171E (1) of the National Law this written statement of decision is to be
provided to the Health Care Complaints Commission,
Nurse Ndiweni, and the
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW.
s171E (3) of the National Law this written statement of decision is to be
provided to the family of the patient.
88. Pursuant
to s171E (4) of the National Law the Council will make this statement of
decision publicly available.
Care Complaints Commission and Mr Thamsanqa Ndiweni have the right to appeal
this decision to the NSW Civil and Administrative
appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of receipt of this
statement of decision.
Mark Paul Chairperson
Date: 29 March 2022
AMENDED COMPLAINT
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION
NATIONAL LAW (NSW)
Executive Officer
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW 477 Pit Street
SYDNEY NSW 2000
The Health Care Complaints Commission of Level 12, 323
Castlereagh Street, Sydney, NSW, having consulted with the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Care Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) (‘
National Law’)
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Mr Thamsanqa Ndiweni
practitioner”) of
, being a registered nurse registered under the
National Law
COMPLAINT ONE
The practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under section 139B(1)(a) and s139B(1)(l) of the
practitioner has engaged in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner
in the practice of
nursing is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training
experience;
practitioner has engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the practice or
purported practice of nursing.
BACKGROUND TO COMPLAINT ONE
In 2008 the practitioner obtained an Advanced Diploma -
Mental Health Nursing in the United Kingdom. On 18 December 2012 he was first
registered in Australia. From 2008 the practitioner worked as a mental health
nurse in various facilities in the UK and
Australia. In 2019 the practitioner was working as a registered nurse at
Morisset Psychiatric Rehabilitation Service as a mental
health nurse but also
took shifts through an agency at other facilities.
On 20-21 December 2019 the practitioner was working the night shift as an agency
nurse at SummitCare Wallsend, an aged care and nursing
(“Wallsend”). Patient A was an 82 year old resident of Wallsend, who
had an indwelling catheter (“IDC”)
which required changing every 4-6
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
1. On 21 December 2019 at about 0200
hours the practitioner inappropriately proceeded to change Patient A’s IDC
in the following
circumstances:
practitioner was the only registered nurse on duty in a facility with 142
practitioner had not changed an IDC for about three to four years;
practitioner’s scope of practice was in mental health nursing;
practitioner had not cared for or interacted with Patient A other than to change
practitioner did not review Patient A’s notes and appropriately assess
Patient A’s suitability for an IDC change including
any contraindications
and for his fluid balance and hydration levels;
A’s IDC did not require changing on the practitioner’s shift;
practitioner could have requested the morning shift RN to undertake the IDC
practitioner changed Patient A’s IDC in inadequate lighting
conditions;
practitioner had not checked either the catheter or drainage bags for
practitioner had no regard to Wallsend’s documented procedure on changing
IDCs (‘Continence Care – Urinary –
Male Urethral
Catheterisation’).
2. By the practitioner’s conduct in particular (1) he
acted contrary to standards 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the Nursing and Midwifery
of Australia’s ‘Registered Nurses Standards for Practice’ (1
June 2016) (“the Board’s Standards”),
and domain 2.2 of the
Board’s Code of Conduct for Nurses.
3. On 21 December 2019 at about 0200 hours the practitioner exercised poor
skill and judgment when removing Patient A’s IDC
causing bleeding and/or
urethral damage to Patient A in that:
practitioner changed Patient A’s IDC in inadequate lighting
conditions;
practitioner removed the IDC with an inflated or partially inflated
asking an assistant in nursing to hold Patient A’s penis while he changed
the IDC, he risked being unable to accurately assess
the level of resistance
when removing the IDC.
4. By the practitioner’s conduct in particular (3) he
acted contrary to standards 1, 3, and 6 of the Board’s Standards.
5. Immediately after removing the IDC as set out in particular
(3), Patient A was bleeding from his penis. The practitioner failed
to properly
respond to Patient A’s bleeding in a timely manner including by:
and documenting a thorough assessment of Patient A including of his bleeding and
on-call advice on how best to respond to the incident until about 0330
6. By the practitioner’s conduct in particular (5) he
acted contrary to standards 1, 4, 6, and 7 of the Board’s Standards.
7. After Patient A suffered bleeding from his penis, at about
0230 hours the practitioner inappropriately attempted to insert a new
Patient A, risking further damage to Patient A, including further bleeding and
urethral damage.
8. On 21 December 2019, the practitioner exercised poor skill
and judgment when attempting to insert a new IDC in Patient A in that:
practitioner did not use lignocaine gel;
practitioner did not assess the angle of insertion;
practitioner failed to use sterile water to flush the catheter;
practitioner flushed unsterile water into the catheter and bladder directly,
rather than into the balloon.
9. By the practitioner’s conduct
in particulars (7) and (8) he acted contrary to standards 3 and 6 of the
Board’s Standards.
10. Immediately after removing the IDC, as set out in particular
(3), Patient A was bleeding from his penis. The practitioner delayed
calling for
an ambulance from the time Patient A started bleeding from about 0200-0230 hours
until about 0330 hours.
11. At about 0400 hours, after NSW ambulance officers arrived at
Wallsend, the practitioner failed to provide accurate and adequate
handover in relation to Patient A in that he did not:
adequate clinical information about Patient A;
adequate information about how or why Patient A was bleeding;
the extent of the bleeding;
that Patient A was bleeding after the first IDC was removed, and after the
second IDC fell out;
that he attempted to insert a new IDC after Patient A began bleeding;
or convey specific information about the observations he took;
information about Patient A’s respiratory distress.
12. By the practitioner’s conduct in particular (11) he
acted contrary to standards 2 and 4 of the Board’s Standards.
13. The practitioner failed to adequately document his care,
treatment and management of Patient A’s clinical incident on 21
2019, which led to Patient A’s transfer from Wallsend to a hospital,
assessment of Patient A’s IDC and need for an IDC change;
details about Patient A including assessment, advice or observations pre-IDC
during the catheter change the balloon was not properly deflated;
Patient A bled for about 10 minutes after the IDC change;
detail about the severity of the bleeding;
the practitioner attempted to insert the new catheter;
Patient A bled again and his observations of Patient A then;
timing for the above;
timing of the vital sign observations recorded in his note;
handover he gave to the ambulance officers.
14. By the practitioner’s conduct in particular (13) he
acted contrary to standard 1 and 5 of the Board’s Standards.
15. The practitioner inappropriately agreed to work at Wallsend
on 20-21 December 2019 in that:
practitioner was the only registered nurse on duty for about 142 residents;
had not refreshed his general clinical nursing skills prior to taking the shift,
including in relation to IDC changes;
agreed to take the shift in an area outside his clinical experience and scope of
had not sought approval for secondary employment from Morisset Psychiatric
Rehabilitation Service.
16. By the practitioner’s conduct in particular (15) he
acted contrary to standards 3 and 6 of the Board’s Standards.
Amended 2 March 2022
Nicole Lawless Director of Proceedings
Health Care Complaints Commission
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (796 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter