URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2015/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v Mannix [2015] NSWNMPSC 5 (1 December 2015)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER S.171
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) 2009
Health Care Complaints Commission v Mannix
[2015] NSWNMPSC
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
COMPLAINANT: Health Care Complaints Commission, represented by Ms Brianna Butt
RESPONDENT: Joy Mannix (Registered Nurse), represented
by Ms Patricia
NSW Nurses Association
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE:
Ms Julie Hughes (Chairperson)
Mr Mark Constable (Nurse Member) Ms Leigh Schalk (Nurse Member)
Ms Frances Taylor (Lay Member)
HEARING DATES: 22 - 23 July 2015
DECISION DATE: 1 December 2015
FILE NO: 2015/05
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law {NSW} 2009;
Health Administration Act (NSW}
CASES CITED:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Gianoutsos v. Glykis
[2006] NSWCCA 137
(2006) 65 NSWLR 539
HCCC v Farag and Raven
[2014] NSWNMPSC 1
HCCC v. Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
, {1997) 41 NSWLR 630;
HCCC v. Gillett
[2007] NSWNMT 7
Kalil v Bray
[1977] 1NSWLR 256;
Lindsay v HCCC
[2005] NSWCA 356
Lucire v.HCCC
[2011] NSWCA 99
Medical Board of Australia v Judge Horeman-Wren
[2013] QSC 339
NSW Bar Association v. Hamman
(1999) NSWCA 404
Re Dr Suman Sood
[2006] NSWMT 1
Re a Medical Practitioner and the Medical Practice Act
unreported, NSWMT
16, 3 September, 2007;
Re Dr Parajuli
[2010] NSWMT 3
CATCHWORDS: Appropriate consequential orders; effect of
Administration Act (NSW)
1982 on tender of certain documents; "practitioner
of equivalent level of training or experience" where the new graduate registered
nurse has many years' experience as an enrolled nurse; unsatisfactory
professional conduct; whether nurse has a duty to order tests
when doctor has
failed to do so.
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Professional Standards Committee Decided:
Committee made a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Consequential
orders are contained at the end of these reasons for decision.
Committee made a non-publication order to prevent the publication of the
identity of the patient the subject of the complaint,
referred to as Patient A,
and of any person whose identity may reveal or suggest the identity of Patient
Background:
matter involves the tragic death of Patient A. Patient A was a fifty-four year
old Aboriginal woman. She had a loving family
and lived with her partner.
Patient A had a number of serious health complications, including poorly
controlled type 2 diabetes and
hypertension, however on this occasion she
presented to hospital suspecting she was suffering from a transient problem.
on admission to hospital Patient A had thought she may have been
suffering from food poisoning.
A presented to the clinic run by Dr Valansi reporting recent profuse diarrhoea,
vomiting, nausea and generalised abdominal
pain. She had fainted the previous
day and injured her sacrum with the fall. Dr Valansi reports that he questioned
Patient A at initial
examination and she denied chest pain, shortness of breath,
palpitations or any neurological symptoms. At this initial examination
pressure was 120/80, heart rate was 74, and temperature normal. Her blood sugar
level was very elevated at 25.7. He described
her abdomen as being soft and not
tender on examination. She was provisionally diagnosed with hyperosmolar
syndrome, secondary to
gastroenteritis, causing profuse dehydration and, as a
result, postural drop or vasovagal syncope
. That is, his view was that she
had a complication of type 2 diabetes which involves extremely high blood sugar
levels, precipitated
by the gastroenteritis. Further, she had fainted the day
before, either due to the effects of the associated dehydration, or from
distress of the symptoms, or a dizzy spell resulting from irregular blood
A was hospitalised in Brewarrina Multi-Purpose Service ('BMPS') between 12
November 2012 and 18 November 2012. In a complex
presentation her condition
ebbed and flowed until after around a week, her health status devolved to
critical, necessitating her
being transferred to Dubbo Base Hospital ('DBH')
after the serious deterioration in her condition.
a number of persons were involved in Patient A's health care, the substance of
this Complaint is the conduct of RN Joy Mannix.
RN Mannix had been an enrolled
nurse for many years, indeed her nursing career commenced back in the late 1970s
as an Assistant in
Nursing. From 2003-11 the Respondent was employed as an
Enrolled Nurse at BMPS on a part-time basis.
recent years Ms Mannix had studied through Charles Sturt University to complete
a Bachelor of Nursing, graduating in 2011. She
was recorded on the Australian
Health Practitioner Regulation Agency's Register as a registered nurse (around
September 2011). She
was employed as a New Graduate Registered Nurse, part-time,
for around twenty four hours a week.
health setting surrounding the facts of this case is not insignificant. The
setting was a small multi-purpose hospital in Brewarrina,
Multi-Purpose Health Service, essentially a small country hospital with a number
of functions. Brewarrina is a small outback
country town, 810km from Sydney and
98km from Bourke. It has a town population of about 1500 people. BMPHS is
serviced by one doctor,
who has responsibility for the general practice and the
hospital patients as the sole doctor for the town. At that time the doctor
Dr Valansi, who had been contracted for an eight week period and had arrived at
the hospital towards the end of October 2012.
During the week of Patient A's
hospitalisation there were staff shortages and there was not a nurse manager on
site, this being a
departure from the usual requirement.
the morning and afternoon shifts there would typically be one Registered Nurse
('RN'), one Endorsed Nurse ('EN') and one Assistant
in Nursing ('AIN'), who
usually worked a six hour shift. Normally the EN assisted and supported the RN
in the Acute Ward and the
Emergency Department, while the AIN tended to the
patients in the aged care section, with the assistance of the RN and EN as
Nurse Manager also typically worked three morning shifts per week, and a Health
Service Manager usually worked Monday to Friday
morning shifts.
the admission of Patient A the Health Service Manager was on leave and the Nurse
Manager was acting in that position, leaving
no-one acting in the Nurse Manager
RN rostered on for the afternoon shifts would be the 'in-charge' nurse for the
evidence was that on a typical morning shift the RN was responsible for care of
patients in the Acute Ward, Aged Care, and Emergency
Department, including
attending to patient triage. Also, the RN would assist and relieve meal breaks
in the Dialysis Unit, as occurred
on 16 November, 2012, during Patient A's
admission. The RN would also attend to the Methadone Clinic between 0900-0930
hours Monday
afternoon shifts the RN was responsible for the care of patients in the Acute
Ward, the Aged Care section, and the Emergency Department,
including attending
to patient triage. This nurse would be the 'nurse in charge' on that shift.
RN's carried a portable phone to ensure that they were always contactable, as
well as to answer external incoming calls, as required.
An Administrative Clerk
took these calls during business hours, but after 5:00pm all incoming calls
would go directly to the RN in
charge of the hospital.
the period of Patient A's hospitalisation at BMPS Ms Mannix worked the following
Tuesday 13 November - afternoon shift. Wednesday 14 November - morning shift.
Thursday 15 November - afternoon shift. Friday 16 November
- morning shift.
A morning shift would commence on or around 7am and go to around 3pm. An
afternoon shift would commence on or around 3pm and go to
Friday 16 November Patient A had cause to be absent from the ward during the
Respondent's shift. She had a morning eye appointment
at a clinic elsewhere on
the grounds, and then she was transported at 12:50pm to Bourke for an x-ray.
This is roughly a 200 km round
trip, and she returned to the hospital at a few
hours later. There are complaints around the Respondent's failure to monitor and
record vital signs on this date, as well as failure to advise the doctor of a
nursing note entry by another practitioner that indicated
a change in Patient
A's symptoms on the shift before RN Mannix worked that day.
16 November, 2012 was the last time RN Mannix nursed Patient A before the latter
became critically ill and was transferred
to Dubbo hospital on
18.11.2012.
The Complaint
Health Care Complaints Commission, having consulted with the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South Wales pursuant to
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act
and section 145A of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW}
('the National Law') complained
that Joy Beverley Mannix ('the practitioner') was guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under
section 139B of the National Law in that the
practitioner had engaged in conduct that demonstrated that the knowledge or
possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of
nursing was significantly below the standard reasonably expected
practitioner of an equivalent level of training of experience.
particulars of the complaint were:
practitioner failed to monitor Patient A's vital signs, namely respiratory rate,
blood pressure, pulse and temperature, on 14,
15 and 16 November, 2012.
practitioner failed to adequately assess, monitor and respond to Patient A's
complaint of upper abdominal
rib cage pain on 14 November, 2012 by
performing a pain assessment, taking a full set of vital observations,
performing a 12-lead
practitioner failed to report Patient A's complaint of upper abdominal
rib cage pain on 14 November, 2012 to the medical officer.
practitioner failed to maintain a fluid balance chart of 14, 15, and 16
November, 2012.
16 November, 2012 the practitioner failed to advise the medical officer of
Patient A's symptoms as documented by the previous registered
practitioner failed to record adequate nursing
finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct will be made when the
Professional Standards Committee ("the Committee") is comfortably
satisfied that
the conduct made out demonstrates one of the deficiencies or inadequacies
contained in s.139B of the National Law.
Complaint alleges that the conduct particularised constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct under s.139b(1)(a) of the Act,
"Unsatisfactory professional conduct"
of a registered health
practitioner includes each of the following:
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of the practitioner's
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience...
process adopted by the Committee is to firstly consider whether conduct
particularised in the Complaint has been made out in point
of fact. It must then
evaluate whether, if established, the conduct amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct within the meaning
of the Act.
can be a difficult matter to discern the type of conduct that amounts to the
dictates of s.130B(1)(a). The National Law does not
attempt to define the
descriptor "significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience". However, this is
variously described in the case law. Deputy Chairperson Judge Freeman proffered
the following
guidance in a New South Wales Medical Tribunal decision,
Medical Practitioner and the Medical Practice
"As a general principle, the use of the term "significant" may in law be
taken to mean
not trivial, of importance, or substantial."
plain terms it may be said "significantly below" is a measure of conduct
departures that is beyond the realm of slight or trivial
matters. The provision
must be read in light of the stated objects of the National Law.
is, the Committee is charged under s.4 of the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law ("the National Law") to exercise its
functions having regard to the
objective and guiding principles of the national registration and accreditation
scheme set out in
the purposes of ease and clarity the relevant objectives and guiding principles
are extracted below:
(1) The objectives of the national registration and accreditation scheme
(a) to provide
for the protection of the public by ensuring that only practitioners who are
suitably trained and qualified to practise
and in a competent and ethical manner
are registered; ...
(e) to facilitate access to services provided by health practitioners in
accordance with the public interest; and
(2) The guiding principles of the national registration and accreditation scheme
are as follows-
(a) the scheme
is to operate in a transparent, accountable, efficient, effective and fair way;
(c) restrictions on the practice of a health profession are to be imposed under
the scheme only if it is necessary to ensure health
services are provided safely
and are of appropriate quality.
3A Objectives and guiding principle [NSW]
In the exercise of functions under NSW provision, the protection of the health
and safety of the public must be the paramount consideration.
both the public and the profession.
(HCCC v. Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630 at (6370 and F];
HCCC v. Gillett
[2007] NSWNMT 7).
The protection of the public encompasses deterring the individual practitioner
from repeating the misconduct, as well as acting as
a general deterrent to
others from behaving similarly (see, for example,
NSW Bar Association v.
(1999) NSWCA 404
Re Dr Parajuli
[2010] NSWMT 3
the Tribunal extrapolated that an entity
exercising its functions under the Act for the paramount purpose of protecting
and safety of the public, may consider five matters concerning such
protection:
(a) Any need to protect the public against further misconduct by the
practitioner;
(b) The need to protect the public through general deterrence (of other
practitioners);
(c)The need to protect the public by reinforcing high professional standard and
denouncing transgressions;
(d) The maintenance of public confidence in the profession;
(e) The desirability of making available to the public any special skills
possessed by the practitioner.
The onus and burden of proof
burden of proof is upon the complainant to the civil standard of proof. That is,
the complainant must prove on the balance of
probabilities that the subject
matter of the complaints against the respondent is established. Due to the
seriousness of the allegations
and the gravity of the consequences, the relevant
standard of proof is that enunciated in
Briginshaw v. Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, that is, that of comfortable satisfaction that the
matters in the complaint have been established.
requirement to be 'comfortably satisfied' does not import a third standard of
proof hovering somewhere between the civil and criminal
standards. It does not
imply requirement of proof to a higher standard than the balance of
probabilities:
Gianoutsos v. Glykis
[2006] NSWCCA 137
(2006) 65 NSWLR 539
at 547-9, applied
by the Medical Tribunal in
In re Dr Suman Sood
[2006] NSWMT 1
standard referred to in
is concerned with the quality or
sufficiency of the evidence necessary to discharge the civil standard, rather
than creating heightened
standard of proof.
accordance with authority, the Committee will make findings for each particular,
and then determine whether those findings amount
to proof on the balance of
probabilities of the complaint
( Lucire v.HCCC
(2011] NSWCA 99 per Basten
JA at [43], see also
Medical Board of Australia v Judge Horeman-Wren
(2013] QSC 339).
Complainant tendered a volume of materials, and after resolution of the
Respondent's objections to certain evidence, it was admitted
as 'Complainant's
Volume' ("CV").
from Western NSW Local Health District to the HCCC dated 30.04.14 and 11.03.14
were tendered by the Complainant and were admitted
without objection as Exhibits
A and B respectively.
Respondent tendered a volume of materials which was admitted after resolution of
an objection as 'Respondent's Volume' ("RV").
The objection was correctly made
with respect to the annexure to the Respondent's statement, and subsequent
tender of, the Root Cause
Analysis interview, or 'RCA', which is the record of
an internal interview of RN Mannix which attempts to unearth information that
may be helpful in determining the events that lead to adverse outcomes. The HCCC
objected, in accordance with the dictates of the
Health Administration Act
1982, to the tender of the document, and this objection was sustained.
Indeed, tender of the document was not pressed. Section 20Q
effectively prohibit admission of such documents into evidence. The ·
Respondent sought to rely on the information
contained in that document
otherwise as a contemporaneous statement that she made some four weeks after she
was nursing Patient A.
The parties agreed that it was open for Ms Robinson to
lead evidence from RN Mannix about the fact that she made a contemporaneous
statement on 21 December, 2012, in which she stated that on the doctor's rounds
on 14 November, 2012 Patient A stated she had pain
below the rib cage. The
Commission had no objection to this course provided it was led on the basis that
it was said, but not necessarily
as to the truth of the statement. Section 22 of
Health Administration Act
contains an exemption regarding the
disclosure of information with consent from the person from whom the information
was obtained.
Ultimately, and on that basis, in oral evidence the Respondent
confirmed that when she provided her response to the HCCC on
she refreshed her memory
from a copy of her record of interview with Root Cause Analysis team on
21.12.2012, which included her contemporaneous
Complainant’s independent expert witness, RN Tracey Jubb (Registered
Nurse), gave evidence at hearing.
Respondent, RN Mannix, also gave oral evidence at hearing.
T = Hearing Transcript; L = Line reference; CV
Complainant Volume;
RV = Respondent Volume
CONSIDERATION OF THE EVIDENCE FOR EACH PARTICULAR
Particular 1
The practitioner failed to monitor Patient A's vital signs,
namely respiratory rate, blood pressure, pulse and temperature, on 14,
November, 2012.
evidence establishes that the following observations of Patient A were taken and
recorded between 14-16 November, 2012:
14 November: at 0600 hours
15 November: at 0600, 1100, 1430 hours
16 November: at 0620, 2315 hours
respondent acknowledged that there are no observations recorded during her
shifts on 14 and 16 November, 2012, and that observations
were recorded on 15
November, 2012 at 1430 hours which was during her
the respondent accepted in her statement and in oral evidence that it was her
responsibility to ensure that observations
were attended at least once during
her shifts from 14-16 November, 2012. These matters are borne out by examination
of the medical
records for Patient A's admission.
is acknowledged that Patient A was absent from the ward for an eye appointment
for some time on the morning of 16 November, and
left the ward at around 12:50pm
that same day for a 200km round trip for an X-ray in Bourke. This meant that
Patient A was not actually
on the ward for a good portion of RN Mannix's shift
that day. The evidence of the expert witness was, however, that a set of
observations
should have been conducted prior to departing the hospital for the
lengthy trip for an X-ray.
is not to say that RN Mannix was the only person with the task of monitoring and
recording Patient A's vital signs, given that
such matters would often be
attended to by an Enrolled Nurse. The statement of Mr Tregoning, one of the
nurses at BMPHC, states that
the Enrolled Nurse, among other things, had the
role of attending to the observations of patients in the acute ward.
However, RN Mannix accepted that
ultimately she was responsible for
that this was done at the
proper frequency.
Mannix, in her statement, notes in mitigation the busyness of the ward, staff
deficiencies (including a skill mix that meant there
was no-one to help her with
medication rounds), her need to attend to the Methadone Clinic between 0900 and
0930 on the two morning
shifts, being present with Dr Valansi when he examined
Patient A on 14 and 16 November, and the times the patient was absent from
ward on 16 November due to other medical appointments.
is not in dispute that the hospital was extremely busy at the time of Patient
A's admission. This is variously recorded throughout
the evidence. RN Jubb, the
Complainant's expert witness, gave evidence in her report, repeated in cross
examination, that the failure
to record observations of Patient A's vital signs
amounted to care that was significantly below the relevant standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of equivalent training and experience and that it
invited her strong criticism.
Jubb did not resile from this position during evidence in chief or cross
examination. She opined that attending to such matters
was elementary to the
practice of nursing.
cross examination Ms Robinson attempted to elucidate from the expert witness
whether, given the heavy workload and factors such
as Patient A having a lot of
time away from the ward on 16 November, her "strong criticism" of RN Mannix's
failings concerning observations
might be confined to just 14 November. The
expert was not swayed to this position, maintaining:
"It is a minimum requirement that we attend to the basic physiological
observations at least on every shift. She was an acute
opinion was not assuaged by the fact that Patient A had been absent from the
ward for much of 16 November, with an eye appointment
elsewhere on the hospital
site in the morning, and a long trip to Bourke for an X-ray that afternoon.
"They are often the circumstances in a rural hospital. That's just how it is
out there, west of the divide. It's busy and we have
one registered nurse in
charge for a whole hospital, that's typical, that's how it
Jubb did acknowledge that in cross examination that a set of observations could
be missed on a busy shift, and that Patient A was
relatively stable and within
normal limits up to 0620 hours on 16 November, 2012, at which time RN Mannix was
not on duty.
was much to-ing and fro-ing in the hearing about the Western NSW Policy
Directive, "Between the
and whether it had
been implemented at the Brewarrina Hospital by November 2012. This policy
specifies recording of observations
at an eight hour minimum in circumstances
where one of the suite of vital signs was sitting in "the yellow zone", or, in
below what would be considered in the range of normal.
or not the "Between the Flags" system was implemented at BMPS, RN Mannix's
amended response to the HCCC's letter of complaint
that at the relevant
time the policy concerning observations was that they should be done and
recorded four times a day on admission
and for the first forty-eight hours, and
then less frequently in accordance with the patient's condition and in
consultation with
the Visiting Medical Officer (VMO).
Robinson made written submissions that the Committee should find that the
conduct regarding the observations on 14 and 16 November
2012 was not
significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of
an equivalent level of training or experience. She noted, in this context, the
expert witness' concession in oral evidence that a set of observations could be
missed on a busy shift, while maintaining in spite
of this that there was a
minimum requirement for observations. Ms Robinson also noted the expert's
concession that Patient A was
relatively stable between 14 and 16 November
it is acknowledged that there were real and present difficulties in terms of
resourcing, staff mix, and general ward busyness,
it cannot be denied that there
was a failure to take and record observations of vital signs. The submissions
made on behalf of the
respondent as to mitigating matters are acknowledged,
however the particular is proved on the balance of probabilities. The Committee
prefers the evidence and submissions of the Complainant, supporting the
contention that such observations amount to basic level nursing
care and duties,
albeit that countervailing factors were present. Failure to ensure that they
were attended to amounts to conduct
significantly below that expected of a
practitioner of the Respondent's level of training and experience.
Mannix was working the morning shift on the 14 November 2012, having worked the
afternoon shift the night before.,
The evidence of RN Mannix, both in her written
her evidence as to a
statement she made on 21.12.2012
and other oral evidence, was that she attended a round with Dr Valansi at about
0800 hours that morning and she was present when
he assessed and examined
Patient A. The evidence continued that during that assessment Patient A told Dr
Valansi about the pain below
the ribcage, but did not give any indication of
chest pain. RN Mannix stated that she asked Patient A to describe her pain and
pointed to her stomach. It was, she reported, her intention to perform a
baseline ECG during her shift, as she was aware that Patient
A was Indigenous
and diabetic, however, due to the busyness of the shift she asked RN Sutherland
at shift handover to attend to the
baseline ECG. RN Mannix had noted that there
had been no ECG on admission. In the a statement,
made on 21.12.2012
contemporaneous document, RN Mannix notes that she requested the ECG "to rule
out any heart problems." RN Sullivan attended
to the ECG during her afternoon
The Complainant draws to our attention the NSW Health Policy Directive
(PD2011_037) on 'Chest Pain Evaluation (NSW Chest Pain
which sets out the
minimum standards for the management of patients presenting with chest pain or
other symptoms of myocardial ischaemia.
The charts within the policy warn:
"Be aware: HIGH RISK ATYPICAL PRESENTATIONS (eg diabetes, renal failure,
female, elderly, or Aboriginal)..."
A, being a letter from the Director of Clinical Governance, Ms Di Wykes (NSW
Health Western NSW Local Health District), dated
30.01.2014, indicates that as
at that date the NSW Chest Pain Pathway had been
implemented.
It is unclear if it had been so at the time of the events concerned in 2012 at
BMPHS. However, that letter does indicated
that at the time of the admission of
Patient A staff were advised on orientation that ECG's are performed on all
admissions to the
facility where risk factors are indicated, such as chest pain
or Aboriginality. The letter also confirmed that, unfortunately, an
performed on Patient A's admission. This is borne out by the evidence of
RN Mannix, who noticed on 14 November that there had not
been an ECG on
admission, and proceeded to arrange one via RN Sutherland.
report of Dr Valansi,
attending physician, corroborates RN Mannix's claim that Patient A had not
reported chest pain, and confirms that he reviewed
"[62] However, when I reviewed the trace, it showed sinus rhythm with a lot
of noise and baseline wander, making it difficult to identify
any acute ST
changes, apart from a possible small Q wave in /II with an inverted T wave in
lead Ill. I considered the Q wave in lead
Ill of uncertain significance, the
isolate T wave inversion [sic] most likely did not reflect ischemia if the QRS
was also negative
(as was the case in lead Ill}. There were no prior ECGs
available for me to compare the result to.
[63] At the time Patient A had not expressed any complaints regarding her
heart such as chest pain or dyspnoea. I knew she was not
on any heart medication
apart from Perindopril for hypertension. In this context, this ECG, apart from
the baseline wander; some
minor background noise; and some minor normal
variations of uncertain significance, was normal."
submission of the Complainant is that the best evidence about what occurred on
14 November is the medical records.
There is no evidence in those records to support that Dr Valansi attended
the patient that day, and the version that he gives in his
statement is
untested. Further, it is submitted, there is no documentary evidence in the
medical records to support that the Respondent
acted upon hearing about the
complaint of pain made by Patient A.
Committee notes Ms Robinson's correct submission on this point that the progress
notes on 14 December at 1500 hours that Patient
A was "seen by VMO this
Robinson further made submissions that the Committee should accept the
Respondent’s contemporaneous account of the events
of 14.11.2012 which was
recorded in the RCA document
21.12.2012 while this information was fresh in her memory.
Committee does accept the evidence that RN Mannix was present with Dr Valansi
when Patient A described the pain below the ribcage
on 14 December, 2015. The
Committee found RN Mannix to be a credible and honest witness, and the matter of
the consultation with
Dr Valansi is corroborated in his statement, albeit
untested evidence by oral testimony at hearing. The progress note entry of RN
Mannix also reports that Patient A had been seen by the doctor that day.
cross examination, the expert witness, RN Jubb, was questioned as to whether she
maintained her opinion that RN Mannix did not
adequately assess and monitor
Patient A's new complaint of upper abdominal and rib cage pain, and that it was
conduct significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner
of equivalent training and experience, inviting her strong criticism. That
did RN Mannix maintain that opinion in circumstances where Dr Valansi was told
of the pain on 14 November, but he did not order
an ECG. RN Jubb
"As the registered nurse in charge of this patient's care, I think we have to
be guided by our own professional judgment and our own
instinct regardless of
what the doctor says or doesn't say, and as autonomous clinicians I guess it is
still our responsibility to
assess and manage the signs and symptoms of the
patients under our
Committee regards this statement as very broad and perhaps somewhat simplistic,
as the implication is that it extends the nurse’s
responsibility beyond that of an attending doctor. The facts, as we accept them,
are that on 14 November, 2012 a new pain
developed that was not apparently
related to the tail bone pain that had been troubling Patient A up to that time.
This was some
sort of discomfort below her rib cage and upper abdomen. Response
to this pain seems to have been somewhat confounded by Patient
A's presentation
during the admission that was characterised by general abdominal discomfort and
associated gut and bowel symptoms.
RN Mannix was with Dr Valansi that day when
this pain was first reported by Patient A, and the doctor, according to his own
examined Patient A at that time.
"During my ward round I reviewed Patient A and asked her how she was feeling.
She said she had a good night but was not feeling well
in her abdomen upon
waking. In accordance with my usual practice, I performed an abdominal
palpation. I was satisfied that her abdomen
was non-tender and there were no
other signs on examination of concern. I checked that her vital signs were all
within normal parameters:
Patient A's VSL was normal at about
at 0600 hours, her blood pressure normal at 110/76, her pulse was normal at 84
bpm, her respiratory rate was 18, and she had
oxygen saturations of 99% on room
I attended the hospital in the afternoon for a ward round. Patient A appeared
well. I examined her abdomen on this occasion, which
unchanged...”
expert witness, RN Jubb, was generally critical of the failure of RN Mannix to
record Patient A’s pain score during any
of her shifts.
she is critical of the failure to exclude the possibility of the pain having its
source in cardiac problems by doing a full
pain assessment. Such pain
assessment, she reports, should include a thorough history and use of a pain
assessment tool.
Committee could not be comfortably satisfied that RN Mannix failed to adequately
assess, monitor and respond to Patient A's complaint
of upper abdominal
rib cage pain on 14 November, 2012 by performing a pain assessment, taking a
full set of vital observations, performing a 12-lead
conclusion might be otherwise had we not determined that there was sufficient
evidentiary support for the contention that RN Mannix
attended the consultation
of Patient A by Dr Valansi on that day. The doctor assessed the pain and
examined Patient A in RN Mannix's
presence. He took a full set of observations
at that time. RN Mannix then arranged for an ECG to be performed by the nurse on
incoming shift. Taking all of these matters into account, the Committee
could not be satisfied to the requisite standard that this
particular had been
proved on the evidence.
Particular 3
The practitioner failed to report Patient A's complaint of
upper abdominal / rib cage pain on 14 November, 2012 to the medical
on the evidence considered in relation to Particular 2, given that RN Mannix was
with Dr Valansi and Patient A when the pain
was reported, the Professional
Standards Committee finds that this particular fails.
Particular 4
The practitioner failed to maintain a fluid balance chart on
14, 15, and 16 November, 2012.
4 fails. There is nothing in evidence that establishes that intra venous (IV)
fluid was charted during RN Mannix's shifts
of 14, 15, 16 November.
evidence confirms that IV fluids were ordered by Dr Valansi on 12 November,
being the date of admission, through to 13 November,
2012. The progress notes
state that the IV fluids should cease once the potassium infusion was complete.
Dr Valansi's statement corroborates
that he ordered (around 12.15pm on 13
November) that the potassium infusion run until the bag was finished, and then
it was not to
be used any
there is no entry in the notes clarifying that the IV infusion had finished, it
can be reasonably inferred that the fluids
ceased around mid-afternoon on 13
November, 2015.
evidence of the Complainant's expert, RN Jubb, was that cessation of the fluids
would normally mean cessation of the fluid balance
in her report, RN Jubb concluded on the basis of the literature, that fluid
balance recording is notorious for being inadequately
or inaccurately completed,
with the major reason for this being staff shortages, lack of training, and lack
Jubb reported that there was no fluid balance chart for the entire admission,
which amounts to conduct falling significantly below
the relevant standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training, but
that it does not invite her strong
was borne out by the evidence at hearing, RN Mannix was not rostered on at the
relevant times when the IV fluid was being infused,
and as such, the particular
Particular 5
On 16 November, 2012 the practitioner failed to advise the
medical officer of Patient A's symptoms as documented by the previous
registered nurse on duty.
particular flows from the events in the early hours of the morning of 16
November, 2012.
progress note entries of relevance are:
16.11.12: 0645hr: NURSING. Pt [patient] did not sleep well last night. Please
refer BSL chart for sugar levels. Around 0540 hrs Pt
complained of pain 5/10
starting below both breasts and radiating to back. More painful while breathing
in and she told she gets
intermittent SOB [shortness of breath] and pain. /UC
removed from left cubital ?[illegible]. Signed Bisymole [Thomas] RN
Add: MO need to review the pt in the morning. Signed: Bisymole [Thomas]
16.11.12: 1800hr NURSING Ambulating around hospital . Went to eye apt
[appointment]. Seen by VMO - oral AB's [antibiotics] charted.
Medication given
Wardsman has taken Pt to Bourke for sacral x-ray. Left
1250hrs. Signed J. Mannix MANNIX (RN)
particular then centres around whether RN Mannix should have specifically
communicated to Dr Valansi the content of the nursing
entry (from the previous
shift) of 0645hours, namely that at around 0540 hours Patient A complained of
pain at a level of 5/10 starting
below both breasts and radiating to her back,
as well as shortness of breath.
Respondent's statement reads:
"I was working a morning shift on 16 November 2012. I asked Dr Valansi to
review Patient A, I do not recall the exact conversation,
however, I was present
when Dr Valansi assessed and examined Patient A at about 0800 hours that
morning. I note that Patient A was
jovial and happy that morning, sitting on
the verandah smoking with other patients ..."
statement then refers to Annexure "D" to the statement, being a copy of a file
note of an interview of the niece of Patient A
by HCCC on 11 March, 2014. This
statement reports that on the morning of 16 November, 2012 Patient A's niece saw
her at the hospital
when the latter came to BMPS for dialysis. Patient A's niece
stated of Patient A that morning:
"...[Patient A] seemed "good". She was walking around, chatting and laughing.
She was going to Bourke that day for an x-ray ...Patient
A rang [her
niece] when she got back from Bourke (at around 4pm) and asked if she could
pick her up the next day, as the doctor was going to let
hospital...”
statement of Dr Valansi reports:
"On 16 November2012, I arrived at the hospital at about 0800 hours to do my
morning ward round. I do not recall precisely when I saw
Patient A. I asked the
on duty about Patient A's condition. I was told that Patient A was
fine the previous evening but had not slept well and
I was asked to review
I was not advised that Patient A had complained of pain, rated as
starting below both breasts and radiating to her back, that she
had pain whilst breathing in and out, intermittent shortness of breath.
recall the nurse specifically asking me to review Patient A due to those
symptoms described above.
When I reviewed Patient A, she was walking along the hospital corridors. She
reported some lower back pain that I considered arose
from her sacral injury.
Patient A did not complain of any chest pain to me or shortness of breath.
On my assessment, her pain was confined to her abdomen, and lower
expert report of RN Jubb cites the Department's Policy Directive PD2012_069,
that health care personnel are responsible for ensuring
they are aware of the
current information about the patient under their care including, where
appropriate, reviewing entries in the
Health Care Record.
this she concludes in her report:
Dr Valansi should have read the nursing progress / clinical
which included the patient's symptoms that had been documented
... on the morning of 16.11.2012.
RN [Bisymole] Thomas should have called Dr Valansi before her shift
and communicated her concerns and clinical findings to Dr
Valansi and requested a review.
RN Mannix should have verbally advised Dr Valansi of Patient A's
as documented by RN Thomas on Friday morning
16.11.12....
...Dr Valansi did need to know that the patient was experiencing these signs
and symptoms [pain below both breasts or pain on inspiration
with shortness of
but it was not solely RN Mannix's responsibility to inform
RN Mannix should have drawn Dr Valansi's attention to Patient A's symptoms
Failure by RN Mannix to verbally advise Dr Valansi of Patient A's
as documented by RN Thomas on the morning of Friday 16.11.12
conduct below the relevant standard of equivalently trained and experienced
practitioners.
conclusion of the expert witness about the Respondent - that the conduct was
below the applicable standard - was confirmed on
cross-examination.
a time of Committee questions to the expert, RN Jubb was asked whether it would
have been reasonable for a nurse to contact
a doctor about an event such as
occurred at 0540 hours on 16.11.2012. RN Jubb responded that it would not have
been unreasonable
to ring the doctor at that time, before the end of the night
shift. She concluded that she would have contacted the doctor herself,
situation, rather than leaving it to the incoming nurse on the morning shift to
oral evidence the Respondent stated that it was her usual practice to notate on
her handover sheet any concerns raised during handover.
The Respondent could not
recall the exact conversation that she had with Dr Valansi when she requested
the morning review, but she
was present when he assessed and examined Patient
Committee cannot be clear as to whether the recorded symptoms of 0540 hours on
16 November were verbally reported to Dr Valansi
by RN Mannix. Dr Valansi says
in his statement that he was not
It is noted that Dr
Valansi's evidence was no tested in the hearing, and that his statement is dated
29.11.2013, almost a year after
the event. Having said this, RN Mannix is not
able to offer confident evidence that she did convey the relevant information to
Valansi when she requested the review. It must also be noted that RN Mannix
did request the review, and an assessment and examination
accordingly took place
some two hours after the recorded event.
factual circumstances of the particular are established on the evidence inasmuch
as the Committee cannot be comfortably satisfied
that RN Mannix did, indeed,
specifically relay to Dr Valansi that the notes indicated that Patient A had
experienced pain of 5/10
rating under the breasts and radiating therefrom, at
around 0540 hours.
is then a question as to whether this amounts to conduct that is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner
of an equivalent level
of training or experience. The expert witness, RN Jubb, found it to be below
such standard, but did not go
so far as to say it was
significantly
can be seen that there was more than one person with responsibilities to access
and convey this information - the registered nurse
from the night shift who
attended Patient A and recorded the events of 0540 hours, and RN Mannix as the
incoming registered nurse
on the morning shift. Finally, Dr Valansi should have
read the last progress note entry during his assessment of Patient A that
these factors, and the relatively short time within which RN Mannix requested
and secured a doctor's review, the Committee would
not consider this conduct to
significantly
below the appropriate standard in the
circumstances.
Particular 6
The practitioner failed to record accurate nursing
Mannix accepts that there was deficit in her nursing notes.
expert witness, RN Jubb, notes that RN Mannix had disclosed in her
correspondence that she was aware of some changes in Patient
A's clinical
condition, but that these findings were not documented in the progress
deemed the failings in relation to the nursing notes amount to conduct below the
relevant standard expected of an equivalently
trained and experienced
practitioner.
Professional Standards Committee agrees and finds that the practitioner failed
to record accurate nursing notes. The Committee
is comfortably satisfied that
the particular is factually proved, but accepts the expert opinion that the
conduct, although below
the relevant standard, is not
significantly below
such standard.
Submissions as to Findings:
COMPLAINANT
Butt, on behalf of the Complainant, made submissions, oral and written, as to
the appropriateness of a finding of unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
submissions as to the standard of proof, after acknowledging the authority of
Lindsay v HCCC
[2005] NSWCA 356
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
, minded the Committee of the judicial warnings that the term
'comfortably satisfied' which was adopted in the
not elevate the civil standard of proof.
Complainant relies on the expert evidence of RN Jubb, whom, it submitted, was a
frank, honest, co-operative witness, with experience
as a rural nurse, and who
was clearly willing to assist.
the suggestions of Ms Robinson, on behalf of the Respondent, at various times in
the hearing, that the expert had not been apprised
prior to hearing of certain
facts or documents in evidence, Ms Butt submitted that such assertions had been
.proved to be incorrect,
and that RN Jubb maintained in re-examination the
opinions detailed in her report. The Committee is satisfied that this reflects
to the true position in relation to the expert's testimony.
in written submissions for the Complainant, the Committee was reminded that the
Professional Standards Committee, itself,
is an expert panel and does not
require expert evidence, referring to the musings of Street CJ (Moffat P and
Glass JA agreeing) in
Kalil v Bray
[1977) 1NSWLR
... The tribunal is in truth an expert panel, and as such it needs no
expert evidence on matters within its particular field of expertise
Its function is to determine in the
light of factual evidence, with or
without supplementation by expert evidence, the proper ...conclusion to be drawn
from such objective
facts as may be established by the
evidence...”
Committee interjects here and notes that, while this is technically correct, the
Complainant is, to put it colloquially, taking
an 'each way bet' on this point,
in as much as it submits its reliance on the expert evidence, but seeks to
depart from it at points
where the· expert has indicated that she did not
consider established conduct departures to be
significant
departures from
the proper standard of conduct (that is, with respect to particulars 5 and
written submissions, Ms Butt initially addressed the difficulty of assessing in
this particular case the baseline question of what
was the appropriate standard
by which the Respondent should be assessed. That is, a finding of unsatisfactory
professional conduct
is triggered under the legislation by conduct that is
deemed to be significantly below the standard reasonably expected
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience."
something of a difficulty with RN Mannix. Technically, she was a very recent
graduate registered nurse, having completed
her degree training and subsequent
registration later in her career.
Ms Butt submits that the Respondent had approximately seventeen years'
experience in patient care, acknowledging that much,
if not all of this
experience was gained whilst working in a part-time capacity. Prior to this
incident, the Respondent had worked
at BMPS for nine years as an Enrolled Nurse,
gaining experience in patient care. It is submitted that the Respondent's
patient care experience should not be compared with a registered
nurse in their first year of practise without
prior experience in a
nursing environment. That is, the submission urges the Committee to regard the
Respondent as someone with a
greater or richer level of experience than a fresh
graduate without prior qualifications and experience in the field of
Butt draws to the Committee's attention the answer of the expert witness, RN
Jubb, to a question from the Chairperson about the
differences between an
Enrolled Nurse and a Registered Nurse. Drawing on her own experience of having
transitioned from an enrolled
nurse to a registered nurse. RN Jubb stated:
"I think an enrolled nurse who transitions to registered nurse brings with
them a wealth of knowledge and experience that they can
build on then as
registered nurses ... enrolled nurses take that with them when they do
transition to registered
Butt acknowledges that the circumstances of work were at BMPS were not ideal,
and RN Mannix was not supported by senior staff when
support was needed. She was
kept busy on a busy shift over a period of days. However, it is submitted, the
circumstances do not detract
from the standard expected of a registered nurse of
the Respondent's experience. The departures particularised allege departures
from conduct that can only be described as "basic nursing
"...Making basic observations, recording them in, the notes, ensuring that
essential nursing records such as observation charts are
routinely and
diligently filled in should be expected of any RN no matter what level of
experience. It follows that such standards
were expected of the Respondent and
in the Commission's submission, were not met with respect to Patient A. This is
a matter where
the respondent has not worked to the standard expected of a nurse
of her training and experience in a number of respects."
Butt drew the Committee's attention to the decision of
HCCC v Farag and Raven
[2014] NSWNMPSC 1.
As elucidated in oral submissions, the Complainant does
not rely on the factual circumstances in the decision (which centres around
failure to complete a fluid balance chart solely) in any way to advance
particular 4 in this matter. The position of the HCCC is
that in that particular
case the failure to attend,
to the fluid balance chart was described as a "basic nursing
intervention”
Committee in that case did not accept that the heavy workload of a shift was a
sufficient justification for the failure of
the two practitioners to read and
maintain the patient's fluid balance chart on two relevant
The Committee was
comfortably satisfied in that case that, taken together, the particulars
amounted to unsatisfactory professional
conduct. That is, it appears to this
Committee, the case was offered as an example to show that a finding of
unsatisfactory professional
conduct may be made even on what might appear at
first blush to be slender grounds - where the departures have been in relation
basic nursing functions, and have occurred in the context of heavy workload
and an understaffed ward.
Ms Butt submits that, in the light of the approach of the Professional Standards
Committee in
HCCC v Farag and
to this Committee to find that particular 1alone amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
It is the submission, ultimately, of the Complainant, however, that the
Committee should be satisfied within the
standard that the
particulars have been proven, individually and collectively, and that a finding
of unsatisfactory professional conduct
should be made.
oral and written submissions for the Respondent Ms Robinson puts that, in
deciding whether the conduct, overall was significantly
below the reasonable
standard, the Committee will consider the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience, and all the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, including the Respondent's role and
responsibilities,
between 14-16 November 2012.
Robinson addressed the appropriate standard by which RN Mannix should be judged,
stating that seventeen years' experience as an
enrolled nurse would not equip
the Respondent for duties as a registered nurse. Although equipped with general
nursing skills, being
an enrolled nurse would not, for example, equip RN Mannix
for the additional responsibilities of supervising medication
administration.
Mannix was a new graduate registered nurse with limited experience in that role,
transitioning from a beginning practitioner to
a registered nurse with ward
responsibilities. There was no educational or mentoring plan in place to assist
the Respondent in her
first year as a new graduate.
13 and 15 November 2012 the Respondent worked as the in-charge nurse of BMPHS.
While she was not paid the in-charge allowance on
14 and 16 November, there was
no Nurse Manager at that time and the Respondent was also in-charge of the
shifts on those dates.
is submitted that it is a mandatory requirement for registered nurses rostered
to work 'in-charge' of shifts at the BMPHS to have
necessary skills and training
to undertake this role in order to protect both the public and the nurse from an
adverse event occurring.
The relevant policy in place at the time dictated that
the minimum requirement for an in-charge role is 2
graduate registered nurse level,
and Transitional Registered Nurses, 1
year post graduate, should
not be rostered in­charge of shifts.
It was submitted orally that the HCCC has ignored the pertinent circumstances
surrounding the case. The Respondent was a new graduate
in November 2011. At the
time of Patient A's admission in November 2012 she had the equivalent of seven
months' full time experience
as a newly graduated registered nurse. She had not
received any additional education or mentoring around her new position. Ms
urges the Committee, in deciding whether the Respondent's conduct,
overall, was significantly below the reasonable standard, to consider
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience and all the circumstances surrounding
the conduct,
including the her role and responsibilities, between 14-16 November,
Robinson notes that the Respondent's oral evidence was that when she raised her
concerns about working in-charge she was assured
by the Health Service Manager
and the Nurse Manager that they were always available on the
is put on behalf of the Respondent that she has, since November 2012, reflected
on her errors and she has made a considerable effort
to improve her practice.
She is now very diligent at checking the observation charts and documenting more
comprehensively.
evidence RN Mannix stated that she has undertaken substantial education, gained
more confidence, and implemented strategies,
such as an acronym, PADDS, which
she uses with her documentation:
"P= if you plan to do something for a patient; A = if you are concerned about
a patient; D = if you discuss anything regarding a patient;
S = if you see or
anything of concern
you must document
Respondent noted in her oral evidence that she requested to attend the First
Line Emergency Care Course ("FLEC") in 2012, 2013,
2014 and 2015, as she
understood this course was necessary for a registered nurse working in BMPHS.
She confirmed that she now has
approval from the Nurse Manage to commence the
six month FLEC course on 29 September
Robinson notes that the case
HCCC v Farag and
put forward by the
HCCC as worthy of consideration when determining whether or not unsatisfactory
professional conduct had been made
out, is distinguishable on the facts. This
is, in the Committee's view and indeed that of the Complainant, correct. Ms
Robinson further
notes that the expert witness in the present case gave oral
evidence that if no IV fluids were going in there was no need for an
input/output.
Robinson further draws the Committee's attention to paragraphs 80 and 81 in
HCCC v Farag and Raven
that the DETECT course is equivalent to the 'Deteriorating Patient'
course available at the College of Nursing. The Committee is pointed
Respondent's oral evidence and her Curriculum
confirming that she
completed the face-to-face DETECT course and TIER 1an TIER 2 courses on 15
March, 2015.
the Committee notes that since December 2012 RN Mannix has completed some
seventy-seven continuing education courses. Many
of these have been done online,
with some being face-to-face
The Respondent gave
evidence that she was able to access a great many online nursing courses and it
is clear from the record that
she has been committed to ongoing education. Her
registration in the FLEC (First Line Emergency Care) course, to commencing 29
2015, is also noted.
closing submissions for the Respondent the Committee is urged to find that BMPHS
failed RN Mannix in November 2012 by placing her
in the in-charge role without
appropriate skills, training and experience to successfully perform this
Committee is also urged to find that the errors made by the Respondent,
Particulars 1, 5 and 6, as a beginning practitioner, do
not amount to
unsatisfactory professional conduct, given all the circumstances, the workload,
duties and responsibilities as in-charge
of shifts and BMPHS between 13 and 16
November 2012.
must be said at the outset that, indeed, that inasmuch as we have found failings
in nursing care by the Respondent, BMPHS and the
Western Area Health Service
also failed RN Mannix. The extension of this may be that the nursing and medical
staff failed Patient
A in some respects during her admission at BMPHS.
Respondent was given the responsibility of being nurse in-charge, in
contravention of the appropriate policy, when she did not
have sufficient
experience as a registered nurse to fulfil that function.
is without taking into account the unfortunate staff shortages that were
operating during Patient A's admission, such that there
was not a nurse manager
on site, and there was a poor skill mix for the task of administration of
medication, acknowledging the statutory
requirements and policy that dictate the
proper and lawful administration of medication. Proper administration of
medication is not
a matter of concern with respect to Patient A, but the lack of
the appropriately qualified nursing staff working that week meant
Mannix's duties were even more difficult and strained.
might suggest that the solution in such circumstances for a registered nurse is
to simply refuse to work under such conditions.
This approach, however, ignores
the realities of rural nursing and the incredible strain under which rural
hospitals habitually function.
Staff cannot simply be procured from thin air,
and hospitals often lack the funding required to create a platform from which a
health service may be consistently delivered.
is, therefore, with a certain degree of sympathy that the Professional Standards
Committee makes the finding of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under
s.130B(l)(a) of the National Law. We do so on the cumulative findings concerning
particulars 1,5 and 6.
the finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct may have been otherwise if
the particulars proved had not centred on matters
of basic nursing duties. For
example, taking and recording regular observations of a patient, particularly
one with indicators of
high risk factors such as Aboriginality and diabetes and
hypertension, cannot be considered in the category of complex or advanced
acknowledging the heavy workload, the difficult circumstances, the lack of
experience as a recent graduate nurse, the failure
of BMPHS to afford RN Mannix
the sort of training and support needed to fulfil her functions (such as the
FLEC course), the improper
positioning of RN Mannix as nurse 'in-charge' in
breach of the area health service's policy, the Committee cannot condone conduct
that amounts to a significant departure from that expected.
is also acknowledged that RN Mannix was not necessarily the only person working
on her shifts charged with the duty of attending
to the matters particularised.
But as the registered nurse on the shift, and, the nurse-in-charge (rightly or
wrongly), the ultimate
responsibility fell her to ensure that proper nursing
care, monitoring, and appropriate information transmission and recording
Particular1
concerning failing to monitor and record observations was proved. This was found
by the Committee to amount to conduct
that demonstrates that the knowledge or
judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner was significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
5 concerning the failure to convey to Dr Valansi the content of the progress
notes as to events from the previous shift
of 16 November 2012 was proved on the
facts, but was not considered a significant departure from the appropriate
standard, in all
the circumstances and in light of the expert evidence.
same finding is made of Particular 6, concerning the failure to record accurate
nursing notes, which was also factually proven.
That is, the conduct
particularised fell below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of
an equivalent level of training
or experience, but not
significantly below,
in the meaning afforded by law.
Committee does not, however, want to convey a stance that defiles the reality
that accurate nursing notes are extremely important.
Particularly in an
understaffed hospital the notes are the core of delivery of good patient care.
If the records are not reliable,
if they omit pertinent events, if they fail to
reflect the ongoing picture of a patient's vital observations, they fail both
patient and the staff, sometimes with grave consequences. Records should be
contemporaneous, accurate and complete. At any time a
health professional should
be able to glean from the patient medical file an accurate profile of progress,
deterioration, or aberration
in medical presentation. If the record is a flimsy
shadow of what is required, the picture of the patient's condition is blurred
fading and serious consequences may flow.
was made in this case as to what should be the relevant level of experience by
which the Respondent's conduct was adjudged. We
have already concluded that RN
Mannix was not to the level of an appropriately qualified nurse 'in-charge',
despite her years of
training in the capacity of an enrolled nurse prior to
registration. In terms of the responsibilities to hand in the relevant period,
we deem her as we would any new graduate nurse, acknowledging that experience as
an enrolled nurse does not equate necessarily to
the demands and added
responsibility of being a registered nurse 'in-charge' of a shift, whether by
design or by default.
much of this is moot inasmuch as the particulars that have been proved do not
fall into the realm of sophisticated or highly
technical matters, but rather
they are in the range of very basic nursing duties, despite the challenges in
the ward at the time.
sad eventuality was that after being transferred to Dubbo Hospital from BMPHS on
18.11.2012, Patient A died on 28.11.2012. It
is not within the responsibility or
concerning Patient A's
care at BMPHS and her subsequent death. There were a
number of people involved in Patient A's care, and it is noted that the
Respondent's
name was not mentioned in the list of staff cited on the relative's
original form of complaint. RN Mannix was part of a health team
at BMPHS caring
for Patient A, whose presentation and symptoms could have been attributed, it
would seem, to a number of causes.
Determination of the cumulative reasons
behind, or circumstances leading to, the death of Patient A naturally lies
outside the brief
of the Nursing and Midwifery Professional Standards
CONSEQUENTIAL ORDERS
finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct triggers under s146B of the
National Law the power of the Nursing and Midwifery
Professional Standards
Committee to, among things, make orders to impose conditions on the
practitioner's registration, order the
practitioner complete a specified
educational course, or make a caution or reprimand.
are fashioned in keeping with the protective, not punitive, functions of the
Committee. As outlined in the treatise on the
relevant law above, the Committee
must consider the protection of the public, maintaining public confidence in the
profession, general
and specific deterrence, and the desirability of making
available to the public any special skills possessed by the
practitioner.
The Committee is
mindful of the need for rural registered nurses, and the scarcity of these much
needed skills in remote communities.
submission of the Complainant is that a clear message should be sent to the
members of the nursing profession concerning the importance
of taking basic
observations, keeping comprehensive documentation and seeking the advice of more
senior staff and/or medical practitioners,
where appropriate.
Complainant asks the Committee to
the practitioner.
Additionally it seek
education and/or mentoring o
rders, as well as an
order requiring
indirect close
on site supervision
practitioner whose registration is free from conditions on practice. There
should be reports from the supervisor to the Council.
The education requested is
completion of a course equivalent to "Clinical Assessment for Nurses" at the
Australian College of Nursing
(or another such course approved by the Nursing
and Midwifery Council). The mentoring is sought for a period of twelve months
to be under a nurse without registration conditions. There should be a
mentoring plan submitted to the Council within four weeks,
for approval, and a
report submitted to the Council every three months.
Professional Standards Committee found RN Mannix to be honest, helpful, and
remorseful. She was ready to concede errors, and,
indeed, did not attempt to
sheet any blame to other members of staff, taking responsibility for the team,
so to speak, on the basis
of her having been the RN in charge at the relevant
Committee has made orders in keeping with the objectives of the legislation. It
was clear at hearing that RN Mannix had learnt
much from the events of November
2012 concerning Patient A. She acknowledged errors, attempted vast
self-education, and modified
is the view of the Committee, imposing further education is not indicated, and
not necessary to protect the public, or to generally
or specifically deter like
conduct, or maintain confidence in the profession. This might be otherwise had
RN Mannix not responded
to the events with attempts at self-improvement. The
Committee did not have cause to disbelieve her genuineness in these matters.
There has been a substantial amount of ongoing professional education, including
registration in the FLEC course. RN Mannix has also
completed the DETECT course,
which focuses on the deteriorating patient. We consider that imposition of a
condition for further education
is onerous and would probably repeat educational
content that had already been completed.
the circumstances of a small rural hospital we consider that the Complainant's
request for supervision is onerous, difficult to
achieve, and of little
practical benefit. We suspect that the result would be that there would be
insufficient appropriately qualified
staff to fulfil this requirement,
particularly as the submission is for a supervisor on site and "working in close
proximity within
a ward or unit with the registrant."
do consider that the participation in a mentoring relationship would be helpful,
particularly in the areas of dealing with the
pressures of rural nursing, where
assistance, equipment, and support can be remote in times of need. In the
circumstances of remote
nursing, such mentoring may take place by way of
telephone, 'skype', or other like communication service. We have not included in
the mentoring order any mandated education or special extra professional
development beyond what is expected of nurses in connection
registration.
in weighing all of the circumstances, the remorse shown by the Respondent, as
well as her considerable efforts at self-improvement
through ongoing nursing
education on her own initiative, we deem it more appropriate to caution rather
than reprimand RN Mannix.
consequential orders are as detailed below.
THE PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE ORDERS:
Professional Standards Committee, having found certain lapses in your
professional conduct and adherence to professional standards,
albeit having
occurred in circumstances of high pressure of work and insufficient support,
cautions you to attend diligently to taking
and recording proper observations of
patients' vital signs as clinically indicated, and to maintain accurate and
complete patient
records in the course of nursing practice.
practitioner's registration is to be subject to the following condition:
registrant must engage in a mentoring relationship for a period of at least 12
months with a registered nurse (Division 10, who
does not have conditions on
her/his practice). The registered nurse mentor must be approved by the Nursing
and Midwifery Council
is not necessary that the mentor work at the same location with the registrant
and mentoring may take place by telephone, Skype,
or other like communication
registrant must:
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW with the name, contact details and
resume of the registered nurse who has agreed
mentor, and
specified in the conditions.
notify the Council of any breach of the conditions, including repeated failure
to attend meetings; and
exchange information with the Council in relation to the registrant's compliance
with the conditions; and
to the Council a copy of the conditions signed by the registrant and by the
mentor indicating awareness of the conditions
authorisation.
Mentoring Plan
registrant must submit a mentoring plan developed in consultation with the
mentor within four weeks of the mentor being approved
by the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of NSW. The plan must detail:
outcomes of the mentoring relationship. The objectives
outcomes must relate to, but are not limited to, the following areas:
regular recording of clinical practice;
for completion of identified activities and outcomes
objectives;
which will demonstrate objectives
outcomes have been met; and a
schedule of meetings with the mentor.
Mentor Report
registrant must provide to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW a mentoring
report which is co-signed by the approved mentor
towards or any achievements of specified objectives or outcomes;
issues affecting progress and a plan to deal with these;
changes to practice resulting from mentoring
The mentoring report must be provided to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of
NSW every six months for a period of at least twelve
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW is the appropriate review body for the
purposes of ss.163-163C of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
where the practitioner's principal place of practice is NSW
125 to 127 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW}
to apply should the practitioner's principal place of practice be anywhere in
Australia other than New South Wales, so that the
appropriate review body in
those circumstances is the relevant National Board.
non-publication order prevents the publication of the identity of the patient
the subject of the complaint, referred to as Patient
A, and of any person whose
identity may reveal or suggest the identity of Patient A.
PUBLICATION
A copy of these Reasons for Decision is to be forwarded by the Registry to:
1. The Respondent and the New South Wales Nurses Association
Health Care Complaints Commission
Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW
Multi-Purpose Health Service
the Council sees fit.
Julie Hughes
Chairperson
CV, Tab 15, pp.3-4, Statement
of Dr Leonel Valansi, dated 29.10.2013, and medical records of Patient A at CV,
Unreported, NSWMT, 3
September 2007.
CV, Tab 11,
RV, Tab 1, pp.2-3,
RV, Tab 1, [15] –
CV 19, p2, Expert
Statement of RN Jubb,
Western NSW Local Health Network, Policy Directive: ‘Between the Flags
– Recognition and Management of the
Patient who is Clinically
Deteriorating”, Document Number WN_PD2001_127, Publication Date – 1
September 2011, (reproduced
in CV, Tab 25, see
CV, Tabs 12 and
CV, Tab 19,
RV, Tab 1, [17],
See [35] of these
Reasons for Decision
See [35] in these Reasons
for Decision
T34, L45-47,
CV, Tab 15,
CV, Tab 15,
RV, Tab 4, Annexure D to
Statement of RN Mannix
Tab 19, p.5
CV, Tab 15,
CV, Tab 19,
Kalil v Bray
CV. Tab 27, p.1, Policy
CV, Tab 27, p1,
Greater Wester Area Health Service policy statement: ‘Area Standard pf
Practice – Roles and Responsibilities
Nursing Team Leader and ‘In
Charge’ of Shift’, August
T55, L46-7; T56,
RV, Tab 1, [21]
(Statement of RN Mannix)
T56, L23-33
[2014] NSWNMPSC
RV Tab 2, Curriculum
Re Dr Parajuli
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (382 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter