URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vivian (a pseudonym) [2025] NSWCATGD 4; (20 June 2025)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Vivian (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATGD 4
Hearing Date(s):
20 June 2025
Date of Orders:
20 June 2025
Decision Date:
20 June 2025
Guardianship Division
V Taylor, Senior Member (Legal)
J McAuliffe, Senior Member
(Professional)
P A Rutledge AM, General Member (Community)
1. A guardianship order is made for Vivian.
2. Kathy of
[Address removed for publication.] is appointed as the guardian.
Melissa of [Address removed for publication.] is appointed as the alternative
4. This is a continuing guardianship order for a period
of six months from 20 June 2025.
5. This is a limited guardianship
order giving the guardian custody of Vivian to the extent necessary to carry out
the functions below.
FUNCTIONS: Kathy
6. Kathy has the
following functions:
To make decisions about
whether or not Vivian can travel to any place outside Australia.
To make a decision about whether or not the passport of
Vivian should be surrendered to the guardian or some other authority the
nominates pending a decision by the guardian concerning
7. The condition of this order
a) Standard Condition
In exercising this role, the
guardian shall take all reasonable steps to bring Vivian to an understanding of
the issues and to obtain
and consider their views before making significant
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – 32-year-old person with autism and borderline
personality disorder – urgent guardianship order sought –
seeking to leave the country to Pakistan that evening – person opposed to
guardianship order – evidence that travel
to Pakistan is unsafe generally,
and particularly in relation to person – concern over lack of supports in
short-term guardianship order made for a period of 6 months
with travel and passport functions only.
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship Act 1987
Cases Cited:
[2004] NSWADTAP 3
Texts Cited:
None cited.
Principal judgment
001: Guardianship Application
Vivian (the person)
(applicant)
Melissa (joined party, proposed guardian)
Kathy (joined party,
proposed guardian)
Public Guardian
Representation:
File Number(s):
NCAT 2025/00235976
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal appointed Kathy as guardian and Melissa as alternative guardian, for a
period of six months, to make decisions about:
whether or not
Vivian can travel to any place outside of Australia; and
whether or not
the passport of Vivian should be surrendered to the guardian or some other
authority the guardian nominates, pending
a decision by the guardian concerning
as set out in the Tribunal’s order.
is 32 years old and prefers to be known as “Viv” and described with
they/them pronouns. We will refer to them as
such throughout these reasons.
is reported to have diagnoses of autism and borderline personality disorder.
They reside at a supported independent living (
) accommodation managed
by a support services provider, in regional NSW.
an urgent application made to the Guardianship Division of the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (
), Andrea, Viv’s mother, requested the
Tribunal make a guardianship order (
Application
). The Application states
that the appointment of a guardian is necessary to prevent Viv from leaving
Australia to go to Pakistan,
on a flight booked to depart that evening.
The hearing
attended the hearing, as did their mother Andrea and two sisters Kathy and
Melissa. For clarity and with no disrespect intended,
we will refer to their
family by their first names.
representative of the Public Guardian also attended the hearing, as did these
members of Viv’s support team:
(1) a support coordinator;
(2) a behaviour support practitioner; and
(3) joining part way through the hearing, the managing director of the supports
services provider which manages the SIL accommodation
in which Viv lives.
GUARDIANSHIP APPLICATION
What did we have to decide?
questions we must decide are:
(1) Is Viv someone for whom we could make an order because they are a
“person in need of a guardian”?
(2) Should we make a guardianship order?
(a) what functions should the guardian be given?
(b) who should be the guardian?
(c) how long should the order last?
Is Viv a 'person in need of a guardian'?
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) provides that the Tribunal may make
a guardianship order for a person if it is satisfied that she is “
person in need of a guardian
person in need of a guardian is “
a person who because of a disability
is totally or partially incapable of managing their or their person
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Act
defines a person with a disability as a
person who is:
(a) intellectually, physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled;
(b) of advanced age;
(c) a mentally ill person within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act
(d) otherwise disabled;
and by virtue of that fact is restricted in one or more major life activities
to such an extent that they require supervision or social
habilitation (i.e.
services to be able to function in the community).
Tribunal reviewed a report from Mr Graham, psychologist and behaviour support
practitioner dated 20 December 2022 (
2022 Report
). The 2022 Report
indicates that Viv has autism spectrum disorder and borderline personality
disorder. Their history includes suicidal
ideation and self-harm; and they
experience current, ongoing distress consistent with anxiety and depression and
poor mental health.
Their medications included anti-depressants.
Viv’s mother and the applicant, confirmed to the Tribunal that Viv was
diagnosed with autism when they were fourteen
or fifteen.
response to this, Viv said “
I don't agree with that,
then stated “
I do struggle with... it takes me two or three times to
meet someone before I know whether they are a good person
”. They did
not put forward any further evidence.
Tribunal accepts Viv’s own evidence about their lack of insight and
struggle to assess risks about people. We also note
that Viv has consistently
resisted the diagnosis of autism. In the 2022 Report, Viv told Mr Graham that
they were diagnosed with Autism when they were 15 years old by their
paediatrician, and they disagreed with this diagnosis
else in the hearing disagreed with the evidence of Viv’s autism and mental
health conditions.
note Viv’s views but prefer the evidence from the 2022 Report, Viv’s
family and support team, which provides a consistent
view that they have autism,
borderline personality disorder and mental health conditions. They also use an
electric wheelchair every
day to mobilise.
Consideration
Tribunal accepts the medical and supporting evidence provided. We are satisfied
that Viv has a disability within the meaning of
Guardianship
, being autism, borderline personality disorder and mental health
conditions.
find that Viv is a “
person who is in need of a guardian
(1) they have some cognitive impairment consequent to autism, borderline
personality disorder and mental health conditions, which
impairs their
decision-making ability;
(2) as a result of these conditions, Viv is restricted in their decision-making,
assessing risk, self-care, problem-solving, mobility
and social isolation, such
that they need significant assistance and support services; and
(3) as a result, they are partially unable to manage their person:
Guardianship Act
Should we make a guardianship order?
deciding whether to make, or not to make, a guardianship order, we must consider
each of the matters set out in
Guardianship Act
(a) the views (if any) of:
(i) the person, and
(ii) the person’s spouse, and
(iii) the person’s carer, and
(b) the importance of preserving the person’s existing family
relationships, and
(c) the importance of preserving the person’s particular cultural and
linguistic environments, and
(d) the practicability of services being provided to the person without the need
for the making of such an order.
decision to make or to decline to make a guardianship order under
Guardianship Act
is a discretionary one, informed by the mandatory
considerations listed in
of that Act and the general principles set out
of that Act:
[2004] NSWADTAP 3
. The matters set
Guardianship Act
have no hierarchy or
at [34]. We are not limited to considering those
Guardianship Act
provides that, in exercising functions under
that Act with respect to people who have disabilities, we must observe the
principles:
(1) the welfare and interests of such persons should be given paramount
consideration,
(2) the freedom of decision and freedom of action of such persons should be
restricted as little as possible,
(3) such persons should be encouraged, as far as possible, to live a normal life
in the community,
(4) the views of such persons in relation to the exercise of those functions
should be taken into consideration,
(5) the importance of preserving the family relationships and the cultural and
linguistic environments of such persons should be
recognised,
(6) such persons should be encouraged, as far as possible, to be self-reliant in
matters relating to their personal, domestic and
financial affairs,
(7) such persons should be protected from neglect, abuse and exploitation,
(8) the community should be encouraged to apply and promote these principles.
The views of Viv
opposed the making of a guardianship order. They told the Tribunal that they
were going to fly to Pakistan that evening because
their fiancé is there,
but they have now cancelled their flights. They have been in a relationship with
a Pakistani resident
called Usman since 7 January 2025. They have never met
Usman in person, only online. Viv and Usman are now engaged.
told the Tribunal that the reason we were all here was because
everyone is concerned for my sanity
”. Viv said they partly
understood their family’s view that they were not “
right decision
” to fly to Pakistan to see Usman. Viv also told us
(twice) this was unfair because their family had never tried to get to know
has met Usman’s cousin Hasaan in person, in Australia. Viv told us that
she met Hasaan “
at the Easter show, or at another event
I think [Hasaan] is the one that mainly wants me to go Pakistan, to
meet my future in laws”
, because “[
Usman]’s mother is
elderly and has Parkinsons
drew the Tribunal’s attention to the Department of Foreign Affairs
) Smartraveller website which provides official travel advice. Viv
told us that the ‘advice level’ for Pakistan is ‘
Reconsider your need to travel
’. Viv considers that this is not the
most serious advice level, which would be ‘
Level 4: Do no
.’ In their view, the DFAT advice means that there is no
absolute prohibition on travel to Pakistan, and they can still travel
providing they have thought twice over about their need to travel.
Tribunal subsequently reviewed the Smartraveller website and noted that DFAT
provides further detail:
(1) for level 3: “
Avoid non-essential travel. At level 3, there are
serious and potentially life-threatening risks. This can make the destination
for tourism and unsuitable for most travellers.
(2) for Pakistan: “
We advise: Reconsider your need to travel to
Pakistan overall due to the volatile security situation and threat of terrorism,
kidnapping,
violent crime and the risk of civil unrest.”
(3) for overlapping risks: “
Different aspects of your identity can
expose you to overlapping forms of discrimination and increase the risks you
might face. This
is sometimes referred to as intersectionality. Aspects of your
identity can include your: ... nationality ...gender...mental health.”
that Viv themselves raised the DFAT Smartraveller advice in the hearing, we
accept that it is relevant. We find that there
serious and
potentially life-threatening risks”
for current travel to Pakistan in
general; and that there are overlapping or intersectional risks which are very
likely to apply
to Viv in particular.
The views of Andrea,
Melissa and Kathy
is Viv’s mother and the applicant. She answered the Tribunal questions in
a clear and measured way. She told us that
she had made the Application because
she believed that Viv was about to fly out to Pakistan to marry Usman. She
considers that Pakistan
is potentially an unsafe place for Viv; and that Viv was
leaving behind a very supportive environment. Her concern is that Viv is
vulnerable and is under pressure from Hasaan to travel to Pakistan. She proposed
Melissa and Kathy as the guardians.
also told us that in her view, an urgent guardianship order should still be
made, in case Viv rebooks the flights. She said
that Viv often trusts people too
much, trusts the wrong people and has a history of providing the reassurance
which people want to
hear, and then going ahead with their plans.
is Viv’s younger sister. She told the Tribunal that even if Viv had
cancelled their flight to Pakistan for that evening,
a guardianship order should
still be made, because she had known Viv to tell different stories and change
plans at the last minute.
She was concerned that Viv might book flights again in
the near future.
said that she was “
genuinely terrified
” for her sister, about
how they might be treated in Pakistan. Because of their conditions, Viv can be
dysregulated and act
inappropriately. Melissa told us about a recent incident
where six police officers were required to restrain Viv. In her view, there
a risk that in a foreign country, Viv might become dysregulated and not be
treated with care.
is Viv’s older sister. She agreed that a guardianship order should still
be made and was still urgent, even if Viv had
cancelled the flights for that
evening. In her view, Viv is very trusting of men, and Kathy was concerned that
someone might take
advantage of them. In Pakistan, Viv would have no support
network. Kathy told us that she had not had any contact with Usman’s
Tribunal also reviewed an undated support letter from Hasaan, entitled
Miss [Vivian] Trip to Pakistan”
. In the letter, he states
that he, Usman and their family will welcome Viv; he will accompany Viv and
ensure her safety”
; he has paid for his own flights; while
acknowledging that Pakistan is “
a country with a complicated
reputation”
, Lahore is a peaceful international city; and he will
ensure Viv’s return to Australia on 30 June 2025, as planned.
letter of support from Hasaan was undated, unsigned and did not provide an
address. Andrea expressed some concern about its provenance.
We find that this
letter does not advance matters in issue and give it little weight. Neither
Hasaan nor Usman attended the hearing.
The importance of
preserving the person’s existing family relationships and particular
cultural and linguistic environments
is well supported by their family, although it is also clear that there are some
complexities in their existing family relationships.
Andrea explained that she
had proposed Melissa and Kathy as the guardians, in order to protect Viv and to
ensure that there was a
balance of views. Towards the end of the hearing, Viv
shouted at Melissa and appeared to blame her because this was the first time
they had spoken in a long time.
making of a guardianship order is likely to place the relationship between Viv
and the guardian under further strain. This is
because Viv is mostly resistant
to a guardianship order which will prevent them from travelling. The Tribunal
considered carefully
the extent to which any tension between Viv and the
guardian would be exacerbated by the making of an order.
was no evidence before us that exercising the discretion to make or not make a
guardianship order would have any material impact
on Viv’s linguistic and
cultural environments.
The practicality of services being
provided without a guardianship order
behaviour support practitioner has been working with Viv as their behaviour
support practitioner since January 2024. He agreed
that a guardianship order was
urgent and should still be made. The behaviour support practitioner indicated
that he was concerned
that in Pakistan, Viv would not be provided with services
and would be entirely dependent on Usman; there were no contingency plans,
including for managing their electric wheelchair which they mobilise with every
also told us that this was the second time Viv had booked flights to fly out to
Pakistan. Previously, Viv had flights booked to
depart for Pakistan on
24 May 2025, but subsequently, on discussion with their support team, they
had started to question that decision
and had either cancelled or altered the
support coordinator has been working with Viv as their support coordinator for
three years. She agreed that a guardianship order
should be made. She told the
Tribunal that Viv has a substantial National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)
support plan, that those
services could not be provided to Viv in Pakistan, and
she would be very concerned about how Viv would cope with less support.
managing director of the supports services provider which manages the SIL
accommodation in which Viv lives joined the hearing
part way through and told
the Tribunal that services would continue to be provided to Viv that night,
there would be a support worker
with them, and they would be safe.
Consideration
considered carefully whether the Tribunal should exercise the discretion to make
a guardianship order.
factors weigh against the granting of a guardianship order:
(1) Viv expressed opposition to a guardianship order and we take their views
(2) it is a mandatory consideration that Viv’s freedom of decision and
freedom of action should be restricted as little as
Guardianship
(3) we also acknowledge that in the hearing, in response to the Tribunal’s
questions, Viv showed a degree of insight and recognised
their family’s
concern for their safety.
on balance, we decided to make a guardianship order because:
(1) safety concerns about travel
– we find that there are
significant safety concerns about current travel to Pakistan in general; and
that there are overlapping
or intersectional risks which are very likely to
apply to Viv in particular;
(2) vulnerability
– we find that Viv is vulnerable and accept the
evidence (including Viv’s own evidence) about their quick trust and lack
of insight about people, and their inability to assess and weigh risk and
safety. We find that this makes Viv especially vulnerable
in the context of
pressure from Hasaan to travel to Pakistan, and the entirely online relationship
and potential marriage with Usman;
(3) lack of insight
– we were also satisfied that, despite
acknowledging their family’s concerns in the hearing, overall Viv
continues to
demonstrate very poor insight into their vulnerability, as well as
consistently poor or impaired judgment regarding their exposure
to exploitation
and associated financial and personal risks;
(4) reliance on services
– we also accept the evidence of
Viv’s support team, which provides a consistent view that they rely on a
substantial
package of supports, which they would be without if they travel
overseas. We consider that a guardianship order would facilitate
the continued
provision of services in a sustainable and ongoing way; and
(5) currency of risk
– although Viv told us that they have
cancelled their flights, we find that the above risks remain current. We accept
the evidence
that Viv has recently rebooked flights to Pakistan and may do so
decided to make a guardianship order for Viv because we were satisfied that they
are a person in need of a guardian, and that this
decision gives paramount
consideration to their welfare and interests.
What functions
should the guardian be given?
decided to give the guardian the functions of travel and passport. Decisions
immediately.
Who should be the guardian?
proposed Melissa and Kathy as the guardians for Viv, and she was also not
opposed to the Public Guardian being appointed.
appoint Kathy as guardian and Melissa as an alternative guardian, we must be
satisfied that they meet the criteria in
Guardianship Act
in that they must:
(1) have a personality generally compatible with the personality of Viv;
(2) have no undue conflict of interest (particularly financial) between their
interest and those of Viv; and
(3) be able and willing to exercise the functions of the order.
told the Tribunal that if we appointed a guardian, Kathy should be appointed,
with Melissa as an alternative guardian. Viv was
very opposed to the Public
Guardian being appointed.
find that Melissa and Kathy have personalities which are generally compatible
with the personality of Viv.
was no evidence before the Tribunal about any conflicts, including financial
conflicts, that would prejudice either Melissa
and Kathy. The Tribunal heard
that both Melissa and Kathy were willing and able to act as guardians, and would
work together.
are satisfied that Melissa and Kathy meet the requirements, and we appoint for
Viv – Kathy as their private guardian; and
Melissa as their alternative
How long should the order last?
Tribunal decided to make a reviewable order for six months.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
11 August 2025 - In the catchwords in the cover sheet the word "woman" was
changed to the word "person."
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (275 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter