URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDRGC/2002/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Buttigieg [2002] NSWDRGC 2 (26 June 2002)
of New South Wales
R v Buttigieg
[2002] NSWDRGC 2
Buttigieg, John Anthony
FILE NUMBER(S) :
0023 of 2002
His Honour Judge Neil Milson at Drug Court
CATCHWORDS:
:- definition of eligible person
- offence involving violent
- whether s5(2)(b) applies to offences not before the Court
exercise of District Court or Local Court jurisdiction s24
- existence of
outstanding bonds before other courts
LEGISLATION CITED:
Drug Court Act 1998
CASES CITED:
Chandler v. DPP
[2000] NSWCA 125
(2000) 113 A Crim R 196
Bull v. Attorney General (NSW)
[1913] HCA 54
(1913) 17 CLR 356
R. v Ahmad [2001]NSWDRGC 7;
R. v. Strbik [2002] NSWDRGC
6 June 2002
DATES OF HEARING:
26 June 2002
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
26 June 2002
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES:
Regina: D. Muddle, Director of Public Prosecutions N.S.W.
P. Johnson, Legal Aid Commission of N.S.W.
1. The applicant seeks entry to a Drug Court
program after having been referred from the Parramatta District on 7 February
in respect of a number of offences.
2. The transcript of the
proceedings of the District Court on 7 February 2002 makes it quite clear that a
breach of bond matter, which
was also before the District Court, was being
adjourned to the Drug Court as a District Court.
3. It was understood by
those who were present and involved in the proceedings on that day, including
Prosecution and Defence as well
as her Honour, that the Drug Court would have
had no power to deal with the offence where the bond has been breached because
an offence involving violent conduct, and it was excluded from the Drug
Court jurisdiction because of the provisions of
and 8 of the
Court Act 1998
(hereafter the Act).
4. Because the breached bond exists,
the present and somewhat limited argument in respect of this applicant is that
he is not an eligible
person within the meaning of
section 5(2)
5. There is no dispute that the offences to which the bond relates
are offences involving violent conduct.
(2)(b) of the Act provides
that a person is not an eligible person if the person is charged with
“(b) an offence involving violent conduct or sexual
6. The real question is whether the existence of
that bond for enforcement, or by extension any other charge before another
renders the person not an eligible person to enter a Drug Court
7. It is also argued by the Crown that because the matter is
before this Court it is a matter that must be regarded as having been
of the Act, although that clearly was not the intention of her
8. It has been the practice of this Court throughout its
existence to exercise Local Court and District Court jurisdiction, which
by virtue of
of the Act, in respect of matters which come before the
Court in one way or another. The Act implies that there is more than one
which cases can come before it. They can be referred under section 6, but
section 7(4) makes it clear that when a person is
being dealt with for an
offence which has been referred under section 6 the Court
the same time convict and sentence the offender for any other offence to which
he has pleaded guilty, ...... whether
or not the person has been referred to the
Drug Court under section 6 in relation to that other offence.”
9. The practice of the Court is to call all outstanding cases in, ie. to
to this Court
and, when they have been adjourned here, to dealt with them. Should one of those
offences be an offence which is excluded
because of the violent conduct
provisions, the Court on occasions has elected to deal with those matters,
exercising District Court
or Local Court jurisdiction, in a fashion that has not
impeded the entry of the person onto a Drug Court program. And it was with
in mind that this bond here was referred.
10. A similar argument was
raised in the matter of R. v Ahmad
[2001] NSWDRGC 7
where cases which were not
referred were at another court. It was argued there that the existence of those
cases rendered the person
ineligible to enter a Drug Court program.
The point is made in the argument before me by the Crown that at all stages the
Court is dealing with a
who is an eligible person or who is not an
eligible person rather than a
that is an eligible charge or not an
eligible charge.
12. In the matter of Ahmad I gave reasons which did not
canvass in detail all of the submissions which had been made and which did
convince me, and I held that the existence of a charge elsewhere was not
sufficient to render a person ineligible to enter a
Drug Court program. I will
expand the reasons today why I consider that decision to be correct.
I acknowledge many of the things which are raised by the Crown on this question
of eligibility. It is clearly one of the underlying
philosophies of a Drug Court
program that eligible offenders are promptly identified and placed within
treatment. That has also been
identified as to one of the success factors in
Drug Court programs. There I refer to publications of the United Nations Drug
program key elements and success factors which were published following a
1999 gathering sponsored by United Nations looking at Drug
Courts. Clearly there
are reasons why people should be put on program quickly.
Ahmad’s case the charge that was not before this Court was a charge to
which the offender was pleading not guilty. I
held that the fact of the
applicant exercising his right to maintain a plea of not guilty, given the
presumption of innocence that
goes with criminal cases, was not a factor of
itself that should prevent the person coming before the Court.
further ruled that if the Court considered that the existence of those other
charges or the prosecution of them before another
court was so distracting or
disruptive that the person could not properly do a Drug Court program, the Court
had the option not to
allow the person to enter a program under its general
discretion.
16. The Crown argues that other charges elsewhere are serious
charges and can take a long time to come before a Court. That is a proposition
which the defence contests, and I do not accept. The fact is that an offence
which involved violent conduct can in fact be of the
most minor type to which a
plea of guilty might be going to be entered in the Local Court some time in the
future. It could be one
of that new found “trifecta” of offences
that includes intimidating police officers. This Court has recently found that
threat of violence amounts to violent conduct and therefore is a section 5(2)
matter. (R. v. Strbik NSW Drug Court 6 June 2002)
17. Of course, it is
quite clear that it was not the intention when the Act was introduced that minor
matters such as that exclude
people’s entry. What was intended was that
people who have a violent disposition be prevented from entering into the Drug
program. And following suggestions in this Court it is anticipated that in
the future the legislation might more appropriately reflect
question is whether the existence of those charges makes the person ineligible.
Section 6 provides
“(2) It is the duty of a court before which a
person is charged with an offence or to which a person appeals against a
imposed by some other court:
(a) to ascertain whether the person appears to be an eligible person, and
(b) if so, to ascertain whether the person is willing to be referred to the
Drug Court to be dealt with for the offence, and
(c) if so, to refer
the person to the Drug Court to be dealt with for the offence.”
19. It seems to me that it is an
available reading of those words to look, not at whether they are eligible
charges, but whether the
person is an eligible person in relation to the charges
which are referred, and it is possible for there to be unreferred charges
do not reflect on eligibility.
20. The reason why I believe there is that
ambiguity within the legislation lies within sections 7(4) and 8(5) which each
“A person who is convicted and sentenced by the Drug
Court under this section with respect to an offence for which the person
been referred to the Drug Court under section 6 may at the same time be
convicted and sentenced for any other offence to which
he or she has pleaded
guilty (other than an offence referred to in section 5 (2)), whether or not the
person has been referred to
the Drug Court under section 6 in relation to that
other offence.”
21. The wording there envisages that even
though the person is entering into a Drug Court program, section 5(2) offences
the less exist, which cannot be dealt with by the Drug Court. This
argues against the suggestion that the mere existence of those
charges elsewhere
is a factor that renders the person ineligible to enter a Drug Court program.
22. I accept that the Act is not clear nor explicit. How should the
ambiguity be determined? The answer to that comes from the concept
being legislation having beneficial purposes within it and, whilst
Chandler’s case (Chandler v DPP
[2000] NSWCA 125
(2000) 113 A Crim R 196)
has been quoted
as the authority, the real authority for that proposition comes from Bull v the
Attorney General of New South Wales
(NSW)(1913)
[1913] HCA 54
where the concept was
explained in these terms at page 384:
“The correct way of reading
legislation where there is such an ambiguity is to construe them generously. Not
that the true signification
of the provision should be strained or exceeded, but
that it should be construed to give the fullest relief with which the fair
of its language will allow”.
23. It continues to be my view, that the words in section
It is the duty of a court before which a person is charged
with an offence or to which a person appeals against a sentence imposed
other court
are intended to imply that the offence is before
that court. If there are charges elsewhere they of themselves do not render a
ineligible. It remains a matter for consideration under the Court’s
discretion as to whether the person will be permitted into
a program, or if the
matters are referred from another court for further consideration as to whether
the person will become eligible
24. The final point that has been
raised in this argument today is whether court orders such as bonds or community
service orders
which are current, or which have been revoked, or are liable to
be revoked are “charges” before a court. If s6 is intended
exclusive, then they would not be a “charge”. I have little doubt
that it was intended that sections 7(4) or 8(5)
would enable the Drug Court to
deal with those matters which warranted being re-sentenced when it dealt with
outstanding cases.
25. It would be inappropriate for Drug Court
5(2) and further that it would also be inappropriate for the Court to
exercise its jurisdiction under section 7(2) were the bond
one that had been
imposed following a plea of not guilty in another jurisdiction.
this particular case I hold that the bond has not been referred to the Drug
Court under s 6; and that it is before me to exercise
District Court
matter here. How the court might exercise
that jurisdiction will depend largely
on the court considering its discretion under
section 7(2)(b)
as to whether, given that the matter appears on the antecedents of the
offender, it is appropriate for the person to participate
Matter adjourned for further consideration in light of these
findings and other issues on 23rd July 2002
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (28.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter