URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2013/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v KREFT (No. 3) [2013] NSWPST 1 (28 May 2013)
PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL
SOUTH WALES
MATTER NUMBER: PSY 004/2010
PS0001018222
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 167
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) No. 86a
REASONS FOR DECISION
COSTS ONLY)
IN THE MATTER OF
STEPHEN FRANK
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
_________________________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Kreft (No. 3)
[2013] NSWPST
PARTIES: Health Care Complaints Commission (NSW)
(Complainant)
represented by Mr T Saunders of Counsel, instructed by Ms P Hook, Solicitor
Stephen Kreft
(Respondent)
self – represented as to
costs. Previously represented by Mr P Strickland of Senior Counsel, instructed
by Ms S Doherty, Solicitor
- HWL Ebsworth Lawyers.
FILE NUMBER: 004/2010
CORAM: Ms Joanne Muller
(Chairperson)
Ms Kristin Young (Psychologist
Dr Megan Brock (Psychologist Member)
Greenaway (Lay Member)
DATE OF DECISION: 28 May 2013
The Tribunal previously made findings of unsatisfactory
professional conduct with respect to Particulars 1.1, 1.2, 1.3.1, 1.3.2, 1.4,
3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 and professional misconduct with respect to Particulars 1 - 4,
and 5, 6 and 7 (
HCCC v Kreft (No. 1)
). The Tribunal subsequently Ordered
that the Respondent was reprimanded, that he was suspended for a period of six
months and thereafter
that various conditions were placed upon his Registration
for minimum periods of two to five years (
HCCC v Kreft (No. 2)
decision deals with the issue of costs alone – Respondent to pay costs of
the HCCC in the sum of $60,000.
CATCHWORDS: registered psychologist – unsatisfactory professional
conduct – professional misconduct – two female
inappropriate conduct during counselling sessions – failure to maintain
professional boundaries – inappropriate
personal relationship –
‘without prejudice offers’ to settle – applicability to
protective jurisdiction –
‘disentitling conduct’.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) No. 86a (National Law – NSW) –
s139B, s139E, s226(3),
schedule 5D – clause 7 & 13.
CASES CITED: HCCC v Kreft (No. 1)
[2011] NSWPST 2
; HCCC v Kreft
[2012] NSWPST 1
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR
Latoudis v Casey
(1990) 170 CLR 334
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
Arian v Nguyen
[2001] NSWCA 5
Keddy v Foxall
[1955] VR 320.
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Only as to costs)
Introduction
Tribunal previously held an Inquiry into complaints made by Ms Karen Mobbs,
Director of Proceedings, Health Care Complaints Commission
(HCCC), dated 3
November 2010, in relation to a registered psychologist, Stephen Kreft (the
Respondent). The Inquiry proceeded as
a ‘two phase’ process as a
result of an application of the Respondent made after the commencement of the
Inquiry. The
first phase dealt with findings with respect to the Particulars and
the Complaints and ‘phase two’ dealt with Orders.
Respondent’s application at the end of ‘phase two’ that the
issue of costs should be dealt with separately,
and only after Protective Orders
were published.
document deals with the Costs Order only (being the only issue left unresolved).
The Tribunal proceeded to deal with this matter
‘on the papers’,
with the agreement of both parties subsequent to the exchange of comprehensive
written submissions made
by both parties.
The Complaints
Complaint alleged that Mr Stephen Kreft, being a person registered as a
psychologist under the Act:
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
section 139B of the National Law, in that the psychologist
(i) demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or
purported practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
At all material times between about 1 February 2008 and about 12 July 2008
the psychologist was employed as the principal psychologist
at the NSW Anxiety
Disorders Treatment Centre.
Client A was under the care of the psychologist between about 1 February 2008
and about 12 July 2008.
psychologist failed to observe proper professional boundaries in relation to
Client A in that the psychologist engaged in inappropriate
discussions of a
personal nature with Client A in which:
1.1 He commented on Client A's appearance in that:
1.1.1 He complimented Client A about her appearance referring to her petite
size, her short height and thin build and likening her
to his girlfriend Client
1.1.2 Commented on Client A wearing Bonds underwear and said that his
girlfriend wore those.
1.2 He asked Client A to comment on his physical appearance;
1.3 He disclosed details of his personal life including:
1.3.1 The number of sexual partners he has had, namely that he had slept with
eighty people; and/or
1.3.2 That his girlfriend, Client B, would have her girlfriends over and they
would sleep in the same bed together; and/or
1.3.3 That he had been in love five times; and/or
1.3.4 He thought about homosexuality when he was younger but was straight;
1.3.5 He and his girlfriend, Client B, had waited the appropriate amount of
time of two years before they entered into a personal
relationship; and/or
1.4 When discussing Client A's sexual relationship with an older man the
psychologist stated "You and I could do it over the desk"
or words to that
effect and then said that he was joking.
practitioner failed to follow or observe appropriate therapeutic practice and/or
failed to observe proper professional boundaries
in that during counselling
sessions on or about 10 and 22 April 2008 the psychologist made a request of
Client A for photographs
of her and obtained from the client a photograph of her
head and shoulders and a photograph of the client in her underwear which
was to be for a study or exercise whereby other people would rate Client A's
appearance.
practitioner failed to follow or observe appropriate therapeutic practice in
that he failed to record in Client A's clinical notes
the request or acceptance
of photographs or the exercises discussed with Client A on or about 10 April
2008 or 22 April 2008 referred
to in Particular 2 above.
psychologist failed to maintain the confidentiality of Client B in that he
disclosed to Client A that his girlfriend Client B,
who was known to Client A,
was a previous client and that he had "cured her".
At all material times between about 5 July 2006 and about 8 August 2006 the
psychologist, was employed as the principal psychologist
at the NSW Anxiety
Disorders Treatment Centre.
Client B was under the care of the psychologist between about 5 July 2006 and
Between August and December 2006 the psychologist sought and/or obtained
advice in relation to his feelings for Client B from senior
colleagues Dr Amanda
Gordon, Ms Cheryle Clothier, Dr Anthony Nicholas and Mr Robert Bust.
psychologist failed to observe proper professional boundaries in relation to
Client B in that:
5.1 The psychologist engaged in inappropriate discussions of a personal
nature with Client B in that on about 9 August 2006, at the
commencement of the
counselling session with Client B, in response to the client saying, "I am
feeling attracted to you. I can't
get you out of my thoughts. I don't want you
to send me off to someone else", that psychologist said "We have a problem now
I have feelings for you as well" or words to that effect; and/or
5.2 On about 10 August 2006, the psychologist allowed Client B to enter his
motor vehicle and travelled to and attended a cafe with
Client B; and/or
5.3 After 9 August 2006 the psychologist spoke with Client B by telephone in
relation to personal matters not concerning the therapeutic
relationship;
5.4 On about 1 September 2006 the psychologist kissed Client
after 11 December 2006 the psychologist entered into an inappropriate personal
and sexual relationship with Client B.
When after 11 December 2006 the psychologist entered into an inappropriate
personal and sexual relationship with Client B he did
so contrary to the advice
of senior colleagues including Dr Amanda
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of section 139E
of the National Law, in that the psychologist has:
(i) demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or
purported practice of
psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
As per Complaint One.
Suppression Order
Tribunal made Orders during ‘phase one’, in accordance with Clause 7
of Schedule 5D of
National Law – NSW
, that the name and any details
that tend to identify Client A and Client B not be published. A schedule marked
‘Annexure B’
containing names suppressed will be attached only to
the original Decision and the copies that are forwarded to the parties. This
schedule should not be reproduced if copies of the Decision are made for any
purpose other than to provide it to an appeals court.
The parties are directed
to take care to ensure that the schedule is not copied. If the transcript of the
proceedings is legally
provided to any entity, the Registry must ensure that it
is appropriately de-identified in accordance with the annexed schedule.
making this Order, the Tribunal notes that details contained in the series of
Reasons for Decision documents which identify Client
B as the Respondent’s
current partner and such identification is not suppressed.
witnesses gave evidence in this matter as it proceeded, by consent of both
parties, on the papers.
Documentation
Tribunal received written submissions (as annexed hereto) from both parties as
well as the documentation referred to by the Respondent
in paragraph 14 of his
written submission.
Relevant Law
Tribunal notes that the National Law makes the following provisions regarding
costs at Clause 13 of Schedule 5D as follows :
Clause 13 Tribunal may award costs [NSW]
(1) A Tribunal may order the complainant (if any), the registered health
practitioner or student concerned, or any other person entitled
(whether as of right or because leave to appear has been granted) at an inquiry
or appeal before the Tribunal to pay costs
to another person as decided by the
(2) When an order for costs has taken effect, the Tribunal is, on application by
the person to whom the costs have been awarded,
to issue a certificate setting
out the terms of the order and stating that the order has taken
(3) The person in whose favour costs are awarded may file the certificate in the
District Court, together with an affidavit by the
person as to the amount of the
costs unpaid, and the Registrar of the District Court must enter judgment for
the amount unpaid together
with any fees paid for filing the
certificate.
such the Tribunal has a general discretion to award costs. This does not mean
that the power is exercised in an unfettered or arbitrary
a successful party will have a ‘reasonable expectation’ of being
awarded costs against the unsuccessful party.
provisions of the National Law mirror the provisions in the previous
legislation, which was in similar terms to that in the
Medical Practice Act 1992
which was considered by the Court of Appeal in
Ohn v Walton
There is nothing in the Second Reading Speech of the National Law that
would displace reliance on the interpretation placed upon
the terms of the
legislative provisions in a manner inconsistent with the principle in
. The High Court clearly stated that the purpose of making a costs
order is to compensate the successful party rather than being
a punishment for
the party against whom the order is made – see
Latoudis v Casey
(1990) 170 CLR 334.
Tribunal accepts the submission of the HCCC that the discretion must be
exercised ‘judicially’. Further, it should
be exercised
according to rules of reason and justice, not according to private
opinion ... benevolence ... or sympathy’
Williams v Lever
presumption will generally only be displaced where there has been some sort of
disentitling conduct on the part of the successful
Oshlack v Richmond
River Council
[1998] HCA 11
Arian v Nguyen
[2001] NSWCA 5
to the considerations in this matter, it has been held that the disentitling
conduct does not necessarily need to amount
to misconduct and may simply be any
'calculated to occasion unnecessary expense'
Keddy v Foxall
[1955] VR 320
relevant law is substantially set out in the submissions made by the parties as
annexed hereto.
Background Material
background material is recorded in
HCCC v Kreft
HCCC v Kreft
This document
should be read in conjunction with these two earlier Reasons for Decision
oral evidence was given during this phase of the Inquiry. The matter proceeded
on the basis of the submissions and the additional
documentation provided by the
Respondent referred to in paragraph 14 of his submission.
Submission of the HCCC re Costs
HCCC provided the Tribunal with a written submission dated 11 October 2012, a
copy of which is annexure A to this Reasons for
Decision document.
Tribunal accepts the legal principles set out in this document. The Tribunal
further accepts the statements of facts and circumstances
regarding this
particular matter as set out in the submission. The Tribunal leaves
consideration of the question of whether or not
there has been any disentitling
conduct on the part of the HCCC until later in this document.
Submission of the Respondent re Costs
Respondent provided the Tribunal with a written submission regarding costs dated
22 November 2012 a copy of which is annexure
B hereto. Subsequently, in March
2013, at the request of the Tribunal, the Respondent provided copies of the
documents to which he
made reference in paragraph 14 of his submission.
respect to paragraph 1 of the Respondent’s Submission, the Tribunal notes
that the application to hold the Inquiry as a
‘two phase’ process
was made after the Inquiry had commenced. The Tribunal is further of the view
that whether or not
the ‘two phase’ process is or is not aligned
traditional legal process’
is not relevant to the
issue to be determined herein.
Tribunal refers to the Respondent’s assertion in paragraph 2 of his
Submission that the Tribunal
that the parties
attempt to negotiate a costs agreement. While this may have been in the mind of
the Respondent, there was in fact
no such direction made by the Tribunal. The
Tribunal notes that paragraph 127 of
HCCC v Kreft (No. 2)
The Tribunal notes the submission made by Senior Counsel for the
Respondent that it was essential to reserve the matter of costs until
handing down of this Reasons for Decision. The Tribunal therefore reserves on
the matter of costs.
Tribunal also notes that during the Respondent’s oral submissions in
‘phase two’, the question of when submissions
as to costs should be
made was raised. The parties were granted a short adjournment to allow the
parties to confer on this matter.
After the adjournment, Senior Counsel for the
Respondent submitted that it would only be appropriate to consider a costs order
the parties had had an opportunity to read the Tribunal’s Reasons
for Decision and Protective Orders and then afforded an opportunity
further submissions (see around T1005-T1006). Counsel for the HCCC indicated
agreement with this position. The Tribunal considered
that this course was
unusual but acceded to the parties’ request and reserved on the issue of
regard to the submission made in paragraph 3, the Tribunal is of the view that
the financial circumstances of the Respondent
are not a relevant consideration
with respect to the determination of costs. This Tribunal is of the view that
the financial and
personal circumstances of a party are not appropriate
considerations in the exercise of the discretionary power regarding costs.
any case, it is an exceptional situation if the Respondent has not been placed
in a position of financial stress and personal
difficulties by virtue of the
proceedings.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent has represented himself with respect to the
determination of costs by the Tribunal. As is illustrated
by the submission
annexed, the Respondent has provided a lengthy and comprehensive submission (see
paragraph 4 of the Respondent’s
submission) that covered appropriate
matters for the purpose of the matter under consideration.
Tribunal notes the submission made by the Respondent in paragraphs 5 and 6 and
agrees that the relevant question for the Tribunal
to determine is whether there
has been any disentitling conduct on the part of the HCCC that would influence
the exercise of the
discretion to award costs.
respect to the submissions made in paragraph 8, the Tribunal notes that the
dates for the Inquiry were set at a Directions Hearing
held on 24 November 2010.
The Tribunal further notes that the Respondent made certain (rather than
substantial) admissions on 5 May
2011 in a document called a
‘response’. At no time did the Respondent provide a comprehensive
statement to the Tribunal.
16 May 2011, being the day before the commencement of the Inquiry, the
Respondent made a further ‘response’ wherein
he made admissions with
respect to significantly more of the Particulars and the Complaint i.e. he made
admissions with respect to
matters denied in the 5 May 2011 response. This
further ‘response’ document was not available to the Tribunal until
commencement of the hearing. These admissions fell short of the entire
complaint. As outlined in the Respondent’s submission,
six Particulars
were not admitted and professional misconduct was only admitted with respect to
respect to the submission made in paragraph 9, the Tribunal is of the view that
the making of admissions for the purpose of narrowing
issues requiring
exploration during the Inquiry is an appropriate course. The Tribunal is further
of the view that there is no doubt
that there is merit in the Respondent making
appropriate admissions, particularly if this results in there being no need to
the victims of the misconduct and to reduce the length of the Inquiry. This
did not occur in the current matter as the Respondent
did not make full
admissions of all Particulars and of all of the Complaints.
respect to the last sentence of paragraph 9 of the Respondent’s
Submission, the Tribunal repeats the view that the personal
circumstances,
including the insurance coverage available to the Respondent, are not a proper
consideration for this Tribunal.
Tribunal accepts that the facts recounted in points a), b), c), and d) of
paragraph 10 are essentially correct. However, the Tribunal
does not accept that
there is an inevitable conclusion that at least two days of ‘phase
one’ could have been avoided
had the document been provided prior to the
commencement of the Inquiry.
Tribunal notes that the HCCC responds to the submission made in paragraph 11 of
the Respondent’s submission. It does appear
to the Tribunal that the HCCC
provided adequate further and better particulars regarding the position it would
take with respect
to the Particulars of Complaint regarding Patient A prior to
the commencement of the Inquiry.
this point it notes that, once a complaint comes before a Tribunal, it is a
matter for the Tribunal to decide whether leave should
be granted to amend a
complaint (including the addition or subtraction of particulars or complaints).
There is a public interest
in the running of a full and comprehensive Inquiry
into the conduct of a practitioner. Indeed, a tribunal exercising a protective
appropriately address all of the conduct identified during
the course of an
Inquiry. Furthermore, if it did not have the statutory powers to deal with
certain aspects of the conduct, then
it is incumbent upon that tribunal to refer
the matters on appropriately. The Tribunal is in no way critical of the
Respondent for
not appreciating the distinct differences between cases
determining individual rights (such as in civil cases) and cases in a protective
Respondent did not make full admissions the maintenance
of the Particulars and
the Complaints by the HCCC was not, and is not, conduct that can be considered
as disentitling conduct in
the circumstances of this matter. At this point the
Tribunal also notes that whether the admissions were, in the Respondent’s
view, made with respect to the
‘most serious of the particulars’
does not result in the Tribunal forming the view that these are the most
serious particulars. The Tribunal is an expert body that
is required to consider
the conduct in light of the accepted ethical standards of the profession and to
maintain high ethical standards
in the profession.
respect to paragraph 12 of the Respondent’s Submission, the Tribunal
accepts the submissions made by the HCCC in the Submission
in Reply at
paragraphs 1 to 10. The Tribunal emphasises that the late admissions of the
Respondent still left a Complaint and significant
Particulars not admitted and
that the matters not admitted were serious.
this point the Tribunal also emphasises that it has an obligation to be
satisfied for itself that any particulars and complaints
admitted during an
Inquiry have been appropriately admitted. Further, the Tribunal needs to gain an
understanding of the nature and
severity of the conduct admitted so as to be
able to fashion orders appropriately protective in the circumstances. This is
be applied once a plea of guilty has been entered for particular
respect to Particular 13 of the Respondent’s Submission, the Tribunal
accepts the submissions made by the HCCC in Submissions
in Reply at paragraphs
13 to 16. Further, the Tribunal notes that it was open on the findings made by
the Tribunal for orders of
the nature sought by the HCCC to have been made. A
proper reading of the Tribunal’s Reasons for Decision
HCCC v Kreft (No
can leave no doubt that had there not been the effluxion of time between
the two phases, the Respondent would not have had the opportunities
himself that enabled the Tribunal to find the level of comfort required to not
proceeded with de-registration.
14 to 17 of the Respondent’s Submission deals with
prejudice offers’.
Paragraph 14 of the Respondent’s submission
refers to further documents. These documents were subsequently provided to the
Tribunal. The documents include an email dated 13 May 2011 from the
Respondent’s Senior Counsel to the HCCC Counsel. The email
proposed the basis for a resolution of the matter by way of agreement. The email
indicated that the report of Dr Diamond
dated of report 1 May 2011 and a follow
up conference with Dr Diamond would allow conclusion that the Respondent had
gained insight,
was unlikely to repeat the conduct, that he could only pose a
danger if he continued to practice psychology in the manner/setting
former practice. It also stated that, in the view of Dr Diamond, the Respondent
‘could practice safely with strict compliance with conditions imposed
upon his registration’
. The email then proposed that
HCCC accept that it is appropriate for the Tribunal to find that Kreft’s
registration be subject to conditions’.
This proposition was put to
the HCCC on the basis that the Respondent would then admit the professional
misconduct with respect to
both Patient A and Patient B, that the Respondent
will not object to any Particulars, apart from the words
Amanda Gordon
’ in particular 7, and that no witnesses were called save
for the Respondent and Dr Diamond.
16 May 2011 the HCCC replied to the proposal put by the Respondent on 13 May
2011 by way of an email. This email includes the following:
The Commission’s role is to prosecute complaints in the public
interest. It is not our role to remove from the Tribunal’s
consideration
any orders available to the Tribunal on a finding of professional misconduct.
Given Mr Kreft’s admission of professional
misconduct in relation to the
[Patient B]
complaint, professional misconduct is likely to be found
proved by the Tribunal. By definition, professional misconduct is sufficiently
serious to warrant de-registration or suspension. Further, the Tribunal would
not consider itself bound by any “agreed”
position on protective
orders. It is the Tribunal’s inquiry and it is for the Tribunal to
determine the appropriate protective
orders at the conclusion of the evidence
and submissions. This would also apply in relation to any finding of
professional misconduct
which may be made in relation to
[Patient A].
Whether your client is prepared to admit professional conduct
in relation to the
[Patient A]
complaint is a matter for your client.
One course your client could take to reduce the length and cost of the
proceedings is to make
full admissions.
The Commission will of course review the evidence as the inquiry
progresses and consider its final position on protective orders at
conclusion of the evidence.
In any event, the Commission is presently limited in its ability to
formulate submissions in relation to each of the particulars of
the complaint
[Patient B]
because the respondent has not provided a
response in relation to those matters. We await a response to those particulars
hearing as requested at the directions hearing before the Chairperson
on Monday, 9 May 2011.
If there is ultimately an issue as to costs in this matter, as you
foreshadowed in your email of 15 May 2011, we will tender this
email on that
email continues with advice regarding the production of Patient A’s
journal the following day.
second ‘without prejudice offer’ to which the Respondent refers in
his submission is recorded in a file note of a
conversation held outside of the
Tribunal on 17 May 2011 during an adjournment which records an offer that was
made to the effect
that the Respondent
‘...will admit all the matters
in the complaint and will admit professional misconduct in relation to both
clients if the HCCC
will accept a short period of suspension, followed by
conditional registration’.
The same file note records the HCCC as
indicating that this offer would not be accepted and, in words to the following
effect, said:
It is not the Commission’s role to remove from the Tribunal’s
consideration any orders available to the Tribunal on a
finding of professional
misconduct. Further, the Tribunal may not consider itself bound by any agreed
position between the parties
on protective orders
Tribunal endorses the position recorded as being the response by the HCCC to the
Respondent’s ‘offer’. There
is no room for usurping the
statutory role of the Tribunal to inquire into and determine complaints. The
Tribunal endorses the submissions
made by the HCCC in paragraphs 17 to 20 of its
submission in reply.
respect to Paragraph 18 of the Respondent’s submission, the Tribunal
leaves comments regarding 18(a) to the findings below.
With respect to the
contents of paragraph 18(b), the Tribunal notes that neither the obligation of
the Tribunal to satisfy itself
of matters admitted or the obligation of the HCCC
to place all of the particulars and complaints that are in the public interest
to do so have been considered by the Respondent. Further, the Respondent’s
submission does not properly account for the six
Particulars and the Complaint
that was not admitted. The case that the HCCC had to prove before the Tribunal
was far from moot.
Respondent’s references to a ‘guilty plea’ and a
‘sentence’ are terms that are properly used in
the criminal
nature of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
This is of course not to say that
the Tribunal can expect respondents to have legal knowledge of this nature. This
Tribunal plays
no role in punishing practitioners for conduct; rather it is
primarily concerned with protecting the public.
Respondent’s lack of knowledge regarding the appropriate conduct of
matters before a protective tribunal may also explain
the submission that the
HCCC’s rationale for not placing the ‘without prejudice
offers’ before the Tribunal was
for an improper purpose of pursuing a full
hearing and securing an order of de-registration.
Tribunal finds there is no foundation to the Respondent’s submission that
the HCCC chose to prolong the hearing, let alone
chose to do so with some sort
of intention to inflict financial hardship on the Respondent and his
Respondent is, on one view of it, correct when he submitted that the actions of
‘disempowered the Tribunal from assessing the potential
options available to it for determining the most appropriate conduct
hearing process’.
This may have been an appropriate course had there
been full admission made by the Respondent. However as there were not full
made, the actions of the HCCC were entirely appropriately. Overall,
the HCCC’s actions with respect to the ‘without prejudice
offers’ were entirely appropriate.
Respondent submitted in paragraph 18(c) that he was the ‘successful
party’ in ‘phase two’. In this regard,
the Tribunal accepts
the submissions made by the HCCC, particularly at paragraphs 13, 14 and 15 of
the Submission in Reply.
Submission in reply of
the HCCC re Costs
HCCC provided Submission in Reply, a copy of which is annexed C hereto.
Tribunal has noted above that it accepts the submissions made by the HCCC at
paragraphs 1 to 10, 14 to 17 and 18 of its Submission
in Reply. The Tribunal
also accepts the submissions set out in paragraphs 11 to 13 which appropriately
set out the Tribunal’s
comments regarding the ‘journal’ of
Tribunal also notes that a number of the matters raised in the HCCC Submission
in reply have been dealt with above in the section
dealing with the
Respondent’s submission.
Consideration of the issues
not relevant to the issue of costs, the Tribunal nevertheless remarks that it is
of concern to this Tribunal that the Respondent’s
submissions do not
provide any indication of significant progress in the development of insight and
judgment that it had hoped would
result from the Conditions imposed on his
Registration.
Tribunal notes that it made observations regarding the difficulty with the
evidence of Dr Diamond due to the dual relationship
that existed between himself
and the Respondent (see paragraph 205,
HCCC v Kreft (No. 1)
and the transcript). The Tribunal now notes that the Respondent attempted, in
his submission regarding costs (and in his without
prejudice offers), to utilise
the comments made by Dr Diamond in his report dated 1 May 2011 regarding his
opinion about
‘suitable conditions’
upon registration as the
basis for pre-empting the Tribunal’s decision.
Tribunal notes that Dr Diamond made suggestions as to conditions on the basis
that they were:
‘in principle the type of conditions that could assist the Tribunal
with its considerations but they are limited because I am
not familiar enough
with the capacity of the Registration Body to administer oversight of compliance
with the conditions’.
Tribunal further notes that the comments made by Dr Diamond were in response to
an invitation to comment upon the following question
in the letter of
instruction (which occurred well before the commencement of the
If Mr Kreft is to be allowed to continue to practise, whether you consider
that conditions should be imposed upon his registration
and, if so, what
conditions you suggest.
way of an aside, the Tribunal notes that the evidence of Dr Diamond relevant to
both ‘phase one’ and ‘phase two’
was heard by the
Tribunal during ‘phase one’ at the request of the Respondent. This
application was made on the basis
that it would be less costly for the
Respondent to have Dr Diamond attend before the Tribunal on one occasion rather
than two. Dr
Diamond commenced giving evidence before the Tribunal on 17 August
2011, just after the morning adjournment, and continued until
the end of that
day’s evidence.
Tribunal notes the correspondence referred to by the Respondent in paragraph 14
of his submission included correspondence from
Senior Counsel acting on his
behalf to Counsel for the HCCC. In an email dated 13 May 2011, Senior Counsel
for the Respondent proposed
that the HCCC accepted, on the basis of there being
certain admissions made by the Respondent (and that no witnesses were called
give evidence at the Inquiry apart from the Respondent and Dr Diamond), that the
‘he had in mind’
were those suggested at page 19
of Dr Diamond’s report dated 1 May 2011and that the Respondent
‘would be open to consider other reasonable conditions that the HCCC
consider necessary’
aside the dual relationship issues identified by the Tribunal in its earlier
decision, the use of the report of Dr Diamond
in this manner is in effect an
attempt at a self-fulfilling prophesy. A process by which a senior member of the
medical profession,
with known involvement in the processes of protective
may be suitable in the event that the practitioner is allowed to continue to
practise and the utilization of these suggested conditions
as part of a
‘without prejudice offer’ is not of assistance to the Tribunal.
if this was a jurisdiction in which some sort of ‘offer’ and
‘settlement’ was appropriate, it is difficult
to reconcile a six
month suspension as being a ‘short period’ of suspension or the
conditional registration being in
the extreme range of conditions ultimately
imposed by the Tribunal as an alternative to de-registration. It is not open to
the Respondent
to submit that the conditions proposed in the ‘without
prejudice offer’ is substantially equal to the ultimate orders
were ultimately substantially more comprehensive.
Tribunal has set out above its views on the submissions made by each party.
While the manner in which the ‘on-line journal’
came before the
Tribunal was not ideal, it is not, after careful consideration by the Tribunal
conduct that amounts to, or even comes
close to being able to be characterized
as ‘disentitling’ conduct. While the issue of the production of the
journal’ had the potential to cause difficulties for the
Respondent, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent sought and was
adjournment and was provided with an opportunity to apply for a further
adjournment if it was required. Such application
was not made.
Tribunal also notes that all of the steps taken by the Respondent subsequent to
the Tribunal’s findings in
HCCC v Kreft (No.1)
that allowed the
Tribunal to place conditions on his registration rather than make an order of
deregistration postdate the ‘without
prejudice offer’ made on behalf
of the Respondent.
Tribunal is of the view that there is no reason why it should depart from the
usual rule of awarding costs in favour of the successful
the reasons set out above, the Tribunal considers that the HCCC was the
successful party.
was no conduct on the part of the HCCC that, in the view of the Tribunal, could
be characterized as disentitling. There was
no misconduct on the part of the
HCCC nor was any part of its conduct able to be characterized as calculated to
occasion unnecessary
expense. The Tribunal takes a contrary view to the position
submitted by the Respondent as it considers that the conduct of the matter
the HCCC to have been appropriate and in the public interest.
HCCC has submitted that the costs should be awarded in the sum of $60,000. The
Tribunal notes that the parties had a considerable
period of time to reach
agreement as to costs and did not do so.
regard to all the circumstances of this matter, particularly the number of
Inquiry days, the Tribunal is of the view that the
sum of $60,000 is a
reasonable quantum of costs.
Tribunal does not find any basis for apportioning the award of costs and intends
to make a costs order against the Respondent
in the amount of $60,000.
HCCC may apply for a certificate to be issued in accordance with Clause 13 of
Schedule 5D of the National
The Tribunal Orders (the Respondent is referred to hereafter as the
Practitioner):
Practitioner is to pay the costs of the HCCC in the amount of
Publication
A copy of this document should be forwarded to the Respondent, the HCCC, the
Psychology Council of New South Wales. The Psychology
Board of Australia and
otherwise as the Council and Board see fit.
Dated: 28 May 2013
___________________
___________________
___________________
___________________
Annexure A – Submissions of the Health Care
Complaints Commission in relation to Costs
Annexure B – Submissions of
the Respondent in relation to Costs
Annexure C – Submissions in reply
of the Health Care Complaints Commission re Costs
HCCC v STEPHEN KREFT (No 3)
Submissions of the Health Care Complaints
Commission in relation to Costs
4 November 2011 the Psychologists Tribunal (‘the Tribunal’)
published its findings on a Complaint against psychologist
Stephen Kreft which
had been referred to it by the Director of Proceedings of the Health Care
Complaints Commission (‘the Commission’)
on 3 November
. The Inquiry into the
Complaint took place on 17, 18, 19 and 20 May, 15, 16, 17 and 18 August and 1
September 2011 (Phase 1).
Tribunal found all particulars proved in fact. It found unsatisfactory
professional conduct proved with respect to Particulars
1.1, 1.2, 1.3.1, 1.3.2,
1.4, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 and professional misconduct proved with respect to
Particulars 1 - 4, and 5, 6
25 January 2012, the Tribunal published its determination as to the appropriate
protective orders consequent on its findings on
. The Tribunal reprimanded
Mr Kreft, suspended his registration for a period of six months and thereafter
imposed a range of conditions
on his registration to remain in place for minimum
periods of two to five years. The Tribunal reserved its decision on the issue
costs to enable the parties to endeavour to negotiate an agreed
parties have been unable to negotiate an agreed position on the question of
costs. As the successful party before the Tribunal,
the Commission hereby seeks
costs in this matter in accordance with the principles governing the award of
costs in this jurisdiction.
Power to make a Costs
Tribunal has a discretion to make a
costs order in respect of proceedings
before it. Clause 13 of Schedule 5D of the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
, ("the National Law"), provides:
(4) A Tribunal may order the complainant (if any), the registered health
practitioner or student concerned, or any other person entitled
(whether as of right or because leave to appear has been granted) at an inquiry
or appeal before the Tribunal to pay costs
to another person as decided by the
(5) When an order for costs has taken effect, the Tribunal is, on application by
the person to whom the costs have been awarded,
to issue a certificate setting
out the terms of the order and stating that the order has taken
(6) The person in whose favour costs are awarded may file the certificate in the
District Court, together with an affidavit by the
person as to the amount of the
costs unpaid, and the Registrar of the District Court must enter judgment for
the amount unpaid together
with any fees paid for filing the
certificate.
power of the Tribunal to award costs is by way of a general discretion. There is
no need to find any special circumstances.
Clause 13 of Schedule 5D of the National Law is for all relevant purposes in the
same terms as the repealed Clause 13 of Schedule
Medical Practice
the Tribunal is bound to apply the reasoning of the New
South Wales Court of Appeal in
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77.
case a complaint by the Health Care Complaints Commission against Dr Ohn was not
made out. The Medical Tribunal declined
to make an order for costs in favour of
Dr Ohn under the repealed
Medical Practitioners Act 1938
and he appealed.
The Court, comprised of Gleeson CJ, Power JA and Cole JA, held
The principles to be applied by the Medical Tribunal in the exercise of its
discretion to award costs under regulation 27 are similar
to those applied by a
court in similar circumstances, so that costs should follow the event unless the
circumstances of the case
require the exercise of a discretion not to do so
[79B, 81A, 85E].
Gleeson CJ observed that the nature of an order for costs applies
... to civil litigation, summary proceedings and disciplinary proceedings.
This does not mean that the discretionary considerations
relevant to those
proceedings are identical. However, the subject of the discretion, that is, an
order for costs, has the same nature,
and that guides the exercise of the
discretion [79B].
Two things follow:
usual rationale for of making a costs order is that it is just and reasonable
that the successful party should be reimbursed for
costs incurred, in the
absence of grounds connected with the charge or the conduct of the proceedings
which make it unjust or unreasonable
that there should be such
reimbursement.
test of whether an order for costs should be made against an unsuccessful
plaintiff or complainant is not whether he or she has
done anything to warrant
punishment. It is whether, in the circumstances, the defendant or respondent
should be compensated.
Powell JA observed that "in ordinary circumstances where a complaint against
a medical practitioner has failed, the Tribunal should
make an order for costs
in the practitioner's favour". As a matter of logic it follows that if a
complaint is made out against a
health practitioner then an order in favour of
the complainant should follow.
the High Court pointed out in
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
purpose of an order for costs is to indemnify or compensate the person in whose
favour it is made , not to punish the person
against whom it is
second reading speech and the explanatory memorandum in relation to the National
Law do not provide any additional information
in aid of the interpretation of
the costs power.
is reasonable to infer that the legislature intended that the power to award
costs to be subject to the principles outlined above.
Exercise of the Discretion to Award Costs
general rule is that, in the absence of disentitling conduct by the successful
party, the Tribunal will exercise its discretion
by compensating the successful
party through an order for costs.
successful party to litigation has a "reasonable expectation" of being awarded
costs against the unsuccessful party:
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
. Fairness dictates that the unsuccessful party
typically bears the liability for costs unless it is demonstrated that some
order is appropriate:
Currabubula Holdings Ply Ltd v State Bank of NSW
[2002] NSWSC 232.
The presumption is based on the principle that costs are
compensatory, and applies to the Psychologists Tribunal:
Ohn v Walton
(1995) 36 NSWLR 77
Latoudis v Casey
(1990) 170 CLR
is for the losing party to establish a basis for any departure from the usual
Waterman v Gerling Australia Insurance Co Pty Ltd (No 2)
NSW v Stanley
[2007] NSWCA 330
. However, the
purpose of an order for costs is to compensate the person in whose favour it is
made and not to punish the person
against whom the order is made:
Allplastics
Engineering Ply Ltd v Dornoch Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 33
Dr Douglass v
Lawton Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2007] NSWCA 90
Medical Tribunal in
NSW Medical Board v Dinakar
[2009] NSWMT 8
– [44] stated the following principles in relation to the award of costs
in the Tribunal:
The discretion to depart from the usual rule is unfettered; however a
tribunal ought not exercise its discretion against the successful
arbitrarily or capriciously, or on no grounds at all:
The discretion must be exercised judicially,
and "according to rules of
reason and justice,
according to private opinion
benevolence...or sympathy
Williams v Lever
(1974) 2 NSWLR 91
95. Generally the presumption will only be displaced where there has been
some sort of disentitling conduct
on the part of the successful party:
at (40) and (69);
Arian v Nguyen
(2001) NSWCA 5
Aussie Ideas Pty Ltd v Tunwind Pty Ltd
Hoddinott v Tunwind Pty
(2006) NSWCA 286
GR Vaughan (Holdings) Pty Ltd v Vogt
Anglo Cyprian Trade Agencies v Paphos Wine Industries
at 874. The disentitling conduct does not necessarily need to amount
to misconduct, and may simply be any conduct 'calculated to
occasion unnecessary
Keddy v Foxall
(1955) VR 320
Lolls v Loulatzis
(2008) VSC 35
Application to these Proceedings
Tribunal has found the subject-matter of the Complaint in this matter proved and
the Commission is therefore the successful party.
proceedings before the Tribunal were conducted in a proper fashion by the
Commission and there has been no disentitling conduct
on the part of the
successful party to displace the presumption that costs will be awarded against
the unsuccessful party.
Commission has assessed its costs in this matter and seeks from the Tribunal an
order for costs in the amount of $60,000.
HCCC v STEPHEN KREFT (No
Submissions of Stephen Kreft in Relation to Costs
Background/Preamble
matter of HCCC v
was determined by the Psychology Tribunal over a total of 11 days beginning on
May 17 2011 and concluding in November 2011. The matter
was heard in two phases
(Phase 1 and Phase 2) to better align the hearing with traditional legal
process. In Phase 1 evidence was
entered and the complaint particulars
determined. In Phase 2 protection orders were determined. As a result of Phase 1
professional
misconduct was found in relation to Client B. In relation to client
A eleven particulars were held to constitute unsatisfactory conduct.
these were determined to constitute professional misconduct.
conclusion of the hearing the Tribunal directed that the opposing parties
attempt to negotiate a costs agreement. Costs orders
were deferred pending the
outcome of these negotiations. Unfortunately, the legal representatives were
unable to negotiate an equitable
agreement as to costs resulting in the present
costs hearing.
a result of being forced to fund my own defence I have currently paid direct
legal expenses in excess of $250,000.00. This expense
has resulted in a current
credit card debt of over $160,000.00 much of which is accruing interest at
around 20% per annum. This debt
has extended a previous mortgage debt of
approximately $690,000.00 (an amount that is greater than the value of my
residence due
to the declining property market). Due to my limited revenue
stream since returning to practise, I am unable to consolidate the
credit card
debt and do not foresee any possibility of doing so for an optimistic minimum of
five years. This situation has seen
me on the verge of bankruptcy on several
occasions that has only been averted via the receipt of significant further
loans from my
mother that must also be repaid (these loans have been directed
from a fund held by mother in non-legal trust for my disabled
a result of my financial situation I have been unable to fund legal
representation for the costs hearing and subsequently am forced
their costs submissions the HCCC is seeking orders against me for the sum of
$60,000.00. I oppose the making of such orders in
accordance with the following
submissions.
Submissions
accept that in the absence of any disentitling conduct by the successful party,
the tribunal may exercise its discretion by compensating
the successful party
via an order for costs.
1 of the hearing alone occupied 9 hearing days. This matter was originally
listed for a five-day hearing. In a response to complaint
(dated 6 May 2011) I
made significant admissions.
9 May 2011 at the directions hearing an application was made to vacate the
hearing date. The possibility of the hearing being completed
in 3 days was
raised by the Chairperson, taking into account that I had made substantial
admissions. The HCCC indicated that 3 days
might be "tight". In an Amended
Response to Complaint dated 16 May 2011 I made further admissions, admitting to
the majority of the
complaint particulars, that my conduct in relation to Client
B constituted professional misconduct and that my conduct in relation
A constituted unsatisfactory professional conduct. There remained 6 particulars
(5 in relation to Client A and one in relation
to Client B) in dispute
the number of sexual partners I disclosed was 80 or some other number;
I had stated to Client A that I had thought about homosexuality when I was
I had told Client A that I and Client B had waited 2 years before entering a
relationship;
I stated to Client A that Client B was a former patient that I had "cured";
I entered into the relationship with client B contrary to the advice of Amanda
Gordon (in addition to Cheryl Clothier, Dr
Anthony Nicholas and Robert Bust
which was admitted).
admissions were made for reasons including to reach an agreed proposal to be
submitted to the Tribunal for consideration in the
hope of expediting the
tribunal hearing (and reducing all associated costs) and to remove the necessity
of clients A and B being
placed in the heavily onerous position of having to
attend the tribunal. The admissions led directly to my indemnity insurer
discontinuing
financial coverage for my defence resulting in me having to bear
all defence costs personally.
1 of the hearing alone occupied 9 hearing days. A substantial portion of the
hearing time was occupied with Client A and her
on-line journal which-
not included in the HCCC's original brief of evidence;
requested, the HCCC informed us contained no relevant entries (based on
information provided by Client A herself);
eventually provided was only provided in part and
finally provided in its entirety occupied approximately 1,200 pages.
Conservatively, at least 2 days of Phase 1 hearing time could have been
avoided had the diary – in its entirety – been
provided prior to the
into account the limited number of matters in dispute it is almost inconceivable
that Phase 1 could have occupied 9 days. Given
that the HCCC had indicated it
would submit that each and every one of the particulars of the complaint in
relation to Client A standing
alone constituted professional misconduct, it was
certainly within their power to have amended the complaint and proceed only on
the significant number of particulars admitted and submit that they (alone or in
combination) constituted professional misconduct,
as distinct from
unsatisfactory professional conduct. This is particularly so given that
admissions were made in relation to the
most serious of the particulars. The
HCCC did not do this.
1 was not conducted in an efficient manner particularly having regard to the
extent and weight of the admissions made. The 6
factual matters which remained
in dispute after the Amended Response to Complaint was made were of such narrow
compass that, had
the HCCC conducted the hearing in a timely and appropriate
manner, Phase 1 could – and should - have been completed in 2-3
Subsequently, I should not be ordered to pay all of the HCCC's costs of Phase 1
and they should be ordered to pay an appropriate
proportion of my
Phase 2 – which occupied two days – the HCCC argued for my
deregistration. It was argued on my behalf that I should
be allowed to continue
to practise with extensive conditions. I was ultimately not deregistered. In
other words, the HCCC was unsuccessful
at Phase 2.
prejudice offers
the HCCC are aware, two without prejudice proposals were made on my behalf which
– had either of them been accepted - would
have significantly reduced the
amount of hearing time in this matter. Details of those proposals were set out
in a document that
was forwarded to the HCCC on 16 December 2011. I will request
this document and tender it to the Tribunal prior to commencement of
findings of fact made by the Tribunal at the end of Phase 1 and the protective
orders made at the completion of Phase 2 mirror
the second proposal made on my
behalf and rejected by the HCCC, i.e. findings of professional misconduct on
both complaints, a period
of suspension followed by conditional
registration.
declining to entertain the proposals the HCCC indicated that “It is not
the Commission’s role to remove from the Tribunal’s
consideration
any orders available to the Tribunal on a finding of professional misconduct.
Further, the Tribunal may not consider
itself bound by any agreed position
between the parties on protective orders”.
Tendering the proposals
would not have precluded the Tribunal from making appropriate protective orders
but would have afforded the
Tribunal an expedient resolution of the matter if it
deemed such a course appropriate. The HCCC had made it clear from the outset
that it wanted me to be de-registered – a point on which it was ultimately
unsuccessful – and declined to put any agreed
position before the Tribunal
on that basis.
Tribunal ultimately made the same findings and orders that I was prepared to
agree to on the first day of the hearing. Had the
HCCC consented to place the
agreed orders before the Tribunal at that point, the remainder of the hearing
may well have concluded
in no more than 3 days (including sufficient time to
hear the evidence of Dr Diamond and myself). This would have meant a total
time of 4 days maximum – precisely what was envisaged at the
directions hearing before the hearing commenced. This would also
have avoided
the onerous necessity for both Client A and Client B to attend the
Application to these Proceedings
into account the matters set out above it is my primary position
HCCC prosecution was intentionally conducted in an inappropriate and inefficient
manner that constitutes disentitling conduct
for which I should be compensated.
questionable, and in my view spurious, to conclude that the HCCC was the
successful party in relation to the outcome of Phase
1. On the basis that
virtually all particulars of significant weight had been admitted prior to the
hearing the need for the HCCC
to prove the substantive elements of their case
was rendered moot. Regardless, the HCCC persisted in pursuing a full hearing and
chose not to tender any proposal to the Tribunal for consideration. In my
understanding these actions conflict with established legal
applicable to the entering of a guilty plea. Pursuing a lengthy hearing for the
primary aim of exerting a possible affect
on sentencing should constitute
disentitling conduct. Securing my deregistration was the HCCC’s rationale
for not tendering
any proposal for consideration by the Tribunal. They were
unsuccessful in achieving this goal. They chose this course despite the
knowledge that their actions would impose on me and my family crippling and
unnecessary financial detriment, and place inappropriate
and unnecessary demands
on the time and resources of the Tribunal and all witnesses called. Their
actions disempowered the Tribunal
from assessing the potential options available
to it for determining the most appropriate conduct of the hearing process. The
orders should reflect this.
was the successful party in relation to Phase 2 of the Tribunal hearing and
allocation of any cost orders should reflect this.
HCCC should pay my costs for the 7 days of hearing which were rendered
unnecessary given the proposal made on my behalf on the
first day of the
hearing; and
should pay the HCCC's costs of 4 days of the hearing.
HCCC v STEPHEN KREFT (No 3)
HCCC v Stephen Kreft
Submissions in reply of
the Health Care Complaints Commission re costs
Commission relies on submissions previously filed and served in this matter on
11 October 2012 and makes the following additional
submissions in response to
those filed by the Respondent on 23 November 2012 although not received by the
Commission until 3 December
paragraph 12 of his submissions, the Respondent asserts that Phase 1 of the
inquiry before the Tribunal was not conducted in an
efficient manner
particularly having regard to the extent and weight of the admissions made. The
Commission notes that it was not
until his Response to Complaint dated 5 May
2011, in the fortnight before the hearing was scheduled to commence, that the
admitted that his conduct in relation to Client B constituted
professional misconduct. It is significant to note that at no point
prior to or
during the inquiry, did the Respondent admit to the Tribunal that his conduct in
relation to Client A constituted professional
misconduct.
Respondent asserts further that the 6 factual matters which remained in dispute
“were of such narrow compass that, had the
HCCC conducted the hearing in a
timely and appropriate manner, Phase 1 could – and should – have
been completed in 2-3
days”. He asserts at paragraph 11 that admissions
were made “in relation to the most serious of the particulars”.
Commission disagrees and maintains that the issues, factual and legal, remaining
in dispute after the Respondent’s Amended
Respondent to Complaint of 16
May 2011, were precisely relevant to the seriousness of the professional
misconduct alleged in relation
to Client A, were highly relevant to the question
of the Respondent’s credit (his denial of the evidence of Dr Amanda Gordon
in particular) and the evidence in relation to these disputed issues was also
critical to the Tribunal’s consideration of the
appropriate protective
orders in this matter.
Respondent submits at paragraph 11 of his submissions that “given that the
HCCC had indicated that it would submit that
each and every one of the
particulars of the complaint in relation to Client A standing alone constituted
professional misconduct,
it was certainly within their power to have amended the
complaint and proceed only on the significant number of particulars
In the Commission’s letter to Ebsworth Lawyers of 4
August 2011, in response to a request for further and better particulars,
Commission stated:
We further note in relation to the particulars of complaint concerning Client
A, that professional misconduct could be made out if
any particulars, found to
be unsatisfactory professional conduct in themselves, are found
combination
with any other particulars found to be unsatisfactory
professional conduct in themselves (emphasis added).
It is submitted that this is the position consistently held, communicated and
submitted by the Commission in relation to the particulars
of complaint
concerning Client A.
is submitted that had the Commission sought to amend the Complaint and proceed
only on the particulars admitted by the Respondent
as is suggested by the
Respondent should have happened (paragraph 11), it is likely that the Tribunal
would not have heard from Client
A and Dr Gordon, would not have had the benefit
of other evidence going squarely to the Respondent’s credit and insight
would have had the compass of its inquiry inappropriately narrowed given the
seriousness of the findings and orders that were ultimately
addition, the Commission submits that the Respondent’s submission that the
Commission could have amended the complaint and
proceeded only on his
admissions, ignores the Tribunal’s role in deciding whether a Complaint
can be amended and particulars
is important to re-emphasise that the Tribunal found all particulars and
sub-particulars of the Complaint against the Respondent
proved. It found the
Respondent guilty of professional misconduct in relation to Client A. In
relation to the particulars in dispute
concerning Client A, it is significant
that the Tribunal consistently preferred the evidence of Client A over that of
the Respondent
in finding these particulars proved:
(i) On balance the Tribunal prefers the evidence of Client A to the Respondent
that the number of sexual partners disclosed by the
Respondent was 80 [para.
(ii) With respect to Particular 1.3.4, the Tribunal notes the denial of the
Respondent to the Particular. The Tribunal ... prefers
the evidence of Client A
to that of the Respondent. The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that this
Particular is established [para.
(iii) The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A as to what the Respondent
said to her in this regard. Further, it is the overwhelming
inference that
allows comfortable satisfaction that the Respondent informed Client A of the two
year ‘limitation’ period
[para.354];
(iv) This Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that the Respondent failed to
maintain the confidentiality of Client B in that he disclosed
to Client A that
his girlfriend Client B, who was known to Client A, was a previous client and
that he had ‘cured her’
[para. 383].
The Commission submits that the preference of Client A’s evidence over
that of the Respondent in relation to multiple areas
of dispute amounts to a
significant finding against the Respondent’s credit. The
Respondent’s denials in relation to
the above proved particulars and the
lengthy and rigorous but ultimately unsuccessful attempts to impugn Client
were also relevant to the Commission’s ultimate
submissions about the Respondent’s deficient insight in this matter.
Commission further submits that it was open to the Respondent to make full
admissions to the Complaint, including to professional
misconduct in relation to
Client A prior to the commencement of the hearing. Instead, he chose to maintain
denials and to cross-examine
Client A at length. That tactical decision on the
part of the Respondent cannot amount to disentitling conduct on the part of the
Commission.
statement has been made that the Commission intentionally conducted this matter
in an inappropriate and inefficient manner. No specific
examples or particulars
- other than in relation to the pursuit of particulars that were not admitted by
the Respondent (and, it
should be added, including a finding of professional
misconduct in relation to Client A) and in relation to Client A’s journal,
discussed below – have been given for the Commission to address. It is
submitted that the Commission cannot be criticised for
not withdrawing
particulars of Complaint that were ultimately proven and that did have a bearing
on the overall seriousness conduct
found proved, nor for pursuing a finding of
professional misconduct which was also found and which had not been
The on-line journal
Respondent asserts that a substantial portion of the 9 days of hearing time was
occupied with Client A and her on-line journal
and there is an estimate that at
least two days of hearing time could have been avoided had the Commission
provided the “diary”
in its entirety prior to the hearing. The
Commission relies on a number of findings set out in the Tribunal’s
decision on Phase
1, in relation to the on-line journal of Client A. The
Commission submits that its conduct concerning the service and tender of the
journal cannot amount to disentitling conduct. In relation to the relevance of
Client A’s on-line journal to the proceedings
before it, the Tribunal
The Tribunal has now had an opportunity to peruse a hard copy
of the electronic document produced by Client A during the Inquiry.
The parties
took the Tribunal to various entries considered relevant to their respective
cases. The Tribunal is of the view that
the document is not properly described
as a ‘diary’ or a ‘day journal’ in the traditional sense
i.e. a document
used to record appointments and/or occurrences and personal
thoughts or views on all daily events. The electronic document has provision
the name of a song to be part of the heading for an entry. Client A’s
evidence is that this, in essence, allows for a reader
to understand the mood
for the entry. There is a facility to allow comments to be written in response
to an entry either by a limited
group of ‘friends’ or more widely.
There is the capacity to keep an entry totally private to the author. Some
are clearly seeking comment while others appear to be a download of
stream of consciousness writings of Client A. The work reads
as a creative
writing endeavour.
This is the first occasion that a document of this nature has come before a
Psychology Tribunal. The Tribunal is of the view that
it would be unsafe to
regard this document as the equivalent of the traditional diary or
contemporaneous day journal
The Tribunal specifically found that the on-line journal cannot have the
evidentiary status of a contemporaneous record:
As to the specific submission that courts have generally recognised that
contemporaneous recollections are more reliable and less
likely to be
contaminated by suggestion or bias than recollections made some time after the
event the Tribunal concurs. However,
as detailed elsewhere, the document is not
viewed by the Tribunal as a contemporaneous record in the usual sense. The
document is
not in the nature of a diary, day book or traditional journal. The
circumstances of this matter are further complicated by Client
realisation that a number of the occurrences to which she had only experienced
vague unease or had brushed off at the time
took on significance when seen as a
whole during later counselling with the overseas therapist. It is the nature of
a therapeutic
relationship that the trust placed by a client in the practitioner
is usually high and the practitioner accorded a degree of power.
This impacts
upon the client’s perception of the practitioner’s behaviour. Hence
in matters in protective jurisdictions
it is not uncommon for shifts in
perception or later realisations to occur after the event as a result of
reflection or the perspective
obtained from discussing the matter with others
(including other health
practitioners)
In relation to the provision of the document by the Commission, the Tribunal
While the manner in which this document came into evidence was not ideal, the
Respondent was afforded the opportunity of an adjournment
with the further
opportunity to make application for any further adjournments that may have been
required to address this material.
While it is the Respondent’s view that
the HCCC resisted the production of the document asserting it was irrelevant to
proceedings, the Tribunal notes that at the time the assertions were made
the officers of the HCCC had not actually viewed the document
and appear to have
acted upon the advice of Client A
Commission submits that the on-line journal was ultimately not determinative of
any matter in the Complaint and that after having
considered evidence and
submissions on the matter, the Tribunal was ultimately not critical of the
Commission’s conduct in
relation to the provision of this evidence. It is
submitted that in the circumstances of the Tribunal’s findings as to the
status of the evidence and the Commission’s conduct, no disentitling
conduct has been established by the Respondent.
Respondent asserts that the Commission was unsuccessful in Phase 2 in that he
was not de-registered despite this being the Commission’s
sole submission
as to the appropriate protective orders to be made by the Tribunal. The
Respondent asserts that he was the successful
party at Phase 2 of the hearing.
Commission submits that it would be inappropriate in disciplinary proceedings
for the Tribunal to consider who has been the “successful
Phase 2, a stage in the inquiry which is concerned solely with the appropriate
protective orders that should flow
consequent on the Tribunal’s findings
on the Complaint. The Commission does not bear any onus of “proving”
appropriate
protective orders. The Commission’s onus is to prove the
subject matter of the Complaint to the requisite standard, as occurred
is important to note that Phase 2 of this matter occupied only 2 days of hearing
time. Given the seriousness of the findings of
the Tribunal at Phase 1, it is
difficult to understand how the Tribunal could have been satisfied as to the
appropriate protective
orders, as it is required to be, without a hearing on
Phase 2 of an equivalent duration.
the Commission relies on the following comments of the Tribunal in relation to
Phase 2 of the hearing:
The Respondent’s conduct as a registered psychologist more generally
should also be considered. In this regard, there are also
factors that weigh
heavily towards a finding of permanent unfitness, with the resultant order being
de-registration. However, on
balance, the Tribunal finds that the Respondent has
commenced to address the deficits in his practice to an extent which allows this
Tribunal to make Orders imposing Conditions on his Registration rather than
ordering removal from the Register.
This is not to say that the Respondent could not have demonstrated a higher
level of commitment and more application and timeliness
to remedying defects
that he avoided facing for a significant period of time due to their
inconvenience and lack of fit with his
purpose. It may well be that the delay in
the completion of the Inquiry has worked in the Respondent’s favour as it
has created
an opportunity for a modicum of reflection and for the process of
remediation to have commenced (significantly due to the contribution
Without Prejudice Offers
Respondent asserts that had either of the proposals or “Calderbank
offers” advanced on his behalf prior to the commencement
of the hearing
been accepted by the Commission, the amount of hearing time would have been
significantly reduced in this matter.
This is because, it is submitted, the
findings of the Tribunal at Phase 1 and the protective orders made at Phase 2,
that is, professional
misconduct in relation to both clients and a period of
suspension followed by conditional registration, mirror the second of those
proposals made on his behalf, which was rejected by the
Commission.
Complainant submits that it would be unwise for the Tribunal to entertain the
notion that it is appropriate to consider making
an indemnity costs order in
respect to disciplinary proceedings. In civil litigation an order for indemnity
costs is usually only
made when the party against whom the order is made has
failed to accept an offer to settle which in all the circumstances it should
have accepted, or where the manner in which it has conducted the proceedings is
such that it has put the other party to unnecessary
Complainant is not in an equivalent position to a party in civil litigation. It
has public interest considerations to take into
account including the criteria
section 90C
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
which provides
that the Director of Proceedings is to take into account the following matters
when making a determination as to whether
a complaint should be prosecuted
before a disciplinary body:
(a) the protection of the health and
safety of the public,
(b) the seriousness of the alleged conduct the
subject of the complaint,
(c) the likelihood of proving the alleged
(d) any submissions made under
by the health
practitioner concerned.
Appropriately, it is submitted, the Commission took the view that this was a
very serious matter and one it was likely to prove.
The Commission complained
that the Respondent was guilty of professional misconduct in relation to both
Client A and Client B and
it was considered likely on the state of the evidence
before the Tribunal, particularly in relation to credit, insight and remorse
the Respondent’s part and a consequent continuing risk to public health
and safety, that a period of de-registration would
be imposed. Given the
Tribunal’s findings as to the seriousness of the misconduct, the extent
and onerousness of the conditions
imposed and the Tribunal’s comments as
to the probable benefit the Respondent obtained from the delay between Phase 1
2 of the hearing (cited above), there are no grounds on which to
assert that the Commission failed to accept an offer which in all
circumstances it should have accepted.
Commission maintains the position it conveyed to the Respondent on 16 May 2011,
in rejecting the proposal to withdraw particulars
in dispute, accept an
admission of professional misconduct in relation to Client A and agree that a
period of suspension followed
by conditions would be appropriate protective
orders, namely:
The Commission’s role is to prosecute complaints in the public
interest. It is not our role to remove from the Tribunal’s
consideration
any orders available to the Tribunal on a finding of professional misconduct.
Given Mr Kreft’s admission of professional
misconduct in relation to the
[Client B] complaint, professional misconduct is likely to be found proved by
the Tribunal. By definition,
professional misconduct is sufficiently serious to
warrant de-registration or suspension. Further, the Tribunal would not consider
itself bound by any “agreed” position on protective orders. It is
the Tribunal’s inquiry and it is for the Tribunal
to determine the
appropriate protective orders at the conclusion of the evidence and submissions.
This would also apply in relation
to any finding of professional misconduct
which may be made in relation to [Client A].
Whether your client is prepared to admit professional misconduct in relation
to the [Client A] complaint is a matter for your client.
One course your client
could take to reduce the length and cost of the proceedings is to make full
admissions.
The Commission submits that this position is entirely consistent with the
Commission’s public interest role of prosecuting serious
against health practitioners and with the Tribunal’s inquisitorial role in
a protective jurisdiction.
summary, the Commission submits that the Respondent has not established any
disentitling conduct on the part of the Commission
sufficient to disturb the
ordinary rule that the Tribunal should exercise its discretion by compensating
the successful party through
an order for costs. The Commission is the
successful party in these proceedings, having proved the Complaint against the
in all particulars.
HCCC v KREFT
[2011] NSWPST 2
(4 November 2011)
HCCC v KREFT
[2012] NSWPST 1
(25 January
HCCC v KREFT
[2011] NSWPST 2
(4 November 2011).
HCCC v KREFT
[2012] NSWPST 1
(25 January
[2011] NSWPST 2
HCCC v Kreft (No. 1)
[2011] NSWPST 2
[314]-[315]
HCCC v Kreft
[2012] NSWPST 1
, paras [89]-[90]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (782 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter