URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/583.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McKenna v Nationwide Corporate Services Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPIC 583; (29 October 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION OF MEMBER
McKenna v Nationwide Corporate Services Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPIC
Leslie McKenna
RESPONDENT:
Nationwide Corporate Services Pty Ltd
Karen Garner
DATE OF DECISION:
29 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workers Compensation Act 1987
medical expenses pursuant to
for upper and lower dentures; whether
the proposed treatment was reasonably necessary as a result of accepted injury;
the upper and lower dentures was reasonably necessary
as a result of the accepted injury; the respondent to pay the applicant’s
medical expenses in respect of the surgery and treatment pursuant to
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
The Personal Injury Commission (Commission) determines:
proposed treatment, in particular upper and lower dentures, is reasonably
necessary as a result of the accepted injury dated 7
The Commission orders:
respondent to pay the costs of and incidental to upper and lower dentures in
accordance with
Workers Compensation Act
A brief statement is attached setting out the Commission’s reasons
for the determination.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
McKenna (the applicant) is a 58-year-old man.
applicant was employed by Nationwide Corporate Services Pty Ltd (the respondent)
in the position of security guard.
7 January 2023, whilst performing his work for the respondent, the applicant was
assaulted and sustained various physical injuries
and a primary psychological
injury (collectively referred to as the accepted injury).
respondent accepted liability for the accepted injury.
applicant sought payment of medical expenses of and related to upper and lower
dentures (the proposed treatment), on the basis
that it is medical treatment
which is reasonably necessary as a result of the accepted injury. In particular,
the applicant alleged
that the need for the proposed treatment is caused by a
condition of bruxism, which was a consequential condition of the accepted
a notice dated 3 January 2025 issued pursuant to s 78 of the
Workplace Injury
Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) and a notice
27 March 2025 issued pursuant to s 287A of the 1998 Act, the
respondent declined liability for the proposed treatment.
PROCEDURE BEFORE THE COMMISSION
present proceedings were commenced by an Application to Resolve a Dispute (ARD)
lodged in the Commission on 30 May 2025. The applicant
seeks compensation
pursuant to
s 60 of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act)
for and related to the proposed treatment. The respondent filed a Reply to the
ARD on 23 June 2025.
parties attended a conciliation/arbitration hearing on 26 September 2025. The
applicant was represented by Mr Rohan de Meyrick,
counsel, instructed by Turner
Freeman Lawyers. The respondent was represented by Mr Josh Beran, counsel,
instructed by Lee Legal
am satisfied that the parties to the dispute understand the nature of the
application and the legal implications of any assertion
made in the information
supplied. I have used my best endeavours in attempting to bring the parties to
the dispute to a settlement
acceptable to all of them. I am satisfied that the
parties have had sufficient opportunity to explore settlement and that they have
been unable to reach an agreed resolution of the dispute.
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
the hearing, counsel accepted that the following matters are agreed and not in
(a) the applicant sustained the accepted injury in an assault on 7 January 2023
in the course of his employment;
(b) the applicant suffers from the condition of bruxism;
(c) the applicant had some degree of periodontal disease prior to the accepted
injury, and
(d) the proposed treatment, being upper and lower dentures, is reasonably
necessary because of the applicant’s dental condition.
parties agree that the following matters are not agreed and remain in
(a) whether the applicant suffered from the condition of bruxism prior to the
accepted injury;
(b) whether, and to what extent, the accepted injury caused or contributed to
the condition of bruxism, and
(c) whether the proposed treatment is reasonably necessary as a result of the
injury as required by s 60 of the 1987 Act.
Oral evidence
party applied to adduce oral evidence nor cross-examine any witness.
Documentary evidence
following documents were in evidence before the Commission and taken into
account in making this determination:
(a) ARD and attached documents;
(b) Reply to ARD and attached documents, and
(c) Certificate of Determination dated 3 April 2023 in matter L7854/22.
consider relevant evidence below in more detail.
SUBMISSIONS
counsel made detailed submissions which were recorded on transcript. A copy of
the recording and transcript will be made available
on request. I have
considered the submissions in full notwithstanding that details are not
specifically repeated or referred to in
these reasons.
counsel referred the Commission to various evidence including the
applicant’s medical history, various medical opinions
and the provisions
of s 60(1) of the 1987 Act.
summary, counsel for the applicant submitted that:
(a) the issue which requires determination by the Commission is effectively a
narrow issue of causation;
(b) the Commission should accept the applicant’s evidence in relation to
how his dental condition deteriorated after he sustained
the accepted injury,
particularly psychological symptoms;
(c) the Commission should prefer and accept the opinion of the applicant’s
independent medical expert, Dr Marios Argrou, which
was based on an
understanding of the relevant history, and provided a thorough analysis of the
causal relationship between the accepted
injury and the proposed treatment;
(d) Dr Juhi Krishnaswamy recorded that, about six months prior to the accepted
injury, on or about 25 July 2022, the applicant completed
a dental history which
stated that the applicant was not aware of grinding or clenching his teeth;
(e) Dr Sotiropoulos acknowledged that the medication Lexapro causes bruxism;
(f) case law has established that to satisfy the test of whether treatment is
reasonably necessary, it is not necessary that the
injury is the only nor
substantial cause of the need for treatment, and it will be sufficient if the
injury materially contributed
to the need for treatment, and
(g) having regard to the evidence as a whole, and the principles established by
case law, particularly in
Diab v NRMA
Murphy v Allity
Management Services Pty Ltd,
Taxis Combined Services (Victoria) Pty Ltd v Schokman
[2014] NSWWCCPD 18
Kooragang Cement Pty Ltd v
the Commission should be
satisfied that the proposed treatment is reasonably necessary as a result of the
accepted injury pursuant
to s 60(1) of the 1987 Act.
summary, counsel for the respondent submitted that:
(a) the treating dental records are difficult to understand;
(b) the evidence of the applicant’s dental history shows that the
applicant underwent significant dental treatment prior to
the accepted injury,
which included the removal of 10 teeth removed and five teeth being the subject
of significant restoration work
(of 32 natural teeth);
(c) there is evidence that the applicant sought treatment for a dental condition
and underwent an orthopantomogram (OPG) in respect
of his dental condition on
28 July 2022 for Dr Daehoon Kang, although there is no evidence of Dr Kang
and that OPG is not in evidence;
(d) on 16 September 2024, Dr Juhi Krishnaswamy recommended replacement of the
applicant’s posterior teeth to prevent further
wear on the anterior
(e) treatment for bruxism is an occlusal splint, which is not the treatment that
is presently sought by the applicant;
(f) rather the proposed treatment is to replace the 10 teeth that were removed
and the five teeth which were the subject of significant
restoration work prior
to the accepted injury;
(g) the applicant’s independent medical expert, Dr Marios Argrou did not
have the OPG, and did not consider OPGs taken before
and after the accepted
(h) the OPG is not in presently evidence, however it was considered by the Dr
Juhi Krishnaswamy;
(i) the posterior support relates to the teeth which were missing prior to the
accepted injury;
(j) if the applicant was missing 10 of 12 molars, his mouth would not close
(k) the respondent’s medical evidence should be preferred and accepted
because the applicant’s independent medical expert
did not have the
objective and verifiable OPG that was taken prior to the accepted injury;
(l) it is clear from the OPG that was taken prior to the accepted injury that
the applicant had significant periodontal issues at
least six months prior to
the accepted injury;
(m) the second OPG showed chronic, generalised and advanced pre-existing
periodontal disease;
(n) the evidence demonstrates that the cause of the applicant’s dental
condition was pre-existing periodontal disease;
(o) in any event, the proposed treatment was directed to replace teeth that were
missing prior to the accepted injury;
(p) significant evidence is missing;
(q) the radiology was not commented on by the applicant’s independent
medical expert;
(r) the treatment for bruxism is an occlusal splint;
(s) the proposed treatment, being upper and lower dentures, is to replace 10
teeth which were missing and five teeth which were the
subject of significant
restoration work prior to the accepted injury;
(t) the applicant has not discharged the onus of proof, and
(u) the proposed treatment does not satisfy the test prescribed by Roche DP in
Diab v NRMA Ltd
60(1) of the 1987 Act.
reply, counsel for the applicant submitted that:
(a) although Dr Marios Argrou was not specifically referred to the OPG, he was
briefed with all relevant material, including the
records of Dr Juhi
Krishnaswamy and he did comment on the same pathology that Dr Sotiropoulos found
on the OPG, and he was clearly
aware of all the pathology and findings on the
(b) Dr Juhi Krishnaswamy’s evidence indicates that the proposed treatment
is not directed just to treat a pre-existing condition,
because Dr Krishnaswamy
accepted that the injury at least partly caused or contributed to the condition
of bruxism and that it would
continue to destroy the applicant’s teeth and
that the proposed treatment was partly to stave of the inevitable as a long-term
solution to address the applicant’s oral health prognosis, and
(c) there is no evidence of any recommendation for dentures prior to mid-2024,
which is after the applicant’s oral health had
been affected by the
accepted injury.
FINDINGS AND REASONS
60 of the 1987 Act relevantly provides:
“60 Compensation for
cost of medical or hospital treatment and rehabilitation etc
(1) If, as a result of an injury received by a worker, it is reasonably
necessary that:
(a) any medical or related treatment (other than domestic assistance) be given,
(b) any hospital treatment be given, or
(c) any ambulance service be provided, or
(d) any workplace rehabilitation service be provided,
the worker’s employer is liable to pay, in addition to any other
compensation under this Act, the cost of that treatment or
service and the
related travel expenses specified in subsection (2).”
Is the proposed treatment medical or related treatment?
applicant seeks compensation for expenses of and related to upper and lower
respondent has not disputed that the proposed treatment is medical or related
treatment (other than domestic assistance) within
the meaning of s 60(1)(a) of
the 1987 Act.
am satisfied that the proposed treatment is “medical or related treatment
(other than domestic assistance)” within the
meaning of s 60(1)(a) of the
Is the proposed treatment reasonably necessary?
Diab v NRMA Ltd,
referring to the decision in
Rose v Health Commission
set out the test for
determining if medical treatment is reasonably necessary as a result of a work
“The standard test adopted in determining if medical
treatment is reasonably necessary as a result of a work injury is that
Burke CCJ in
Rose v Health Commission (NSW)
[1986] NSWCC2;
[1986] NSWCC 2
) where his Honour said, at 48A-C:
necessity for relevant treatment results from the injury where its purpose and
potential effect is to alleviate the consequences
is reasonably necessary that such treatment be afforded a worker if this Court
concludes, exercising prudence, sound judgment and
good sense, that it is so.
That involves the Court in deciding, on the facts as it finds them, that the
particular treatment is essential
to, should be afforded to, and should not be
forborne by, the worker.
so deciding, the Court will have regard to medical opinion as to the relevance
and appropriateness of the particular treatment,
any available alternative
treatment, the cost factor, the actual or potential effectiveness of the
treatment and tis place in the
usual medical armoury of treatments for the
particular condition.”
DP also noted that the Commission has generally referred to and applied the
decision of Burke CCJ in
Bartolo v Western Sydney Area Health
“The question is should the patient have this treatment or not. If it
is better that he have it, then it is necessary and should
not be forborne. If
in reason it should be said that the patient should not do without this
treatment, then it satisfies the test
of being reasonably necessary.”
“In the context of s 60 the relevant matters,
according to the criteria of reasonableness, include, but are not necessarily
limited to, the matters noted by Burke CCJ at point (5) in
above), namely:
(a) the appropriateness of the particular treatment;
(b) the availability of alternative treatment, and its potential
effectiveness;
(c) the cost of the treatment;
(d) the actual or potential effectiveness of the treatment, and
(e) the acceptance by medical experts of the treatment as being appropriate and
likely to be effective.
With respect to point (d), it should be noted that while the effectiveness of
the treatment is relevant to whether the treatment was
reasonably necessary, it
is certainly not determinative. The evidence may show that the same outcome
could be achieved by a different
treatment, but at a much lower cost. Similarly,
bearing in mind that all treatment, especially surgery, carries a risk of a less
than ideal result, a poor outcome does not necessarily mean that the treatment
was not reasonably necessary. As always, each case
will depend on its
applicant’s treating dentist, Dr Juhi Drishnaswamy provided a quote for
the proposed treatment dated 27 August 2024, which
estimates the total costs of
the proposed treatment to be $7,803. The respondent has not raised any issue
regarding the quantum of
that estimate.
the hearing, counsel accepted, and it is not in dispute, that the proposed
treatment, being upper and lower dentures, is reasonably
necessary treatment
because of the applicant’s dental condition.
any event, I note that such a conclusion is generally consistent with the
treating and independent medical evidence that is before
Does the need for the proposed treatment arise as a result of a work
critical question that I am required to determine in this case relates to the
issue of causation, particularly whether the proposed
treatment is reasonably
necessary as a result of the injury.
commonsense evaluation of the causal chain is required. In
Kooragang Cement
Pty Ltd v Bates,
Kirby P (as
his Honour then was) stated:
“The result of the cases is that
each case where causation is in issue in a workers compensation claim, must be
determined on
its own facts. Whether death or incapacity results from a relevant
work injury is a question of fact. The importation of notions
of proximate cause
by the use of the phrase ‘results from’, is now not accepted. By the
same token, the mere proof that
certain events occurred which predisposed a
worker to subsequent injury or death, will not, of itself, be sufficient to
that such incapacity or death ‘results from’ a work
injury. What is required is a commonsense evaluation of the causal
chain. As the
early cases demonstrate, the mere passage of time between a work incident and
subsequent incapacity or death, is not
determinative of the entitlement to
compensation.”
Murphy v Allity Management Services Pty
“... a condition can have multiple causes (
Wormald Bros Industries Ltd
(1973) 47 ALJR 236
Pyrmont Publishing Co Pty
Ltd v Peters
(1972) 46 WCR 27
Cluff v Dorahy Bros (Wholesale) Pty Ltd
(1979) 53 WCR 167
ACQ Pty Ltd
[2009] HCA 28
[2009] HCA 28
237 CLR 656).
The work injury does not have to be the only,
or even a substantial, cause of the need for the relevant treatment before the
of that treatment is recoverable under s 60 of the 1987 Act.
Ms Murphy only has to establish, applying the commonsense test of causation
Kooragang Cement Pty Ltd v Bates
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
10 NSWCCR 796)
that the treatment is reasonably necessary ‘as a result of’ the
injury (see
Taxis Combined Services (Victoria) Pty Ltd v Schokman
NSWWCCPD 18
). That is, she has to establish that the injury
materially contributed to the need for the surgery (see the discussion on the
of causation in
Sutherland Shire Council v Baltica General Insurance Co
(1996) 12 NSWCCR 716).
The applicant’s
applicant gave evidence that his treating dentist, Dr Juhi Krishnaswamy has
recommended that he obtain upper and lower dentures
to treat his current dental
condition, which was caused by bruxism which is a consequential condition of the
accepted injury.
is not in dispute that the applicant suffers from the condition of bruxism and
that he had some degree of periodontal disease prior
to the accepted
applicant gave evidence that his dental history prior to the accepted injury
included the surgical removal of two of his teeth
when he was 13 years old as he
required braces, and the subsequent removal of three additional back teeth over
12 or 15-month period.
applicant’s evidence is that he developed the condition of bruxism
subsequent to the accepted injury as a result of the
psychological injuries,
which included anxiety, depression and post-traumatic stress disorder and stress
associated with the accepted
injuries and the claim for compensation, and
various medication that he was prescribed to treat his psychological condition.
applicant stated that following the accepted injury, in around early 2024, he
commenced experiencing pain in his jaw and frequent
headaches, and he clenched
his teeth and jaw as a reaction to anger and frustration, although he did not
think to mention that to
his treating general practitioner (GP). The applicant
stated that, in or around July 2024, Dr Nabil Malik, psychiatrist, noted on
examination that the applicant was constantly clenching his teeth and jaw and
recommended that it should be investigated. The applicant
stated that he was
subsequently referred by his GP to a dentist and he has received treatment from
his GP, psychiatrist, psychologist
and dentist. The applicant stated that he
currently takes medications Serotonin 50mg and Clonidine 150mg.
applicant stated that the onset of bruxism has caused issues with his oral
health generally. He stated that because of the bruxism,
he is worried that he
will lose his front teeth and a lot of time and money that he previously spent
on his teeth seems to be useless.
Dr Juhi Krishnaswamy, the
applicant’s treating dentist
Krishnaswamy’s quotation detailed the dental treatment plan proposed to be
undertaken over six visits.
a report dated 16 September 2024, Dr Krishnaswamy stated that the applicant
initially presented to him seeking treatment for a
chip in his upper left front
tooth and bruxism on the suggestion of a psychiatrist who was treating him for
post-traumatic stress
disorder following a workplace assault in 2023. Dr
Krishnaswamy stated that the applicant has symptoms relating to bruxism, he has
been waking up with bilateral headaches in the temporal region for about 18
months and he believes that he clenches more so during
the day than the night.
On examination, Dr Krishnaswamy noted a 21MIBP enamel dentine fracture, which
could be repaired but had a
poor long-term prognosis as there is a lack of
surface area to bond to.
Dr Krishnaswamy noted that heavy wear is present on
the anterior teeth and wear facets present on some posterior teeth, all canines
exhibited heavy wear, many posterior teeth are missing and there exist three
occluding units, two on the left side and one on the
right side. Dr Krishnaswamy
stated that:
“I discussed with [the applicant] the concept of
the shortened dental arch in dentistry ie. 4 occluding units necessary for
No posterior guidance (canine guidance or group function) exists on the RHS
and LHS due to tooth wear. Anterior guidance is via the
I recommend replacement of posterior teeth to prevent further wear on
anterior teeth.
Radiographs taken:
- OPG - HRS BW
The POG showed potential calcifications in the carotid
region, I wrote a letter to [the applicant’s GP and asked him to follow
47 36 grade 2 mobile
I discussed with [the applicant] the opportunity to discuss the potential of
planning for a partial upper and lower denture with a
prosthetist. The upper
partial denture can be constructed to replace 25 26 27 16 17. Teeth on the lower
arch which do not have good
long term prognosis include 47 45 36. These teeth
are indicated for extraction. The lower partial denture can then be constructed
to replace 47 46 45 36 37. This is accounted for in the treatment plan.
In relation to [the applicant’s] bruxism we discussed the option of an
occlusal splint. He may or may not be able to use this
as he sleeps with a cpap
machine. We also discussed the option of botox and muscle relaxants which can be
prescribed by his GP. His
bruxism not only be a manifestation of PTSD as it may
also be a side effect of lexapro. I advised him to I discuss this with his
Other conservative options of stress management include yoga, meditation and
Leslie is motivated to look into these.
In relation to Leslie's airways, I offered him option of referral to an ENT.
Bruxism can be related to sleep apnoea.
I also recommend a scale and clean and fluoride treatment and this has been
added to the treatment plan.”
a report dated 11 February 2025, Dr Krishnaswamy:
(a) noted that in preparing the report, he considered material which included an
OPG taken on 28 July 2022 (for Dr Daehoon Kang)
and an OPG taken on
(b) noted a medical history which included the applicant taking Lexapro
medication and also a dental history form completed on 25
July 2022, which
responded “no” to the question “are you aware of grinding or
clenching your teeth?”
(c) recorded a reported history taken on 27 August 2024, that over about the
previous 18 months, the applicant had been waking up
with headaches bilaterally
in the temporal region and across his forehead and that he had been taking
Lexapro medication on and off
for about seven years, and he sought a dental
opinion as to whether clenching and grinding could have caused damage to his 21
(d) stated that on examination, Dr Krishnaswamy found an MIBIP fracture in tooth
21, in enamel and dentine, and evidence of significant
(e) stated that over time, bruxism can lead to micro-cracks in the tooth which
in turn may propagate, leading to fracture of the
tooth structure;
(f) stated that the applicant’s medical history discloses that her bruxism
is likely to be multi-faceted, including general
life stresses, side-effects of
Lexapro, airway problems and post-traumatic stress disorder;
(g) stated that the bruxism will continue to destroy the applicant’s
remaining teeth;
(h) stated that the proposed treatment will provide artificial replaceable teeth
to enable the applicant to have a functioning oral
cavity and, in conjunction
with the general dentistry work identified in the treatment plan, will be
effective to provide the applicant
with a long-term functioning mouth;
(i) stated that he is unaware of any viable forms of alternate treatment, and
(j) stated that replacement of posterior teeth will provide the applicant with a
functioning mouth and an occlusal splint to mitigate
damage on remaining teeth
during nocturnal bruxism will prolong longevity of the applicant’s
remaining dentition.
a report dated 6 April 2025, Dr Krishnaswamy stated that:
(a) bruxism is a medical term for teeth grinding and clenching and that the main
contributing causes of bruxism include general life
stresses, post-traumatic
stress disorder, airway problems and side effects of various drugs including
(b) in his opinion the fracture of tooth 21 is likely to have been a consequence
of bruxism over time;
(c) over time without treatment, bruxism, can cause significant wear to teeth
and can lead to cracked teeth whereby the formation
of microcracks within the
tooth structure may propagate and lead to tooth fracture, and
(d) wear of the tooth through bruxism will lead to loss of effective mouth
function which can impact on general health, it may cause
widening of the
periodontal ligament which can lead to pain on biting, it may lead to straining
of the muscles on mastication which
may lead to headaches, which the applicant
Dr Leila Mirbagher Ajorpaz, treating general practitioner
a referral letter dated 11 June 2024, Dr Ajoropaz recorded that the applicant
was undergoing psychological treatment for post-traumatic
stress disorder
following the accepted injury. Dr Ajoropaz recorded various medications that
were prescribed to the applicant.
a report dated 17 February 2025, Dr Ajorpaz reported that the applicant has a
history of bruxism, which has been causing irritation.
Dr Ajorpaz stated that it
is uncertain whether the applicant’s employment was a substantial
contributing factor. Dr Ajorpaz
could not give an opinion regarding the
reasonable necessity of the proposed treatment and referred to the opinion of
the treating
Mali Lefmann, treating psychologist
a report dated 13 March 2025, Ms Lefman reported on psychological treatment of
the applicant following the accepted injury. Ms
Lefman diagnosed post-traumatic
stress disorder, caused by the workplace assault. Ms Lefman expressed the
opinion that the assault,
along with the subsequent development of
post-traumatic stress disorder, is a significant contributing factor to the
aggravation
and exacerbation of deterioration of the applicant’s dental
Dr Lanny Bochsler, treating psychiatrist
a report dated 25 April 2025, Dr Bochsler reported on his review of the
applicant and stated an impression of exacerbation of post-traumatic
disorder, triggered by further aggressive interaction at work.
Clinical notes of Atune Health Centre
notes of Atune Health Centre record the applicant’s various attendances
during 2024 and 2025.
included an OPG image and a CT scan taken on 16 January 2023.
Other evidence
treating medical evidence included a Discharge Summary issued by the Singleton
District Hospital dated 7 January 2023.
Dr Georgios Sotiropoulos,
dental surgeon, independent medical expert qualified by the respondent
a report dated 27 November 2024, Dr Sotiropoulos:
(a) recorded that the applicant reported experiencing bilateral tightness in the
temporal muscles, headaches and recently chipped
front tooth (21);
(b) recorded a diagnosis of mild bruxism due to pre-existing factors including
loss of posterior support and development malocclusion,
sleep apnoea, but
possibly associated with and exacerbated by, recent primary psychological
injury, noting that a side-effect of
long-term administration of Lexapro is an
association with bruxism, and
(c) expressed the opinion that the applicant’s employment with the
respondent is unlikely to be “the main substantial
contributing
factor” to the applicant’s dental condition.
a report dated 20 December 2024, Dr Sotiropoulos:
(a) expressed the opinion that the applicant’s current dental condition
has a likely aetiology including (but not limited to)
poor oral hygiene, diet,
neglect, lifestyle factors and that it is not “substantially
consequential” to the accepted
(b) stated that the OPG demonstrates the presence of Chronic Generalised
Advanced Periodontal Disease (Stage 3-4 periodontitis) which
is the likely cause
of historic tooth loss (loss of posterior support) and present occlusal
instability and changes;
(c) opined that any bruxism is likely due to occlusal changes consequential to
loss of posterior support, “with possibly a
minor, if any, exacerbation
due to” the accepted injury;
(d) expressed the opinion that the applicant’s pre-existing condition was
“not substantially consequential to, nor aggravated
by” the accepted
(e) expressed the opinion that the proposed treatment is necessary to the
applicant’s condition but not due to the accepted
injury, and
(f) stated that occlusal splint therapy is contraindicated and not necessary due
to the accepted injury.
Dr Marios Argyou, dental surgeon, independent medical expert qualified by
the applicant
a report dated 17 February 2025, Dr Argyrou:
(a) noted that he reviewed various documents including “COC
(b) recorded a medical history that the applicant had a complex medical history
following the accepted injury, which has led to significant
psychological and dental complications, and that the applicant has reported
ongoing chronic pain, psychological distress
and functional impairments which
have progressively worsened since his injury, and had been placed on an
extensive medication regimen;
(c) stated that the combination of chronic stress, bruxism (teeth grinding),
medication-induced dry mouth and acid reflux has significantly
impacted the
applicant’s dental health, leading to structural tooth loss and functional
limitations;
(d) expressed the opinion that, on the balance of probabilities, the
applicant’s employment has been a substantial contributing
factor to the
applicant’s current dental pathology diagnosed, noting that the
applicant’s work-related psychological
injury, including post-traumatic
stress disorder, anxiety and depression, has directly contributed to his severe
bruxism, xerostomia,
and progressive dental deterioration, leading to enamel
erosion, occlusal wear, stress fractures, increased tooth mobility, and
temporomandibular
joint dysfunction, all of which are clinically evident upon
examination, and that the long-term use of medications prescribed for
applicant’s psychological condition, including antidepressants and
anxiolytics, has caused significant salivary gland suppression,
resulting in
persistent xerostomia;
(e) stated that the proposed treatment is reasonably necessary as it directly
addresses the functional and structural consequences
of the applicant’s
dental deterioration;
(f) stated that, given the applicant’s multiple missing teeth, severe
bruxism, periodontal instability, and temporomandibular
joint dysfunction,
prosthetic rehabilitation is required to restore occlusal stability, improve
mastication, and prevent further
dental and TMJ complications;
(g) stated that the proposed treatment is reasonably necessary for the applicant
to restore oral function, improve mastication, and
prevent further complications
related to his missing teeth and deteriorating dentition;
(h) noted that the applicant has multiple missing teeth, including 17, 18, 26,
27, 28, 46, 47, 48, 37, and 38, which has resulted
in reduced occlusal
stability, inefficient chewing, and increased strain on his remaining dentition,
and that the absence of those
teeth has led to greater functional stress on the
remaining teeth, worsening the applicant’s bruxism and temporomandibular
joint dysfunction, and
(i) stated that without prosthetic rehabilitation, the applicant is at increased
risk of further tooth loss, occlusal imbalance,
and worsening TMJ-related
symptoms and that the proposed treatment is a necessary and reasonable treatment
to restore function, alleviate
symptoms, and prevent further oral health
Consideration
treating medical evidence and the history recorded by the independent medical
experts indicates that the applicant reported experiencing
bilateral tightness
in the temporal muscles, headaches and recently chipped front tooth (21) only
subsequently to the accepted injury.
note that Dr Sotiropoulos diagnosed mile bruxism due to several factors
“with possibly a minor, if any, exacerbation due to
the” accepted
injury. Dr Sotiropoulos referred to and apparently applied various causal tests
which involved a finding of “substantially
consequential”. That is
not the test that I am required to apply to determine this claim. I just have to
determine whether
there was a material contribution.
found Dr Argrou’s report to be particularly compelling as it provided a
particularly detailed and comprehensive analysis of
the applicant’s
medical history and causal factors relevant to the development of the
applicant’s bruxism and current
dental condition and the need for the
proposed treatment. Further, it provided a detailed and considered explanation
of the need,
purpose and appropriateness of the proposed treatment to treat the
applicant’s current dental condition, specifically in relation
present and future consequences of the applicant’s bruxism condition,
noting a clear connection between the applicant’s
employment and the
dental pathology diagnosed.
regard to the evidence as a whole and applying a commonsense evaluation of the
causal chain, I consider that it is logical
and likely that the applicant
developed the condition of bruxism as a consequence of the accepted injury,
which materially contributed
to the applicant’s current dental
do not need to be satisfied that the accepted injury was the only, or even a
substantial, cause of the need for the proposed treatment.
these reasons, I am satisfied that the accepted injury materially contributed to
the need for the proposed treatment and that
the need for the proposed treatment
arose as a result of the accepted injury.
all the reasons above, I am satisfied, having regard to the considerations
identified in
Diab v NRMA Ltd
Rose v Health Commission
that the proposed
treatment is, therefore, reasonably necessary as a result of the accepted
summary, the following findings and orders are made:
(a) The Commission determines:
(i) the proposed treatment, in particular upper and lower dentures, is
reasonably necessary as a result of the accepted injury.
(b) The Commission orders:
(i) the respondent to pay the costs of and incidental to the proposed treatment.
[2014] NSWWCCPD 72.
[2015] NSWWCCPD 49
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
NSWCCR 796.
[2014] NSWWCCPD 72.
[2014] NSWWCCPD
[1986] NSWCC2;
[1986] NSWCC 2
[1997] NSWCC 1
NSWCCR 233.
(1994) 35 NSWLR
10 NSWCCR 796.
NSWWCCPD 49
NSWWCCPD 72.
[1986] NSWCC 2
(1986) 2 NSWCCR 32.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.17 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter