URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/1090.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:59:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Services Union of NSW v Health Secretary o/b NSW Ambulance [2025] NSWIRComm 1090 (30 October 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Health Services Union of NSW v Health Secretary o/b NSW Ambulance
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 1090
Hearing Date(s):
15 & 16 October 2025
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Decision Date:
30 October 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Commissioner Howell
The HSU’s application for interim Orders under s 136(d) of the IR Act
preserving the ‘status quo’ provided by cl
47(g) of the Paramedics
(State) Award 2023, is refused.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW – Award interpretation – meaning
and application of status quo provision in the award
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Cases Cited:
Australian Salaried Medical Officers Federation (NSW) v Ministry of Health
[2019] NSWIRComm
Australian Salaried Medical Officers Federation (NSW) v Health Secretary
[2021] NSWIRComm 1002
Australian Salaried Medical Officers
Federation (NSW) v Heath Secretary
[2023] NSWIRComm 1105
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v BHP Coal Pty Ltd
[2016] FCA 1009
(2016) 262 IR 176
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and
Energy Union v Mt Arthur Coal Pty Ltd
[2021] FWCFB 6059
(2021) 310 IR 399
Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association v Health Secretary on behalf of
Western NSW Local Health District
[2019] NSWIRComm 1025
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Health Services Union NSW (Notifier)
Health Secretary o/b NSW Ambulance
(Respondent)
Representation:
Health Services Union
Respondent:
Mr D Gardner
Bartier Perry
File Number(s):
2025/00264482
Publication Restriction:
10 July 2025 the Health Services Union NSW
(the HSU or the Notifier)
industrial organisation of employees representing the industrial interests of,
amongst others, paramedics employed by the Ambulance
Service of NSW, notified
the Commission of an industrial dispute with the Health Secretary on behalf of
NSW Ambulance
(NSW Ambulance or
the Respondent)
, pursuant to
Industrial Relations Act
(the IR Act).
dispute was described the dispute in this way (emphasis in original):
“2 This dispute concerns the
withdrawal or non-backfilling of Station
Officer (SO) positions
at multiple NSW Ambulance stations as part of the
implementation of the
Station Manager (SM)
3 The HSU does
not dispute the introduction of Station Managers
the dispute centres on the
reduction in SO staffing
, which has occurred
without agreement and has altered long-standing operational support structures
at station level.
4 At numerous stations, it had previously been identified that the complexity
and demand of operations required the presence of
one SO per rostered
. This model was agreed to and implemented to ensure that every crew
had access to immediate on-road supervision, real-time decision-making,
safety oversight—particularly during high-pressure periods such as night
shifts. This established staffing arrangement
has been an integral part of
station operations.
5 While SMs serve an administrative and strategic function, SOs perform a
distinct role as the first line of leadership embedded
in day-to-day operations.
The removal of these roles has created a gap in real-time operational management
that cannot be substituted
by the SM structure.
6 After members reported the withdrawal of these roles, the Union invoked the
status quo provision on 13 June 2024, formally requesting
reinstatement of
withdrawn SO positions pending resolution.”
will be necessary to say more about the background to this dispute below, but in
short, the HSU contends the Respondent, in the
context of a prolonged exercise
to implement a significant reform package known as the Strategic Workforce and
Infrastructure Team
Paramedic Workforce Enhancements program, is
altering a long-standing work practice in connection with the organisation of
based in ambulance stations, the practical effect of which (it says)
is to reduce the level of frontline supervision available to
paramedics across a
roster pattern.
matter was listed for Conciliation before me on a number of occasions between 10
July and 5 August 2025. On 5 August 2025 I issued
a Certificate of Attempted
Conciliation, having satisfied myself that all reasonable attempts to resolve
the matter by conciliation
had been exhausted. At that time the Notifier sought
the Commission list the matter for a limited arbitration on the operation of
“status quo” in cl 47(g) of the dispute resolution clause within the
NSW Ambulance Paramedics (State) Award 2023
(the Award)
reasons expressed at the time (in particular, the HSU’s indication that
resolution of the narrow status quo issue may well
facilitate the resolution of
the dispute by further conciliation) I was satisfied, despite some hesitation,
that to list the status
quo issue for separate determination would facilitate
the just quick and cheap resolution of the dispute.
the hearing the HSU relied upon an outline of written submissions filed 2
September 2025
, an outline of written submissions in reply
dated 7 October 2025
(the NSUBR),
a number of
and the evidence
(1) Ms Tess Oxley (who provided a Statement in chief and in reply), a paramedic
employed by the Respondent since April 2010, who
has been involved in
“many different consultations made by NSWA throughout the years, including
the implementation of the SWIFT
program, the Frontline Leadership Model (FLM)
Program and, later, the reintroduction of Station Managers” on behalf of
(2) Mr Michael Grayson, a paramedic employed by the Respondent for some 37 years
and delegate of the HSU, who described having been
involved in a number of
change processes with the Respondent (as a union delegate), including the
“the Rural Roster Dispute,
SWEP, SWIFT and Regional 500 programs”.
In that context Mr Grayson said he had “extensive experience in rosters
NSW Ambulance”
(3) Mr Dain Willougby, a paramedic employed by the Respondent for approximately
19 years, who gave evidence of his experience of
the SWIFT roll out in the Coffs
Harbour and Mid North Coast Zone of the Northern Sector of the
of Ms Oxley, Mr Grayson and Mr Willoughby in the course of their evidence
confirmed they had reviewed the evidence Mr Willis
and Mr Hughes. Only Ms Oxley
provided a reply statement in accordance with the Commission’s directions.
That reply statement
did not respond to anything in Mr Willis’ statement,
and responded to only a few matters in Mr Hughes’ statement. There
substance, very little factual dispute.
Respondent relied upon an outline of written submissions dated 30 September 2025
, and evidence of:
(1) Mr Daniel Willis, a paramedic employed by the Respondent since 2006, who has
worked in a number of positions across the paramedic
workforce. He is
substantively appointed as an SO, but since March 2023 has been employed as the
Senior Manager Workforce Program
Implementation. In that position he is “a
senior operational leader supporting the delivery of workforce enhancement and
initiatives,
including the SWIFT
enhancements”
evidence primarily directed to the introduction of temporary SOs as part of the
SWIFT enhancements, and the subsequent reintroduction
(2) Mr Damian Hughes
, a paramedic
employed with the Respondent since June 1997. He has held various positions over
the course of his long employment,
and since March 2022 has been the Associate
Director of the Respondent’s North Coast Sector. Mr Hughes primarily gave
relating to the roll-out of the SM positions in August 2024.
the witnesses were required for cross-examination. I have reviewed and had
regard to all that evidence, but not all of it will
be referred to in these
parties also filed a document entitled Statement of Agreed Facts and Disputed
Facts and Issues. Despite the rather extensive list
of facts said to be in
Dispute, as noted, there was in reality very little dispute in the evidence.
or around early 2022
government announced the SWIFT Paramedic Workforce Enhancements program. Mr
Willis, who has been working as the Senior Manager
Workforce Program
Implementation since March 2023, described SWIFT in this way (at [10] –
“The Strategic Workforce Infrastructure Team
Program is a
multi-year program involving the investment of approximately $1.76 billion into
NSW Ambulance including the recruitment
and onboarding of up to 2500 new staff
including 500 paramedics to rural and regional areas and building 30 new
stations in NSW.
The aim of SWIFT is to improve emergency response times, enhance the growth and
career pathways for clinicians and the wellbeing
and safety of staff.
One of the main objectives of SWIFT is to strengthen leadership with an uplift
in management capability across frontline teams, through
the Frontline
Leadership Model
understand consultation with the relevant unions, the HSU and the Australian
Paramedics Association (NSW)
, around the implementation of the
enhancements arising from SWIFT commenced in early 2023 with the first
“PCC” meeting
(which I understand means Peak Consultative
Committee), having been held on 8 or 9 February
confirmed that the
initial enhancement proposals did not provide for any additional management or
supervisory resources in connection
with the significantly increased paramedic
workforce. It was anticipated the new Frontline Leadership Model
would be implemented in a timely way and facilitate that enhanced
leadership. In the course of consultation regarding the rollout
of the initial
enhancements, the Respondent took on feedback indicating a need for more
leadership to support the increased paramedic
workforce in the short
and obtained approval (from
the SWIFT Executive Steering
addition of temporary Station Officer positions [as] an interim measure to
support the increasing paramedic workforce
pending the FLM
(my emphasis). As
Mr Willis described it in his oral evidence, “We would implement temporary
station officers to provide that
initial level of additional management on a
temporary basis until the new management structure was
implemented.”
email was sent from the Respondent to the PCC members on 14 February 2023
confirming the following (my
“Where a SWIFT enhancement is a complete new module, a Station Officer
will be appointed. This will either be on a permanent
or temporary 12-month
basis to support existing management structures.”
amounts to a ‘module’ generally was the subject of contest in the
evidence. There is very little contest in the evidence,
however, that in the
context of the SWIFT enhancements, the parties understood “a complete new
module” to mean 11 paramedics
and one team leader (now known as an SO),
that would be rostered to work as a unit (or module) over a roster pattern
(usually a 9
week roster pattern). To the extent there is any factual dispute
that dispute
to deal with the interim relief sought by the HSU.
HSU’s response to this email raised “concerns around the wording of
the allocation being based on a ‘complete
new module’, as it
doesn’t necessarily mean that an appropriate Paramedic to Station Officer
ratio is being maintained”
and pressed a position that “the current
ratio be maintained: 11 Paramedics = 1 Station Officer. Further the positions
be permanent”.
is clear on the evidence, particularly that of Mr Willoughby and Ms Oxley, that
the HSU, perhaps reluctantly (its preferred position
being the SOs should be
), accepted temporary
SOs would be introduced pending the introduction of the FLM. The primary concern
of the HSU was to ensure the
face to face supervision afforded to the paramedic
modules was provided until the FLM was implemented, whether it be by way of
appointments or otherwise. It is an agreed fact
“Temporary Station Officer positions were introduced as an interim measure
to support the paramedic workforce pending the Frontline
Leadership Model (FLM)
36 temporary SOs
were thereafter
appointed on temporary contracts of 12 months duration “with possible
at different
stations “depending on the current requirements of the station including
current Station Officer positions and
the number of additional paramedics
onboarded.”
Each of those
36 temporary SOs were introduced with a new
. At that time, an SO was
the first line manager in an ambulance station.
has been a delay in the development and rollout of the FLM. Mr Willis
understanding that the implementation of FLM was delayed due to the Notifier
invoking the 'status quo’ on the
program”. Mr Hughes gives evidence
to the same effect
. Mr Grayson
says “...FLM has been held up for a number of years due to lack of
clarity/head way.”
Oxley says that the FLM roll out has been delayed “due to a number of
, but in her
reply evidence, Ms Oxley does not state either Mr Willis or Mr Hughes are
mistaken in identifying the invocation of ‘status
quo’ by the HSU as
one of them. I had foreshadowed an intention to take steps to try and resolve
that broader dispute of the
Commission’s own
, but am led to understand
the parties have recently recommenced discussions regarding the implementation
of FLM. Further meetings
are scheduled through to January 2026. In those
circumstances, it is unnecessary for the Commission to takes steps to resolve
dispute of its own motion.
be the reason for it, the continued delays in the roll-out of the FLM resulted
in approval being given to the Respondent
to rollout additional management
resources in the form of permanently appointed Station Managers (
The position of SM already existed in the classification structure in the Award
(cl 5(j), Work Level Manager-Level
). The position was apparently
first introduced into a predecessor of the Award in 2008 and was used in
practice until in or around
2011. It is uncontroversial that as at 2024, there
had not been SMs appointed to ambulance stations for some years – hence
the deployment of SM positions in local management structuers in 2024 being
described in the evidence as its ‘reintroduction’.
As Mr Hughes
described it
considered that the reintroduction of this role would be a relatively simple
enhancement as it had previously been
negotiated into the Award and [was] part
of a model that was understood by the parties.”
8 August 2024, the Respondent sent the HSU and APA an email about upcoming
consultation sessions relating to the reintroduction
. The email attached a
copy of the SM PD (updated in relation to nomenclature and references, but
otherwise substantively the same
as had been previously agreed between the
parties), a document describing the “Station Manager concept
arrangements”,
and a list of the 56 places where an SM was to be appointed
(based on the places where SMs had been positioned
historically).
“concept arrangement” document identified SMs would be appointed as
a Level 2 Manager under the Award (the existing
classification), with a PD
“unchanged since its initial publication” save for minor amendments
to update references.
The SM would report directly to a Duty Operations Manager.
SOs would report directly to the SM. The SM would work an 8 line roster:
12 hour shifts worked on a rotating pattern of 2 day and 2 afternoon shifts
followed by 4 days off, averaging 38 hours per
week over an 8 week roster.
rostering pattern is significant, because it is (on any view of the various
roster patterns described in evidence), different
to the roster pattern of the
paramedic modules (unlike SOs, who are rostered as part of the module, to
provide face to face supervision
when on shift).
would be deployed as “part of the clinical response grid, as a rapid
response tier”
they would respond as a single unit, and so could respond quickly, but be
somewhat limited in the services they could provide
without assistance (for
example, assistance would be required for patient transport). Recruitment would
be merit based, and “Successful
candidates will be appointed to Zones with
management responsibility for a specific location(s), however there may be a
requirement
to work at other locations should the need
understand the longer-term proposal was for the persons appointed permanently as
an SM to be transitioned into a comparable position
(the Clinical Manager
position) in the FLM upon its introduction.
marked up SM PD provided to the HSU with the 8 August 2024 email described the
‘Purpose of the Position’ in this way
“The Station Manager supervises Station Officers Team Leaders on a day to
day basis to ensure the delivery of high quality,
cost effective emergency
health transport, clinical and operational practice, rescue and patient
transport services for the community.
The Station Manager supervises a number of Station Officers Team Leaders at a
large station or a number of Station Officers Team
Leaders managing small teams
across a group of rural stations.
The Station Manager may be part of an operational crew or rostered to
supervisory roles depending on the size and location of the
station and the
number of Station Officers team leaders being supervised.
are “developed between the
It would appear
it has always been a part of the PD of an SM that they “
may be part of
an operational crew or rostered to supervisory roles”,
depending on
their location and the make-up of their station, but their primary role is and
has always been the supervision of SOs
(formerly Team Leaders). As I understand
it, the extent to which SMs are now to be relied upon to provide daily
supervision of an
operational crew, rather than having an SO rostered as part of
a module to provide that frontline supervision, lies at the heart
Consultation
meetings relating to the reintroduction of SMs were held with the unions at
least on 15, 22, 29 August 2024, and 19 September
the minutes of those meetings (the content of which are not in any real
) it is clear there was
discussion around many aspects of the proposed reintroduction of SMs. Detailed
written feedback was provided
by the HSU on 21 August
(in response to the
documents sent on 8 August 2024 and the discussions at the first meeting). The
matters raised by HSU were discussed
at the consultation meeting the following
day (22 August 2024), and a detailed written response was provided to the
HSU’s correspondence
on 6 September
. The matters still in issue
were discussed in the meetings thereafter.
a result of the consultation process, on the evidence before me the HSU had all
its questions answered (albeit not everything they
raised was agreed), and
notably, the HSU were able to persuade the Respondent to reintroduce SMs at
additional stations (it would
appear 5 additional stations had SMs allocated as
a result of the consultation process), and to move the specific station at which
a number of the SMs would be
can be no doubt on the evidence that the issue at the heart of this dispute was
canvassed as part of those consultations. The
meeting minutes of 19 September
2024 record under the heading “1.6 Other Business”, the following
(emphasis added):
“Question raised regarding the retention of 3 station officers (including
1 temporary) at Broken Hill with the introduction
of a Station Manager. NSWA
advised that it will clarify the position, but initial advice which extends to
the broader context is
that temporary SO positions would not be continued at
locations due to receive a Station Manager
understand the advice as to the temporary SO position not being continued where
a permanent SM was appointed arose from a question
Mr Hughes gave unchallenged
evidence that (emphasis
“It is my recollection that during the consultation meetings, there was
discussion around what would happen to the temporary
Station Officers who had
been introduced at some locations as a temporary measure to support existing
management structures. NSWA
clearly communicated during consultation that these
roles would be transitioned back to a paramedic position on the introduction
the permanent Station Manager position. It was stated that 18 of the 61
locations receiving a Station Manager that had a temporary
appointed Station
Officer would be transitioned back to a paramedic position. No other temporary
appointed Station Officer positions
are impacted.”
the issue came up in the consultations is irrelevant. The fact is it was raised
and discussed. The “Action Item” for
the Respondent arising from the
notation in the minutes of the 19 September 2024 meeting extracted at [29]
above, was “NSWA
to confirm arrangements for temporary SOs at locations
slated to receive a Station
30 September 2024, the Respondent sent the unions a response to the Action Items
from the meeting on 19 September 2024. Amongst
the list was the following
(underlining added):
“4. NSWA to confirm arrangements for temporary SOs at locations slated
to receive a Station Manager
- The temporary SOs were introduced at some locations as a
temporary measure to support existing management structures. With the
introduction of the permanent extra position of SM at a location, a temporary SO
position at that location will transition to a Paramedic
that the HSU had
verbally communicated it did not agree with the SOs transitioning back to a
paramedic position, but there is no
doubt on the evidence the HSU was well aware
from (at the latest) 30 September 2024, that the Respondent was not going to
temporary SOs into further temporary engagements once an SM was appointed
to a station. The station would not lose the paramedic
that had been temporarily
appointed as an SO – they would be transitioned back to their substantive
paramedic position (and
I infer, other than to deal with some local staffing
anomaly such as occurred at Coffs Harbour, continue to be rostered as part of
their module). The Respondent’s position has not changed since at the
latest 30 September 2024
30 September 2024, the Respondent sent the HSU an additional
regarding consultation
regarding the reintroduction of SMs. It is a little lengthy, but in light of
some of the HSU submissions in
these proceedings it ought be set out
(underlining added):
“Dear Stuart,
I write regarding the reintroduction of Station Manager.
NSWA sees the reintroduction of Station Managers as providing significant
benefits for paramedics and operational managers.
As you are aware there has been a concerted effort by NSWA and the HSU to
undertake consultation on this program.
Consultation meetings were commenced on 15 August following the provision of
information including the concept of operation, proposed
locations and draft
role description on 8 August. Four meetings specific to Station Manager have
since occurred and responses have
also been provided to the written feedback
As put forward during consultation, there is interest in progressing this
program toward recruitment to support the benefits for
Based on the progress of consultation, we are now ready to proceed to the
recruitment phase and would intend to commence advertising
from Friday 4
We wish to acknowledge the effort and engagement the representatives from the
HSU have brought to the consultation.
This level of engagement has supported robust discussions and influenced
Of note the consultation has supported an adjustment in the total number of
locations for Station Managers from 56 to 61.
This was made possible following feedback on other historical locations.
Station Manager positions.
In regard to ongoing engagement, it is anticipated the recruitment process could
take upward of three months.
During that time, work will continue on planning the implementation and
on-boarding of the positions.
While elements relating to implementation have formed part of our consultation,
we would reasonably expect to continue engagement
with your union in the coming
months and remain interested in matters that might arise during that period.
Attached for your reference is a bundle of information as shared with HSU
representatives at various points in the consultation.
I would in particular draw your attention to:
Station Manager Locations – reflecting the adjustment from 56 to 61
Consultation action items – responses to final queries from the
consultation meetings,
Station Manager RD - Role Description for the position.
The remainder of the documents primarily relate to meeting minutes and feedback
to written input from HSU.
As you would appreciate there is a commitment to communicating the progress of
the Station Manager initiative with staff.
This is particularly relevant in relation to the recruitment phase given the
potential interest in the positions.
While there were some plans to progress this communication today, we wanted to
first take the opportunity to collate and redistribute
the attached information
relating the consultation in the first instance. We would however still be
aiming to communicate to staff
in the earlier part of this week.
I have CC’d Tess Oxley and Chelsea Barker into this mail. Their
contributions, and that of your other representatives, have
been invaluable to
Thank you for the engagement and effort HSU has committed to the Station Manager
program to date.
As always, please contact me should you have any queries or concerns.”
were subsequent meetings relating to the SM reintroduction on at least 17
October 2024
, 21 November
and 19 December
the invitation in the 30 September 2024 letter extracted at [34] above, there is
no evidence the HSU raised any issue or engaged
in any further correspondence
regarding the subject of this dispute.
Unsurprisingly,
from 30 September 2024 the Respondent considered “the industrial
consultation process to be finalised and that
it was able to proceed to the
recruitment phase”
was made clear over the consultation meetings that occurred from that time
through to the end of the year, and in correspondence
to the workforce.
aware that this was the Respondent’s position on the temporary SOs upon SM
recruitment, the HSU stood by whilst the SM
recruitment campaign took place
(applications for SM recruitment commenced on 4 October 2024 and ceased on 23
October 2024).
No dispute was
raised under cl 47 of the Award directly with the Respondent. No dispute was
raised in this Commission. There is no
evidence the HSU at or around 30
September 2024 or in the months that followed had suggested the consultation
regarding the reintroduction
of the SMs (including as to what would happen to
the temporary SOs upon the appointment of an SM), was inadequate or incomplete.
is not entirely clear when the document became available to the workforce, I
assume as part of the recruitment process, but the
evidence includes a
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) document entitled “Station Manager (SM)
. Notable from the FAQ
are the following:
“1. What is a Station Manager?
The Station Manager (SM) position was first introduced into the NSW Ambulance
management structure in 2008 and remains active within
the NSW Ambulance
Paramedics (State) Award 2023. SM positions will not displace any existing
substantive DOM & SO positions.
The Station Manager is responsible as part
of the sector management team for operational, clinical, and financial
governance.
3. Is the Station Manager part of the Frontline Leadership Model (FLM)?
No. The Station Manager role is separate to the FLM and is being implemented as
an immediate additional management support while
consultation continues on the
4. Will the SM role continue once FLM is implemented?
No. SMs will transition to Clinical Managers under FLM.
7. If I am a substantive Station Manager what happens when FLM is
implemented?
At FLM implementation employees substantively appointed as a Station Manager
will transition to a Clinical Manager (CM) position.
11. What are my responsibilities as a Station Manager?
The Station Manager is responsible for the operational, clinical and financial
governance of the station at the first line level.
The position holder provides
advice and direction to Station Officers on a shift-to-shift and day-to-day
basis, on matters including
rostering; clinical governance and leadership,
staffing; coaching staff, asset and financial management.
The Station Manager liaises and maintains effective communication with the Duty
Operations Manager, Station Officers, on-road operational
staff and Control
Centre employees in relation to operational matters.
14. Will there be on call for Station Managers?
No. There is no requirement for Station Managers to do on call.”
evidence discloses a risk assessment process in connection with the
reintroduction of SMs was undertaken between December 2024
and 10 January
. That included a meeting
with the HSU on 19 December 2024 “with the opportunity to provide
. Despite the
complaints made in these proceedings about the appropriateness of that risk
assessment, Mr Hughes’ unchallenged
evidence was to the best of his
knowledge “the Notifier did not raise any concerns following the outcome
of the WHS risk
assessment”
26 May 2025, it is not in dispute the Respondent had created 61 SM positions in
ambulance stations around the State, and recruited
57 SMs into those
genesis of the current dispute can be traced to the permanent appointment of an
SM in Coffs Harbour.
10 June 2023 Coffs Harbour Station received a SWIFT enhancement that included 11
FTE paramedics and a temporary Station Officer
(in other words, a complete new
module). Following this temporary appointment, Coffs Harbour had 3 Station
Officers, two of whom
were permanent, and one of whom was
5 April 2025, months
after the consultations between the HSU and the
Respondent surrounding the reintroduction of SMs had concluded, the SM role was
implemented
at Coffs Harbour Station. The temporary SO position transitioned to
a substantive paramedic role, as had been foreshadowed in the
consultation
process around the reintroduction of the SM positions in September 2024. The
structure at Coffs Harbour still retained
the 2 permanent Station Officer
26 May 2025, the HSU raised a dispute with the Respondent in relation to the
Coffs Harbour Station and sought to trigger the status
quo under cl 47(g) of the
(underlining
“I write to you regarding a practice that has been reported by ADHSU
delegates in the Mid North Coast.
It’s been reported that a Station Officer has been appointed as an acting
Station Manager at Coffs Harbour station, and NSWA
is refusing to backfill the
SO position that is now vacant. As such, Coffs Harbour is now running an SO down
for the foreseeable
future (use to have 3, now only have 2).
It is a longstanding practice that there is a SO for each and every module on a
station. The appointment of a Station Manager does
not substitute for a SO nor
does it negate the need for an SO. Further, it was never raised during
consultation that the appointment
of a Station Manager would prevent the
backfilling of an SO.
This is causing WHS issues as there is now reduced management and oversight on
station. HSU is putting a status quo as per the Award
on this practice, meaning
that all 3 SO positions need to be rostered for Coffs Harbour station. The
matter is now formally in dispute.”
claim in that letter that “it was never raised during consultation that
the appointment of a Station Manager would prevent
the backfilling of an
is self-evidently wrong.
Respondent replied on 29 May 2025, explaining that the transitioning of the SO
to their substantive paramedic position following
the appointment of a permanent
SM was consistent with both local consultation at Coffs Harbour (about which
there is no real evidence)
prior to the appointment of the SM, and as part of
the consultation through the peak forums (traced earlier in these
The Respondent
indicated a preparedness to resolve the dispute locally.
was a further exchange of correspondence between the HSU and the Respondent in
which the HSU demanded
“Immediate backfilling of the Station Officer position”, claiming
“Removing this role has left our members without
proper on-road support
during night shifts. It is affecting supervision, safety, and command functions
at major incidents”,
demanded “Proper consultation with the workers
directly affected” relying upon consultation obligations under the
Health and Safety Act
(NSW), and the “NSW Health Industrial
Consultative Arrangements Policy (PD2024_001)”, and “access to all
related to the decision-making”.
Respondent sent the HSU all the materials from the consultation regarding the
reintroduction of SMs in August and September 2024
(I note the HSU industrial
officer handling the matter had changed by this time, so the industrial officer
involved in the consultations
in September/October 2024 was no longer involved),
and a meeting took place on 12 June 2025. That was followed by an email dated
June 2025, in which the HSU said, amongst other things (emphasis
“Thank you again for your time and engagement in yesterday's meeting.
Following the discussion and in light of the absence of agreement, I write to
formally reinforce the invocation of status quo across
the state regarding the
current dispute.
To be clear, the Health Services Union is not opposing the implementation of
Station Managers (SMs). Rather, the core of this dispute
relates to the
reduction of Station Officer (SO) positions at stations where SMs have been or
are being introduced.
We formally challenge and dispute the current allocation of Station Officers
across affected stations, particularly where modules
are now operating without
one SO per roster module. As outlined previously, the original understanding and
commitment under the Frontline
Leadership framework was that one SO would be
appointed per module. The withdrawal of those roles—whether previously
as temporary or not—has not been agreed to and is the central
matter in dispute.
Accordingly, we confirm that the status quo invoked by the union requires the
reinstatement of all withdrawn or unfilled SO positions
at stations impacted by
this reduction, pending resolution of the dispute.”
is no evidence before me of “the original understanding and commitment
under the Frontline Leadership framework”
that “one SO would be
appointed per module”. There is, however, the evidence referred to earlier
as to what a ‘complete
new module’ would mean in the context of the
SWIFT enhancements more generally.
Respondent replied on 16 June 2025 saying, amongst other things (emphasis
“From our perspective, the introduction of the SM positions and transition
of the temporary SO positions are intrinsically
linked and have been subject to
consultation.
All matters raised during consultation had been responded to and NSWA has
progressed with implementing these changes following the
conclusion of
consultation. The HSU did not raise a dispute or request status quo due to any
concerns regarding the introduction
of the SM roles and transition of the
temporary SO positions.
Accordingly, NSWA is of the view that the established management positions have
changed following implementation, as confirmed on
30 September 2024.
While the transition of temporary SO positions at each location may vary to
account for local and contractual arrangements, the status
quo, in our view, is
to reflect the ‘new’ approved established management positions,
which has already been implemented.”
a further reply on 18 June 2025, the HSU said, amongst other
(1) In relation to the subject of the dispute (emphasis added):
“2. The Dispute Concerns SO Reductions and WHS Risks – Not the SM
Role We reaffirm that the HSU is not disputing the
establishment of the Station
Manager role itself. The dispute centres solely on the removal or
non-backfilling of SO roles, which
- Reduced frontline and night shift supervision;
- Weakened command and safety structures, especially during incidents;
- Created WHS risks that have not been appropriately assessed or
mitigated.”
(2) In relation to what the HSU asserted is the status quo:
“3. Status Quo Reflects Pre-Change Staffing Structures
The HSU does not accept that the newly implemented structure constitutes the new
status quo. The operational staffing levels that
existed prior to the withdrawal
of SO positions form the basis of the union’s status quo invocation.
This includes one SO per module, and any SO positions that were previously in
place—regardless of whether they were designated
as temporary—must
remain rostered until the dispute is resolved.”
(3) As for consultation, the HSU said it had not agreed to this change in
practice but emphasised it had been validly consulted (emphasis
“While we acknowledge that conversations regarding the Station Manager
(SM) rollout occurred in late 2024, we must respectfully
restate the Health
Services Union’s position:
1. Feedback Was Provided – No Agreement Was Reached
Although HSU representatives and delegates participated in the consultation
meetings, it is not accurate to say the union agreed
to the removal of Station
Officer (SO) positions as part of the SM rollout.
The union consistently expressed concerns about any reduction in SO numbers
during those meetings. ...
At no point did the HSU support a model in which the introduction of SMs would
result in a net reduction in SO coverage—particularly
without mitigation
strategies in place.
Lastly, we reject the suggestion that the absence of a written HSU submission
equates to an absence of feedback. Union representatives
clearly provided verbal
consultation.”
Dispute was ultimately notified to this Commission on 10 July 2025, describing
the dispute as set out in the extract at the outset
of these reasons for
interlocutory hearing is directed to securing interim relief, reliant upon cl
47(g) of the Award. The Award was made by consent
on 21 December 2023, with
a nominal term of 1 July 2023 to 30 June 2026. It provided for a
material change in the classification
structure during that nominal term.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, there are a number of provisions directed to the
management of change
during the nominal term, including clauses 5(n), 49, 51 and
6, entitled “Introduction of Change” which provides:
“Any proposal that will significantly affect employees covered by the
Award will be the subject of genuine consultation between
the parties.
Should such a change lead to an expanded scope of practice for any
classification or group of employees covered by this Award, the
parties agree to
discuss the impact of this on the classification structure.”
Award contemplates engagement on a permanent full-time, permanent part-time,
temporary full-time, temporary part-time or casual
and for employees to be
provided with a position description
developed between the parties
commensurate with their position
upon employment.
would be apparent, the SM position was reintroduced using the PD previously
applied to that position (updated to present day nomenclature
and references,
but not otherwise changed). That PD was supplied to the union (in a
‘track changes’ form to enable easy
identification of relevant
amendments) under an email of 8 August 2024. There is no evidence of any issue
having been raised by the
HSU with that updated PD, or the scope of duties of an
SM therein described. The issue giving rise to this dispute as I understand
although it is not expressed clearly in this way, is the deployment of SMs in
the reintroduction of that position (including
the extent to which they are to
be required to undertake frontline supervision in the absence of an SO being on
duty), is inconsistent
with the PD or the historical deployment of SMs . In that
connection, the PD has always
“The Station Manager may be part of an operational crew or rostered to
supervisor roles depending on the size and location
of the station and the
number of Station officers team leaders being supervised.”
the HSU is correct in that submission is a question for the substantive
then to the Award, clause 7, entitled “Employee’s Duties” says
(amongst other things, emphasis added):
“The employer may direct an
employee to carry out such duties as are reasonable, and within the limits of
the employee’s
skills, competence and training consistent with the
employee’s classification, provided that such duties are not designed to
promote de-skilling.” Clause 7 otherwise requires directions under to be
“consistent with the employer’s duties
to provide a safe and healthy
working environment”, and “undertaken in a
fair, reasonable and sensible
. The HSU did not
rely upon these parts of cl 7 in these proceedings (and no mention is made of
them in the correspondence that preceded
the notification of this dispute).
47 of the Award provides (emphasis added):
47. Issues Resolution
(a) The parties must:
(i) Use their best endeavours to cooperate in order
to avoid grievances and disputes arising between the parties or between the
employer and individual employee(s); and
(ii) Abide by the procedures set out in this clause to resolve
any issue which might arise; and
(iii) Place emphasis on negotiating a settlement of any issue
at the earliest possible stage in the process.
(b) In this clause, "issue" means any question, issue,
grievance, dispute or difficulty which might arise between the parties
(i) The interpretation, application or operation of
this Award; or
(ii) Any allegation of discrimination in employment within the
meaning of the
Anti-Discrimination Act
which is not
covered by established policies and procedures applicable to the employer
regardless of whether the issue relates to
an individual employee or to a group
of employees.
(c) Any issue, and in the case of a grievance or dispute, any
remedy sought, must be discussed in the first instance by the employee(s)
the Union on behalf of the employee(s) if the employee(s) so request) and the
immediate supervisor of that employee(s).
(d) If the issue is not resolved within a reasonable time, it
must be referred by the employee(s) immediate supervisor to his or
supervisor (or his or her nominee) and may be referred by the employee(s) to the
Union Organiser for the employer. Discussions
at this level must take place and
be concluded within two working days of referral or such extended period as may
(e) If the issue remains unresolved, it may be referred by any
of the parties to more senior officials of the Union who must then
confer with
the Chief Executive (and/or his/her nominee(s)) of the employer. The conclusions
reached by those representatives must
be reported to the parties within two
working days of referral or such extended periods as may be agreed.
(f) If these procedures are exhausted without the issue being
resolved, or if any of the time limits set out in those procedures
are not met,
parties may seek to have the matter mediated by an agreed third party, or the
matter may be referred, in accordance
with the provisions of
Industrial Relations Act
, to the Industrial Relations
Commission of New South Wales for its assistance in resolving the issue.
(g) Unless agreed otherwise by the parties, the status quo must
continue whilst these procedures are being followed. For
this purpose
"status quo" means the work procedures and practices in
(i) Immediately before the issue arose;
(ii) Immediately before any change to
those procedures or practices, which caused the issue to arise, was made.
The employer must ensure that all practices applied during the operation of
these procedures are in accordance with safe working
(h) Throughout all the stages of these procedures, adequate
records must be kept by the parties of all discussions.
(i) These procedures are to be facilitated by the earliest
possible advice by one party to the other of any issue or problem which
rise to a grievance or dispute.
(j) All matters in dispute arising out of the application of
this Award may be referred to a disputes committee consisting of not
six members with equal representatives of the employer and the Union. Such
committee shall have the power to investigate
all matters in dispute and report
to the employer and the Union, respectively, with such recommendation as it may
think right and,
in the event of no mutual decision being arrived at by the
Committee, the matter in dispute may be referred to the Industrial Relations
Commission of New South Wales.
is in that context I come to consider the application of cl 47(g) of the Award
in the context of this interim hearing.
SUBMISSIONS AND
Notifier’s Submissions
HSU’s submission can be reduced to the following propositions:
(1) NSW Ambulance organises its operational staff by reference to
“modules”. A standard or complete module (in an ambulance
is made up of 12 full-time equivalent staff: 11 paramedics and one SO, who
together work a 9-line roster. Each station
that operates at least one module
has at least one SO. Those stations with less than a full module also have an SO
to provide supervisory
support and manage day to day operations. The number of
SO positions has historically been directly linked to the number of modules
given station
. The important
feature of a module is that the SO is rostered with that team, unlike the SMs
that work on a different roster pattern.
(2) Consistent with that historic rostering ratio/practice, in the context of
the SWIFT enhancements, wherever a “complete
new module” (meaning,
on the HSU’s case, 11 FTE paramedic positions) was rolled out, a temporary
SO was also allocated,
pending the rollout of the FLM.
(3) The FLM has not been implemented. The SO roles introduced as part of the
SWIFT enhancements, temporary pending the introduction
of the FLM, should not
have been impacted by the subsequent reintroduction of SMs. SMs were not
introduced as part of the FLM. The
roles and working patterns of SOs and SMs are
different. SOs should continue to be rostered to provide frontline supervision
the introduction of FLM.
(4) The refusal to backfill the position of SO (on a temporary or permanent
basis) pending the introduction of the FLM, following
the recruitment and
deployment of SMs, is a change to a “consistent and clearly identifiable
working practice and procedure
[that] was in place – namely, that each
module established under the SWIFT enhancement program included one dedicated
(5) Clause 47(g)(ii) of the Award provides, unless otherwise agreed, “the
existing status quo – defined as the work practices
and procedures in
place immediately before the issue arose – must be
maintained”
connection, giving the words used their ordinary meaning viewed in context, a
work practice means the habitual or customary
performance” of work, and a
work procedure is the act or manner of proceeding in any action or process or
conduct in connection
(6) The ratio of paramedics to SOs on a roster is a work practice and/or
procedure. The respondent is required to maintain the status
quo until this
dispute is resolved, meaning they must continue to roster SOs as part of a
complete module (at least up until the
time FLM is introduced).
(7) The Commission should reject the Respondent’s contention that the
status quo was one
per module, rather than one SO per module. The
roles of SO and SM are different, with different scopes, responsibilities and
submitted (NSUBR at [16] – [17]):
“The Respondent claims that the status quo is "one manager per module."
That phrase, on its face, suggests one dedicated manager
module—nothing else makes sense. If that were the case, then it would have
to be a Station Officer, because Station Managers
are not dedicated to a single
module. They are allocated to stations and oversee multiple teams or modules. In
fact, their very role
involves supervising one or more Station Officers, not
replacing them. So, the claim that a Station Manager fulfils the “one
manager per module” requirement collapses under examination.
If, on the other hand, what the Respondent means is simply “some form of
manager per module,” then even a DOM would suffice.
But that, again,
defeats the entire purpose of introducing enhancements to management and
supervision in the first place. After all,
if the existing structure of DOMs was
sufficient, there would have been no need to introduce more Station Officers in
2023, or Station
Managers in 2024. The point here is that only Station Officers
were intended to enhance management and leadership at the module level,
Station Managers, introduced later, were designed to assist stations, not
individual modules. They were layered on top of
what already existed. So, trying
to retroactively claim that one replaced the other is disingenuous and
inconsistent with the Respondent’s
own timeline and logic.”
(8) The failure to backfill SO positions following the implementation of SMs
is not a mere technical breach of the status quo
. SMs were an
additional resource placed at locations where they had been placed historically,
not based on an assessment of supervisory
. Temporary SOs were
already in place – there was no demonstrated operational need for an
additional SM
justification for temporary SOs pending the introduction of the FLM was because
the Respondent accepted the increased paramedic
workforce required additional
frontline supervision and
leadership.
In response to the
submission (RSUB [27]) that “the Commission's general approach to
workplace change is not to infringe upon
an employer's right to manage unless
the employer's action imposes unfair or unreasonable demands on employees or
where it becomes
unsafe”, that HSU argued that was precisely the scenario
it was dealing with. The removal and non-backfilling of Station Officer
have placed unreasonable strain on the workforce and created clear safety
concerns. It is a matter of employee safety, fairness,
and operational
(9) By this dispute the HSU is not seeking to interfere with managerial
discretion in the operation of the Respondent’s business
(cf RSUB [25]
– [26]), it is seeking compliance with the status quo obligation under cl
47 of the Award
for Relief, the Dispute notice sought “the status quo be maintained
[pending resolution], specifically that one SO be rostered
per module,
consistent with the previously implemented operational structure”
and “A recommendation pursuant to
section 134(2)
Relations Act
(NSW) that NSW Ambulance reinstate all withdrawn or
unfilled Station Officer positions previously embedded within
NSUB the HSU said it “seeks orders from the Commission to maintain this
arrangement until the matter is determined or
the parties reach a
resolution”
The Orders it sought were proposed under the new s
136(1)(d) of the IR Act, enacted by the
Industrial Relations and Other
Legislation Amendment (Workplace Protections) Act
2025 No 42. The HSU
submitted the new section 136(1)(d) expressly empowers the Commission to make
any order it considers necessary
to resolve an industrial dispute, including
orders consequent upon the application or interpretation of an industrial
instrument.
The situation
presented in these proceedings squarely engages section 136(1)(d) of the
It sought orders from the
Commission that:
(1) the Respondent be required to fill and backfill the Station Officer
positions in question, on an interim basis, until FLM is
rolled out.
(2) Other Orders the Commission deems fit.
Respondent’s submissions can be essentially reduced to these
propositions:
(1) The Commission will not lightly interfere with the rights of an employer to
manage its operations
Commission's general approach to workplace change is not to infringe upon an
employer's right to manage unless the employer's
action imposes unfair or
unreasonable demands on employees or where it becomes
. It is not for the
Commission to substitute its own views should they be different from the
Respondent, “
without more
” being shown by the
. As Hungerford J said
BHP Steel AIS Pty Limited v Federated Ironworkers' Association of
Australia, New South Wales Division
(unreported, Hungerford J, IRC94/2208, 7
November 1994):
“The way in which issues of this nature are assessed by the Commission,
involving as they do potential intervention in the
employer's operation and
management of its business, requires the Commission not to assume the role of
the employer. Rather, the
approach is, and this is a longstanding and
established principle, to attend to whether the employer's action imposes unfair
or unreasonable
demands on employees, not infrequently referred to as industrial
injustice.”
(2) SOs and SMs were only necessary because of the delay in the
implementation of the FLM. The SOs affected by this dispute were always
as an interim measure, reflected in the fact they were appointed on a temporary
basis on 12 month engagements (with possible
. They were never
intended to be permanent
(3) The reintroduction of SMs was to further support SWIFT enhancements
pending the implementation of the
. The SM role was one well
understood, having been negotiated and accepted in the
. The SM role continued to
form part of the classification structure of the Award, and had an agreed
(4) Both the introduction of SOs and SMs was the subject of extensive
consultation
. As a result of
. It was well
communicated and understood that temporary SOs would revert to their substantive
position as a paramedic upon the appointment
. The Notifier raised no
objection to that proposal at the time of
consultation
(5) The Notifier was well aware that the Respondent considered consultation
as at and end on 30 September 2024, and further that the
Respondent conducted
recruitment of SM positions over October
(6) As at 26 May 2025, when the status quo was invoked in relation to a
dispute localised to Coffs Harbour, and later on 13 June 2025
when the Notifier
sought to extend the status quo across the State, the factual position was there
were 61 permanent SM positions
created, 57 of which had been filled, and of the
36 temporary SO positions initially deployed, 18 had reverted to paramedic
through natural
(7) The Commission should understand the concept of ‘status quo’
by examining its operation contextually, and in a manner
consistent with the
discussion of a status quo provision in the decision of the Full Bench in
South Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association v Health Secretary on behalf
of Western NSW Local Health District
[2019] NSWIRComm 1025
In particular, here, as
was the case with the clause under consideration by the Full Bench in that
matter, the status quo provision
informs the parties of how work is to continue
while the dispute remains unresolved. It would be inconsistent with this purpose
the status quo provision were to be interpreted as operating to stop a party
from continuing their business as they usually would
while the dispute remains
unresolved. As at 26 May 2025 (or 13 June 2025), the “status quo”
was “one manager per
module not one Station Officer per
as alleged by the
Notifier, nor was it one SO per module
(8) The Notifier seeks to place constraints on the Respondent’s ability
to implement SMs. Clause 47(g) operates in the general
framework of the Award to
preserve rather than to constrain the Respondent’s rights to implement
strategies to enhance its
The Respondent has
the ultimate right to manage its operation according to its perceived business
needs and lawful requirements.
(9) The Notifier is, by this dispute, attempting to transform a
position with respect to SOs into a permanent position, in circumstances
where this was never the basis upon which the temporary SO
implemented or were operating in
. By the relief sought,
the HSU was “trying to recover the ingredients from a cake that’s
already been baked”
(10) While the Respondent accepts that the Commission has very wide powers to
deal with disputes notified under s 130, including by
way of recommendations, it
is not empowered to make any kind of order which might seem just in the
circumstances of the particular
The Commission must
have regard to the public interest, including the statutory purpose, obligations
and responsibilities of the
Health Services Act
(NSW): “to adopt and
implement all necessary measures (including systems of planning, management and
quality control) as will
best ensure the efficient and economic operation and
use of resources in the provision of ambulance services”.
(11) To attract the Commission’s intervention, the Notifier is required
to demonstrate with compelling evidence that reasons
exist to support the
proposition that the Commission should interfere with the Respondent’s
management of its operations under
the HS Act. The Notifier has failed to do
Respondent submits not only that the Notifier has failed to make good its
contentions with respect to the ‘status quo’,
but that the
Commission should in fact make a recommendation in its favour
“permitting”
“36.1 Temporary Station Officer positions to expire upon their terms
without the requirement to be backfilled; and
36.2 Station Managers to continue to fulfil their duties pursuant to the terms
and conditions of their appointment.
CONSIDERATION
would appear the issues requiring determination are as follows:
(1) Does this dispute engage cl 47 of the Award at all?
(2) If so, what is the ‘status quo’ for the purpose of cl 47(g) of
the Award, and is the Respondent acting consistently
with that obligation?
(3) Is the Commission empowered by s 136(d) to make orders of the kind
contemplated by the Notifier?
(4) What, if any, relief ought the Commission grant the Notifier in the
circumstances?
Does this dispute engage cl 47 of the Award at all?
is no suggestion the Commission does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine
the dispute. The dispute is clearly about an
“industrial matter”
within the meaning of s 6 of the IR Act. The resolution of this interim
application will not finally
dispose of that dispute. But the foundation of the
interim relief the HSU seeks is cl 47(g) of the Award (extracted earlier in
reasons). At the outset of the hearing I raised whether the subject matter
of this dispute was an “issue” for the purpose
of cl 47 of the
Award, and if it were not, whether cl 47(g) had any application to the dispute
at all. I deliberately raised that
matter at the outset as I was conscious the
Notifier may wish to lead evidence (beyond what was in the statements), that
subject matter of the dispute to an “issue” as the Award
defines it. I invited submissions (as part of the closing submissions)
proper operation cl 47 of the Award requires the relevant clause to be given
meaning (a process of construction) and applied to
the facts. The relevant
principles of interpretation are not in dispute and were
New South Wales Nurses and
Midwives' Association v State of NSW
[2024] NSWSC 636
They need not be set out here.
is trite that the interpretation of an industrial instrument commences with the
ordinary meaning of the words used in the instrument
having regard to relevant
context and its industrial purpose.
47 of the Award meets the IR Act’s requirement that an award contain a
dispute resolution provision: an award cannot
be made “unless it contains
procedures for the resolution of industrial disputes under the award”,
providing for consultation
at the workplace and the involvement of relevant
industrial organisations
Dispute settlement provisions in an award serve to encourage the orderly and
fair disposition of disputes and, if possible, to avoid
disputation
47, amongst other things, requires the parties to “Use their best
endeavours to cooperate in order to avoid grievances
and disputes arising
between the parties
by the procedures set out in this clause to resolve any issue which might
, and requires
the parties to “Place emphasis on negotiating a settlement of any issue at
the earliest possible stage in the
procedures in cl 47 “are to be facilitated by the earliest possible advice
by one part to the other of any issue or problem
which may give rise to a
grievance or dispute”. Clause 47 provides two procedures for the
resolution of any “issue”:
(1) The first is a familiar escalating process for discussions about “Any
, emphasising
timeliness in the application of that procedure. Clause 47(d), the second stage
of the procedure provides, if discussions
at the first level of discussion are
not resolved “within a reasonable time”, the dispute
“must” be escalated
to the next level, stating “Discussions at
this level must take place and be concluded within two working days of referral
or such extended as may be agreed”. Clause 47(e) provides if unresolved at
the second stage the dispute “may” be
referred to more senior
levels, and if so, then “The conclusions reached by those representatives
must be reported to the parties
within two working days of referral or such
extended periods as may be agreed”. I note the procedure requires
records [to be] kept by the parties of all discussions”.
(2) Clause 47(j) permits “All matters in dispute arising out of the
application of this Award” to be “referred
to a disputes
committee” made up of six members with equal representatives of the
employer and the Union, who are to “investigate
all matters in dispute and
report to the employer and the Union, respectively, with such recommendation as
it may think right”.
the dispute is not resolved by either of these procedures, or “if any of
the time limits ...are not met” in the application
of the first procedure,
the matter “may” be referred to an agreed mediator or to the
Industrial Relations
status quote in clause 47(g) is directed the “work procedures and
practices in place” before “the issue arose”
caused the issue to arise”, and provides such work procedures and
practices “must continue whilst these
procedures are being
followed”. It obliges the Respondent to “ensure that all practices
applied during the operation
of these procedures are in accordance with safe
working practices”.
“issue” in cl 47 is defined in subclause 47(b) (extracted above).
No-one suggests the dispute in these proceedings
arises from an allegation of
discrimination (cf cl 47(b)(ii)), and so for cl 47 to be engaged at all, a
dispute must fall within
cl 47(b)(i) “any question, issue, grievance,
dispute or difficulty which might arise between the parties about:...(i) The
interpretation,
application or operation of this Award...”
Self-evidently,
the status quo obligation in cl 47(g) can only be engaged if an issue enlivens
the dispute resolution procedure in
cl 47 at all. The question I asked the
parties to address was specifically how this dispute could be characterised as a
dispute about
the interpretation, application or operation of the Award –
that is, an ‘issue’, for the purpose of cl 47(b) so
as to engage cl
47, and 47(g) in particular.
answer to the question the HSU submitted that this dispute “touche[d]
multiple elements of the award” and was not only
“a single issue
. Specifically,
the HSU referred to:
(1) The obligation to genuinely consult in cl
(it was said “there
was no such genuine consultation, ...in relation to the decision to remove the
station officer positions,
which, by prior agreement, were to remain in place
until the implementation of the FLM structure”). In this connection, the
HSU referred to
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v
Mt Arthur Coal Pty Ltd
[2021] FWCFB 6059
(2021) 310 IR 399
, a decision discussing,
amongst other things, the obligation to consult imposed by s 47 of the
Workplace Health and Safety Act
2011 (NSW);
(2) The proper application of the Award particularly in relation to
classification levels. In this connection it was said “the
station officer
role is classified as level 1 of management, whereas the station manager is a
level 2 of management ... these roles
are distinct and not
interchangeable. The respondent has attempted to collapse this
distinction, effectively, absorbing the supervisory
responsibilities [of the SO]
into the station manager role, and stating that it's only
necessary ‑ one manager per module,
thereby bypassing both
classifications”
(3) The failure to comply with the status quo requirement
Respondent submitted this was not a dispute about the application,
interpretation or operation of the Award at all. There is no
evidence of a
dispute about consultation. There was a ‘faint suggestion’ that this
dispute was about ‘rostering’,
but there is no evidence that is
being seriously advanced in these
proceedings
. To the extent
there is some suggestion of a safety issue, “if any station officers who
were reverted back to their paramedic
roles are still there, it makes very
little sense to suggest that there was some
understand to mean, merely attaching the label of SO does not change the
knowledge and skill of the paramedic who continues
to form part of a roster
module), and in any event, having regard to the classification descriptors of
Manager Level 1 and Manager
Level 2 in the Award, a Manager Level 2 “is
assumed to be someone who has the knowledge and skills of a Manager Level 1,
. That role
of the SM was historically agreed and has never changed. There is no evidence of
a dispute about the application, interpretation
or operation of the Award.
do not accept the HSU’s submission that the dispute currently before the
Commission is about a failure to comply with cl 47(g).
A dispute about
compliance with cl 47(g) cannot of itself be the “issue” that
attracts the operation of cl 47 in the
first place. Clause 47(g) operates to
ensure the interests of the parties in dispute are not prejudiced while the
parties follow
the dispute resolution
. It has no work to do
unless and until an “issue” within the meaning of cl 47(b) is
raised, thereby invoking the dispute
settlement procedure. I reject the
submission the dispute that invoked the operation of cl 47
in the first
was a dispute over the application of cl 47(g).
course if a dispute over an issue arises and the dispute settlement procedure is
engaged and the status quo invoked, and there
is a subsequent dispute over
whether a party is complying with its obligations under cl 47(g), that further
raise an issue about the interpretation, application or
operation of the Award. That is not, however, what has been notified to this
Commission. There is no evidence that anything has materially changed since the
invocation of the status quo on 26 May 2025.
the extent the HSU submits this dispute is properly characterised as a dispute
of cl 6, and in particular
the obligation to genuinely consult, I do not accept that submission:
(1) There was no complaint of inadequate consultation under the Award at or
around 30 September 2024, or in the letter of 26 May
2025 at the genesis of the
current dispute, or in the 13 June 2025 correspondence from the HSU extending
the scope of the dispute
beyond Coffs Harbour, or in the 18 June 2025 letter
reinforcing the HSU position, or in the Dispute notice itself.
(2) The Dispute notice articulates a dispute about “the
reduction in SO
, which has occurred without agreement and has altered long-standing
operational support structures at station level” (emphasis
in original).
That is consistent with the preceding correspondence. In its 13 June 2025
letter, the HSU says “the core of this
dispute relates to the reduction of
Station Officer (SO) positions at stations where SMs have been or are being
introduced.”
In the 18 June 2025 letter the HSU says “The dispute
centres solely on the removal or non-backfilling of SO roles” with
attended consequences alleged.
(3) In the 18 June 2025 letter the HSU does not allege a lack genuine
consultation under the Award. Quite the contrary. It acknowledges
representatives and delegates participated in the consultation meetings”
but that the union had not “agreed
to the removal of Station Officer (SO)
positions as part of the SM rollout”, emphasising “Union
representatives clearly
provided verbal feedback in formal meetings, which
constitutes a valid form of consultation.” As the Full Bench of the Fair
Work Commission in
CFMEU v Mr Arthur Coal
observed in its summary of
established principles with respect to an obligation to consult (emphasis
“an ordinary understanding of the word “consult” would suggest
that the obligation to consult does not carry with
it any obligation either to
seek or to reach agreement on the subject for consultation. Consultation is not
an exercise in collaborative
decision-making. All that is necessary is that a
genuine opportunity to be heard about the nominated subjects be extended to
required to be consulted before any final decision is made”
respect, trying to characterise this dispute as being about the operation of cl
6 of the Award was a transparent attempt to frame
this dispute so it appeared to
attract the operation of cl 47, in order that the HSU could assert maintenance
of the ‘status
quo’. I accept the Respondent’s submission that
there is no evidence of this being a dispute about consultation.
to the remaining contention, whilst the issue was not framed in the dispute
notice as ‘collapsing’ the roles of Manager
Level 1 and Manager
Level 2, from the outset the substance of the dispute has been framed as one
directed to the proper supervisory
role of SOs and SMs:
(1) In the email of 26 May 2025, the genesis of the current proceedings, the
HSU, having raised concern about the refusal to backfill
the SO position upon
the appointment of an SM,
“It is a longstanding practice that there is a SO for each and every
module on a station. The appointment of a Station Manager
does not substitute
for a SO nor does it negate the need for an SO. ...
This is causing WHS issues as there is now reduced management and oversight on
(2) In the email of 13 June 2025, having referred to the “core of this
dispute” as noted above, the HSU
“We formally challenge and dispute the current allocation of Station
Officers across affected stations, particularly where
modules are now operating
without one SO per roster module. As outlined previously, the original
understanding and commitment under
the Frontline Leadership framework was that
one SO would be appointed per module. The withdrawal of those
roles—whether previously
described as temporary or not—has not been
agreed to and is the central matter in dispute.”
(3) In the email of 18 June 2025, having referred to the HSU’s
“consistently expressed concerns about any reduction in
SO numbers”
during the consultation meetings in 2024, the HSU emphasised “The
understanding was that SMs would enhance,
not replace, on-road supervisory
capacity”, and continued to
“At no point did the HSU support a model in which the introduction of SMs
would result in a net reduction in SO coverage—particularly
mitigation strategies in place.”
“We reaffirm that the HSU is not disputing the establishment of the
Station Manager role itself. The dispute centres solely
on the removal or
non-backfilling of SO roles, which has:
frontline and night shift supervision;
Weakened command
and safety structures, especially during incidents;
Created WHS
risks that have not been appropriately assessed or mitigated.
The changes have materially altered operational support structures and were
implemented without addressing the specific risks raised
by members or ensuring
equivalent coverage.”
(4) The Dispute notice itself, as referred to earlier in these reasons,
focuses on a dispute about “the reduction in SO staffing”
“long-standing operational support structures at station level”
(emphasis in original).
5 of the Award contains the classification structure, referred to as Work
Levels”. The “Manager Work Levels”
set out in subclauses 5(i)
to (l), which include Manager – Level 1 and Manager – Level 2, and
“are intended to
encompass employees who are registered paramedics and
appointed to management roles”. The “Positions” within Manager
Level 1 include persons appointed as a “Team Leader”. It is not in
dispute that an SO is a Team Leader, or that SOs are
appointed as Manager
– Level 1 employees. The positions within Manager – Level 2 include
persons appointed as a “Station
Manager”. Clause 5(n) provides,
amongst other things, that the “assignment of a classification to a work
level in this
Award must be done by genuine consultation between the parties
with a mind to achieve agreement”.
Award requires employees to be provided “with a position description as
developed between the parties commensurate with
. The position
description of an SM is in evidence. It is clear the position focuses upon the
management of teams via interface with
SOs, rather than the face to face
supervision of a team directly. It is sufficient for present purposes to
emphasis the “Purpose
of Position” in the PD (using the marked up
version of the PD disclosed on 8 August 2024):
“The Station Manager supervises Station Officers Team Leaders on a day to
day basis to ensure the delivery of high quality,
cost effective emergency
health transport, clinical and operational practice, rescue and patient
transport services for the community.
The Station Manager supervises a number of Station Officers Team Leaders at a
large station or a number of Station Officers Team
Leaders managing small teams
across a group of rural stations.
The Station Manager may be part of an operational crew or rostered to
supervisory roles depending on the size and location of the
station and the
number of Station Officers team leaders being supervised.”
would add the responsibilities of the SMs upon their reintroduction were
described in answer to Question 11 in the FAQ document
circulated by the
Respondent, extracted at [39] above.
of the Respondent’s submissions on this question seemed to raise the
merits of the dispute, rather than the proper characterisation
of what the
dispute is about (for example, whether there was in fact any ‘risk’
arising from an SO reverting to the position
of paramedic, but still being
available for deployment in the same module). The merits have not yet been
accept the substance of the dispute raised by the HSU, directed as it is to the
nature and scope of the supervisory roles of SOs
and SMs, respectively Manager
Level 1 and Manager Level 2 under the Award, in the context of the
reintroduction of the SM position
is properly characterised as a
“question, issue, grievance, dispute or difficulty” about, at the
least, the application
or operation of the Award, and as such is about an issue
within the meaning of cl 47(b).
addition, although it was not specifically raised by the HSU, aspects of the way
in which the asserted collapsing of Manager Level
1 and Manager Level 2 are said
to impact on the work of employees may raise the duties of employees under cl 7
of the Award (extracted
earlier in this decision). Specifically the obligation
on the Respondent to ensure employees, who are bound to perform “such
duties as are...reasonable” and “consistent with the
classification”
allocated duties in a “fair, reasonable and sensible
“consistent with the employer’s duties to provide a safe and healthy
working environment”
What is the ‘status quo’ for the purpose of cl 47(g)
of the Award, and is the Respondent acting consistently with that
obligation?
47(g) is directed to the maintenance (during the dispute resolution processes)
of the work procedures and practices in place
(a question of fact), at two
potentially different points in time: either “
Immediately before the
issue arose”,
which may look to a time before any change to work
practices or procedures has occurred, or
“Immediately before any change
to those procedures or practices, which caused the issue to arise, was
, which necessarily looks to work procedures and practices in
the issue arose. More specifically, to the work procedures
and practices in place
before any change which caused the issue to arise
operation of cl 47 of the Award is, despite the differences in language between
the award under consideration in
New South Wales Nurses and Midwives’
Association v Health Secretary on behalf of Western NSW Local Health
and cl 47 of the Award, is accurately described in the decision of
the Full Bench
– [51], modified to reflect cl 47(b):
“...The Status Quo Provision will apply to the broad range of disputes
that may arise within the context of ...[cl 47(b)] ...
and requires that the
established work practices and procedures will continue as they were immediately
before the dispute arose,
or as they were immediately before any change to those
procedures or practices, which caused the issue to arise (provided these are
Contrary to the Appellant’s submissions, the subclause will apply in every
dispute. As we have noted, the Status Quo Provision
requires in such matters
that what has happened historically (the work practices and procedures in
place), must continue until the
resolution of the dispute, or if the dispute is
dispute must be retained during the currency of the dispute.”
terms, the concept of ‘status quo’ in cl 47(g)(ii) will require the
reversion to work practices and procedures extant
before any change,
change to work procedures and practices is what
caused the issue to arise.
The Respondent’s complaint that the notifier may be engaged in
“an exercise of trying to recover the ingredients from
a cake that's
already been baked”, may ring hollow, as that is precisely what cl
47(g)(ii) contemplates.
of these two alternative concepts of ‘status quo’ (ie s 47(g)(i) or
(ii)) applies to a dispute will inevitably be
determined by the facts of the
given case, having regard to the parties obligations under cl 47 viewed as a
whole (in particular,
cl 47(a) and (i)).
have no difficulty accepting that the scope of the supervisory work performed by
SOs and SMs, and the allocation or rostering of
SOs as the Team Leader of a
‘module’ of paramedics, is a work procedure and/or practice within
the meaning of cl 47(g)
of the Award. A work practice or procedure may be
something less than a documented
HSU says the ‘status quo’ it invokes is that contemplated by cl
47(g)(ii). The ‘issue’ is the role of
an SO and an SM (Manager Level
1 and Manager Level 2 under the Award), and the reduction in SO staffing arising
from the introduction
of SMs, which it is said altered long standing operation
support structures at station level. The change to work procedures and practices
is the change to SO supervision of a module, so that there is no longer an SO to
each complete module. That change was implemented
after the consultation in
September 2024. It is the work procedures and practices in place
September 2024 that the HSU says reflects the status quo for the purpose of
cl 47(g)(ii).
Respondent says the relevant ‘status quo’ are the work procedures
and practices that existed immediately before the
issue arose: cl 47(g)(i). The
issue arose when, looked at generously, the HSU raised the issue and invoked the
status quo (albeit
then directed only to Coffs Harbour) by way of correspondence
dated 26 May 2025. The Respondent says that by that time, the relevant
procedures and practices had changed, so that the relevant work practice and
procedure did not involve the allocation (or rostering)
of one SO per complete
module (as it appears the Respondent accepts was the position following the
agreement in February 2023 to
deploy temporary SOs to enhance supervision in the
field pending the introduction of the FLM), but one
. As it said in answer
to the 13 June 2025 email from the
“From our perspective, the introduction of the SM positions and transition
of the temporary SO positions are intrinsically
linked and have been subject to
consultation. All matters raised during consultation had been responded to and
NSWA has progressed
with implementing these changes following the conclusion of
consultation. The HSU did not raise a dispute or request status quo due
concerns regarding the introduction of the SM roles and transition of the
temporary SO positions.
Accordingly, NSWA is of the view that the established management positions have
changed following implementation, as confirmed on
30 September 2024.”
Respondent submitted the status quo was that which existed immediately before
the email of 26 May 2025 arising from the dispute
at Coffs Harbour (or the email
of 13 June 2025 which purported to extend the ‘status quo’ across
the State, albeit there
is no difference in the factual position between those
two points in time
May 2025, 61 SM positions had been created, 57 had been filled, and 18 temporary
SOs had transitioned back to their substantive
position of paramedic.
accept the Respondent’s submission. Clause 47(a)
the parties to
“use their best endeavours to co-operate
in order to avoid grievances
and disputes
arising...”
abide by the dispute resolution procedures “to resolve any issue
might arise
emphasises negotiations in settlement of the “issue” “
the earliest possible stage in the
The parties have committed themselves to the timely engagement of the dispute
resolution procedure. That includes having committed
themselves to, amongst
other things, engaging the dispute resolution procedure to resolve any issue
(consistent the
definition of “issue” in cl 47(b): “any question, issue,
grievance, dispute or difficulty
which might arise
between the
parties”). That is to say
the dispute has actually arisen,
but where it may be clear such an issue
construction of the parties commitments in cl 47(a) is reinforced by cl 47(i):
“These procedures are to be facilitated
the earliest possible advice
by one party to the other of any issue or problem which may give rise to a
grievance or dispute
HSU knew from 30 September 2024 (at the latest) that temporary SOs would not be
continued beyond the appointment of permanent
SMs, albeit it emphasises it did
not agree with that change. That change in practice surrounding front-line
supervision was, on the
evidence and as the Respondent correctly observed,
intrinsically connected with the reintroduction of SMs from the outset. The
in work procedure and practice surrounding front-line supervision was
made upon the conclusion of the consultation surrounding the
reintroduction of
SMs (30 September 2024), or at the latest, upon the commencement of the
recruitment process for SMs to put that
change into effect (4 October 2024).
That it took some time to give practical effect to that change, because it took
some time to
undertake the recruitment process for SMs, does not alter the fact
the change work procedures and practices surrounding front-line
supervision
occurred when the final decision to implement the SM reintroduction was made.
the evidence, the first time the HSU raised the “issue” was on 26
, when the HSU said
“The appointment of a Station Manager does not substitute for a SO nor
does it negate the need for an SO”
and that to do so was “causing
WHS issues as there is now reduced management and oversight on station”,
despite the fact
it knew of the change to the engagement of temporary SOs upon
the appointment of SMs from as long ago as 30 September 2024 (at the
the evidence, the Respondent is correct in submitting that as at 26 May 2025,
the “status quo” was that an SM would
absorb the supervisory
responsibility of the temporarily appointed SOs, who would be transitioned to
paramedic upon the appointment
of the SM (I would not accept the more generic
position contemplated by the Respondent’s submission that the status quo
“one manager per module not one Station Officer per module”).
Nor was the status quo one SO per module
must have been apparent in September 2024 that the ‘issue’
ultimately raised on 26 May 2025 about supervision of modules
by SMs would arise
upon the reintroduction of SMs (presumably why it did not agree to transitioning
the temporary SOs back to their
substantive paramedic role during consultation
in the first place), and yet did nothing about it. The HSU stood by an allowed
SM recruitment process to unfold. It did not invoke the dispute settlement
procedure (and thereby trigger the status quo obligation)
at that time, despite
the fact it was bound by cl 47 to invoke the dispute resolution procedures
“to resolve any issue
which might
, nor did it
comply with its obligation to facilitate the dispute settlement procedures by
the earliest possible advice by one party to the other of any issue or
problem which may give rise to a grievance or dispute
cannot accept the appropriate conception of the ‘status quo’ in this
case is, as the HSU contends, the work procedures
and practices prior to the
conclusion of the consultation processes surrounding the reintroduction of SMs
in September 2024.
Orders (or Recommendations) the HSU seeks by way of this interim application do
not, in my view, reflect the proper application
and operation of cl 47(g) of the
Award. In those circumstances, it is unnecessary to determine whether the Orders
it sought are within
the ambit of what may be done under s 136(1)(d) of the IR
Act, or whether it would be appropriate to grant relief to the Notifier
circumstances. In deference to the parties’ submissions, I would however
make three observations:
(1) Assuming the Order was appropriately drafted, I can see no reason why the
Commission could not, in discharging its functions
in connection with the
resolution of a dispute about the application of a status quo obligation in a
dispute settlement procedure
in an industrial instrument, determine the proper
interpretation, application or operation of the instrument (s 175 of the IR Act)
and in light of that determination, make an order, with prospective application
(on an interim or final basis), about the application
of that feature of the
award for the purposes of resolving the dispute.
(2) Status quo obligations in an award bind the parties by force of s 12 of the
IR Act. Obligations that arise under an award, including
a status quo obligation
preserving work procedures and practices pending the resolution of a dispute,
are extant, as are any risks,
costs or inconvenience which flows from those
obligations
. Compelling
compliance with such an extant obligation does not involve interference with an
employer’s managerial prerogative.
(3) As to whether relief would be granted if it could have been shown the
Respondent had been acting in a manner inconsistent with
its obligation under cl
47(g) of the Award, whilst I recognise relief under s 136 is discretionary, I
adopt what Commissioner Sloan
ASMOF (NSW) v Ministry of Health
[2019] NSWIRComm 1041
(with which the Chief Commissioner Constant agreed in
Australian Salaried Medical Officers Federation (NSW) v Health Secretary
[2021] NSWIRComm 1002
): “It cannot realistically be
suggested that being aware of the possibility of a party acting, or purporting
to act, in breach
of an award the Commission would, as a matter of
‘discretion’, sit idly by”.
light of the conclusions I have reached, the HSU’s application for interim
Orders under s 136(1)(d) of the IR Act, or a Recommendation
under s 136(1)(a) of
the IR Act, is refused.
matter will be listed for Directions via AVL at
midday, Monday 10 November
at which time I will hear from the parties as to whether further
Conciliation is appropriate (before myself or another member of
the Commission),
or whether the matter should be programmed for substantive hearing.
The Health Secretary being the
nominal employer of staff in the NSW Health Service, including those employed by
the Ambulance Service
of NSW under Chapter 5A of the
Health Services Act 1997
and also the nominal employer of members of the NSW Health Service in
proceedings before this Commission: see
Health Services
Marked Exhibits N4 -
Statement of Agreed Facts
and Disputed Facts and Issues at
Willis TS 15/10/2025 pg 52 line 3 to
Ex R1 at [33], and
Willis TS 15/10/2025 pg 52 line 45 to pg 53 line
Ex R1 at [14]; Willis
TS 15/10/2025 pg 52 line 35 -
Willis TS 15/10/2025 pg
53 line 29-37
Ex N4 CB pg
Agreed Facts at
Willis TS 15/10/2025 pg
56 line 45 to 50
Ex R1 [17],
DW1 pg 140; Agreed Facts at
Willis TS 15/10/2025 pg
56 line 48 to 50
See s 130(2) of the IR
Agreed Facts at
Agreed Facts at
Ex R2 DH7 pg
Ex R2 DH7 pg
Ex R2 DH7 pg
Ex R2 at [17], DH1,
DH2, DH3 and DH4; Agreed Facts at
I note there is said to
be one omission from DH4 (Ex N2 at [11]), but there is no evidence the minutes
are otherwise inaccurate.
R2 at [19], DH5 pg CB177
R2 at [20], DH6
A convenient
summary can be seen at Ex R2 DM8 pg
Ex N2 at [11]; Oxley
TS 15/10/2025 pg 22 line 1 to
Ex R2 DH4 pg
Ex R2 DH8 pg
Ex N2 at [11], Oxley
TS 15/10/2025 pg 22 line 49 to pg 23 line 2, pg 23 line 34 – 36, line 50
to pg 24 line 5
accepted this proposition in her evidence: TS 15/10/2025 pg 26 line 35 to
Ex R2 DH9 CBpg 208-209;
Agreed Facts at [11]
DH16 pg 252
Ex R2 DH16 pg
Ex R2 DH16 pg
Ex R2 at [43] –
[45], DH10 and DH11l; Agreed Facts at [12] –
Ex R2 at [28]
– [32], DH12 –
Agreed Facts at
Ex R1 at [31], DW2 pg
CB144l; Agreed Facts at [16]
Ex R2 at [37] , DH15 pg
Ex R2 at [37] DH15 pg
Ex R2 DH16 pg
Ex R2 DH17pg
Ex R2 DH17 pg
Ex R2, DH7 CB pg 194.
The underlining and interlineation is in the
Clause 7(c) and
(d) of the Award
NSUB [5], [9]
New South Wales Nurses
and Midwives’ Association v Health Secretary on behalf of Western NSW
Local Health District
[2018] NSWIRComm 1079
– [75], [81] –
[82], affirmed on appeal New South Wales Nurses and Midwives’ Association
v Health Secretary on
behalf of Western NSW Local Health District
NSWIRComm 1025
– [75], [81] –
NSUBR [13] –
NSUBR at [5],
NSUBR at [22],
Dispute Notice at [11]
RSUB [26], referring to
Re Cram; ex parte New South Wales Colliery Proprietors' Association Ltd
[1987] HCA 28
163 CLR 117
at 136-137; In re Dispute Between the Federated Engine Drivers and
Firemen's Association of Australasia (Coast District) and the
Broken Hill Pty
Company Ltd
(1950) 49 AR 371
at 372; BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Limited v The Federated
Ironworkers' Association of Australia, New South Wales Division
[1994] NSWIRComm
RSUB at [27], referring
to The Federated Ironworkers' Association of Australia (NSW Division) v BHP
Steel Sheet & Coil Products
[1992] NSWIRComm 5
; John Lysaght
(Australia) Limited v Automotive, Metals and Engineering Union and the Federated
Ironworkers' Association of Australia,
New South Wales Division
[1994] NSWIRComm
; John Lysaght (Australia) Limited - Port Kembla - Slit Recoil Line - Rates of
[1995] NSWIRComm 18
; Australian Federated Union of Locomotive
Employees State Rail Authority of New South Wales (XPT Case)
[1984] CthArbRp 432
(1984) 295 CAR 188
at 191; and Health Services Union v Ambulance Service of New South Wales re-
Changes to Demand Protocol
[2008] NSWIRComm 1027
and Notification under Section
130 by the Ambulance Service of New South Wales of a dispute with Health
Services Union re-threatened
industrial action in Inner Hunter Area
NSWIRComm 1136.
referring to In re Department of Tourism Appointments [1980] AR (NSW) 241 at
RSUB [11] –
RSUB [15], [18] and oral
submissions
RSUB [15] –
RSUB [29] –
RSUB [3], [31],
RSUB at [34], referring
to Grayson DP in STA NSW v RTBU NSW
[2008] NSWIRComm 19
TS 15/10/2025 pg 7 line
Referring to
Notification under section 130 by the New South Wales Teachers Federation of
adispute with the Department of Education
and Training re casual teacher
[2003] NSWIRComm 145
; as cited in Fire Brigade
Employees’ Union of New South Wales v Industrial Relations Secretary on
behalf of Fire and Rescue
NSW (In Orders Dispute)
[2022] NSWIRComm 1016
RSUB [20] –
[24], referring to Application for NSW Ambulance Safe Paramedic Crewing Award
[2022] NSWIRComm 1037
Health Services Act
New South Wales Nurses
and Midwives’ Association v Health Secretary o/b Western NSW Local Health
[2019] NSWIRComm 1025
Clause 47(c)
Clause 47(f)
TS 16/10/2025 pg
98 lines 19 - 20
16/10/2025 pg 98 lines 20 -
TS 16/10/2025 pg 98
lines 42-50
TS 16/10/2025
pg 99 lines 1 - 2
16/10/2025 pg 107 line 21 to pg 108 line
TS 16/10/2025 pg 108
line 43 - 45
16/10/2025 pg 108 line 50 to pg 109 line
New South Wales Nurses
and Midwives’ Association v Health Secretary o/b Western NSW Local Health
[2019] NSWIRComm 1025
At [108] by
reference to CFMEU v BHP Coal Pty Ltd
[2016] FCA 1009
(2016) 262 IR 176
. See also ASMOF
(NSW) v Heath Secretary
[2023] NSWIRComm 1105
Ex R2 DH15 pg
Ex R2 DH17 pg
Ex R2 DH17 pg
Cl 9(c) of the
Cl 7(a) of the
Cl 7(d) of the
Cl 7(c) of the
[2019] NSWIRComm
New South Wales
Nurses and Midwives’ Association v Health Secretary on behalf of Western
NSW Local Health District
[2019] NSWIRComm
RSUB at [p15]
– [18], [31]
DH17 pg 294:
16/10/2025 pg 104 lines 39 to
“The parties
Ex R2 DH15 pg
Salaried Medical Officers Federation (NSW) v Ministry of Health
[2019] NSWIRComm
, per Sloan C (ASMOF (NSW) v Ministry of Health)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (491 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter