URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2013/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v SHAFFER [2013] NSWPHT 6 (10 September 2013)
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION OF NEW SOUTH WALES
SUSAN SHAFFER
AN INQUIRY BY THE
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL CONSTIUTED UNDER SECTION 165A OF THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER
REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) (“THE
NATIONAL LAW”) INTO COMPLAINTS
REFERRED TO THE TRIBUNAL UNDER SECTION 145D AND CONDUCTED UNDER SECTION 167,
NON-PUBLICATION DIRECTION APPLIES
Pursuant to Clause 7
of Schedule 5D of the National Law, the Tribunal has made a non-publication
direction in respect of the name
and address of any patient or of any prescriber
resident in the USA, or of material that may identify any such patient or
prescriber;
HCCC v SHAFFER
[2013] NSWPHT
Health Care Complaints Commission of New
South Wales
(Complainant)
Susan Shaffer
(Respondent pharmacist)
: Mr. Peter
Dwyer, Chairperson
Mr. Russell Benda (Pharmacist
Mr. Jonathan Chen (Pharmacist Member)
Dr. Noel Greenaway (Lay Member)
23 July 2013.
: 10 September
APPEARANCES:
Mr. P. Griffin of Counsel,
instructed by Mr. M. Darmody, Solicitor (HCCC), for the Complainant;
The Respondent did not appear in person or by a legal representative, at
this further hearing;
Pharmacist—
consequent upon
Unsatisfactory
Professional
Professional
—dispensing of
medications prescribed by medical practitioners in USA for patients in
Mail order dispensing
-prescriptions subsequently made available
electronically, to Respondent pharmacist in Sydney—prescriptions
authorised locally
by NSW-registered medical practitioner—dispensed
medications dispatched by Respondent’s pharmacy to patients in
USA—failure
to apply Pharmacy Board of NSW
Mail Order Dispensing
1998—failure to comply with requirements of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
LEGISLATION CITED
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods
Therapeutic Goods Act
CASES CITED
NSW Bar Association v Meakes
[2006] NSWCA 340
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
Regina v McGrath ([1971])
2 NSWLR 181
Re Dr. G.C. and the
Medical Practice Act
[2007] NSWMT;
Dawson v Law Society of NSW
[1989] NSWCA 58
Ex parte Tziniolis Re Medical Practitioners Act
67 SR (NSW) 448
[2012] NSWCA
Consequent upon its Findings of
Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct
Professional Misconduct
HCCC v Shaffer
[2013] NSWPHT 3)
, the Tribunal makes the following
the Practitioner for her failure to apply the
Guidelines for Mail Order Dispensing
issued by the former,
Board of New South Wales
to registered pharmacists, designed to be
protective of the community served by the profession of Pharmacy. The Tribunal
the Practitioner for her continuing failure over the
period between 21 June 2006 and 27 July 2007, in dispensing
medications
to patients resident in the USA when, at the time of dispensing,
the Practitioner did not have a valid prescription, contrary to
38(1) of the NSW
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Tribunal imposes the following
on the Practitioner’s
registration
Without first obtaining the prior approval
Pharmacy Council of New South Wales
, the Practitioner is not to
engage in any way, whether as a proprietor-pharmacist or as an employed
pharmacist, in the dispensing
and supply of any prescribed medications by way
or any other, similar,
electronic method of delivery and receipt of prescriptions intended for
dispensing and supply, without
face-to-face contact with the patient for whom
any medication is prescribed or face-to- face contact with a carer or agent, of
such patient; and whether any such patient is resident in Australia or in
any other country;
application
of the above
Division 8 of the National Law, may not be made until after a period of two (2)
years has elapsed, such period to commence
on and from, the date of the
Tribunal’s decision; and for the purpose of any such application for
Pharmacy Council of New South Wales
appropriate review body
contravention of the above
imposed by the Tribunal on the
Practitioner’s registration, will result in the practitioner’s
registration being cancelled;
and pursuant to section 149A (4) and (5) of the
National Law the
compliance condition
Respondent is to pay the Complainant’s
as agreed; or if
agreement cannot be reached, either party may have the matter relisted for
assessment by the Tribunal. The Tribunal
notes that not all of the Particulars
were proved;
to section 167F (3) of the National Law, a copy of this
Statement of
is to be provided to the Director,
Pharmaceutical Services, NSW
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
This decision is concerned only, with the
making of Orders consequent upon its earlier Findings of
unsatisfactory
professional conduct
professional misconduct
, the Tribunal having
conducted its hearing for the purpose of consequential Orders, on 23 July 2013
(“the second hearing”);
The Hearing and the
prior to this second hearing, the Tribunal requested the Tribunal Coordinator
Mr. McMahon, to advise the Respondent practitioner
Practitioner”) that, to assist her to appear at the hearing, it would do
its best to accommodate her anticipated
child-care responsibilities, by
adjusting its hearing hours; a similar offer of assistance was also made by the
Complainant’s
solicitor, Mr. Darmody, included in his letter to the
Practitioner dated 15 July (later admitted into evidence as the
Practitioner’s
Exhibit “R-4”). The Practitioner did not
request any such assistance from the Tribunal; she did not appear at the second
1 May 2013, the Tribunal conducted a Directions Hearing and made directions for
the Complainant to provide its written submissions
as to consequential Orders,
to the Practitioner by 31 May, 2013 (later amended to 4 June 2013); for the
Respondent to provide any
written submissions to the Complainant, by 28 June
2013; with any Complainant’s submissions-in-reply, by 12 July 2013;
the Complainant’s letter to the Practitioner (Exhibit R-4, above) Mr.
Darmody referred to documents in two ‘
Practitioner provided to the Tribunal Registry on 29 August 2012; these were
subsequently presented at the Tribunal’s
Directions Hearing conducted by
the Chairperson, on 3 September 2012, attended by the Practitioner and by Mr.
Darmody; and the letter
also referred to his E-mail message of 4 July 2013
enquiring whether the Practitioner wished to rely on such documents as evidence
in the second hearing. The Complainant foreshadowed that in the absence of any
response from the Practitioner, it would submit that
these documents should be
admitted as the Practitioner’s evidence in the second hearing, having
regard to the Chairperson’s
allowing the first two pages of the bundle
presented, as submissions with respect to
relevant to the
complaints, in the first hearing. Mr. Darmody’s letter (Ibid.) noted that
the Chairperson did not admit the
balance of the documents, as they appeared not
to be relevant to the first hearing; and he requested the Practitioner to advise
she intended providing any further written submissions to or filing any
further evidence to be considered by, the Tribunal; and whether
she would be
attending the second hearing;
Complainant submitted that in the Practitioner’s absence at the second
hearing, the above described, two bundles of documents
should be admitted as the
Practitioner’s evidence. The Tribunal accepted the Complainant’s
submission and the documents
were admitted—the
first bundle
comprising 85 pages, commencing with a page entitled “
Office of the
Special Advocate for Prescription Drugs
Rod R. Blagojevich
State of Illinois
“ as Exhibit “R-1”;
second bundle
commencing with a page with the
Practitioner’s words “...
I am sorry that I didn’t come to
the meeting after
all...”admitted as Exhibit
Practitioner did not respond to the Complainant’s requests (above) in her
subsequent E-mail messages to Mr. Darmody the
first of which was sent on 15 July
2013; it was admitted as the Practitioner’s exhibit “R-5”; and
the second, dated
16 July 2013, admitted as Practitioner’s Exhibit
the same letter (above, Exhibit R-4) Mr. Darmody provided two currently
Internet website
addresses namely “
” (page entitled
World Pharmacy Supplies
” (pages relevant to the Practitioner, under her
name) and copies of those pages from those sites; and informed the Practitioner
that the Complainant would tender them on the basis they are evidence of
ongoing involvement by you in pharmaceutical supply including via
the Internet
.” The Practitioner did not respond to this information.
The three pages were admitted as Exhibit “R-3”;
as Exhibit “R-5”, were an E-mail message from Mr. Darmody to the
Practitioner dated 15 July 2013 which accompanied
his letter of that date (which
became Exhibit “R-4”, described above); and the Practitioner’s
E-mailed response
of the same date;
further, E-mailed message from the Practitioner to Mr. Darmody dated 16 July
2013 responding to the “...
...” (presumably, of Mr.
Darmody’s letter dated 15 July, 2013 which became Exhibit
“R-4”) was admitted as
Exhibit “R-6”;
into evidence as Exhibit “R-7” was a two page extract from the
Register of Practitioners
maintained by the
Australian Health
Practitioners Regulation Agency
(AHPRA) which included the
Practitioner’s
registration
confirming the date of her first registration, as 13 October, 1987; and her
current registration expiry date as 30 November 2013;
nothing in any way adverse
to the Respondent’s registration was recorded in the above AHPRA
Respondent’s evidence
R-1 included copy of submissions of the Illinois USA,
Office of the Special
Advocate for Prescription Drugs
, proposed to be presented to the US
and Drug Administration
(FDA) addressing the high cost of drug prices in the
State of Illinois; and how many Illinoisans benefited from obtaining medications
through the Internet and mail-order programs. The Tribunal concludes that the
Practitioner relies on this document to support and
explain, the financial
benefit of the system she adopted and applied (C/F Particulars of Complaints at
Paragraph 2). The document
therefore, goes to
. The proven,
Particulars of paragraph 8 of the Complaints, rely on breach of Clause 38(1) of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Regulation”)
the Tribunal notes that the relevant statutory
requirement is absolute in its terms;
is irrelevant. The Tribunal
notes also, the lengthy period during which the Practitioner was in breach of
Clause 38(1); and the significant
number of prescriptions dispensed in that
period. It was not an isolated event;
R-2 included references to recent, beneficial, major change to the US health
care system and reference to Australian law and
of sending meds out of Australia
...” (taken from the
Practitioner’s opening pages preliminary to the balance of Exhibit R-2).
The Practitioner also recorded
(Ibid): “...
I find it offensive that
there is a suggestion that I used
John McKenzie for my own
financial gain
...”. Again, the Tribunal concludes that the Respondent
, as justification for her dispensing to US patients.
The Tribunal is concerned in this second hearing,
as to what if any,
protective orders
are needed, based on its earlier findings as to which
of the Complaints were proven—essentially, failure to comply with the
Pharmacy Board (“the Board”)
Guidelines for Mail Order
issued to all NSW-registered pharmacists in August, 1998; and
dispensing over a significant period, contrary to Clause 38(1) of the
Regulation;
was never the Complainant’s submission that the dispensing of medications
to the US was illegal; but the Practitioner failed
relevantly, by not applying
the Board’s
; and by providing medications as
particularised, contrary to Clause 38(1) of the Regulation. It was not the
Complainant’s case
that such statutory failure was
First hearing at [92]). In Exhibit R-2, the Practitioner
expressed an apology for not providing the Board with “...
a copy of our
her E-mail response to Mr. Darmody, Exhibit R-5, the Practitioner in effect,
described that since 2008 when she “...
discontinued
...” she had not been able to work as a pharmacist as she is
on a parenting payment ...
studying full
...[i.e. Technical & Further Education]...”;
and because of the age of her children she cannot work as a pharmacist as it
is virtually impossible to get shifts as a pharmacist in the hours
.” She recorded her children’s ages as “...
”. Included in Exhibit R-5 relevant to her TAFE studies, the
Practitioner stated “...
I am studying Electrotechnology
...[and they
teach at TAFE at Mt. Druitt]...
specifically about photovoltaic technology
... [and]...
once finished I plan to return to Pakistan to work to
promote solar technology so that Pakistan doesn’t have to suffer power
her further E-mail, Exhibit R-6, referring to the
...” information, the Practitioner said that such
information “...
doesn’t state that I am or would dispatch from
I pointed out
intend to return to Pakistan as I feel I can make a difference to the lives of
people there by promoting domestic solar power
.” She emphasised in
this message again, that every medication she dispensed to US patients was
with authority of a script written by an Australian
.” The Tribunal again notes, that notwithstanding such
authorisation, she was in breach of Clause 38(1) of the Regulation as
particularised in paragraph 8 of the Complaints. She also said (in Exhibit R-6)
to Mr. Darmody: “...
Most importantly you need to reconcile the fact
that I am in Australia with my children and studying that obviously I am not
in Pakistan to dispatch medicines. If this business is being conducted
then someone else is evidently doing it
.” The Practitioner’s
husband apparently resides in Pakistan;
(Internet) document—part of Exhibit R-3—includes the
World Pharmacy Supplies
“ with directions to
this company
...”by message to
Ms. Susan Shaffer
World Pharmacy Supplies
‘down loaded’ date on this document is 31 May 2013. An
of the Practitioner includes “...
at World Pharmaceutical Supplies
.”; and included under the
susan shaffer’s Education
Advanced Diploma, Electrical and Electronics Engineering
2013-2013 (expected)
Grade: Specialising in Solar Technology
Certificate IV, Tourism and Travel Services management
University of New South Wales
Commerce, Marketing 1982-1985
her E-mail response to Mr. Carmody admitted as Exhibit R-6, the Practitioner
referred to the above,
link and included the following:
I would like to point out a fact that seems to have eluded you and
the department
the legislation you are enforcing is for
link which dates back to 2007 states that the
medicines would be shipped out from Pakistan. If I were still doing this
business then
I believe that you have no jurisdiction over what happens in
It seems a little arrogant and over reaching
department to think that it can interfere with anything outside what happens in
.” The Practitioner added “...
If this business is
being conducted then someone else is evidently doing it
.” It is not
necessary for the Tribunal to enter into the legalities of whatever the
” is precisely, or whether it continues. These are
more appropriately, matters for consideration within the statutory jurisdiction
Pharmaceutical Services
its prior decision as to
, the Tribunal recorded its
disappointment that the Practitioner did not attend its Inquiry, to assist the
Tribunal. Yet again, in
this Inquiry into what if any, consequential,
protective orders
it should make, the Respondent has not assisted the
Tribunal by not appearing before it—despite as noted above, the
willingness to facilitate her attendance at the Inquiry, given
her claimed child care responsibilities.
Notwithstanding
what the Practitioner has stated (above) about not having practised as a
pharmacist since approximately, 2008, she
has obviously sought renewal of her
registration annually, since that time (C/F Exhibit R-7, AHPRA
Practitioners
); and apparently, has satisfied the relevant
requirements for
registration
of the former Board and since 1 July 2010,
those of the
Pharmacy Board of Australia
. She remains
registered as a
registration
date is 30 November 2013
Complainant’s submissions—an outline
Complainant provided written submissions and also addressed the Tribunal
relevant to consequential
. They are not repeated in their entirety
but have been taken into account by the Tribunal in reaching its
determinations;
Complainant emphasised the
purpose of orders consequent upon a
professional misconduct
and noted the availability of
cancellation
registration pursuant
to section 149C (1) (b) of the National Law; and noted the object of
of the particular practitioner and of the profession
generally, as included within the object of protection of the community; noting
also, that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is not
was also submitted that no order should be made which has more serious
consequences for a practitioner than is reasonably necessary
to promote the
purpose; however, relying on the observations of
NSW Bar Association v Meakes
[2006] NSWCA 340
purpose may operate in different ways: either by its direct effect to prevent a
practitioner from practising—by an order
cancellation
registration
, or by an order acting as a
to repetition of the subject conduct by way of a
Complainant referred to the power enabling the Tribunal to impose a
not more than 250 penalty units
provided in section 149B of
the National Law, the current maximum being $27,500.00 (the amount comprising a
penalty unit
currently, $110.00). It was also noted that by section 149B
is not to be imposed unless there is a finding of
professional misconduct
unless the Tribunal is satisfied that
no other order or combination of orders is “...
appropriate in the
public interest
matters for consideration as to whether a
should be imposed were
cited by the Complainant, taken from a decision of the NSW
concerning a fine under section 62 of the repealed
Practice Act 1992
Re Dr. GC and the
Medical Practice Act
The matters the Complainant emphasised from this decision,
included—the risk of re-offending; whether there was a
benefit from the impugned conduct; whether such conduct has ceased; the extent
or incidents, of the impugned conduct; whether the
conduct was isolated or
otherwise; the likelihood as to whether a finding of
professional
will have a
general deterrent
. It was noted that the Practitioner’s conduct occurred in a
period, five (5) to seven (7) years ago;
Complainant referred to the Tribunal’s
reasons for decision
making its finding of
professional misconduct
against the Practitioner
including that the relevant conduct was not a
departure from
professional standards but rather in effect, was the result of inadequate
supervision or structured process. It was
submitted, there was no evidence of
any medications dispensed and dispatched, to US patients without the
‘electronic’
authorisation of a locally registered medical
practitioner, later confirmed by a signed, written prescription from the local
prescriber; and it was also submitted that there was no evidence before
the Tribunal of any adverse outcome by any US patient; and
that the medications
relevantly prescribed and dispensed, were of a routine, ongoing nature for the
particular patients’ indications;
and it was further submitted that such
medications were not known generally, as “...
dangerous, addictive or
prone to abuse
was submitted that according to the evidence before the Tribunal, there was no
record of any other misconduct by the Practitioner
since the date of her first
becoming registered as a pharmacist, in October 1987; but that, since the events
the subject of the complaints
proved against her, “...
of any appreciation
nature and extent of her contravention of the Guidelines and the
and she does not appear to fully understand how far she
departed from the statutory standard
Considering
the Practitioner’s documentary responses and what she said at the
Tribunal’s hearing of submissions on 9 October,
2012, as to
, it was submitted that “...
what is absent
Practitioner’s]...
response is any expression of
remorse or contrition in relation to the conduct
which has been found
against her
.”; although having expressed an apology to the Tribunal,
it was submitted that the Practitioner has in effect, not demonstrated
sufficient acknowledgment of her failure to comply
relevant statutory requirements; and of the essential need for such strict
compliance by registered pharmacists, charged
with protection of the
Complainant submitted that the Practitioner’s attitude to the Tribunal
proceedings was “...
generally dismissive
...” and Counsel
cited her E-mail to the Tribunal dated 23 May 2012 (Exhibit C-38 in the first
hearing), which included “...
I thought I explained to you over the
phone and in the email
I DON’T CARE IF I AM NO LONGER REGISTERED
AND I AM NOT PREPARED TO COME TO ANY MORE MEETINGS
.” (The capital
letters are as composed by the Practitioner);
was noted by the Complainant in its submissions, that during the
Tribunal’s hearing on 9 October 2012, the Respondent explained
her belated
appearance at the Inquiry and restated her attitude to the proceedings as
Look, I’m sorry that I’ve caused so much
trouble. I mean, when I got the original files, I just sort of thought
just so much stuff and I weighed up whether I really cared about
it. I’ve explained and then when I saw that it got down
nitty-gritty things, I thought I needed really to explain it. I’m sorry
that you feel I’ve cheated. I’ve
told you, I don’t even
care what the outcome of this is. It doesn’t matter to me.
page 5l, Lines 20-25].
Complainant submitted that the Practitioner’s
registration
; alternatively, that it be
imposed; and should the Tribunal not order suspension or cancellation, it was
submitted that a
imposed on her registration including: restricting her from participating in
; that she not be permitted to work without
supervision
and that she not be permitted to
pharmacists; that she advise the Council of her “...
professional
working arrangements and inform
of any changes
”; and, that a
be appointed to assist her to
observe professional standards and deal with the issue of
professional isolation
. ” The Complainant also submitted that the
appropriate review body
for the purpose of any application for
of the Tribunal’s orders, pursuant to Division 8 of the
National Law, be the Pharmacy Council of New South Wales; and it sought
in its favour;
Discussion—Orders
provided by the National law, two members of the Tribunal are registered
pharmacists and as such, the Tribunal is an ‘
expert professional
’, so described by the NSW Court of Appeal in respect of
another professional disciplinary tribunal, in
Kalil v Bray & Anor.
1 NSWLR 256
Tribunal has already recorded its disappointment that the Practitioner has not,
registered pharmacist
, first registered in 1987, appeared before it
at its second hearing, to assist its consideration as to what if any
protective orders
should be made; disappointing also, that she has made
some deprecating remarks about the profession of pharmacy she chose to enter
in which she has remained, renewing her registration every year since 1987; and
Community Pharmacy
and pharmacists—her professional
colleagues; she seems to have forgotten or put to one side, that the conduct
found by the
Tribunal to be
professional misconduct
, was her conduct, not
that of others;
the Practitioner has in effect, expressed an apology for the conduct found by
the Tribunal to constitute
professional misconduct
, the Tribunal accepts
on consideration, the Complainant’s submission, to the effect that the
Practitioner has not expressed
sufficient acknowledgment of her failure to
comply with the Board’s
designed to
receiving dispensed medications by so-called
and of her failure to comply with Clause 38(1) of the Regulation. The Tribunal
notes in her dispensing to US patients, according
to the relevant system in
place, that prior to the later period during which she failed to comply with
Clause 38(1) of the Regulation,
as found by the Tribunal, the Practitioner had
apparently, complied with Clause 38(1) of the Regulation;
Tribunal accepts the Complainant’s submissions, that there was no apparent
harm occasioned by such failures especially given
the nature of the medications
prescribed for the US patients; and that there was no evidence to suggest other
than as the Practitioner
asserted, each such medication supplied to the US
patients was dispensed only after first being electronically authorised by a
registered medical practitioner;
Notwithstanding
the above observations, it is important to reflect upon the protective purpose
of the NSW Parliament, in enacting
Therapeutic Goods Act
relevant to the Practitioner’s failures
over a significant period—between 21 June 2006 and 27 July 2007—to
with the statutory requirements for the dispensing of
are allocated to certain categories in the
Standard for the Uniform
Scheduling of Drugs and Poisons
by an expert body known as the
Drugs and Poisons Schedule Committee
(NDPSC) formed under the Commonwealth
Therapeutic Goods Act
Overview of Poisons
Legislation’
Regulation of Drugs
The Laws of Australia
—Thomson Lawbook Co., 2008). The proved
Particulars in paragraph 8 of the complaints relate to the dispensing of
medications
classified as
Relevantly,
in 1971 the NSW Court of Appeal in
Regina v. McGrath
—an appeal from a conviction for the unlawful supply of
amphetamine
under the then applicable,
Poisons Act
—considered the
purpose of the (then current legislation—relevant also to the current NSW
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
legislation) and said (at page 187):
The subject matter...of the Act is one vital to
the welfare of the community and...designed for the protection of the
public...The
clear purpose...is that...
[Poisons and Restricted
Substances]...
shall be in the hands of persons who may be expected to know
their purposes, effects and evils and who would sell them for proper
purposes only.
described by the Complainant’s Counsel in submissions, the
Practitioner’s conduct cannot be described as “...
isolated or out
of character
...” given that under the relevant arrangement
she achieved a high volume and turnover which involved hundreds of
(Exhibit C-49]”
. It follows, that the Practitioner
was remunerated for each supply of every medication dispensed to each of the US
patients, consequent
upon her declared purpose to assist such patients to
benefit by paying less than that apparently charged for their prescribed
medications
in the USA;
considering the Respondent’s likely behaviour in the future, the
observations of
Dawson v Law Society of New South Wales
[1989] NSWCA 58
, are relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration of its
orders and their purpose, to protect the community:
“In judging whether an applicant will, in the future,
act differently from the past, the Court is not required to act on
psychological
theories or analyses...As I have said, it is difficult to decide
what a man will do and the decision in a particular case is, to
a greater or
lesser extent, dependent on the Court’s assessment of the applicant. And
in making that assessment it may draw
inferences from what he has done in the
past and, in particular, what led to his being removed from the roll. An
understanding of
that may assist the court to determine what are his standards
and his understanding...[of his]...responsibility and, from this,
apt to do in the future. And it is perhaps, on this basis that, where what has
been done in the past has been sufficient
to indicate his ‘probably
permanent unfitness’:
parte Lenehan
at 422; the court
will require ‘
solid and substantial grounds’
conclusion that his standards have changed or that he will act
differently.”
(Emphasis added]
Ex parte Tziniolis Re Medical Practitioners Act
(1966) 67 SR (NSW) 448
JA observed:
“Reformation of
character and of behaviour can doubtless occur but their occurrence is not the
usual but the exceptional
thing. One cannot assume that a change has occurred
merely because some years have gone by and it is not proved that anything of
discreditable kind has occurred. If a man has exhibited serious deficiencies
in his standards of conduct and his attitudes,
it must require clear proof to
show that some years later he has established himself a different man...In
such cases it has been
frequently said that a heavy onus lies on the
applicant.”
Complainant cited several authorities in its submissions as to consequential
. Relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration of Orders
consequent upon its
[2012] NSWCA 80
referring to the words of
HCCC v Karalasingham
, the Court said, at [30] per
His Honour agreed that other cases might be of value as
examples in indicating a range of appropriate orders but could not be seen
precedents.” And at [33] “Just as the characterisation of conduct
as professional misconduct entails the exercise
of judgment by a specialist
tribunal, so too, it seems to me, does a decision about the order that should be
made where such conduct
is proved.”
the features and elements, of the Practitioner’s proven
professional
discussed above; and in applying the questions formulated by the
Medical Tribunal in
Re Dr. G.C. and the
Medical Practice Act
[2007] NSWMT
described above, including that as to whether a practitioner received a benefit
financially from the impugned conduct,
the Tribunal considered that a
should be imposed on the Practitioner. However, it notes the
limitation in section 149B (2) of the National Law, to the effect that
notwithstanding a finding relevantly, of
professional misconduct
is not to be imposed unless the Tribunal is satisfied “...
no other order, or combination of orders, that is appropriate in the public
[Section 149B (2) (b)];
Tribunal must therefore first consider whether there is another order, or
combination of orders, that is
appropriate
public interest
in order to be
of the community. The Tribunal is satisfied and
has determined, that in all the circumstances of this matter, the following
are appropriate in the
public interest
and consistent with
section 149B (2) (b), a fine will not be
the Practitioner for her failure to apply the
Guidelines for Mail Order Dispensing
issued by the former,
Board of New South Wales
to registered pharmacists, designed to be
protective of the community served by the profession of Pharmacy. The Tribunal
the Practitioner for her continuing failure over the
period between 21 June 2006 and 27 July 2007, in dispensing
medications
to patients resident in the USA when, at the time of dispensing,
the Practitioner did not have a valid prescription, contrary to
38(1) of the NSW
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Tribunal imposes the following
on the Practitioner’s
registration
Without first obtaining the prior approval
Pharmacy Council of New South Wales
, the Practitioner is not to
engage in any way, whether as a proprietor- pharmacist or as an employed
pharmacist, in the dispensing
and supply of any prescribed medications by way
or any other, similar
electronic method of delivery and receipt of prescriptions intended for
dispensing and supply without face-to-face
any medication is prescribed or face-to-face contact with a carer of any such
patient; and whether
any such patient is resident in Australia or in any other
application
of the above
Division 8 of the National Law, may not be made until after a period of two (2)
years has elapsed, such period to commence
on and from, the date of the
Tribunal’s decision; and for the purpose of any such
application
Pharmacy Council of New South Wales
appropriate review body
contravention of the above
imposed by the Tribunal on the
Practitioner’s registration, will result in the practitioner’s
registration being cancelled;
and pursuant to section 149A (4) and (5) of the
National Law, the
critical compliance
Respondent is to pay the Complainant’s
as agreed; or if
agreement cannot be reached, either party may have the matter relisted for
assessment by the Tribunal. The Tribunal
notes that not all of the Particulars
of the Complainant’s
to section 167F (3) of the National Law, a copy of this
Statement of
is to be provided to the Director,
Pharmaceutical Services, NSW
......................................................
Chairperson
..................................................................
-------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------
Date of decision: 10
September 2013.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (215 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter