URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCTTT/2013/656.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Keeping, O'Donnel v Mifsud ATF the Chrisim Family Trust (Home Building) [2013] NSWCTTT 656 (23 December 2013)
Keeping, O’Donnel v Mifsud ATF the Chrisim Family Trust (Home Building)
[2013] NSWCTTT 656
(23 December 2013)
CONSUMER, TRADER AND TENANCY
Building Division
APPLICATION NO:
HB 12/48427
APPLICANTS:
Graham Keeping and Amanda Lynn O’Donnel
RESPONDENTS:
Simon Joseph Mifsud and Simon Joseph Mifsud ATF the Chrisim Family
APPLICATION:
For damages
28 and 29 November 2013 at Sydney
APPEARANCES:
Mr Garcia for the applicants
Mr Grew for the respondents on 28
November 2013 and the respondents in person on 29 November 2013
LEGISLATION:
application is dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
APPLICATION
1. In this application, the applicants seek damages in respect of defective
residential building works. A threshold issue in the
matter is whether the
respondent is the person who undertook the building works.
2. The applicants bring the application as successor in title to
the previous owner, Built by Big Pty Ltd [the vendor], a company
deregistered on
22 January 2012. They purchased the extensively renovated house which is the
subject of the application in May 2009.
The home owners’ warranty
insurance [HOWI] certificate supplied by the vendor at the time of the sale
names the respondent
in his capacity as trustee as the person who carried out
the building works. Prior to signing the contract for sale, the applicant
Elio Del-Ben, who was apparently a director of the vendor (or in any event, the
vendor’s representative). Mr Del-Ben
is also associated with the
company Big Dig Pty Ltd, which operates an excavation and concreting business.
3. In June 2011 the applicants advised Mr Del-Ben in writing that there was
water penetration into the lounge room. In July 2011,
Ms Ishinjerro (on behalf
of Mr Del-Ben) provided to the applicants details of the waterproofing
contractor and a copy of the warranty
in respect of the waterproofing. The
applicants were invited to contact the water proofer directly. After further
attempts to communicate
with Mr Del-Ben directly and through is solicitor, Mr
Grew, the applicant had a conversation in which Mr Grew told him that he should
of insurance for the premises.
4. The applicants contacted the respondent who attended the residence, advised
the scope of works necessary to stop the water penetration
and said that he
would carry out rectification works. These works were ultimately commenced.
However, the works were not completed
and the applicants commenced proceedings,
claiming damages in respect of defective building works.
PROCEEDINGS
IN THE TRIBUNAL
5. The proceedings were commenced on 19 September 2012. The address for the
respondent listed in the application was care of Matthew
Grew of MKG Solicitors.
The matter was first listed for directions on 3 December 2012. Whether the
respondent was the builder was
raised as an issue at the first directions
hearing and directions were made for the respondents to file and serve points of
and evidence in relation to the preliminary issue by 21
December 2012. The respondent filed points of defence and
an affidavit by the
respondent and attached documents was filed on 4 January 2013. The
respondent denied having entered
a contract to undertake building work and
denied having done so.
matter was listed for further directions on 26 February 2013. On that date, the
applicant sought and was given leave to issue
summonses for the production of
documents and the attendance of witnesses. On 20 March 2013, summonses to
produce documents were
issued to Duncan Dovico Chartered Accountants, Elio
Robert Del-Ben (the director of Built by Big Pty Ltd), the respondent in his
personal capacity and the home owners warranty insurer, Master Builder
Queensland Insurance Services.
return of summons hearing was held on 23 April 2013. On that date, orders were
made for access to documents produced by Master Builders
Queensland Insurance
Services and Duncan Dovico Chartered Accountants. Time was extended for the
production of documents in relation
to the summonses issued to Elio Del-Ben and
the respondent.
a return of summons and directions hearing on 1 May 2013, time was further
extended for production of documents. On that date,
the Tribunal’s file
notes that the respondent’s solicitor sought time to obtain instructions
from the respondent in relation
to the carriage of the matter. Correspondence
sent to the Tribunal by the applicants’ solicitor on 28 May 2013 notes
the previous hearing the respondent’s solicitor advised the
Tribunal that he had lost contact with the respondent for several
2 July 2013 the Tribunal made directions for the filing and service of documents
and determined that a hearing on the preliminary
issue should not be listed. The
parties were directed to file and serve all documents on which they intended to
rely at the hearing
(including, amongst other things) their expert evidence by
19 July 2013 for the applicant and 13 September 2013 for the respondent.
applicant complied with these directions. The respondent did not.
application was listed for further directions on 23 September 2013. The
respondent did not appear and was not represented at that
hearing. The Tribunal
noted that the respondent had not complied with the Tribunal’s directions
in relation to the provision
of evidence and that the Tribunal had not received
any correspondence from the respondent since the last directions hearing to
the respondent’s failure to serve evidence or their non-appearance
at the directions hearing. The Tribunal ordered that evidence
not served in
compliance with the Tribunal’s directions would not be admissible at the
hearing. The matter was subsequently
listed for hearing on 28 and 29 November
27 November 2013, the Tribunal’s Registry received an email from the
respondent seeking an adjournment of the hearing. In
this email the respondent
stated, amongst other things, that the solicitor who had appeared for him
– Mr Grew – was not
his solicitor but “Elio’s”
(That is, Mr Del-Ben, who was apparently a director of the vendor) and that when
signed the affidavit he thought that was the end of the matter as he was not
involved in any of the building works.
respondent’s application was refused. On the first day of hearing, Mr Grew
appeared for the respondent with limited instructions
to apply for an
adjournment. Mr Grew submitted that the respondent had a range of personal
difficulties which contributed to his
non-attendance, but that he would be able
to attend the hearing on the second day. Mr Grew withdrew from the
proceedings when
he was advised of the reason for requesting the adjournment
given by the respondent in his email of 27 November 2013. Mr Grew stated
had acted for Built by Big Pty Ltd on the sale of the property and he had acted
for the respondent in relation to a number
of matters. Mr Grew stated that he
had not taken instructions from Mr Del Ben in these proceedings.
Garcia for the applicant submitted that the Tribunal should hear the expert
evidence in the absence of the respondent, on the basis
applicants’ expert evidence had been filed and served, that the
applicants’ expert witness was present and that
the respondent had not
filed any expert evidence and had not demonstrated any interest in doing so. In
the interests of expediency,
the Tribunal agreed to hear the applicants’
expert evidence, albeit recognising that if the applicants were unsuccessful on
the preliminary issue this could be a waste of time, and on the proviso that any
application made by the respondent to have the applicants’
expert recalled
for cross-examination would be considered.
respondent attended the hearing in person on 29 November 2013. He stated that he
had not known about the hearing and that he had
heard nothing about the
proceedings since January when he signed the affidavit. The respondent
reiterated that he had not been involved
in the building works. He confirmed
that he was ready to proceed with a hearing in relation to that issue, relying
on his affidavit.
The hearing accordingly proceeded.
the end of the hearing, the applicants’ representative was given leave to
file and serve written submissions in relation
to his oral submission that by
having his name on the HOWI certificate, the respondent was deemed to be the
builder. A written submission
was filed on 6 December 2013. No submission in
reply was received from the respondent by the due date of 13 December
threshold issue to be determined in this matter is whether the respondent has
been correctly identified; that is, whether he (in
either his individual
capacity or his capacity as a trustee) undertook the building works which are
the subject of the application.
EVIDENCE AND SUBMISSIONS
relation to the issue of whether the respondent was the builder, the applicants
relied on Mr Keeping’s statutory declaration
dated 18 July 2013 and
attachments to the declaration, and an affidavit dated 22 November
2013 of Ian David Parkinson,
the Manager – Insurance Operations at Master
Builders Queensland Insurance Services, with attachments. The attachments are
documents produced under summons by the insurer. Mr Parkinson’s affidavit
was marked Exhibit A1 in the proceedings.
respondent relied on his affidavit dated 3 January 2013.
documents and the written submission filed on behalf of the applicants on 6
December 2013 were considered in making this decision.
section 48K
of the Act, the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine a
“building claim” in which the amount claimed does not
$500,000.00.
claim” is relevantly defined in
section 48A
of the Act as a claim for:
(a) the payment of a specified sum of money, or
(b) the supply of specified services, or
(c) relief from payment of a specified sum of money, or
(d) the delivery, return or replacement of specified goods or goods of a
specified description, or
(e) a combination of two or more of the remedies referred to in paragraphs
that arises from a supply of building goods or services.
relevantly defines the term “building goods and services” as
“goods or services supplied for or in connection with the carrying out
of residential building work or specialist work”,
being goods or
“supplied by the person who contracts to do, or otherwise
does, that work”.
“Residential
building work” is defined in
of the Act as:
.... any work involved in, or involved in co-ordinating or supervising any
work involved in:
(a) the construction of a dwelling, or
(b) the making of alterations or additions to a dwelling, or
(c) the repairing, renovation, decoration or protective treatment of a
certain works from the definition of residential building
work, but the
exclusions are not relevant to this application.
effect, the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine a claim against a
person who or an entity which has carried out any
work involved in the
construction, alteration, repair, decorative treatment or protective treatment
of a dwelling or has been involved
in the coordination or supervision of such
applicants’ submitted that the respondent should be found to be the
builder because:
(a) The respondent applied and paid for HOWI in August 2008 and then increased
the insurance cover in October 2008.
(b) There is evidence that the respondent had entered into a contract with the
vendor contained in the business records of the home
owners’ warranty
insurer, which were produced under summons.
(c) The respondent agreed to undertake and commenced rectification works.
the issue was uncontested, the applicants’ evidence in relation to those
two factors might be relatively strong. However,
against that evidence
(a) The respondent’s denial that he undertook the works, which was not
shaken under cross-examination.
(b) The lack of any documentation demonstrating that the respondent actually
undertook, co-ordinated or supervised the building works.
In relation to this,
the invoices produced in response to the summonses issued to Mr Del Ben and the
respondent – there are
admittedly very few, relating only to the
waterproofing and the supply of doors – are addressed to Mr Del Ben and/or
Build”. There is no building contract and the
respondent’s evidence is that the details in relation to starting dates
the HOWI documentation were entered not by him but by an officer of the insurer.
There are no invoices addressed to the respondent.
Nor is there any evidence
that the respondent was ever on site, that he paid sub-contractors or that he
was paid by the vendor.
(c) The fact that Mr Del-Ben did not immediately refer the applicant to the
respondent, but rather to the water proofer, which suggests
that Mr Del-Ben (or
the vendor) was assuming some responsibility for the building works.
(d) Some of the email correspondence attached to the applicant’s
application; for example, the email dated 11 January 2012
from Mr Grew to the
applicant (which was copied to the water proofer and to Elio Del Ben, but not to
the respondent) stating that
he had spoken to “
Elio, Simon [the
respondent] and Brad [the water proofer]”
and all had expressed
“a willingness to work together to fix the waterproofing”.
Grew went to state that “Elio” – and not the respondent - had
asked him to coordinate the work. Also relevant
is an email dated 8 December
2011 from the applicant to Mr Grew stating that the respondent had told him in a
telephone conversation
on 5 December 2011 that the waterproofer and the
developer [that is, the vendor] had agreed “to provide service and/or
to allow the respondent to carry out rectification works. This
tends to support the evidence given by the respondent during the hearing
part of the reason he agreed to do the rectification works was that the vendor
had agreed to pay for that to occur.
are certainly weaknesses in the respondent’s denial that he was the
builder. One weakness is the internal inconsistency
in what the respondent has
said concerning this denial. For example, in his affidavit dated 3 January 2013,
the respondent states
“at no time did I agree to do or enter into a
contract to do, and at no time did I do any building work at the
However, in the email requesting an adjournment received by
the Tribunal on 27 November 2011, the respondent states that he was going
the works but
“a disagreement on price came about and I walked away
without even starting”
and during the hearing the respondent indicated
that he had not undertaken any works because when he went to the site on one
“Elio’s boys” had already started the works.
weakness in the respondent’s denial that he was the builder is his
apparent preparedness to do rectification works.
During the hearing the
respondent stated that he felt sorry for the applicants and that this is why he
had agreed to do the work.
In my view it is implausible that a builder would
agree to rectify work for which he had no responsibility because he felt sorry
for a homeowner. Further, the respondent’s evidence in this regard is not
consistent with the comment in his email of 27 November
2013 that he became
involved in the rectification work because his name was on the homeowners’
warranty insurance certificate.
said, in spite of the weaknesses in the respondent’s evidence, other than
the respondent’s name being on the homeowners’
warranty insurance
certificate and the respondent having agreed to undertake and commenced
undertaking rectification work, there
is scant evidence that he did any of the
work involved in the construction of the dwelling that is the subject of this
application
or that he was involved in co-ordinating or supervising any work
involved in the construction. Although the respondent commenced
rectification
work and there is evidence that what was done was neither completed nor done
well, that is not the work which is specifically
the subject of this
application.
note the case of
Gupta v Anor v Xanthakis & Anor
(Domestic Building)
[2013] VCAT 1127
(3 July 2013) [Gupta’s case], referred to in the
submissions filed on behalf of the respondent. That case does bear some
similarities
to the current matter, but it also bears some significant
differences. A relevant difference is that in Gupta’s case a contract
between the builder and the vendor was in evidence and the builder admitted to
having undertaken inspections of the work (albeit
of a very cursory nature) and
to being aware that he was responsible for the sub-contractors engaged by the
vendor, who was also
a party to the proceedings.
noted above, in this case no contract between the vendor and the respondent has
been produced and the evidence that there ever
was a contract is slight. I am
not satisfied that the references to a contract in the home owners’
warranty insurer’s
documentation outweighs the respondent’s oral
evidence, and the lack of other evidence supporting a finding that the
was involved in undertaking the work. There is no evidence that the
respondent received or made payments in respect of the works.
There is no
evidence that the respondent was ever on site during construction or that he
engaged, coordinated or gave instructions
to contractors working on the site or
that he dealt with the certifier. There is no evidence that he inspected the
work. Further,
in addition to the respondent’s admittedly internally
inconsistent evidence, there is some evidence to support a finding that
respondent agreed to do rectification work not because he had undertaken the
original work, or indeed because he felt sorry for
the applicants, but because
he was going to be funded to do so; that is, the email from the applicant to Mr
Grew dated 5 December
2011 recording a conversation between the applicant and
the respondent.
I am not satisfied that the weight of evidence supports a conclusion that the
defective building work of which the applicants
complain was done by the
respondent. Their application accordingly fails.
elephant in the room in this matter is the role played by Mr Del Ben and Built
by Big Pty Ltd. Neither party obtained a statement
from Mr Del Ben or
summonsed him to give evidence. While the applicants summonsed Mr Del Ben to
produce documents in relation
to the building works, the documents actually
produced were scant. It may well be, as claimed by the respondent, that the
undertaken by the vendor and/or Mr Del Ben. It is also possible that
the respondent allowed the vendor to use his home building licence.
This was not
addressed during the hearing and I make no finding that this is what occurred.
However, such a scenario might explain
the circumstances leading to this
application more convincingly than the explanation advanced by the respondent.
If this did occur,
then it may give rise to another cause of action against the
respondent and/or Mr Del Ben, but that is not a matter for the
issue of concern arising from this matter is the role played the
respondent’s former solicitor, Mr Grew. On the first
day of the hearing,
prior to withdrawing from the proceedings, Mr Grew told the Tribunal that he had
not taken instructions from
Mr Del Ben in this matter. That may be correct.
However, the applicant’s evidence – which I accept – is that
Grew, acting as the vendor’s solicitor (or alternatively as Mr Del
Ben’s solicitor), referred him to the respondent on
the basis that the
respondent was the builder. Mr Grew was subsequently involved in arranging
proposed rectification works, apparently
at the request of Mr Del Ben. Mr
Grew then represented the respondent in these proceedings, filing an affidavit
on his behalf
which sets out the respondent’s defence that he was not the
builder - a defence which is in conflict with Mr Grew’s prior
communications with the applicants.
his written submission, the applicants’ solicitor requested that the
matter be listed for further directions if the respondent
was found not to be
the builder, as the applicants intend to seek leave to amend their points of
claim (adding new causes of action
and new respondents) and/or seek leave to
have the proceedings transferred to a court of competent jurisdiction to enable
of action to be determined. I decline to accede to this request. The
applicants had ample opportunity to amend their points of claim
or seek to join
other parties to the proceedings from the time they were on notice of the
respondent’s defence to their application.
Further, if the applicants wish
to pursue other causes of action, either against the respondent or against
another party or parties,
then new proceedings can be commenced in the Tribunal
or in the appropriate jurisdiction in the usual manner.
summary, the onus is on the applicants to prove each element of their case. This
means that the onus is on them to prove that they
have named the correct
respondent. Although it is possible that the respondent undertook the
residential building works which are
the subject of this application, the
evidence does not support a finding on the balance of probabilities that he did
so. The applicants
find themselves in a terrible situation. They have purchased
a dwelling which the expert evidence clearly demonstrates has very serious
defects which will be very expensive to rectify. However, I am not satisfied
that the respondent carried out the residential building
work to which this
application relates. It follows that the application does not constitute a
building claim as defined in section
48A of the Act and the Tribunal accordingly
does not have jurisdiction to deal with the application pursuant to section 48K
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy
23 December 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (170 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter