URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/840.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hoger v LD Engineering Services Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPICMP 840; (30 October 2025)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL PANEL
Hoger v LD Engineering Services Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPICMP 840
Clayton Hoger
RESPONDENT:
LD Engineering Services Pty Ltd
APPEAL PANEL
Carolyn Rimmer
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Margaret Gibson
DATE OF DECISION:
30 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workplace Injury Management and Workers
Compensation Act 1998
; review of Medical Assessment Certificate (MAC);
assessment of the cervical spine, and left upper extremity; Medical Assessor
one-tenth pursuant to
section 323
from the impairment assessed in
respect of the cervical spine and one-third pursuant to
section 323
impairment assessed in respect of the left upper extremity; radiological
investigations demonstrated significant degenerative
change in the cervical
spine and in the left shoulder; Appeal Panel found no error in the deductions
made pursuant to
section 323
despite the appellant being asymptomatic in those
body parts before the work injury;
– MAC confirmed.
BACKGROUND TO THE APPLICATION TO APPEAL
30 July 2025 Clayton Hoger lodged an Application to Appeal Against the Decision
of a Medical Assessor. The medical dispute was
assessed by Dr Robert Kuru, a
Medical Assessor, who issued a Medical Assessment Certificate (MAC) on 2 July
appellant relies on the following grounds of appeal under s 327(3) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
the assessment
was made on the basis of incorrect criteria, and
the MAC contains
a demonstrable error.
delegate is satisfied that, on the face of the application, at least one ground
of appeal has been made out. The Appeal Panel
has conducted a review of the
original medical assessment but limited to the ground(s) of appeal on which the
appeal is made.
128 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (the PIC Rules) and Procedural
Direction PIC7 - Appeals, reviews, reconsiderations
and correction of obvious
errors in medical disputes set out the practice and procedure in relation to the
medical appeal process
under s 328 of the 1998 Act. An Appeal Panel
determines its own procedures in accordance with r 128(1) of the PIC Rules.
assessment of permanent impairment is conducted in accordance with the
NSW Workers Compensation Guidelines for the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment,
1 March 2021 (the
Guidelines) and the
American Medical Association Guides to the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment,
RELEVANT FACTUAL BACKGROUND
appellant sustained an injury deemed to have occurred on 9 November 2022 in his
employment as a fitter and turner with L D Engineering
Services Pty Ltd (the
respondent).
appellant lodged an Application to Resolve a Dispute in the Personal Injury
Commission (Commission) dated 16 May 2025 in which
he claimed lump sum
compensation in respect the injury to his cervical spine and left upper
matter was referred to Dr Robert Kuru, Medical Assessor, for assessment of whole
person impairment (WPI) of the cervical spine
and left upper extremity as a
result of the injury deemed to have occurred on 9 November 2022.
Medical Assessor examined the appellant on 24 June 2025 and assessed 16% WPI of
the cervical spine and 8% WPI of the left upper
extremity (shoulder) and 1% for
scarring (TEMSKI). The Medical Assessor deducted one tenth under s 323 from the
assessment of the
cervical spine which resulted in an assessment of 14% WPI of
the cervical spine. The Medical Assessor deducted one third under s
323 from the
assessment of the left shoulder which resulted in an assessment 5% WPI in
respect of the left upper extremity (shoulder).
The total WPI assessed was
therefore 19% deemed to have occurred on 9 November 2022.
PRELIMINARY REVIEW
Appeal Panel conducted a preliminary review of the original medical assessment
in the absence of the parties and in accordance
with the Procedural Direction
a result of that preliminary review, the Appeal Panel determined that it was not
necessary for the appellant to undergo a further
medical examination because
there was sufficient information upon which to make a
determination.
Documentary evidence
Appeal Panel has before it all the documents that were sent to the Medical
Assessor for the original medical assessment and has
taken them into account in
making this determination.
Medical Assessment Certificate
parts of the medical certificate given by the Medical Assessor that are relevant
to the appeal are set out, where relevant, in
the body of this
SUBMISSIONS
parties made written submissions. They are not repeated in full but have been
considered by the Appeal Panel.
appellant’s submissions include the following:
(a) ground 1 - the Medical Assessor erred in applying a one tenth s 323
deduction of the 1998 Act when the medical evidence before
him was that the
appellant’s degenerative changes in the cervical spine were asymptomatic
at the time of his injury;
(b) there were no complaints of neck or cervical spine pains or restriction of
movement prior to the deemed date of injury, 9 November
2022. Moreover, there
were no radiological investigations of the cervical spine prior to the deemed
dated of injury;
(c) prior to the deemed date of injury, the appellant was working a heavy and
repetitive manual job as a fitter and turner without
neck or cervical spine
complaints;
(d) the Medical Assessor made a 10% s 323 deduction purely as there was evidence
of cervical spondylosis on the scans;
(e) evidence of mere degenerative changes is not enough to warrant a deduction
under s 323. See
Cole v Wenaline Pty Limited
[2010] NSWSC 78
Ryder v Sundance Bakehouse
[2015] NSWSC 526
(f) there was no medical or lay evidence before the Medical Assessor to warrant
any deduction under s 323;
(g) the clinical records of Dr Wang (general practitioner (GP)) demonstrate that
the appellant’s neck and cervical spine were
asymptomatic for over 13
years from June 2009 to November 2022;
(h) ground 2 - the Medical Assessor erred in applying a one third s 323
deduction when the medical evidence before him was that the
appellant’s
degenerative changes in the left shoulder were asymptomatic at the time of his
(i) there were no complaints of left shoulder pains or restriction of movement
prior to the deemed date of injury, 9 November 2022.
Moreover, there were no
radiological investigations of the left shoulder prior to the deemed dated of
(j) the Medical Assessor made a one third 323 deduction purely “as there
was evidence of cervical spondylosis on the scans”;
(k) the Medical Assessor failed to consider the left shoulder was asymptomatic
for at least 13 years prior to the deemed date of
injury as demonstrated by Dr
Wang’s clinical records;
(l) contrary to the referral, the Medical Assessor found there was no evidence
of acute injury to the left shoulder;
(m) the one third deduction under s 323 where there is no evidence “that
the pre-existing abnormality made a difference to
the outcome in terms of the
degree of impairment resulting from the work injury” therefore constitutes
a demonstrable error;
(n) the MAC should be revoked for the reasons outlined above, and
(o) the MAC should be modified to make no s 323 deductions to the Medical
Assessor’s WPI assessments of the cervical spine
and left shoulder.
Alternatively, the appellant seeks a re-examination by a member of the Medical
Appeal Panel
respondent’s submissions include the following:
(a) ground 1: one-tenth deduction to the WPI at the cervical spine. The
appellant submits that there were no complaints of neck or
cervical pain prior
to the date of injury, and no radiological investigations of the cervical spine
prior to the date. However, the
Certificate of Capacity dated 12 December 2012
(page 33 of the Reply), which was prior to the subject injury, records that he
head on low beam” on this date and had “cervical facet
joint impingement”;
(b) in his report dated 18 March 2025 (page 25 of the Reply) Dr Peter Moloney
advised that he considered a one-tenth deduction was
applicable to account for
the prior injury on 12 December 2012;
(c) having regard to the above, the available evidence indicates that the
appellant’s cervical spine was not asymptomatic prior
to the subject
injury as is alleged by the appellant;
(d) MRI scan taken of the appellant’s cervical spine on 27 February 2023
(page 42 of the ARD) demonstrated “Severely
narrowed degenerative discs at
C5/6 and C6/7”;
(e) the Medical Assessor correctly applied the rationale outlined in
when applying a one-tenth deduction to his assessment of WPI to the cervical
spine. In this regard, he explained that in the absence
of the pre-existing
cervical spondylosis, the appellant’s cervical foraminotomy would not have
been indicated. He went on to
state that the impairment at the cervical spine
was assessable based on the surgery the appellant had undergone. Therefore, the
pre-existing
condition caused the impairment at the cervical spine to be greater
than had the appellant not had a pre-existing degenerative condition;
(f) the Medical Assessor did not err in applying a one-tenth deduction to his
assessment of WPI to the cervical spine. The Medical
Assessor’s assessment
of the deductible portion was based on correct criteria and was consistent with
the evidence available
(g) ground 2 - one-third deduction to the WPI at the left shoulder. Regarding
the appellant’s submission that the left shoulder
was asymptomatic prior
to the subject injury, an MRI of the appellant’s left shoulder taken on 12
December 2022 (page 39 of
the ARD) found “severe AC joint
osteoarthritis”. A CT of the appellant’s left shoulder taken on 8
March 2024 (page
45 of the ARD) demonstrated “moderate degree OA at the
glenohumeral joint, moderate to marked degree OA at the AC joint”;
(h) Dr Donald Osborne, treating orthopaedic surgeon, reported on 18 January 2024
(page 33 of the ARD) that the appellant had “significant
pathology in the
form of osteoarthritis causing symptoms in his shoulder”;
(i) in his report dated 4 September 2024 (page 20 of the ARD), Dr Michael J
Edger accepted that a deduction was applicable to the
assessment of WPI at the
left shoulder “due to likely preexisting shoulder osteoarthritis”.
He applied a one-tenth deduction
but did not comment on whether this was at odds
with the available evidence;
(j) the Medical Assessor correctly applied the rationale outlined in
when applying a one-third deduction to his assessment of WPI to the
left shoulder. He considered the appellant’s pain ongoing
restriction of movement was due to these pre-existing conditions, as opposed to
the injury on
9 November 2022. Accordingly, he considered a one-tenth
deduction was at odds with the available evidence, and
(k) having regard to the above, the Medical Assessor did not err in applying a
one-third deduction to his assessment of WPI at the
left shoulder. The Medical
Assessor’s assessment of the deductible portion was based on correct
criteria and was consistent
with the evidence available to him.
FINDINGS AND REASONS
procedures on appeal are contained in s 328 of the 1998 Act. The appeal is to be
by way of review of the original medical assessment
but the review is limited to
the grounds of appeal on which the appeal is made.
Campbelltown City Council v Vegan
[2006] NSWCA 284
the Court of Appeal
held that the Appeal Panel is obliged to give reasons. Where there are disputes
of fact it may be necessary to
refer to evidence or other material on which
findings are based, but the extent to which this is necessary will vary from
case. Where more than one conclusion is open, it will be necessary to
explain why one conclusion is preferred. On the other hand,
the reasons need not
be extensive or provide a detailed explanation of the criteria applied by the
medical professionals in reaching
a professional judgement.
Appeal Panel reviewed the MAC and the evidence in this matter.
Section 323 deductions
323 of the 1998 Act provides:
“(1) In assessing the degree of
permanent impairment resulting from an injury, there is to be a deduction for
any proportion
of the impairment that is due to any previous injury (whether or
not it is an injury for which compensation has been paid or is payable
Division 4 of Part 3 of the 1987 Act) or that is due to any pre-existing
condition or abnormality.
(2) If the extent of a deduction under this
section (or a part of it)
will be difficult or costly to determine (because, for example, of the absence
of medical evidence), it
is to be assumed (for the purpose of avoiding
disputation) that the deduction (or the relevant part of it) is 10% of the
impairment,
unless this assumption is at odds with the available evidence.
Note. So if the degree of permanent impairment is assessed as 30% and
subsection (2) operates to require a 10% reduction in that impairment
assumed, the degree of permanent impairment is reduced from 30% to 27% (a
reduction of 10%).
The reference in subsection (2) to medical evidence is a reference to medical
evidence accepted or preferred by the medical assessor
in connection with the
medical assessment of the matter.
The WorkCover Guidelines may make provision for or with respect to the
determination of the deduction required by this section.”
1.27 of the Guidelines provides:
“In assessing the degree of
permanent impairment resulting from the compensable injury/condition, the
assessor is to indicate
the degree of impairment due to any previous injury,
pre-existing condition or abnormality. This proportion is known as ‘the
deductible proportion’’ and should be deducted from the degree of
permanent impairment determined by the assessor. For
the injury being assessed,
the deduction is 1/10th of the assessed impairment unless that is at odds with
the available evidence.”
Justice Schmidt held at [29-30]:
section is directed to a situation where there is a pre-existing injury,
pre-existing condition or abnormality. For
a deduction to be made from what has
been assessed to have been the level of impairment which resulted from the later
injury in question,
a conclusion is required, on the evidence, that the pre-
existing injury, pre-existing condition or abnormality caused or contributed
that impairment.
30. Section 323 does not permit that assessment to be made on the basis of an
assumption or hypothesis, that once a particular injury
has occurred,
it will always, ‘irrespective of outcome’, contribute to the
impairment flowing from any subsequent injury. The assessment
must have regard
to the evidence as to the actual consequences of the earlier injury,
pre-existing condition or abnormality. The
extent that the later impairment was
due to the earlier injury, pre-existing condition or abnormality must be
determined. The only
exception is that provided for in s 323(2), where the
required deduction ‘will be difficult or costly to determine (because,
example, of the absence of medical evidence)’. In that case, an assumption
is provided for, namely that thededuction ‘is
10% of the impairment'. Even
then, that assumption is displaced, if it is at odds with the available
Honour continued at [31]:
“The reason for this statutory
approach can readily be seen...an earlier injury which was asymptomatic, may or
may not contribute
to the impairment which results from a second injury. That is
a matter of fact to be assessed on the evidence led in each case.”
Honour held at [34]:
“Section 323 requires that a conclusion
be reached as to whether or not any proportion of permanent impairment assessed
from an earlier injury, pre-existing condition or abnormality. In a
case such as this, that conclusion must be reached on the evidence
led as to the
actual consequences of the earlier and later injuries, unless the assumption
provided in s 323(2) applies.”
above was further affirmed in
, whereby at [32], Campbell J
“But it is necessary that the pre-existing condition
was a contributing factor causing the loss. And, of course, it is necessary
there was a pre-existing condition.”
at [40], Campbell J stated:
“In Smart (at [33]) Giles JA
emphasised that the questions of whether there is a pre-existing condition, and
whether it is a
contributing factor to the post-injury permanent impairment, are
questions of fact. In Cole Schmidt J emphasised that it is inappropriate
assume that if a pre-existing condition, or injury, is made out on the evidence
then it must contribute to the impairment ([28-30]).”
[45] Campbell J set out what was necessary to determine whether there was to be
a deduction. He said:
“What s 323 requires is an inquiry into
whether there are other causes, (previous injury, or pre-existing abnormality),
impairment caused by a work injury. A proportion of the impairment would
be due to the preexisting abnormality (even if that proportion
precisely identified without difficulty or expense) only if it can be said that
the pre-existing abnormality made a difference
to the outcome in terms of the
impairment resulting from the work injury. If there is no difference in
outcome, that is to say, if the degree of impairment is not
greater than it
would otherwise have been as a result of the injury, it is impossible to say
that a proportion of it is due to the
pre-existing abnormality. To put it
another way, the Panel must be satisfied that but for the pre-existing
abnormality, the degree
of impairment resulting from the work injury would not
have been as great.”
Vitaz v Westform (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 254
referred to the
approach adopted by the Court in, for example,
D'Aleo v Ambulance Service of
New South Wales
(NSWCA, 12 December 1996, unrep) (quoted by Giles JA, Mason
P and Powell JA agreeing, in
Matthew Hall Pty Ltd v Smart
[2000] NSWCA
and, more recently, by Schmidt J in
. His Honour said:
“The resulting principle is that if a pre-existing condition
is a contributing factor causing permanent impairment, a deduction
is required
even though the pre-existing condition had been asymptomatic prior to the
Appeal Panel accepts that s 323 of the 1998 Act requires that a deduction be
made “for any proportion of the impairment
that is due to any previous
injury or that is due to any pre- existing condition or abnormality” even
though the pre-existing
condition had been asymptomatic prior to the
Ground 1: One-tenth deduction to the WPI at the cervical
appellant submits that the Medical Assessor erred in applying a 10% s 323
deduction when the medical evidence before him was that
the appellant’s
degenerative changes in the cervical spine were asymptomatic at the time of his
noted above it does not necessarily follow that if the degenerative changes in
the cervical spine were asymptomatic at the time
of his injury, there would be
no deduction made “for any proportion of the impairment that is due to any
previous injury or
that is due to any pre- existing condition or
abnormality”. A deduction is to be made for any proportion of the
that is due to any previous injury or that is due to any pre-
existing condition or abnormality.
page 7 of the MAC, the Medical Assessor reports that he considers the appellant
suffers from pre-existing cervical spondylosis.
“Injury to the cervical spine represents an aggravation
of pre-existing constitutional cervical spondylosis. In the absence
pre-existing condition, cervical foraminotomy would not have been indicated.
Impairment in the cervical spine is now assessable
on the basis of Mr Hoger
having had surgery rather than on the basis of him having sustained an acute
Medical Assessor concluded that the extent of the deduction was difficult or
costly to determine so in applying s 323(2) of the
1998 Act, assessed the
deductible proportion as one-tenth.
report of the MRI scan taken of the appellant’s cervical spine on 27
February 2023 by
Dr Amanda Woodward, radiologist, (page 42 of the ARD)
demonstrated:
“Severely narrowed degenerative discs at C5/6
and C6/7”. Uncovertebral joint osteophytes project into the neural
foramina at these levels. There is significant foraminal stenosis and nerve root
compression on the right at the C5/6 level with
compression of exiting right C6
nerve root. Minor mass effect on the exiting left nerve root.”
a report dated 4 September 2024, Dr Micheal Edgar, consultant neurosurgeon,
“There is no history of any pre-existing cervical
spine or left upper limb pain, weakness, or injury, prior to November 2022,
although bilateral hand and feet pins and needles was noted earlier in the
Therefore, for the cervical spine, the whole person impairment is reached by
combining (using AMA5 combined values chart, page 604)
18% with 3% to reach 20%.
Accepting that there were no symptoms of cervical spine pain or left upper limb
C6 radiculopathy prior
to the injury, I do not consider that any deduction is
required for pre-existing conditions.”
Peter Moloney, consultant neurosurgeon in a report dated 20 January 2025,
“On the basis of the history available to me, there
were no prior or subsequent injuries.”
Moloney was of the view that the applicant had reached maximum medical
improvement (MMI) in respect of the cervical spine and assessed
the applicant as
DRE cervical category III with a baseline of 15%, added 2% WPI for ADL and a
further 3% WPI for ongoing radiculopathy.
Dr Moloney wrote: “He has no
past history of spinal complaint and therefore I do not believe that there is a
deductible proportion
to be applied.”
a supplementary report dated 18 March 2025, Dr Moloney noted that the applicant
has sustained an injury to his head and neck at
work on 12 December 2012. Dr
Moloney noted that the applicant had investigations following the injury and was
referred to doctors.
Dr Moloney considered that a deduction of one tenth
for the pre-existing injury was appropriate.
Appeal Panel accepts that there was evidence of an earlier injury on 12 December
2012 to the appellant’s neck and head.
In a WorkCover NSW Medical
Certificate dated
12 December 2012, Dr Matthew McDonald noted that the
appellant had struck his head on low beams and made a diagnosis of cervical
joint impingement. The Management Plan was “x -ray, analgesia”
and he noted that the appellant was fit for suitable duties,
normal hours.
Appeal Panel notes that it appears that there were no other complaints made by
the appellant to his GPs after that incident on
12 December 2012 until the
subject work injury.
Appeal Panel accepts as did the Medical Assessor that the appellant was
asymptomatic in terms of his cervical spine at the time
of the subject work
injury. The Medical Assessor made the one tenth deduction pursuant to s 323 on
the basis that the appellant had
pre-existing constitutional cervical
spondylosis. The MRI scan on 27 February 2023, some two and a half months after
the injury on
9 November 2022, showed severely narrowed degenerative discs at
C5/6 and C6/7 and significant foraminal stenosis and nerve root compression
the right at the C5/6 level. The degree of degeneration was clearly
longstanding.
Appeal Panel rejects the appellant’s submission that the Medical Assessor
erred in applying a one tenth s 323 deduction
when the medical evidence before
him was that the appellant’s degenerative changes in the cervical spine
were asymptomatic
at the time of his injury. The radiological investigations
before the Medical Assessor demonstrated long term degenerative change
Appeal Panel agrees with the Medical Assessor that a proportion of the
impairment assessed was due to the pre-existing degenerative
Medical Assessor made a deduction of one tenth as he concluded that the extent
of the deduction was difficult or costly to determine
applying s 323(2) of the
1998 Act. The Appeal Panel finds no error in this approach.
ground of appeal is not made out.
Ground 2: One-third deduction
to the WPI at the left upper extremity (shoulder
appellant submits that the Medical Assessor erred in applying a one third s 323
deduction when the medical evidence before him
was that the appellant’s
degenerative changes in the left shoulder were asymptomatic at the time of his
page 7 of the MAC, the Medical Assessor reports that he considers the appellant
suffers from pre-existing osteoarthritis at the
left shoulder. He
“Imaging on the left shoulder demonstrates significant
pre-existing acromioclavicular and glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis.
pain and impairment in the shoulder is on the basis of pre-existing
osteoarthritis rather than acute structural injury to
the shoulder.”
Medical Assessor explained his reasoning for applying a one-third deduction as
“Left upper extremity (shoulder): Whilst the extent
of the deduction is difficult or costly to determine the available evidence
that the deductible proportion is large and a deduction of one tenth is at odds
with the available evidence. In my opinion the
deductible proportion is one
third for the following reasons:
(i) As noted above, imaging has demonstrated a pre-existing constitutional
osteoarthritis of the glenohumeral and acromioclavicular
joints. Imaging has not
demonstrated acute injury to the shoulder on the date of injury. Ongoing pain
and restriction of movement
in the shoulder and ultimately the recommendation
for any surgical treatment is on the basis of addressing pre-existing
glenohumeral
osteoarthritis and not the effects of acute injury.”
his statement dated 30 April 2025 the applicant stated that prior to his
employment with the respondent he did not suffer from
any pain or restrictions
in his neck or left shoulder.
Donald Osbourne, treating orthopaedic surgeon, in a report dated 14 March 2023
“His MRI scan shows severe glenohumeral osteoarthritis
primarily manifested in the glenoid. There is cystic changes and bone
oedematous changes with grade 4 chondral loss. I note the report suggests
partial tear of the supraspinatus but to my eye
the supraspinatus tendon is
unremarkable. There is also degenerative AC joint arthritis.
The MRI scan of his contralateral right shoulder shows bone marrow changes in
his posterior glenoid.”
Osbourne in a report dated 18 January 2024 wrote:
“He has had
surgery with Dr Spitaller in August. Unfortunately this has not helped his
shoulder symptoms in any way. I think
this does confirm that he has significant
pathology in the form of osteoarthritis causing symptoms in his
a report dated 4 September 2024, Dr Micheal Edgar, consultant neurosurgeon,
:There is no history of any pre-existing cervical spine or
left upper limb pain, weakness, or injury, prior to November 2022, although
bilateral hand and feet pins and needles was noted earlier in the year.
Left shoulder - These impairments are added to result in 15% upper extremity
impairment, and this is converted to 9% whole person
impairment using table
16.3, page 439. Due to the likely pre-existing shoulder osteoarthritis, I have
deduced 10% for pre-existing
conditions, resulting in an impairment of the left
upper extremity (shoulder) of 8%.”
Peter Moloney, consultant neurosurgeon in a report dated 20 January 2025,
“On the basis of the history available to me, there
were no prior or subsequent injuries.
Prior to the injury, he had severe arthritis changes in the shoulder as
detailed by Dr Osman and these changes have been aggravated
and possibly
accelerated as a result of the nature of the work that he was carrying out on 09
November 2022.”
Moloney believed that further, more aggressive treatment to the shoulder
“may well improve the situation to the point of
making a significant
difference to his whole person impairment.” He noted that there had been a
change in the left shoulder
condition since he saw Dr Edgar and a deterioration
in his ability to move the shoulder. Dr Moloney considered that with further
treatment there could be an improvement in shoulder movements.
appellant submits that the Medical Assessor erred in applying a one third s 323
deduction when the medical evidence before him
was that the appellant’s
degenerative changes in the left shoulder were asymptomatic at the time of his
injury. The Appeal
Panel accepts that there were no complaints of left shoulder
pains, restriction of movement or radiological investigations prior
deemed date of injury, that is, 9 November 2022.
as noted above, it does not necessarily follow that if the degenerative changes
were asymptomatic at the time of his injury,
there would be no deduction made
for any proportion of the impairment that is due to any previous injury or that
is due to any pre-
existing condition. A deduction is to be made for any
proportion of the impairment that is due to any previous injury or that is
to any pre-existing condition or abnormality.
appellant submits (B 3, page 4 of the appellant’s submissions) that the
Medical Assessor made a one third 323 deduction
purely “as there was
evidence of cervical spondylosis on the scans”. The Appeal Panel rejects
that submission as the
one third deduction in respect of the left shoulder was
clearly made on the basis that imaging demonstrated a pre-existing
constitutional
osteoarthritis of the glenohumeral and acromioclavicular joints.
In the view of the Appeal Panel, the Medical Assessor considered
that ongoing
pain and restriction of movement in the shoulder was caused in part by
pre-existing glenohumeral osteoarthritis.
appellant submits that contrary to the referral, the Medical Assessor found
there was no evidence of acute injury to the left
shoulder. The Appeal Panel
rejects this submission as what the Medical Assessor in fact stated was:
“Ongoing pain and impairment
in the shoulder is on the basis of
pre-existing osteoarthritis rather than acute structural injury to the
shoulder”. The Medical
Assessor did not find that there was “no
evidence of an acute injury to the left shoulder”.
appellant submits that the one third deduction under s 323 was made where there
is no evidence “that the pre-existing abnormality
made a difference to the
outcome in terms of the degree of impairment resulting from the work
injury” and therefore constitutes
a demonstrable error.
Appeal Panel notes that Dr Edgar deducted one tenth from his assessment of the
left upper extremity (shoulder) due to “the
likely pre-existing shoulder
osteoarthritis”. The radiological investigations demonstrate that the
appellant had severe glenohumeral
osteoarthritis primarily manifested in the
glenoid. There was cystic changes and bone marrow oedematous changes with grade
loss and degenerative AC joint arthritis. The Appeal Panel rejects
the submission that there is no evidence “that the pre-existing
abnormality made a difference to the outcome in terms of the degree of
impairment resulting from the work injury”.
Appeal Panel considers that the deduction of one third of the impairment
assessed in respect of the left shoulder was reasonable
because of the
significant amount of osteoarthritis found in the radiological investigations,
especially in the MRI scan undertaken
on 12 December 2022. The radiological
investigation of 12 December 2022 only post-dates the subject injury by about a
the arthritis and other degenerative changes demonstrated on that
scan would have been longstanding. The Medical Assessor considered
the deduction was difficult or costly to determine, the available evidence was
that the deductible proportion was large
and a deduction of one tenth was at
odds with the available evidence. The Appeal Panel agrees that deduction of one
tenth is at odds
with the radiological evidence and a deduction of one third was
appropriate in this case.
ground of appeal is not made out.
conclusion the Appeal Panel is satisfied that the Medical Assessor did not err
in applying a one-tenth deduction to his assessment
of WPI to the cervical spine
and a one third deduction to his assessment of the left shoulder. The Appeal
Panel is satisfied that
the assessment was made on the basis of the correct
these reasons, the Appeal Panel has determined that the MAC issued on 2 July
2025 should be confirmed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.17 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter