URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KCN [2013] NSWGT 28 (26 September 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 28
(26 SEPTEMBER 2013)
REQUESTED REVIEW
OF A GUARDIANSHIP ORDER
APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ORDER
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW OF A REVOCATION OF AN ENDURING POWER OF
Review Concerning:
Review Requested by:
Guardian at time of hearing:
Date and place of hearing:
26 September 2013 at Balmain
Tribunal Members
Presiding Member:
Ms Jill Moir
Professional Member:
Ms MeLMNie Oxenham
Community Member:
Ms Margaret Watson
Review of revocation of enduring power of attorney
– determined under
section 36(1)
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
carry out a review of the revocation and dismissed the application - financial
management order suspends enduring power of
Financial management – NSW Trustee and
Guardian appointed as financial manager.
Guardianship –
review of guardianship order – family conflict – accommodation and
medical decisions – communication
– guardianship order varied,
Public Guardian appointed with accommodation function – private guardian
appointed separately
with health care and medical and dental consent
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 26 September 2013
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal reviewed the previous guardianship order concerning Mrs KCN and
confirmed that order with the following variations:
Tribunal appointed Ms EMM as Mrs KCN’s guardian to make decisions on her
behalf about her health care and medical and dental
treatment; and the Tribunal
appointed the Public Guardian as Mrs KCN’s guardian to make decisions on
her behalf about her accommodation.
Tribunal appointed the NSW Trustee and Guardian as Mrs KCN’s financial
Tribunal determined under
section 36(1)
Powers of Attorney Act
not to carry out a review of the revocation on 21 May 2013 of the
Enduring Power of Attorney executed by Mrs KCN on 29 January 2010,
and instead
dismissed the application for review.
KCN is an 88 year old woman diagnosed with dementia. She has a daughter, Ms EMM,
a grandson, Mr HAT, a great granddaughter, Ms
NFD, and a brother Mr LMN who have
all been actively involved in the proceedings before the Tribunal. Mr HAT lives
overseas. The
others all live in Sydney.
29 January 2010 Mrs KCN appointed Ms EMM as her Attorney pursuant to an Enduring
Power of Attorney.
August 2012 Ms EMM made an application for guardianship. On 2 January 2013 the
Tribunal appointed Ms EMM as the guardian for Mrs
KCN for a period of 12 months.
At that time Mrs KCN was in respite at an aged care facility, having been
discharged there after a
hospital admission in July 2012, following a fall at
KCN’s accommodation. After her appointment as guardian, Ms EMM made a
decision that Mrs KCN be permanently placed at an aged
care facility.
24 April 2013 the Tribunal received an application from Mr HAT to review the
Enduring Power of Attorney. On 12 June 2013 the Tribunal
received an application
from Mr EMM to review the guardianship order on the basis that that Mrs
KCN’s accommodation was not
appropriate.
21 May 2013 Mrs KCN revoked the appointment of Ms EMM as her
26 June 2013 the Tribunal adjourned Mr EMM’s application to review the
guardianship order for 3 months but conducted an own
motion review of the order
and added the functions of health care and medical and dental consent. The
Tribunal consented to the withdrawal
of the application to review the enduring
power of attorney because Mrs KCN had purportedly revoked the EPA on 21 May 2013
meant, at that stage, that there was no instrument to
11 July 2013 Ms EMM made an application for a financial management order. On 11
July 2013 Mrs KCN executed a further enduring power
of attorney, appointing Mr
LMN and Mr TJG as her attorneys.
18 September 2013 Ms EMM made an application to review the revocation of the
enduring power of attorney. There was no application
to review the making of the
enduring power of attorney appointing Mr LMN and Mr TJG.
reasons for decision arise from the hearing conducted on 26 September 2013,
which addressed the adjourned review of the guardianship
order requested by Mr
HAT, as well as Ms EMM’s applications for a financial management order,
and review of the revocation
of the enduring power of attorney.
Conduct of the hearing
hearing was conducted in Balmain, and was attended by Mrs KCN, Ms EMM, Mr LMN,
Mr TJG, Ms NFD and a representative from the Private
Guardians Support Unit at
the NSW Trustee and Guardian. Mr HAT participated by conference telephone from
overseas for the whole of
the hearing. Ms Z from the aged care facility
participated by conference telephone for part of the hearing and gave evidence.
Y, barrister and Mr X, solicitor attended as McKenzie friends for Mrs KCN and
Ms EMM respectively.
it makes a decision the Tribunal must try to bring the parties to settlement if
this is possible and appropriate. Throughout
the course of the hearing, the
Tribunal used its best endeavours to bring the parties to agreement. These
endeavours were not successful.
GUARDIANSHIP
What did Tribunal have to decide?
reviewing the current guardianship order the Tribunal may confirm, vary, suspend
or revoke the order.
questions which had to be decided by the Tribunal are:
Mrs KCN someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order because she continues
to have a disability which prevents her from being
able to make important life
the guardianship order continue?
functions should now be given to the guardian?
should be the guardian?
Is Mrs KCN someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order because she
continues to have a disability which prevents her from being
able to make
important life decisions?
Guardianship Act 1987
provides that the Tribunal may make a
guardianship order for a person if it is satisfied that he/she is “a
person in need of
a guardian.” A person in need of a guardian is “a
person who because of a disability is totally or partially incapable
of managing
his or her person”
(section 3(1)
Guardianship Act 1987
). A person
with a disability is a person who is:
intellectually,
physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled;
advanced age;
mentally ill person within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act 2007
and by virtue of that fact is restricted in one
or more major life activities to such an extent that he or she requires
supervision
or social habilitation
(section 3(2)
Guardianship Act 1987
the time of the initial order, the Tribunal considered a neuropsychological
report dated 8 August 2012 from a clinical psychologist
at a public hospital,
which stated that Mrs KCN has very poor short term memory and widespread
deficits consistent with a diagnosis
of Alzheimer’s dementia, with
possible contribution from vascular factors. Mrs KCN scored 12/30 on the ACE-R
test. The psychologist
concluded that Mrs KCN did not have the capacity to
decide where she should live.
HAT has told the Tribunal at this hearing that he wants the order revoked as he
considered his grandmother has the capacity to
make all her decisions for
herself. Mrs KCN agreed with this view, but others at the hearing who gave
evidence did not express this
view. To varying degrees, they each expressed
reservations about Mrs KCN’s ability to make important decisions on her
own behalf.
There was general agreement that the assessment from August 2012 may
have reflected Mrs KCN at her worst, and that she is not as
impaired as this
assessment indicted. This view was confirmed by Ms Z when the Tribunal obtained
her view about Mrs KCN’s accommodation
Tribunal noted the social work letter dated 14 August 2012 from Mr W, as well as
the ACAT assessment dated 7 August 2012. These
provide information about Mrs
KCN’s circumstances prior to her admission to a public hospital. She was
admitted to hospital
on 24 July 2012 on the request of her GP because of
recurrent falls, and delirium resulting from a urinary tract infection. She was
reported to have delirium superimposed on dementia as well as anxiety,
depression, oedema of legs, insomnia and falls. She was said
to have paranoia at
times. She was assessed in hospital as being “
Alert but lacking in
insight into memory loss and care needs
”. The aged care assessment
noted she needed some assistance with mobility and personal hygiene, and to be
dependent on others
for assistance with medication, noted that she had been
living alone, supported by Regal nurses, DVA homecare, her daughter and family.
An occupational therapist conducted an assessment and a functional review and
found significantly impaired functioning. The aged
care assessment concluded
that Mrs KCN was “
struggling to cope at home with services and now
requires low residential care in a Dementia specific hostel
to the hearing the Tribunal was sent two letters from Dr V (both dated 24 June
2013) and a letter from Dr U, GP, dated 20 May
2013. Dr V states that he saw Mrs
KCN for the first time on 24 June 2013, and that she scored 22/30 on a mini
mental state examination
(MMSE). He referred her to a geriatrician, Dr T for
further evaluation, as he states that the reason for her presentation was that
she was interested in leaving the aged care facility to live with her
U had seen Mrs KCN previously. Her letter is also a referral to a geriatrician
(Dr S) for assessment, as Mrs KCN was reported to
be keen to change her power of
attorney and guardianship.
Unfortunately
Mrs KCN did not go on to have further assessment by either geriatrician, nor a
further aged care assessment. A letter
from Dr S dated 20 September 2013
confirmed that the appointment did not go ahead as Ms EMM cancelled it. There
was some discussion
at the hearing about the appropriateness of this action, and
reference to it having been agreed at the last hearing that further
would proceed. It appears that Ms EMM was unhappy that Mr TJG had taken Mrs KCN
to see Dr U and Dr V without consultation
with her. Mr TJG advised that he
believed he was acting in Mrs KCN’s interests in doing this. The Tribunal
notes that the
reasons for decision from the hearing on 26 June 2013 indicate
that the guardian’s powers were extended to include healthcare
and medical
and dental consent because of confusion caused by people other than Ms EMM (as
Mrs KCN’s person responsible) taking
her to medical appointments. The
reasons for decision do not make reference to any agreement that a further
assessment should be
the course of the hearing, the Tribunal spoke for a period of time with Mrs KCN
with only Ms Y present. Consistent with the
evidence referred to above, the
Tribunal observed that Mrs KCN demonstrated a lack of insight about her
situation, stating that she
was taken to hospital because her daughter made her
go, although she was not sick. She advised that she was there one week, and that
she was kept there because she was helping the other patients and the nurses
although there was nothing wrong with her. She said
that when she was at home
she did not need any assistance, although nurses came to help with medication
and cleaners came too. Her
daughter sometimes came and helped with shopping, but
she was generally capable of looking after herself and making her own decisions.
does not wish to stay in her current accommodation and feels she should be able
to return home where she would be capable of living
on her own. As an
alternative she said she could live with her brother.
the basis of all of this information, the Tribunal considered that whilst Mrs
KCN may not be as impaired as the August 2012 assessment
indicated, she is still
significantly impaired by dementia. Whilst she is well able to express her views
in her life, she lacks insight and memory and for this
reason is unaware of the extent of the care and support she requires. For
reason the Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that Mrs KCN does not have the
capacity to make these decisions on her own behalf.
balance the Tribunal is satisfied that Mrs KCN remains a person for whom a
guardianship order could be made.
Should the guardianship
order continue
stated reason for the adjournment was that there was agreement that Mrs
KCN’s accommodation was not suitable, and there
were reasonable prospects
that this could be resolved between the parties, hence the adjournment to allow
time for this to occur.
However this matter was not resolved during the period
of the adjournment.
stated earlier, it was generally agreed by the participants at the current
hearing that Mrs KCN did not require the level of care
that she receives in her
current accommodation. She is located in a locked ward and the other residents
are significantly more impaired
by dementia than she is, and so provide minimal
company for her. There is little on offer which is interesting or stimulating
her. Ms EMM explained that since the last hearing she had found an
alternative facility, which would be suitable and she has put
her mother on the
waiting list. However she had not told her mother, nor anyone else about this
as she did not want to raise her
Tribunal heard from Mr TJG and Ms Z that Mrs KCN’s needs may be better met
in the unit upstairs from where she currently
is at an aged care facility. This
is still a secure unit, but on the whole the residents are more at Mrs
KCN’s level and so
would provide her with more company, and the activities
are also more suitable for her. Ms Z said that she had spoken to Ms EMM about
the possibility of her mother moving to the upstairs unit, but that she had not
taken up this option. Ms EMM denied that there had
“official” discussion about this. Mr TJG, Mr HAT and Mr LMN were all
keen for this move to occur, and Mrs KCN
also expressed that she would prefer to
be there, than where she is.
this basis the Tribunal was reasonably satisfied that there is still an
outstanding decision which must be made by a guardian regarding
accommodation.
Tribunal also noted there was some ongoing confusion about what medical
appointments were necessary for Mrs KCN, and who is responsible
for making these
decisions. In light of this, as well as the recent history referred to above
and in the reasons for decision from
the previous hearing, the Tribunal
considered that it was still necessary for a guardian to have clear authority to
make decisions
regarding Mrs KCN’s health care and, where necessary, to
consent on her behalf to medical and dental treatment.
be the guardian?
EMM has been her mother’s guardian since the order was first made in
January 2013. She advised that she wished to continue
to be her mother’s
guardian. The Tribunal also heard that Mr TJG, Mr HAT and Mr LMN were all
willing to be appointed as guardian
for Mrs KCN, either separately or in a joint
appointment.
Tribunal has to be satisfied that any person appointed as a private guardian
meets the following requirements in accordance with
of the Act. They
a personality generally compatible with the personality of the person under
guardianship;
no undue conflict of interest (particularly financial) with those of the person;
able and willing to exercise the functions of the order.
deciding whether a person is able to undertake the role of guardian, the
Tribunal must consider whether the proposed guardian is
able, having regard to
the circumstances, to exercise the functions in accordance with the principles
Guardianship Act 1987
(per Windeyer J in
S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and the Public Guardian
(unreported)
NSW Supreme Court 29 November 1999. These principles include
the responsibility to recognise the importance of preserving the family
relationships of the person under guardianship, and to act in the best interests
of the person. The Tribunal saw these issues to
be of particular significance in
this matter.
Tribunal did not have concerns that any of the people who proposed themselves as
guardians for Mrs KCN genuinely cared for her,
had personalities which were
compatible with hers and felt that they understood what she wanted and needed.
However what was very
apparent from the correspondence on the file, as well as
the interactions during the hearing, was that there was a great deal of
animosity between members of Mrs KCN’s family, as well as Mr TJG. There is
no need to go into detail about how this was demonstrated,
but it was clearly a
very powerful feature of the events that have unfolded for Mrs KCN in the last
year. The Tribunal observed that
this has led each of them to engage in
behaviour and make decisions influenced by their damaged relationships rather
than Mrs KCN’s
best interests being the primary concern.
Ms EMM’s case, this is best illustrated by her delay and lack of
communication about options for Mrs KCN’s accommodation,
even though there
was apparent consensus at the last hearing that her current accommodation was no
longer appropriate. At the current
hearing she was reluctant to commit to the
need to communicate with other people important to Mrs KCN about significant
such as where she was living.
the case of Mr HAT, Mr TJG and Mr LMN, this is best illustrated by their actions
in arranging medical assessments for Mrs KCN with
no communication with Ms EMM
despite her role as Mrs KCN’s person responsible and carer. It is also
illustrated by their clear
willingness to exclude Ms EMM from Mrs KCN’s
financial affairs, which will be detailed further below in relation to the
of financial management.
Tribunal considered that the decision regarding Mrs KCN’s accommodation is
of such importance that it should be made by
an independent guardian. This
person would be able to properly consider the views of Mrs KCN and those who
care for her, weigh the
information about the available options and make a
decision where her best interests are central to the decision. For the reasons
already referred to above, the Tribunal is not reasonably satisfied that any of
the proposed private guardians are able to do this.
The Tribunal therefore
determined to appoint the Public Guardian with the authority to make decisions
regarding Mrs KCN’s accommodation.
from the issue of further assessment of Mrs KCN’s cognitive capacity,
there is no evidence that decisions about Mrs KCN’s
health care are in
dispute, or that there is any objection to Ms EMM retaining this authority.
There is also no evidence that persuades
the Tribunal that Mrs KCN has missed
out on necessary health care because of the issues between her family. During
the hearing Mrs
KCN indicated that she did not trust her daughter to look after
her financial affairs, but the Tribunal did not conclude that Ms
personality was not compatible with Mrs KCN. Ms EMM has been assisting her
mother to access health services for many
years and has the best understanding
of her history and current needs in this regard. The Tribunal was reasonably
satisfied that
it is in Mrs KCN’s best interest for Ms EMM to retain
responsibility for these decisions regarding Mrs KCN’s health care
consenting to her medical and dental treatment.
Tribunal is satisfied that Ms EMM meets the requirements to be a guardian for
Mrs KCN in relation to decisions regarding her health
care and medical and
dental consents, and she should continue to be appointed with authority for
these decisions.
reasons referred to above, the Tribunal is not satisfied that any of the
proposed private guardians meet
the requirements to be appointed as
guardian for Mrs KCN to make decisions regarding her accommodation. The Tribunal
decided therefore,
the Public Guardian should now be appointed with this
Period of the Order
this review has arisen during the term of the original order, the Tribunal is
not able to change the period of the order. The original
order was made for 12
months from 2 January 2013, and will be reviewed on its expiry to determine if
it should continue, and if so,
in what terms.
What did the Tribunal have to decide?
issues for the Tribunal were:
Mrs KCN incapable of managing her affairs?
there a need for another person to manage Mrs KCN’s affairs and is it in
her best interests for a financial management order
so, who should be appointed financial manager?
KCN incapable of managing her affairs?
person’s capability to manage his or her affairs was considered by
Campbell J in the NSW Supreme Court in
Re GHI (a protected person)
Campbell J affirmed the approach enunciated in
2 NSWLR 700
by Powell J, at paragraph 7:
“It is my view
that a person is not shown to be incapable of managing his or her own affairs
unless, at the least, it appears:
(a) that he or she is incapable of dealing, in a reasonably competent fashion
with the ordinary routine affairs of man; and
(b) that by reason of that lack of competence there is shown to be a real
risk that either
or she may be disadvantaged in the conduct of such affairs; or
such moneys or property that he or she may possess may be dissipated or lost ...
it is not sufficient in my view merely to demonstrate
that the person lacks the
high level of ability needed to deal with complicated transactions or that he or
she does not deal with
even simple or routine transactions in the most
efficient manner...”
(unreported) NSW Supreme Court 20 March 2000, in dealing with
the capacity test as it has been enunciated in NSW, said that dealing
“ordinary affairs of man” does not simply mean being able to go to
the bank and draw out housekeeping money.
Most people’s affairs, his
Honour said,
“are more complicated than that, and the
ordinary affairs of mankind involve at least planning for the future, working
one will feed oneself and one’s family and how one is going to
generate income and look after capital. Accordingly, whilst
one does not have to
be a person who is capable of managing complex financial affairs, one has to go
beyond just managing household
should be noted that the relevant time for considering whether a person is
incapable of managing his or her affairs is not merely
the day of the hearing
but the reasonably foreseeable future (
(1983) 3 NSWLR 81
Tribunal noted the evidence already referred to regarding the extent of Mrs
KCN’s dementia. Mrs KCN said that she could
look after her own affairs and
did not need any assistance. However there was no evidence before the Tribunal,
including any evidence
presented by other hearing participants that suggested
that Mrs KCN was capable of managing her own financial affairs. In fact as
current attorneys, Mr TJG and Mr LMN have taken charge of her finances and have
arranged for direct debits for her fees, as
well as opening a new bank account
for payment of her other bills. Clearly they would not be doing this if they
considered that Mrs
KCN was able to manager her own affairs. The Tribunal was
satisfied that
Mrs KCN is incapable of managing her financial affairs.
Is there a need for another person to manage Mrs KCN’s
affairs and is it in her best interests for a financial management order
KCN was able to provide her views to the Tribunal. She was adamant that she no
longer wanted her daughter to look after her finances
but was not able to
clearly explain why this was the case. She suggested that her daughter may have
taken her money or other property
for her own use, but could not go beyond this
level of broad allegation. She indicated that Ms EMM was going to sell her house
she did not want her to do this because she wanted to go home and live
there. She did not trust what her daughter would do with
the money from the
sale, and was unaware about the need to pay an accommodation bond for the aged
care facility. She said that Ms
EMM never gave her any money for herself, which
she did not like. She said that she wanted her grandson, Mr TJG and/or her
to look after her financial affairs, as she trusts them all.
EMM explained that she had put her mother’s house on the market as there
is a need to use the money from this to pay the
$500,000 bond for the aged care
facility. The bond is accruing interest whilst it is unpaid, apparently at
around $1,800 a month.
Mrs KCN does not have sufficient other resources to meet
the cost of the bond without selling the house. However Mr HAT, assisted
TJG and Mr LMN forced the house off the market without any discussion with her,
by arranging for the revocation of her power
of attorney and presenting this to
the estate agent.
TJG explained that Mrs KCN had told him she did not want her house sold, as she
wanted to go home to live. Because at that time
he thought her accommodation was
not suitable for her, in consultation with Mr HAT and Mr LMN, he downloaded a
form for her to revoke
her appointment of Ms EMM as her attorney and arranged
for her to sign this. Sometime later they arranged for Mrs KCN to execute
Power of Attorney, appointing Mr TJG and Mr LMN. There is a limit on their
authority s attorney’s so that any decision
involving more than $10,000
must be approved by Mr HAT. Since this time they have made various
rearrangements of Mrs KCN’s
affairs to ensure that her fees for the aged
care facility are paid, as well as the ongoing bills and other bills she
continues to
incur for her property.
was apparent that neither Mr HAT, Mr TJG, nor Mr LMN, contacted Ms EMM about
their plans or to enquire about the reason for selling
the house prior to taking
the actions to remove it from sale. They were unaware, apparently until the
hearing, that there was an
accommodation bond, and also apparently unaware that
this was accruing considerable interest as long as it was unpaid. They also
seemed unaware or unconcerned about the fees Mrs KCN incurred because of the
withdrawal of her property from sale. They now all agree
that Mrs KCN is not
well enough to return home to live and plan to put the house back on the market.
There was no clear explanation
withdraw the property from sale, regardless of the associated costs to Mrs KCN.
also unclear why it was now acceptable to them, having withdrawn it from
sale, to put it back on the market a matter of months later,
although there has
been no change in Mrs KCN’s circumstances during this period. The Tribunal
concluded from this sequence
of events that Mrs KCN ultimately has borne the
financial cost of forfeited sales fees, as well as accruing bond interest
the people around her elected not to communicate with each other about
her situation. It is apparent that Mrs KCN’s best interests
have not been
the primary focus of these actions, and again the hostile relationship between
her family members has influenced these
matter of selling Mrs KCN’s house remains unresolved and she continues to
accrue debt as the bond remains unpaid. In the
normal course of events if a
person has a validly appointed attorney, who is acting with that person’s
interests as their primary
concern, they would not need a financial manager. On
the face of it, Mrs KCN has validly appointed attorneys who could progress this
matter on her behalf. However, given the circumstances referred to earlier, as
well as the disputed circumstances around the making
of this instrument and the
revocation of the previous instrument, the Tribunal considers that there is a
need to appoint a financial
manager in order to give clear authority for her
affairs to be managed.
Tribunal was satisfied that there is a need to appoint someone to manage Mrs
KCN’s affairs and it is in her best interests
that an order be
Who should be appointed financial manager?
appointing a financial manager, as in making all other orders under the
Guardianship Act 1987
(‘the Act’), the Tribunal must act with
the interests of the person concerned as the paramount consideration and in
with the other principles set out in
of the Act.
provides that, if the Tribunal makes a financial
management order, it may appoint a suitable person to manage the person’s
or may commit the management of the estate to the NSW Trustee and
Holt & Anor v Protective Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
, the Court
said that the dominant consideration in making orders about financial managers
was the welfare of the person. The President
of the Court of Appeal emphasised
the Court’s broad discretion in deciding who should be financial manager
but also set out
possible considerations as to the competing advantages of the
Protective Commissioner and a family member as the manager of an estate.
NSW Trustee and Guardian now exercises the role of the Protective
Commissioner.
the side of the Protective Commissioner was seen to be the manifest independence
of the statutory office, the advantages of a dispassionate
and neutral approach
in situations of family conflict and divided views as to the best interests of
the person, expertise and experience
in managing estates, an impeccable
reputation and the security provided to an estate against loss or damage.
advantages of the appointment of a family member were more economic management
of smaller estates (that is, freedom from fees)
and a greater familiarity with
assets and liabilities in smaller estates, a greater capacity of a person with a
disability to interact
with the manager so as to exercise a greater influence
over the broad directions of the management of the estate, love and affection
for and knowledge of the protected person and concern for his or her quality of
life, and particular qualities or qualifications
enabling family members to act
as managers.
Tribunal heard that Ms EMM, Mr TJG, Mr LMN and Mr HAT were all willing to be
appointed as financial manager, and other than Ms
EMM they were willing to be
jointly appointed in any combination. Mrs KCN was adamant that she no longer
wanted her daughter to manage
her financial affairs. Although she was not able
to explain why this was the case when she had been previously happy for her to
her attorney, the Tribunal was reasonably satisfied that Mrs KCN no longer
trusted her daughter to manage her financial affairs.
In these circumstances,
the Tribunal did not consider that it would be possible to appoint her as
financial manager.
Tribunal considered the option of appointing Mr TJG, Mr HAT and/ or Mr LMN
either singly or on their own as financial manager.
However given the concerns
the Tribunal has already expressed about the influence of family conflict on the
actions they have taken
in rearranging Mrs KCN’s affairs, the Tribunal is
persuaded that it is in Mrs KCN’s best interests to appoint an independent
financial manager.
this basis, the Tribunal was satisfied that the estate of for Mrs KCN should be
committed to the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
Review of revocation
of Enduring Power of Attorney
EMM has asked that the purported revocation of her appointment as attorney be
Section 36(3A)
Powers of Attorney Act
provides that the
Tribunal may conduct a review, but is not compelled to do so. There is no
application to review the making of the
instrument appointing Mr TJG and Mr LMN
as attorneys. If the Tribunal reviewed the purported revocation and was
satisfied that Mrs
KCN did not have the capacity to make this revocation at the
time, she would, on the face of it, have two operative powers of attorney,
the attorneys are in conflict. This is clearly untenable and not in her best
any event, as the Tribunal has decided to appoint a financial manager for Mrs
KCN, any power of attorney ceases to have effect.
The Tribunal therefore decided
not to conduct a review into the purported revocation of the enduring power of
attorney because it
would serve no useful purpose.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (202 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter