URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/296.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McGufficke v Building Professionals Board [2013] NSWADT 296 (20 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
McGufficke v Building Professionals Board
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 296
Hearing Date(s):
29 November 2013
Decision Date:
20 December 2013
General Division
Judge K P O'Connor, President
P Friedmann, Non-judicial Member
The decision of the Board is affirmed.
Catchwords:
PROFESSIONAL DISCIPLINE - Accredited Certifier - Review of disciplinary
decision - standards in relation to issuance of construction
and occupation
certificates - Board finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct - those
allegations found proven - orders of reprimand
and fine - decision of Board
Building Professionals Act 2005
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Building Professionals Act
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Environmental
Planning and Assessment Regulation 2000
Cases Cited:
Baulkham Hills Shire Council v Ko-veda Holiday Park Estate Pty Ltd
Bennett v Building Professionals Board (No 2)
[2011] NSWADT 238
Cessnock City Council v Laila Investments Pty Ltd
[2012] NSWLEC 206
Project Blue Sky v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1988] HCA 28
194 CLR 355
Principal judgment
Scott McGufficke (Applicant)
Building Professionals Board
(Respondent)
Representation
C O'Neill (Applicant)
- Solicitors:
J Callaghan, Lee & Lyons (Applicant)
A Grey, Building Professionals
Board (Respondent)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
is a review application brought by Mr Scott McGufficke, an accredited certifier.
He holds a Category A2 accreditation, with conditions,
registration no BPB 0083.
He is director of the business, AcroCert Pty Ltd, based at Maitland
Building Professionals Board has taken disciplinary action against him pursuant
Building Professionals Act 2005
23 May 2013, the Board found proven all three allegations made against him in
relation to the issuance of a construction certificate
(the first two
allegations) and the issuance of a final occupation certificate (the third
allegation). It found him guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct within
the meaning of s 19 of the BP Act, and imposed a reprimand and a fine of
23 July 2013 he applied under s 33 of the BP Act to the Tribunal for review of
the determination. The Tribunal's powers are conferred
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(ADT Act), the primary provision being
63 Determination of review by Tribunal
(1) In determining an application for a review of a reviewable decision, the
Tribunal is to decide what the correct and preferable
decision is having regard
to the material then before it, including the following:
(a) any relevant factual material,
(b) any applicable written or unwritten law.
(2) For this purpose, the Tribunal may exercise all of the functions that are
conferred or imposed by any relevant enactment on the
administrator who made the
(3) In determining an application for the review of a reviewable decision,
the Tribunal may decide:
(a) to affirm the reviewable decision, or
(b) to vary the reviewable decision, or
(c) to set aside the reviewable decision and make a decision in substitution
for the reviewable decision it set aside, or
(d) to set aside the reviewable decision and remit the matter for
reconsideration by the administrator in accordance with any directions
recommendations of the Tribunal.
Tribunal convened on 29 November 2013 to hear the application. The panel was
constituted in the usual way for disciplinary proceedings
involving accredited
certifiers - one presidential judicial member of the Tribunal, and a
non-judicial member with relevant expertise
(on this occasion, Mr Peter
Friedmann, a registered surveyor of standing).
material before the Tribunal included the investigation report of the Board, the
decision of the Board and submissions from both
parties. Mr O'Neill appeared for
Mr McGufficke, Mr Grey appeared for the Board.
case relates to a residential development involving the building of six
residential villa units on a site at 5 Maitland Street,
Branxton ('Maitland
Street' is the local street name for that part of the New England Highway). The
general site received subdivision
consent in 2004. The terms of the development
consent affecting the site upon which the villa units have been built are found
an agreed order of the Land and Environment Court dated 7 April 2008 made in
settlement of an appeal.
McGufficke states that he was engaged in or about February 2011 to provide
certification services to the Dickinson Property Group.
He issued the
construction certificate on 23 June 2011. He issued the final occupation
certificate on 22 February 2012. The Council
raised concerns with the developer
in March 2012 over compliance with conditions of the development consent. On 18
November 2012
the Board notified Mr McGufficke that it was investigating his
conduct. On 21 August 2012, following application by the Council,
the Land and
Environment Court declared the occupation certificate invalid and of no effect:
Cessnock City Council v Laila Investments Pty Ltd
[2012] NSWLEC 206 (Pain
J). Mr McGufficke made a submitting appearance. The declaration was not opposed
by any of the respondent parties.
development consent had 44 conditions, divided by the following headings:
'General' (1-6), 'Prior to Issue of Construction Certificate'
(7-21), 'During
Construction' (22-35) and 'Prior to Occupation' (36-44).
of those under the heading 'Prior to Issue of Construction Certificate' (7 and
15) related to road works connecting the site to
the New England Highway. All
three allegations have these conditions as their background.
PRIOR TO ISSUE OF CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATE
Condition 7
Access, Car Parking & Loading Arrangements
The applicant shall obtain at its own cost the concurrence of the Roads and
Traffic Authority (RTA) to the proposed road works and
opening onto the New
England Highway. Evidence verifying the RTA's concurrence to the proposed road
works and all road concurrence
to proposed road work and road opening shall be
submitted to Council prior to the release of the Construction Certificate. All
of the RTA's approval must be complied with prior to issue of the
Occupation Certificate.
To ensure a safe and efficient access is provided to the New England Highway
to and from the proposed development.
Condition 15
The registered proprietor of the land shall construct:-
a. A new sea-gull intersection on the New England Highway at the driveway to
the adjacent property
, DP 238139) to allow for all turning movements.
The intersection shall provide a left turn in deceleration lane, a right turn
deceleration
and storage lane and right turn out holding lane. The sea-gull
intersection should be contained within the eastbound overtaking lane.
intersection shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the RTA's Road
Design Guide to RTA/Council requirements.
b. A service road/driveway from this intersection to connect to the proposed
development and the existing residences immediately to
the west and east of the
subject property, to RTA/Council requirements.
c. All works shall be to RTA and Council requirements and constructed at full
cost to the developer with no costs to the RTA or Council.
d. Place an AC seal on new works in accordance with the RTA's
requirements.
e. Construct drainage works as necessary.
f. The abovementioned works are to be undertaken in accordance with Council's
'Engineering Requirements for Development' and set out
on a set of plans, four
(4) copies of which are to be submitted and approved by Council and the RTA
prior to release of the Construction
Certificate.
To ensure public road facilities are upgraded to an appropriate standard as a
result of additional requirements of the development.
The Construction Certificate Issues
Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation 2000
Reg) provides:
146 Compliance with conditions of development consent
A certifying authority must not issue a construction certificate for building
work or subdivision work under a development consent
unless each of the
following have been complied with: ...
(c) each other condition of the development consent that must be complied
with before a construction certificate may be issued in
relation to the building
work or subdivision work.
The accredited certifier, Mr McGufficke, issued construction certificate
no. CC 11-504 dated 23 June 2011, prior to condition 7 of
development consent
8/2004/596/1 dated 7 April 2008 being complied with. Accordingly, in these
circumstances as Mr McGufficke issued
construction certificate no CC 11-504
dated 23 June 2011 he contravened clause 146(c) of the
Environmental Planning
and Assessment Regulation 2000
The accredited certifier, Mr McGufficke, issued construction certificate
no. CC 11-504 dated 23 June 2011, prior to condition 15 of
development consent
8/2004/596/1 dated 7 April 2008 being complied with. Accordingly, in these
circumstances as Mr McGufficke issued
construction certificate no CC 11-504
dated 23 June 2011 he contravened clause 146(c) of the EPA Reg.
is no dispute that the condition had not been complied with by the developer at
the time the construction certificate issued.
The Board found the allegations
Nature of Accredited Certifier's Responsibilities in issuing a
Construction Certificate
McGufficke made submissions to the Board as to the interpretation of the
conditions of the development consent and as to the interpretation
governing his functions. The Board's reasons rejected the submissions without
giving any reasons. He has repeated these
submissions to the Tribunal.
construction certificate is a standard 1 page one, and appears at p 69 of the
Board's folder of documents. There is nothing on
the face of the construction
certificate to indicate that at the time of its issuance Mr McGufficke held the
view that it was not
certifying comprehensively as to all matters the subject of
the development certificate.
Nonetheless
as a matter of law, Mr McGufficke contends that he can only breach cl 146 if he
has breached a condition of the consent
in relation to 'building work' or
'subdivision work' (the latter is not relevant to this case). He maintains that
conditions 7 and
15 are not about 'building work', therefore there is no breach
in having issued a construction certificate with conditions 7 and
submission notes that building work is not defined in the EPA Reg, but there is
a relevant definition in the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act
(EPA Act). 'Building work' is defined
as 'any physical activity
involved in the erection of a building'. Further, 'Building' is defined
includes part of a building, and also includes any
structure or part of a structure (including any temporary structure or part of
temporary structure), but does not include a manufactured home, moveable
dwelling or associated structure or part of a manufactured
dwelling or associated structure.
submission is that the proposed road works to which conditions 7 and 15 refer
are 'civil works', a term sometimes used in development
consents (as seen for
example in cl 14 of the present development consent), and which we understand to
refer to works of an infrastructure
kind affecting the public domain of the
development (for example, sewerage works, electrical and utility
connections).
our view, cl 146 does not use the term 'building work' in the limited sense
suggested by Mr McGufficke. It is used as a compendious
expression that applies
to all of the activity that has as its ultimate purpose the building of the
approved development. Further,
a construction certificate is to be understood as
certifying to all the matters the subject of the development consent unless
are express indications to the contrary on its face, or there are
circumstances that demonstrate that it is a certificate of limited
critical provisions appear in Part 4A of the EPA Act.
reaching this view, we begin with the breadth of meaning given by the law to the
word 'development'. It is defined (s 4) as:
development
(a) the use of land, and
(b) the subdivision of land, and
(c) the erection of a building, and
(d) the carrying out of a work, and
(e) the demolition of a building or work, and
(f) any other act, matter or thing referred to in section 26 that is
controlled by an environmental planning instrument,
but does not include any development of a class or description prescribed by
the regulations for the purposes of this definition.
'development consent' is defined (s 4) as:
development consent
means consent under Part 4 to carry out
development and includes, unless expressly excluded, a complying development
certificate.
4A is headed 'Certification of Development'. All of the provisions of this Part
(with one exception relating to Crown works (s
109R)) belong to Division 1 of
Part 4A (ss 109C-Q). Section 109C sets out and defines the four types of
certificate (compliance certificate,
construction certificate, occupation
certificate and subdivision certificate).
109D stipulates the authorities that may grant these certificates. In the case
of a construction certificate or an occupation
certificate it can be a consent
authority, a council or an accredited certifier. Section 109D
109E Principal certifying authorities
(1) The person having the benefit of a development consent or complying
development certificate for development:
(a) is to appoint a principal certifying authority in respect of building
work involved in the development and a principal certifying
authority in respect
of subdivision work involved in the development, and
(b) may appoint only the consent authority, the council or an accredited
certifier as the principal certifying authority for the building
subdivision work, and
(c) may appoint the same principal certifying authority for both types of
work or different certifying authorities.
(1AA) The council must, if appointed under subsection (1), accept that
appointment.
(1A) Despite subsection (1), such an appointment may not be made by any
contractor or other person who will carry out the building
work or subdivision
work unless the contractor or other person is the owner of the land on which the
work is to be carried out.
(2) Despite subsection (1), an accredited certifier must not be appointed as
the principal certifying authority for subdivision work
unless the subdivision
to which the work relates is of a kind identified by an environmental planning
instrument as one in respect
of which an accredited certifier may be a
certifying authority.
(3) A principal certifying authority for building work or subdivision work to
be carried out on a site is required to be satisfied:
(a) that a construction certificate or complying development certificate has
been issued for such of the building work or subdivision
work as requires
development consent and over which the principal certifying authority has
control, before the work commences on
the site, and
(b) that the principal contractor for the work is the holder of the
appropriate licence and is covered by the appropriate insurance,
in each case if
required by the
, before any residential building
work over which the principal certifying authority has control commences on the
site, unless the
work is to be carried out by an owner-builder, and
(c) that the owner-builder is the holder of any owner-builder permit required
, before an owner-builder commences on
the site any residential building work over which the principal certifying
authority has control,
(d) that building work or subdivision work on the site has been inspected by
the principal certifying authority or another certifying
authority on such
occasions (if any) as are prescribed by the regulations and on such other
occasions as may be required by the principal
certifying authority, before the
principal certifying authority issues an occupation certificate or subdivision
certificate for the
building or work, and
(e) that any preconditions required by a development consent or complying
development certificate to be met for the work before the
issue of an occupation
certificate or subdivision certificate have been met, before the principal
certifying authority issues the
occupation certificate or subdivision
certificate.
(4) A principal certifying authority must also comply with such other
requirements of a like or different nature as may be imposed
on principal
certifying authorities by the regulations.
Section 81A prohibits the commencement of building work or
subdivision work unless the consent authority has been notified of the
appointment of a principal certifying authority for the work. Section 109D (2)
prohibits the issue of an occupation certificate authorising
the occupation and
use of a new building except by the principal certifying authority appointed for
the erection of the building.
Section 109D (3) prohibits the issue of a
subdivision certificate for a subdivision involving subdivision work except by
the principal
certifying authority appointed for the carrying out of the
subdivision.
will be seen that the responsibility vested in a certifier is very broad, and on
its face relates to all aspects of the development
our view, these and the remaining provisions of
of the Act and
the regulations manifest a clear intention that accredited certifiers must deal
comprehensively with the terms of the development
consent when deciding whether
to issue a certificate.
reference to 'physical activity' in the definition of 'building work' is not to
be read down so as to confine itself to the principal
built elements, as this
submission would tend to suggest. It is to be viewed widely as all the physical
activity that bears on the
principal works.
approach, we consider, accords with the well-known guidance given by the High
Court in interpreting provisions in regulatory
statutes in
Project Blue Sky v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR 355
McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ said, at [69] and [78].
submission is rejected.
Clarity or Otherwise of Development Consent
next submission argues that the development consent as a whole is difficult to
construe because while some clauses refer to 'the'
construction certificate,
some refer to 'a' construction certificate and others refer to 'a' or 'the'
construction certificate for
differently described activities, for example,
condition 12 speaks of 'the' construction certificate for the 'building/s' while
14 speaks of 'the' construction certificate for 'the civil works'.
Variations in terminology of this kind are taken up in support
of the submission
'it is generally unclear from the development consent which type of construction
certificate was required in respect
of each condition. This uncertainty made the
process facing the applicant unworkable.'
have had regard to the guidance given in relation to the interpretation of the
terms of development consents given by Pain J in
Baulkham Hills Shire Council
v Ko-veda Holiday Park Estate Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWLEC 181
. Her Honour
The well established principles concerning the construction of development
consents are:
(i) the object of construction is "to construe the relevant provision so that
it is consistent with the language and purpose of all
of the provisions" of the
development consent;
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR 355
(ii) development consents are not statutes and construction of conditions of
consent need to be "rationalised, in a practical and
effective way";
Hills Shire Council v Dix
[2004] NSWLEC 404
(2004) 136 LGERA 149
(iii) a development consent "is not personal to the applicant, but enures for
the benefit of subsequent owners and occupiers";
Royal Ryde Homes;
(iv) "Any lack of clarity or certainty is the responsibility of the council
and it must take the consequences of any failure to specify
accurately or in
detail what is consented to as well as any conditions to which a consent is
Royal Ryde Homes.
our view, and mindful of the sound warning that development consents are not
statutes, we consider that conditions 7 and 15 speak
clearly to the matters with
which they were concerned.
reliance was placed on the Tribunal's decision in
Bennett v Building
Professionals Board
[2011] NSWADT 238.
In that case the certifier had
issued construction certificates on a staged basis. There was a debate in the
case as to whether that
was acceptable practice. The shift in language in the
terms of the development consent between the words 'the' and 'a' when describing
a construction certificate requirement went to that issue.
question does not arise in this case. Mr McGufficke proceeded in the usual way
of dealing with all matters by means of the one
construction certificate. There
is nothing in the material before us that he had in mind the possibility of
issuing staged construction
certificates, and had made a conscious decision to
defer dealing with the road works conditions until a later stage of the project.
Furthermore
the development consent in the
case was not as clearly divided as
the present development consent. There the headings used were 'general
conditions', 'matters relating
to the issue of a construction certificate',
'pre-commencement conditions', 'construction conditions' and 'post-construction
conditions'.
The condition in issue (having to do with the state of a retaining
wall already present on the site) fell into the category of 'matters
relating to
the issue of a construction certificate'.
the present case the road work conditions clearly appear under the heading
'Prior to Construction Certificate', and there is not
the degree of uncertainty
that arose in
as to the point of time in the progress of the
project that the condition was to be addressed.
was some discussion at hearing as to whether all the road works contemplated by
conditions 7 and 15 could reasonably be expected
to be completed ahead of
issuance of a construction certificate.
we see it the obligation imposed by conditions 7 and 15 required the developer
to deal with the relevant authorities (RTA in the
case of condition 7 and the
RTA and Council in the case of condition 15). It was open to the relevant
authorities to negotiate with
the developer over the extent of the works and the
timing of the works, with a view to ensuring appropriate and safe methods of
to and egress from the site during the project.
Consideration
the material before the Board and the Tribunal shows, in February 2011 when he
was first consulted, Mr McGufficke appraised the
terms of the development
consent, and did so methodically. As Mr Grey noted in his submissions he dealt
appropriately with the matters
raised by conditions 7 and 15, and noted that the
developer would need to provide the required authorisations and demonstrate
satisfaction
of the authorities' requirements (RTA in the first instance, RTA
and Council in the second instance).
formal application for the construction certificate was lodged by the developer
on 18 June 2011, and the certificate issued only
five days later. This rushed
turnaround may explain Mr McGufficke's omission to follow through on the good
advice he had given in
February. When he became aware of Council's concerns
(following the issue of the final occupation certificate) he acknowledged his
errors both at the construction certificate stage and the occupation certificate
stage, but shifted position to his present submissions
at the Board stage. Mr
Grey noted these matters.
our view Mr McGufficke failed to address compliance with conditions 7 and 15
when he issued the construction certificate.
Occupation Certificate Issues
The accredited certifier, Mr McGufficke issued final occupation
certificate dated 22 February 2012, prior to condition 7 of development
8/2004/596/1 dated 7 April 2008 being complied with. Accordingly, in these
circumstances as Mr McGufficke issued occupation
certificate dated 22 February
2012 he contravened s 109H (2) of the EPA Act.
109H(2) provides:
109H Restrictions on issue of occupation certificates
(2) An occupation certificate must not be issued unless any preconditions to
the issue of the certificate that are specified in a
development consent or
complying development certificate, or any requirements of a planning agreement
referred to in section 93F
that, by its terms, are required to be complied with
before such a certificate is issued, have been met.
McGufficke's defence is that he relied on assurances received from a member of
staff of his client advising that the relevant authorisations
required by
condition 7 had been obtained. He did not check her advice, and did not call for
documentary proofs. Yet in his very
first appraisal of the terms of the consent
(in February 2011) he had noted to his client the need to provide proofs. He
to the Tribunal that it was sufficient for an accredited certifier in
deciding whether to issue a final occupation certificate to
rely on assurances
on matters of this kind.
Mr Grey noted, an accredited certifier is reasonably to be expected to do a
final view of the site before issuing a final occupation
certificate, and it
would have been immediately obvious that condition 7 had not been met. There is
no evidence from Mr McGufficke
before the Tribunal as to what view or inspection
he undertook. Nor was there any reply at hearing either from him or via his
as to this point.
the Land and Environment Court hearing that led to the occupation certificate
being declared invalid, he did, we accept, move
to rectify the situation and
issued a new acceptable occupation certificate. This conduct was raised as
demonstrating the genuineness
of his desire to deal practically with the
submissions on this issue drew attention to s 109E(3)(a) of the EPA
(3) A principal certifying authority for building work or subdivision work to
be carried out on a site is required to be satisfied:
(a) that a construction certificate or complying development certificate has
been issued for such of the building work or subdivision
work as requires
development consent and over which the principal certifying authority has
control, before the work commences on
submission was that as Mr McGufficke had 'satisfied' himself that condition 7
had been met, he had therefore satisfied s 109E(3)(a).
It is submitted: 'This
satisfaction must have meant that he also complied with s 109H(2), otherwise the
sections would operate inconsistently.'
submission is rejected. The requirements that appear at s 109E(3) are mainly
procedural in nature. There are a number of matters
that must be checked by the
principal certifying authority. The key substantive obligation appears at para
[must be satisfied] that any preconditions required by a development consent
or complying development certificate to be met for the
work before the issue of
an occupation certificate or subdivision certificate have been met, before the
principal certifying authority
issues the occupation certificate or subdivision
certificate.
obligation is reinforced by the terms of s 109H(2):
(2) An occupation certificate must not be issued unless any preconditions to
the issue of the certificate that are specified in a
development consent or
complying development certificate, or any requirements of a planning agreement
referred to in section 93F
that, by its terms, are required to be complied with
before such a certificate is issued, have been met.
generally, these submissions raise concerns about Mr McGufficke's understanding
of his professional responsibilities. It plainly
can not be enough for a
certifier to rely in relation to matters to which the terms of a development
consent have given close attention
on the word of a client without seeing the
appropriate official documentation, at the least. His laxness in this regard is
out by the email he sent on 29 March 2012 where he said 'I should have
checked to ensure that all conditions of the RTA's approval
had been complied
with prior to the issue of the occupation certificate ... however I was under
the impression that Dickson's [the
developer] had obtained all of the required
approvals and had completed the works in accordance with Council's approval of
Road Works'.
are satisfied that Mr McGufficke failed to address compliance with condition 7
when he issued the occupation certificate.
Whether Errors constituted Unsatisfactory Professional Conduct
this case the parts of the definition in s 19 that might be relevant are
unsatisfactory professional conduct
of an accredited certifier
means any of the following (whether consisting of an act or omission):
(a) conduct occurring in connection with the exercise of the accredited
certifier's functions as a certifying authority that falls
short of the standard
of competence, diligence and integrity that a member of the public is entitled
to expect of a reasonably competent
accredited certifier,
(b) a contravention of this Act, the
Environmental Planning and Assessment
Strata Schemes (Freehold Development) Act 1973
Strata Schemes (Leasehold Development) Act 1986
, or the regulations under
any of those Acts, by the accredited certifier, whether or not the accredited
certifier is prosecuted or
convicted for the contravention,
our view Mr McGufficke clearly breached his obligations in respect of the
matters raised by the Board. He did not show the competence
and diligence that a
reasonable member of the public who is reasonably informed as to the role and
duties of an accredited certifier
would expect of an accredited certifier.
Disciplinary Order
of Mr McGufficke's penalty submissions proceeded on the premise that he did not
contravene cl 146 of the EPA Reg or s 109H(2),
a premise that we have
emphasis was given in the submissions to Mr McGufficke's honesty and
genuineness. These characteristics were not put in issue
by the investigator,
the Board in its reasons or by Mr Grey in his submissions. This is a case simply
McGufficke's CV is impressive. He has six tertiary qualifications including a
Bachelor of Applied Science and a Masters in Public
Health. He has served in the
regular Army and the Army reserve. Between 1987 and 2004 (17 years) he held
senior positions in the
health safety or building compliance sections of local
councils - at Muswellbrook, Cessnock, Broken Hill, Christmas Island and
He is a member of relevant professional and industry associations. We
have reviewed the personal testimonials attached to the affidavit
solicitor, Mr Callaghan.
have taken note of the submissions made to the Board by Mr McGufficke in
relation to penalty (at p 9 of the Board's folder).
Board in its reasons referred to its disciplinary penalty guidelines. Mr
McGufficke's penalty submissions to the Board refer to
one other matter, a
determination notified 3 May 2013 in relation to his conduct with respect to a
substantial development at Lot
100 Headlam Road, Moss Vale, described as an
equine agistment facility. The Board imposed a reprimand, a fine of $10,000 and
him to undertake and complete a course in Advanced Building Regulation.
The Tribunal heard Mr McGufficke's application for review
on Monday 2 December
2013, the decision is pending.
to the extent of the breach on this occasion, Mr McGufficke submitted that
relatively minor works were required ultimately to bring
conditions 7 and 15.
also submitted that no harm was caused by his error in issuing the construction
certificate or the occupation certificate when
there remained non-compliances
with conditions 7 and 15. The subject conditions, it was submitted, did not go
to the health and safety
of the future occupants of the
development.
do not agree. This was an important residential development. It had already been
surrounded by some controversy as signified by
the terms of development consent
being settled after appeal to the Land and Environment Court. Mr McGufficke
should have been especially
vigilant in dealing with the matter. The provision
of safe and acceptable means of entry and egress to a building site adjacent to
a busy highway was a matter of great importance from a public viewpoint. There
should have been strict compliance, and Mr McGufficke
should have been vigilant
in that respect. He lacked vigilance in dealing with this
also referred to the financial penalty he had suffered in agreeing to contribute
$10,000 towards the Council's costs of setting
aside the occupation certificate
at the Land and Environment Court. He referred also to the legal costs he
personally had incurred
in respect of the watching brief for those proceedings.
referred in those submissions to the fact that his business AcroCert employs a
number of certifiers. He expressed concern to retain
his Grade 2 accreditation.
He referred to the testimonials (see the attachments to his solicitor Mr
Callaghan's affidavit in these
proceedings).
our view, this case involves a serious transgression of standards on the part of
a certifier with substantial prior experience
in the practice of certification,
both as a private practitioner and previously as a senior council officer. His
work career has
been centred on the Hunter Valley region. We find it difficult
to accept that an experienced certifier with this degree of familiarity
region could have failed to give strict attention to conditions that regulated
traffic movement between the site and the
penalty of reprimand was appropriate. We consider the amount of the fine also
appropriate.
The decision of the Board is affirmed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (217 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter