URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/261.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GYB v Commissioner of Victims Rights [2025] NSWCATAD 261; (23 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
GYB v Commissioner of Victims Rights
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 261
Hearing Date(s):
18 July 2025
Date of Orders:
23 October 2025
Decision Date:
23 October 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
J McAteer, Senior Member
(1) The decision of the respondent of 27 February 2025 is
(2) In substitution of that decision, the
applicant is eligible for a Category C Recognition Payment in the amount of
for an act of violence resulting in grievous bodily harm.
Catchwords:
VICTIMS SUPPORT – Administrative law – act of violence –
whether medical evidence verifies injury – sufficiency
of evidence –
whether applicant suffered serious bodily injury as a result of the act of
violence – whether grievous
bodily harm present as a result of
psychological injury – meaning of grievous bodily harm – limits on
beneficial interpretation
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
Victims Rights and Support Act 2013
Victims Support and
Rehabilitation Act 1996 (repealed)
Cases Cited:
Casey v Pel-Air Aviation Pty Ltd; Helm v Pel-Air Aviation Pty Ltd
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs [1979] AATA
(1979) 46 FLR 409
EGM v Commissioner of Victims Rights
[2020] NSWCATAD
[2008] NSWCCA 209
R v Donovan [1934] 2 KB 498
Compensation Fund Corporation v Brown
[2003] HCA 54
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
GYB (Applicant)
Commissioner of Victims Rights (Respondent)
Representation:
Solicitors:
Mid North Coast Legal Centre (Applicant)
Victims Services
Legal (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00118382
Publication Restriction:
Section 64(1)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
the identity of the applicant.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
applicant (GYB) has made a claim seeking a recognition payment under the victims
of crime scheme. The applicant asserts that she
is a victim of violent crime and
has suffered injury as a result. The victims of crime scheme provides that
eligible victims may
recover financial grants and the provision of services
Victims Rights and Support Act 2013
(the VR&S Act).
order to be eligible to recover under the scheme, a victim must either be a
primary victim (the victim of an assault), or a secondary
victim or family
victim. As will be explained in these reasons, victims of crime must pass
through various factual thresholds as
set out in the VR&S Act in order to
receive benefits under the scheme.
the current matter, the applicant had previously established that she was the
victim of violent crime and was entitled to a recognition
payment. The initial
decision maker found that the evidence was sufficient to determine that the
applicant was the victim of an act
of violence and was entitled to a Category D
recognition payment.
applicant contends she is eligible for a Category C recognition payment.
internal review, the reviewer found that the applicant was a victim of a series
of related acts including assaults constituting
domestic violence; however, the
reviewer did not accept that the domestic violence offences were such that
grievous bodily harm was
inflicted. Accordingly, the reviewer affirmed the
decision to award the applicant a Category D, rather than a Category C,
recognition
set out in the Application for Administrative Review, these proceedings concern
whether the applicant in her claim has established
that she was a victim of a
violent crime (the statutory term being ‘act of violence’) in
accordance with the VR&S
Act, and is entitled to a Category C recognition
specifically arising in circumstances where the applicant
sustained grievous bodily harm.
applicant in these proceedings before the Tribunal is referred to as
‘GYB’, in conformity with an order made under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
on 9 May 2025. The section
64 Tribunal may restrict disclosures concerning
proceedings
(1) If the Tribunal is satisfied that it is desirable to do so by reason of
the confidential nature of any evidence or matter or for
any other reason, it
may (of its own motion or on the application of a party) make any one or more of
the following orders—
(a) an order prohibiting or restricting the disclosure of the name of any
person (whether or not a party to proceedings in the Tribunal
or a witness
summoned by, or appearing before, the Tribunal) ...
Summary of the claim
applicant described the incidents constituting an act of violence in her
application for support under the victims support scheme.
Her summary is as
The Perpetrator inflicted physical and emotional abuse
against me throughout the relationship.
The Perpetrator repeatedly made threats against my life. There was an
incident where the Perpetrator broke in to my house and attempted
with a kitchen knife. He chased me around the house and stated words to the
effect of “I’m going to kill you
and then kill myself”. The
Perpetrator stabbed himself during the incident and then fled from Police. One
of our daughters
witnessed the incident.
The perpetrator was physically abusive towards me which made me fear for my
physical safety. The Perpetrator would continuously physically
restraining me, pushing me, hitting me, etc. The Perpetrator would make repeated
threats against my life.
The Perpetrator also destroyed my property. He would come to my house and
smash my items.
order to understand the basis of the claim, the administrative review and the
position of Victims Services, it is necessary to
briefly examine the legislation
relevant to this claim.
Legislation
has been regularly observed, the VR&S Act continues a scheme which provides
eligibility criteria for victims of violent crime
to receive support and
assistance. The current Act replicated the former
Victims Support and
Rehabilitation Act 1996
(the former Act) but maintained its central
provisions as to an eligible victim of crime, in that claimants are required to
that they are a victim of an ‘act of violence’, being the
statutory term. The relevant current provisions are set out
in the following
sections of the Act:
5 Meaning of “victim of
(1) For the purposes of this Part, a victim of crime is a person who suffers
harm as a direct result of an act committed, or apparently
committed, by another
person in the course of a criminal offence.
(2) A person suffers harm if, as a result of such an act:
(a) the person suffers actual physical bodily harm or psychological or
psychiatric harm, or
(b) the person’s property is deliberately taken, destroyed or
(3) If the person dies as a result of the act concerned, a member of the
person’s immediate family is also a victim of crime
for the purposes of
(4) If a person dies as a result of the act concerned and there is more than
one member of the person’s immediate family, members
of the immediate
family may nominate a representative for the purposes of the Charter of Victims
19 Meaning of “act of violence”
(1) In this Act,
act of violence
means an act or series of related
acts, whether committed by one or more persons:
(a) that has apparently occurred in the course of the commission of an
offence, and
(b) that has involved violent conduct against one or more persons, and
(c) that has resulted in injury or death to one or more of those persons.
2) For the avoidance of doubt, the reference to an offence in subsection (1)
(a) extends to conduct of a person that would constitute
an offence were it not
for the fact that the person cannot, or might not, be held to be criminally
responsible for the conduct because
of the person’s age or mental illness
or impairment.
(3) For the purposes of this section, violent conduct extends to sexual
assault and domestic violence.
(4) Except as provided by subsections (5) and (6), a series of related acts
is two or more acts that are related because:
(a) they were committed against the same person, and
(b) in the opinion of the Tribunal or the Commissioner:
(i) they were committed at approximately the same time, or
(ii) they were committed over a period of time by the same person or group of
persons, or
(iii) they were, for any other reason, related to each other.
(5) An act is not related to another act if, in the opinion of the Tribunal
or the Commissioner, having regard to the particular circumstances
acts, they ought not to be treated as related acts.
(6) An act is not related to any earlier act in respect of which support is
given under this Act if it occurs after the support is
(7) For the purposes of this Act, a series of related acts, whether committed
by one or more persons, constitutes a single act of
20 Meaning of “primary victim”
(1) A primary victim of an act of violence is a person who is injured, or
dies, as a direct result of that act.
(2) A primary victim of an act of violence extends to a person who is
injured, or dies, as a direct result of:
(a) trying to prevent another person from committing that act, or
(b) trying to help or rescue another person against whom that act is being
committed or has just been committed, or
(c) trying to arrest another person who is committing, or who has just
committed, that act.
Act provides for a number of areas of support for victims of violent crime. This
review concerns an area of support referred to
as a recognition payment. Section
34 of the Act defines the term “recognition payment”:
recognition payment
means a payment made in
recognition of the trauma suffered by a victim of an act of violence.
to accessing a recognition payment, an applicant must satisfy the criteria set
out in s 39 of the VR&S Act. This requires
that the incident be reported to
relevant entities. This requirement is in addition to establishing that they
are the victim of
an ‘act of violence’. The section has been amended
since the VR&S Act commenced. The section currently
39 Documentary evidence
(1) An application for victims support is to be accompanied by such
documentary evidence as may be required by the approved form.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the documentary evidence to be
(a) for an application for financial assistance for immediate needs under
section 26—is documentary evidence (such as a medical
or police report or
a report by an agency that provides support services to victims of crime)
sufficient to support, on the balance
of probability, the applicant’s
claim to be a victim of an act of violence, and
(b) for an application for financial assistance for economic loss under
section 26 or 27
or for a recognition payment—is:
(i) a police report, or a report by a Government agency or any other
agency that provides support services to victims of crime, sufficient
support, on the balance of probability, the applicant’s claim to be a
victim of an act of violence, and
(ii) a medical, dental or counselling report verifying that the applicant
or child who is the primary victim concerned has actually
been injured as a
result of an act of violence.
(Emphasis added)
threshold elements are preconditions under the VR&S Act which lead to a
recognition payment. If an applicant crosses the
necessary thresholds, they are
able to access certain applicable benefits of the victims of crime scheme. Once
an eligible victim
(of an act of violence) has passed through the initial
threshold, an assessment of the circumstances of the incident(s) and level
injury is carried out to determine the appropriate recognition payment
34 and 35 of the VR&S Act specify the types of recognition payments and
particularises the factual circumstances of the
act of violence (including
injury) necessary to enliven a particular category of recognition payment. The
sections provide:
34 Definitions
In this Division—
category of recognition payment means a category of recognition payment
described in section 35.
recognition payment means a payment made in recognition of the trauma
suffered by a victim of an act of violence or act of modern
series of related acts has the same meaning as in section 19 (4).
sexual assault has the meaning it has in paragraph (a), (b), (c) or (e) of
the definition of sexual assault and domestic violence
in section 19 (8).
sexual touching or sexual act means sexual touching (within the meaning of
Division 10 of
Crimes Act 1900
) of a person without his or her
consent or sexual touching of a child under the age of 16 years or the carrying
out of a sexual act
(within the meaning of that Division) with or towards a
child under the age of 16 years.
35 Categories of recognition payment
(1) A category A recognition payment is a payment given in respect of an act
of violence or act of modern slavery that apparently
occurred in the course of
the commission of a homicide.
(2) A category B recognition payment is a payment given in respect of an act
of violence or act of modern slavery of the following
(a) a sexual assault resulting in serious bodily injury or which involved an
offensive weapon or was carried out by 2 or more persons,
(b) a sexual assault, sexual touching or sexual act or attempted sexual
assault involving violence that is one of a series of related
(3) A category C recognition payment is a payment given in respect of an
act of violence or act of modern slavery involving any of
(a) a sexual assault other than one referred to in subsection (2) (b),
(b) an attempted sexual assault resulting in serious bodily injury,
(c) an assault resulting in grievous bodily harm,
(d) physical assault of a child that is one of a series of related acts.
(4) A category D recognition payment is a payment given in respect of an
act of violence or act of modern slavery involving any of
(a) sexual touching or sexual act,
(b) an attempted sexual assault involving violence other than one referred to
in subsection (3) (b),
(c) a robbery involving violence,
(d) an assault (not resulting in grievous bodily harm).
(Emphasis added)
has already been assessed as eligible for a Category D recognition payment. The
initial decision before the Assessor on 22 October
2024 determined a Category D
recognition payment on the basis that the evidence established on the balance of
probabilities that
GYB was the victim of a series of assaults in the nature of
domestic violence perpetrated over a period in excess of 19 years.
internal review on 27 February 2025 reached the same conclusion. The basis of
the internal review request was that the injuries
to GYB as a direct result of
the acts of violence constituted or resulted in grievous bodily harm, entitling
her to a Category C
recognition payment rather than ‘not resulting in
grievous bodily harm’ as per s 35(4)(d) of the VR&S Act (as set
bold at [14] above).
administrative review before the Tribunal, GYB seeks to establish that she is
eligible for a Category C recognition payment on
the basis of sustaining an
injury equating to grievous bodily harm. This is in order to displace the
current finding that GYB was
the victim of an assault that resulted in injury,
but not resulting in grievous bodily harm.
the question of act of violence, the Senior Assessor as delegate on review
accepted and adopted the findings of the initial assessor
and found that GYB was
the victim of an act of violence. They did not establish any disentitling
factors under s 44 of the VR&S
the question of injury and category of recognition payment the Senior Assessor
on review set out the categories from the VR&S
Act and explained the
payment provisions for each. After considering those matters the Senior Assessor
refers to the medical evidence
and stated:
17. In terms of assessing
the injuries that [GYB] experienced, I note there is no medical evidence
provided that demonstrates [GYB]
suffered a physical injury or injuries arising
out of the violence perpetrated upon her. I note the two Certificates of Injury
lodged for [GYB] that have been completed by C Gillett, a social
worker/counsellor, dated 30 November 2023 and 19 December 2024.
18. Ms Gillett states that [GYB] was as first seen on 9 February 2023 and for
the first Certificate was examined on 30 November 2023.
[GYB] reported
experiencing various forms of domestic violence over an ongoing period of time.
Ms Gillett indicates that [GYB] reported
she suffered nightmares,
hypervigilance, was mistrusting, suffered anxiety, fear and difficulties in
relationships. Ms Gillett opines
the symptoms could be consistent with that of a
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and anxiety.
19. The second Certificate obtained for the purposes of internal review,
indicates ongoing symptoms [GYB] continues to suffer and
Ms Gillett opines that
the symptoms have increased in severity, are tiring to [GYB] and are impacting
her daily. She again states
that they could be consistent with Chronic Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder and anxiety and ongoing treatment is needed in the
to long term.
20. In assessing the impact of the violence on [GYB], I am satisfied from the
two Certificates that she continues to suffer ongoing
impacts of the violence
psychologically. In spite of the ongoing nature of the psychological impacts
mentioned, Ms Gillett does not
mention any need to refer [GYB] for treatment by
a clinical psychologist or psychiatrist to treat the nature and severity of the
impacts being experienced.
21. To be eligible to receive a Category C recognition payment require the
evidence to establish that the person who experienced the
act of violence
suffered grievous bodily harm. Grievous bodily harm, in my view, means a level
of injury or harm that is very serious,
as the word implies, and grave. Whilst
such an injury is normally seen with very serious physical injuries, I accept it
can be established
arising from psychological harm experienced from a person who
has suffered violence, but only where the nature and extent of the
psychological
injury essentially means they are unable to function in most or all of their
normal day to day activities, and may
have required inpatient hospitalisation,
ongoing treatment with a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist and reliance on
ongoing pharmacological
treatment. In other words, it is at a level of
seriousness and gravity that it has measurable impacts on a person’s day
day functioning.
27 March 2025 GYB filed an Application for Administrative Review in the
Tribunal. As GYB was notified of the decision on 28 February
application for administrative review has been received within time (on the 28th
day after receiving notice of the decision)
in the 28 day period provided for by
the operation of s 55 of the
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
(the ADR Act) and cl 24 of the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
is no dispute that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the administrative
review if validly lodged. Section 51 of the VR&S
Act provides for
administrative review by the Tribunal.
51 Application to Tribunal
for administrative review of decision concerning recognition payment
(1) An applicant for a recognition payment who is aggrieved by the decision
of a decision maker in respect of the application may
apply to the Tribunal for
an administrative review under the
Administrative Decisions Review Act
of a decision made by the Commissioner following an internal review
of the decision maker’s decision with respect to the
recognition payment.
(2) An applicant for a recognition payment who is aggrieved by the decision
of the Commissioner in respect of the application may
apply to the Tribunal for
an administrative review under the
Administrative Decisions Review Act
of a decision made by the Commissioner.
Tribunal’s powers in relation to an application for administrative review
are governed by s 63 of the ADR Act, which provides:
Determination of administrative review by Tribunal
(1) In determining an application for an administrative review under this Act
of an administratively reviewable decision, the Tribunal
is to decide what the
correct and preferable decision is having regard to the material then before it,
including the following:
(a) any relevant factual material,
(b) any applicable written or unwritten law.
(2) For this purpose, the Tribunal may exercise all of the functions that are
conferred or imposed by any relevant legislation on
the administrator who made
the decision.
(3) In determining an application for the administrative review of an
administratively reviewable decision, the Tribunal may decide:
(a) to affirm the administratively reviewable decision, or
(b) to vary the administratively reviewable decision, or
(c) to set aside the administratively reviewable decision and make a decision
in substitution for the administratively reviewable
decision it set aside,
(d) to set aside the administratively reviewable decision and remit the
matter for reconsideration by the administrator in accordance
directions or recommendations of the Tribunal.
Tribunal’s function on review under s 63 of the ADR Act is to make the
correct and preferable decision having regard to
the material before it, and any
applicable written or unwritten law. It is well established that in considering
an application for
review the Tribunal is not constrained to have regard only to
the material that was before the agency, but may have regard to any
material before it at the time of the review:
Drake v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1979] AATA 179;
(1979) 46 FLR
The hearing
matter was heard briefly on 18 July 2025 with a number of items of material
received in evidence. No person was required to give
evidence at hearing and
that matter was reserved to be determined by the Tribunal on the basis of the
written material received.
GYB’s evidence
relied on the following evidence:
(1) Certificate of Injury (COI) dated 30 November 2023.
(2) COI dated 19 December 2024.
(3) Discharge Summary of 3 March 2025.
(4) Letter from C Gillett dated 27 May 2025.
also filed written submissions on 3 June 2025 and submissions in reply on 8 July
Commissioner’s evidence
Commissioner relied on:
(1) Documents filed pursuant to s 58 of the ADR Act (74 pages).
Commissioner also filed written submissions on 25 June 2025.
Commissioner’s decision
decision under review is summarised in detail at [19] above
my assessment of the evidence the decision of the Commissioner should be set
aside and a recognition payment in the nature of Category
C awarded. My reasons
are as follows.
Consideration of GYB’s evidence
COI dated 30 November 2023 refers to GYB having first seen that practice for
treatment concerning the impact of the acts of violence
on 9 February 2023.
a later examination on 30 November 2023 GYB was found to be presenting with the
following symptoms: “nightmares, hypervigilance,
mistrusting, anxiety,
anger, fear, and difficulties in relationships”. As a provisional
diagnosis the COI suggests that the
symptoms “could be consistent with
PTSD [Post Traumatic Stress Disorder] and anxiety”. A follow up was
scheduled for
two and a half weeks, indicating that the symptoms and treatment
were ongoing. The COI confirmed that the provisional diagnosis was
with the clinical findings.
further COI dated 19 December 2024 was provided. It referred to GYB’s
symptoms and treatment being ‘ongoing’.
examination on 19 December 2024 GYB was found to be presenting with the
following symptoms: “Hypervigilance, overthinking,
catastrophising,
mistrust, guilt & fear. [GYB] reports that these impacts have increased in
severity, are tiring and are impacting
COI provides a provisional diagnosis of Chronic PTSD & anxiety and opines
that “ongoing treatment is needed in the medium
to long term”. The
COI confirmed that the provisional diagnosis was consistent with the clinical
discharge summary from the hospital dated 3 March 2025 recorded that the
applicant had presented with chest pain, possible cardiovascular
respiratory issues (shortness of breath). According to GYB this presentation
arose in the context of experiencing a panic
attack in March of this year,
apparently triggered by GYB’s trauma. The detailed discharge summary makes
no reference to this
aspect of the evidence.
letter/report from C Gillett under the letterhead of Counselling and Support
Services dated 27 May 2025 indicates the following:
(1) GYB continues to experience the symptoms identified six months earlier in
the December 2024 report.
(2) GYB’s symptoms have not abated or lessened and treatment discussions
have commenced regarding EMDR therapy to target traumatic
memories and
(3) The impacts that her symptoms have on her functioning remain the same as in
the December 2024 COI.
(4) GYB had not as at May 2025 been referred to her GP or a psychologist for
additional support, as she remains in the trauma recovery
stages of stabilising,
processing, integration and healing.
evidence indicates that mistrusting, anxiety, anger, fear and difficulties in
relationships is present. The COI suggests that
the symptoms could be consistent
with PTSD (Post Traumatic Stress Disorder) and
Consideration of GYB’s submissions
note that it is now a number of years since GYB’s relationship with the
perpetrator ended and that the act of violence concluded
in early 2023. I also
note that GYB claims domestic violence from her former partner over the 19-20
years of their relationship which
involved raising children. It was over
two years since the major incident in April 2023 when the most recent evidence
(the letter
of C Gillett of May 2025) was prepared, which indicates that GYB
continues to be impacted and is still attempting trauma recovery.
submitted that the COI is sufficient to establish grievous bodily harm.
Reference was made to the meaning of the term as defined
The term grievous bodily harm is defined to include “any
permanent or serious disfiguring of the person”.
submitted that the “psychological evidence affirms the chronic and severe
nature of the psychological injuries sustained
as a direct result of the
violence perpetrated against her”
applicant referred to the case of
[2008] NSWCCA 209
often cited in administrative reviews under the VR&S Act. At [137] the Court
considered the practical impact of the
term “grievous bodily harm”
and stated:
137 The trial judge informed the jury that the third
element of the offence, namely, that the impact caused “
grievous bodily
” was in dispute. His Honour directed the jury to look at
the seriousness of the injury that Mr Mousselamani
”. The trial judge correctly directed the jury as to the
meaning of “
grievous bodily harm
” and also directed them that
this was a question of fact for their determination. His Honour informed the
jury that the challenge
was whether the injury amounted to “
bodily harm
” which, he explained, “
simply means really
serious bodily injury
”. No challenge is made to this direction,
although the adverbial qualification of “
”, should, in
my view be avoided as it might be considered to downplay the seriousness of the
injury for the purposes of the
section. His Honour also directed the jury that
it was a question of fact for their determination as to whether the injury
grievous bodily harm
”. His Honour pointed out
that the injury did not need to be permanent, or long lasting, or life
threatening. His Honour reiterated
grievous bodily
” meant that the injury was “
a really serious
parties relied upon
in their reasoning and submissions.
highlighted the Court’s observation that the injury did not need to be
permanent, or long lasting, or life threatening but
that it must be a really
serious bodily injury.
applicant also referred to the case of
Casey v Pel-Air Aviation Pty Ltd; Helm
v Pel-Air Aviation Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWSC 566
) which was
followed by the Tribunal in
EGM v Commissioner of Victims Rights
NSWCATAD 181.
Those cases are authority for the proposition that that grievous
bodily harm extends to serious psychological injury. Whilst
subject to an appeal that aspect was not impacted by the appeal.
through her legal representatives submitted that her psychological injuries had
been an overwhelmingly present factor in her life
since the violence started.
GYB noted (as has the Tribunal at [36] above) that it has been over two years
since the last act of violence
in April 2023 and the most recent medical
assessment and evidence.
submitted that the medical evidence concluded that her symptoms remain present
and show no signs of abatement. To the extent that
they wished to respond to the
Delegates’ references to medical treatment by a psychologist or
psychiatrist GYB noted that the
treatment being sought and obtained was
treatment funded and authorised through Victims Services for victims of violent
also referred to the beneficial nature of the legislation and that she had
engaged with her General Practitioner for medication
around anxiety arising from
the impact of the perpetrator’s actions. They also noted in reply
submissions that the Respondent
takes issue that this matter has not been
Consideration of the Commissioner’s
submissions
written submissions the Commissioner referred to the lack of medical evidence
supporting GYB’s claim and that the evidence
did not support a finding of
‘grievous bodily harm’ as a direct result of the act of violence for
the purposes of a Category
C recognition payment.
R v Donovan
[1934] 2 KB 498 at 509 was also referred to by both
parties and provides authority for the proposition that actual bodily harm means
any hurt or injury to a person, which does not have to be permanent, but is more
than merely transient or trifling. Whilst that
case deals with actual bodily
harm, in an instance of psychological harm, the harm must also be more than
transient or trifling.
The current case goes beyond actual physical bodily harm
and that is clearly the case as the Commissioner in finding act of violence
satisfied that GYB had been injured as a result of the act of violence,
suffering psychological or physical harm, constituting
actual bodily harm.
note that both physical and psychological or psychiatric injuries through
different types of evidence constitute harm to the person.
The threshold is that
the hurt or injury must also be something that has an effect (general or
specific) but importantly one that
is more than transient or trifling.
of violent crime claiming psychologically based injuries no longer require a
formal diagnosis. Whilst there is nothing in
the legislation requiring that the
impact of the assaults be a diagnosed mental illness or disorder, the finder of
fact must be satisfied
that grievous bodily harm has been inflicted as a direct
result of the assault with evidence sufficient to support such a finding.
Commissioner relied upon a line of cases dealing with grievous bodily harm and
serious bodily injury in the context of whether
a claimant was eligible for a
higher level of recognition payment. Where GYB referred to barriers in obtaining
reports and specialist
(psychiatrist) treatment the Commissioner noted that the
onus was on GYB to establish that she was the victim of an act of violence
what relevant level of injury was present.
it has been referred to as obiter in at least one Tribunal case, I reject the
Commissioner’s implied submission that
to have sustained grievous bodily
harm in a psychosocial rather than physical sense a person must be under active
medical and behavioural
treatment by a psychiatrist and psychologist. There is
no legislative requirement for such matters, but rather the finder of fact
identify sufficient evidence to establish the relevant matter to the requisite
was also made to
Victims Compensation Fund Corporation v Brown
with the Commissioner noting that the case also set out the limits of the
beneficial nature of the legislation and that the Court
was not required to give
the most expansive possible interpretation to the circumstances of a case.
Consideration
noted above, in my view, having regard to the evidence before the Tribunal,
there is sufficient evidence to establish a finding
of grievous bodily harm. GYB
was the victim of domestic violence for two decades involving numerous physical
assaults and significant
threats all constituting criminal acts whether charges
were preferred or not.
application was considered by the delegates as a series of related acts of
violence constituting one act of violence, which under
the legislation is a
finding open to the decision maker: VR&S Act, s 19(4). GYB has not sought to
overturn that matter however
I do note that the final act of the perpetrator in
April 2023 was a particularly violent and vicious incident and would have been
terrifying for GYB.
violence lasted 20 years and two years after it ended GYB continues to receive
treatment and her symptoms and presentation have
not, on the available evidence,
abated or changed. The Tribunal is not determining whether GYB had been disabled
seriously with a
chronic condition but rather whether she presents with a level
of harm that could be considered as equating to grievous bodily harm.
note that GYB’s symptoms have continued for in excess of two years so they
would be considered chronic by a qualified clinician,
predominantly as they have
persisted (even with the benefit of treatment) for well in excess of six months.
respect of criticisms by the Commissioner that certain evidence was not
available or produced I note that no such evidence was
sought or otherwise
requested in these proceedings nor was GYB herself required for
cross-examination at hearing.
the legislation is beneficial consistent with the obiter of the High Court in
Victims Compensation Fund Corporation v Brown
[2003] HCA 54
there still must be evidence sufficient to make the findings sought or relied
upon by a party. In my view the medical evidence
coupled with the circumstances
of the act of violence which the evidence refers to, is sufficient to
substantiate that GYB has suffered
grievous bodily harm by way of psychological
or psychiatric harm.
the current claim taking into consideration the totality of the evidence I find
that GYB is the victim of an act of violence and
is entitled to recover a
recognition payment, that is due to having been the victim of domestic violence
in the nature of assaults.
I find no relevant issues under s 44 of the VR&S
Act to disentitle or reduce GYB’s victims support.
Notwithstanding
the findings immediately above, the narrow issue in dispute was clearly agreed
by the parties and their helpful submissions
focused on this issue as to whether
the evidence was sufficient to establish Category C or Category D recognition
payment eligibility.
of the above finding, the decision of the Commissioner of Victims Rights
delegate will be set aside following administrative
the reasons outlined above, the decision of the respondent will be set aside and
GYB is eligible to receive a Category C recognition
Tribunal makes the following orders:
(1) The decision of the respondent of 27 February 2025 is set aside.
(2) In substitution of that decision, the applicant is eligible for a Category C
Recognition Payment in the amount of $5,000.00 for
an act of violence resulting
in grievous bodily harm.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (295 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter