URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2025/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sandra (a pseudonym) [2025] NSWCATGD 13; (24 July 2025)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Sandra (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATGD 13
Hearing Date(s):
24 July 2025
Date of Orders:
24 July 2025
Decision Date:
24 July 2025
Guardianship Division
A Britton, Deputy President
Dr K Eggleton, Senior Member
(Professional)
S Bullock, General Member (Community)
In relation to the enduring guardian appointment made by Sandra on 30 March
2023 appointing Victor and Liza the tribunal orders, directs
The appointment of Victor and Liza as an enduring
guardian is confirmed.
In relation to the enduring power of
attorney made by Sandra on 30 March 2023 which appointed Victor and Liza as
attorneys, the Tribunal
determines, orders or declares:
out a review of the making or revocation or operation and effect of the enduring
power of attorney.
Not to make an order under
Attorney Act 2003
(NSW). The application for review of the enduring power of
attorney is treated as an application for a financial management order
Guardianship Act 1987
1. The estate of Sandra
is subject to management under the
NSW Trustee and Guardian Act 2009
2. The management of the estate of Sandra is committed to
the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
Catchwords:
GUARDIANSHIP – requested review of enduring guardianship appointment
– subject person with early onset Alzheimer’s
disease – powers
available to Tribunal upon review – insufficient evidence to revoke
appointment of the guardians and/or
to vary the appointment –
principal’s welfare and interests not adversely affected – enduring
guardianship appointment
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT –
requested review of enduring power of attorney – allegations of financial
abuse by attorney –
intermixing of principal’s money –
obligations owed by attorney to the principal – Tribunal decided to
discretion to review the enduring power of attorney –not in
principal’s best interests to make an order under
Attorney Act
– application treated as application for a financial
management order – order made committing principal’s estate
NSW Trustee and Guardian.
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), Sch 6, cl
Guardianship Act 1987
(1)(a)-(b),
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
Cases Cited:
Bale v Kimberley Developments Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWSC 820
Garslev Holdings
Pty Ltd v Overdean Developments Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 259
P v NSW Trustee and
[2015] NSWSC 579
Reilly v Reilly
[2017] NSWSC 1419
Elizabeth Parker v Margaret Catherine Higgins
[2012] NSWSC 1516
O’Bryan-Turner
[2021] NSWSC 5
Texts Cited:
None cited.
Principal judgment
001: Review of an Enduring Power of Attorney
Sandra (the
Victor (applicant, attorney)
Liza (attorney)
NSW Trustee and
002: Review of an Enduring Guardianship
Appointment
Sandra (the person)
Victor (applicant, enduring
Liza (enduring guardian)
Public Guardian
NSW Trustee and
Representation:
File Number(s):
NCAT 2025/00123144
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
Sixty-six-year-old
Sandra lives with her daughter, Liza, and her son-in-law in their home on the
NSW Central Coast. In 2023, Sandra
was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s
March 2023, Sandra appointed Liza and her son, Victor, as her enduring attorneys
). On the same day she appointed Liza and Victor as her enduring
guardians (the
). In each appointment, Sandra authorised Liza and
Victor to act jointly and severally.
applications made to the Guardianship Division of the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (
) on 31 March 2025, Victor sought review of
the EPoA and the EGA. Among other things he claimed that Liza had been making
informing him; used over $100,000 of their mother’s money
renovations to her home (
Liza’s home
); and, missed monthly
instalments payments on a mortgage on their parents’ home. Liza lives with
her husband and two small
a separate application made to NCAT, Victor sought review of the enduring power
of attorney made by his father, Mr Z. Made in March
2023 and in the same terms
as the instruments of appointment made by his wife, Mr Z appointed his son and
daughter as his enduring
guardians and attorneys.
the reasons that follow, we decided to make a financial management order in
respect of Sandra and to confirm the EGA. Because
they raise common issues,
parts of these reasons are identical to those given for our decision to make a
financial management order
in respect of Mr Z.
Review EPoA
the application of an “attorney”, NCAT may decide to review the
operation and effect of a “reviewable power of
attorney”, or to not
carry out such a review:
Powers of Attorney Act 2003
(NSW) (the Act),
(1). A “reviewable power of attorney”, is an “enduring
power of attorney”: the Act,
-(2). The EPoA made by Sandra is an
enduring power of attorney: the Act,
of the Act provides:
36 Interested persons may apply for review
Tribunal may review making or operation and effect of
A review tribunal may, on the application of an interested person,
decide to review the making, revocation or the operation and effect
reviewable power of attorney or not to carry out such a review.
(2) As a consequence of reviewing the making, revocation or
operation and effect of a reviewable power of attorney, a review tribunal
decide whether or not to make an order under this section.
Orders relating to operation and effect of power
review tribunal may, if satisfied that it would be in the best interests of the
principal to do so or that it would better reflect
the wishes of the principal,
make any one or more of the following orders relating to the operation and
effect of a power of attorney:
(a) an order varying a term of, or a power conferred by, the
power of attorney,
(b) an order removing a person from office as an attorney,
(c) an order appointing a substitute attorney to replace an
attorney who has been removed from office by a review tribunal or
who otherwise
vacates the office,
(d) an order reinstating a power of attorney that has lapsed
by reason of any vacancy in the office of an attorney and appointing
substitute attorney to replace the attorney who vacated office,
(e) an order directing or requiring any one or more of the
(i) that an attorney furnish accounts and other information to
the tribunal or to a person nominated by the tribunal,
(ii) that an attorney lodge with the tribunal a copy of all
records and accounts kept by the attorney of dealings and transactions
the attorney under the power,
(iii) that those records and accounts be audited by an auditor
appointed by the tribunal and that a copy of the report of the
furnished to the tribunal,
(iv) that the attorney submit a plan of financial management
to the tribunal for approval,
(f) an order revoking all or part of the power of
(g) such other orders as the review tribunal thinks fit.
explained by Slattery J in
Susan Elizabeth Parker v Margaret Catherine
Higgins & Ors
[2012] NSWSC 1516
(2) of the Act give
NCAT a two-step discretion. NCAT may first exercise a discretion to
“decide to review” the operation
and effect of a reviewable power of
attorney or “not to carry out such a review”: the Act,
NCAT decides to exercise that discretion, it may exercise a further discretion
“whether or not to make an order under [s
36]”: the Act,
satisfied that it would be in the best interests of the principal to do so or
that it would better reflect the wishes of the principal,
NCAT may make one or
more of the orders listed in
of the Act.
Alternatively,
following review of the operation and effect of a reviewable power of attorney,
if NCAT decides not to make an order
of the Act, it may (if it
considers it appropriate in all the circumstances to do so)
decide to treat the application for the review
as an application for a
financial management order under
(Financial management) of
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW): the Act,
exercising the power to review the EPoA we must observe the principles
Guardianship Act
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), Sch 6,
Guardianship Act
4 General principles
It is the duty of everyone exercising functions under this Act with respect to
persons who have disabilities to observe the following
principles:
(a) the welfare and interests of such persons should be given
paramount consideration,
(b) the freedom of decision and freedom of action of such
persons should be restricted as little as possible,
(c) such persons should be encouraged, as far as possible, to
live a normal life in the community,
(d) the views of such persons in relation to the exercise of
those functions should be taken into consideration,
(e) the importance of preserving the family relationships and
the cultural and linguistic environments of such persons should
recognised,
(f) such persons should be encouraged, as far as possible, to
be self-reliant in matters relating to their personal, domestic
and financial
(g) such persons should be protected from neglect, abuse and
exploitation,
(h) the community should be encouraged to apply and promote
these principles.
Background facts
June 2023, Sandra was referred for assessment to clinical neuropsychologist, Dr
Y, by her employer, a major Australian retailer,
because of concerns about
her work performance and memory changes. Sandra was then 64 years of age and had
been working for her employer
for thirty years.
a report dated 19 June 2023, Dr Y said on assessment of Sandra there was
“evidence of global cognitive decline”, showing
a “striking
impairment in encoding information into memory, with further loss over time, and
almost no recollection of performing
tasks”. In her opinion, Sandra had
“younger early onset Alzheimer’s disease”.
was then living with her husband, Mr Z, in their jointly owned home on the NSW
Central Coast. Around the same time as Sandra’s
diagnosis, Mr Z was
also diagnosed with dementia. In January 2024, he commenced living in
residential aged care. He continues to
2023, Sandra became a participant in the National Disability Insurance
Scheme (NDIS). Under the first 12-month NDIS plan which
commenced in
July 2023, Sandra received assistance with daily living
and “social, economic and community participation”.
recorded that Sandra was also receiving support from her children, primarily
April 2025, Sandra was admitted to a district hospital following a fall.
A couple of weeks later, Liza removed Sandra from hospital
and took her to
Liza’s home. In a report filed in these proceedings, a social worker wrote
that Liza removed Sandra from hospital
against medical advice. Liza claims that
when she visited her mother in hospital, she was agitated, begged to be taken
to be sent to aged care. Liza said she was “disgusted”
by the lack of care being provided to her mother. She said when
she was informed
by the “geriatrics doctor” that there was no plan to undertake any
further tests, and, following a general
set of observations undertaken by a
nurse, everything “appeared fine”, she took Sandra back to
Liza’s home. Liza
claimed that she endeavoured to consult with Victor
continues to live with Liza, her son-in-law, and grandchildren in Liza’s
by Liza, Sandra receives
NDIS-funded care and support from external care providers.
claims that Sandra is well cared for and enjoys living with her family.
Victor alleges financial abuse
alleges that acting in her role as attorney, Liza has withheld information from
him about decisions she made in relation to
their parents’ financial
affairs. He alleges that Liza has been using their parents’ money for her
own purposes. Liza
disputes those allegations. She said that until recently,
Victor has shown no interest in the management of their parents’
affairs, and she has shouldered the burden of paying bills, negotiating with
aged care and service providers, Centrelink
and the NDIS. She contends that she
has always acted in the best interests of her mother and has gone to great
lengths to support
her mother and to enable her to live her “best
set out below the main allegations made by Victor and Liza’s response to
those allegations:
Allegation 1: that Liza has used over $127,000
of their mother’s money, including her entire superannuation payout
to pay for renovations on Liza’s home
claims that:
(1) with Victor’s agreement she used $87,000 of her mother’s money
towards the cost of renovating her home, not $127,000
as he claimed;
(2) after her mother was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease in 2023, at a
family meeting her mother agreed that when she required
24/7 care, she would
move in with Liza and contribute to the cost of renovating Liza’s home to
enable her to live there comfortably;
(3) she discussed with her mother the possible uses of her superannuation: to
pay off the mortgage on her home (about $100,000),
or, to contribute to the
renovation of Liza’s home;
(4) her mother consented to her superannuation payout being used to fund
renovations to Liza’s home and said that when she
passed, as a beneficiary
under her will, Victor would receive an amount equivalent to the amount she gave
Liza to renovate her home.
The balance of her estate would then be
distributed equally to her two children;
(5) the above arrangement was agreed to by Victor but never put in writing. When
that agreement was reached, she and Victor had a
great relationship. Liza said
that she never anticipated that Victor would accuse her of financial abuse.
disputes that he agreed to the above arrangement. He claims that in 2023 he and
Liza agreed that $50,000 from their mother’s
superannuation pay out would
be used to pay off the mortgage on their parents’ home and the balance
would be left for their
mother’s own use. He alleges that despite
undertaking to do so, Liza did not pay $50,000 towards their parents’
He claimed that he agreed that Liza could use $25,000 of their
mother’s money to complete the renovations on Liza’s home
not discover until late 2024 that Liza had in fact used over $100,000 of their
mother’s money to renovate Liza’s
parents’ bank accounts and trusted Liza to do the “right
Allegation 2: that their mother no longer has
access to her pension or bank account and is often left with two dollars in her
denies this allegation and claims that:
(1) she always ensures that her mother has cash in her wallet and access to
money to pay for cigarettes, outings, etc.
(2) she uses her mother’s pension ($1,140 pf) to pay for rates and other
expenses on her parents’ property and expenses
incurred by her mother for
groceries, medication, clothing, etc.
(3) her mother lives rent free in Liza’s home.
(4) she obtained legal advice which was to the effect that she was not required
to keep receipts for the purchase of groceries and
other small items purchased
on behalf of her mother.
Allegation 3: we are unable to effectively communicate. Liza refuses to
respond to his request for information about the use of his
claims that despite her efforts to include him in decisions about their
mother’s financial affairs, for the past two and
a half years, Victor has
shown little or no interest. She claims that she has always responded to his
requests for information in
a timely manner.
Obligations owed by
attorney to the principal
attorney owes the obligations of a fiduciary to the person who appointed them as
Reilly v Reilly
[2017] NSWSC 1419
) at [111].
A foundational duty of a fiduciary is to act in the interests of a
beneficiary, in good faith:
Bale v Kimberley Developments Pty Ltd
. As a fiduciary, a manager must avoid a conflict, or sensible
possibility of conflict, between his or her personal interests and
duty to the principal a manager must not place him or herself in a position of
conflict between his or her personal interests
and his or her duty to the
Garslev Holdings Pty Ltd v Overdean Developments Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 259
. Nor is an attorney entitled to make a gift of the
principal’s estate to him or herself or to others:
O’Bryan-Turner
[2021] NSWSC 5
above obligations are reflected in the Act which states that unless the
instrument creating a prescribed power of attorney expressly
provides otherwise,
an attorney cannot give a gift of all or part of the principal's property to
another person, or confer a benefit
on themselves: the Act,
accepting their respective appointments under the EPoA, Victor and Liza accepted
the above obligations. Their respective signatures
appeared below the following
“7 Acceptance by attorney
(a) I accept that I must always act in the principal’s
best interests.
(b) I accept that as attorney I must keep my own money and
property separate from the principal’s money and property.
(c) I accept that I should keep reasonable accounts and
records of the principal’s money and property.
(d) I accept that, unless expressly authorised, I cannot gain
a benefit from being an attorney.
(e) I accept that I must act honestly in all matters
concerning the principal’s legal and financial affairs.”
Should orders be made under
of the Act?
his application seeking review of the EPoA (the
Application
sought the revocation of the EPoA and the variation of the terms of the EPoA so
that any decision concerning the sale of
their parents’ property would
need to be made jointly. In addition, he sought several other orders, including
that Liza be
required to give to the Tribunal accounts of Sandra’s
finances and to arrange for those accounts to be audited. At the hearing,
requested us to make a financial management order. Liza on the other hand
requested that she be permitted to continue to act as
her mother’s
remove Liza or Victor as attorney, we must be satisfied that it is in
Sandra’s best interests to do so, or, that it would
better reflect her
are not satisfied that it would be in Sandra’s best interests
to remove Liza or Victor as attorneys and leave the other
sole attorney, largely because the evidence reveals that each
sibling misapprehends the role of the attorney. At a time when each
were of the
opinion that their mother lacked capacity to manage her financial affairs and
that the EPoA had come into effect, they
agreed that it was appropriate that
Liza be permitted to use some of Sandra’s money to fund renovations to
Liza’s home.
Whether as claimed by Victor it was agreed that that
contribution be capped at $25,000, or that the amount actually spent, was
(as claimed by Liza), or $125,000 (as claimed by Victor), is not to the
point. It was a substantial sum.
accept that Liza holds the genuine belief that she was entitled to use her
mother’s money to improve her home because it
would, and in fact has been
to the benefit of Sandra. However, as the summary set out above of the
obligations owed by an attorney
to a principal reveal, in doing so, she acted in
breach of her duties as attorney, by mixing her own finances with those of her
and by conferring a financial benefit on herself.
Victor has been highly critical of Liza’s actions as attorney, he admits
agreeing to Liza using their mother’s funds
to renovate Liza’s home.
In addition, for over 12 months he took no steps to ensure that his
mother’s financial affairs
were being appropriately managed.
we are not satisfied that it would better reflect Sandra’s wishes to
remove one of her children as her attorneys. At
a time when apparently, she had
capacity to make decisions about who to appoint to manage her affairs when she
was no longer able
to do so, she decided to appoint both
Other orders sought
addition, we decided not to make the other orders sought by Victor. As we
explain below, the current EPoA has become unworkable.
Varying the terms of the
EPoA by requiring any decision about the sale of their parents’ home to be
made jointly by the attorneys,
is likely to be unworkable. As we have decided to
commit the management of Sandra’s estate to the NSW Trustee and Guardian,
no useful purpose would be served in requiring Liza to produce accounts to NCAT
and to arrange for them to be audited.
To treat the application
to review the EPoA as an application for a financial management order
decided not to make an order under
of the Act, we decided it appropriate
to treat the Application as an application for a financial management order.
exercise the power to make a financial management order in relation to Sandra,
we must be satisfied:
(1) Sandra is incapable of managing her affairs.
(2) There is a need for another person to manage Sandra’s affairs; and
(3) It is in Sandra’s best interests for a financial management order to
considering whether to exercise the discretion to make, or not to make, a
financial management order, we must have regard to the
principles.
Sandra is incapable of managing her affairs
question of whether Sandra is not capable of managing her finances requires
consideration of the nature of her estate.
receives the disability support pension (
), about $1100 per fortnight.
She owns a residential property estimated to be worth about $650,000 jointly
with her husband. That
property has a mortgage of about $100,000 (see, Exhibit
A1). Since 2023, Sandra’s financial affairs have been managed by Liza.
their simple nature, the medical evidence indicates that Sandra is unable to
manage her finances in a reasonably prudent fashion.
Liza and Victor
Is there a need for a person to manage Sandra’s
current arrangement whereby Liza and Victor are jointly and severally appointed
to manage Sandra’s financial affairs has
become unworkable. Each
believe that the other is not acting in Sandra's best interests. Each allege
that the other has abused Sandra’s
trust. Victor alleges that Liza has
used their mother’s money to benefit herself. Liza makes much the same
allegation about
Victor and alleges, among other things, that he lived rent free
in their mother's property in 2024 and provided her with little support
at a time when her cognition was in decline. Liza is particularly aggrieved that
in 2024 when her own son was very ill and
hospitalised, Victor did little to
assist her to manage their parents' financial and personal affairs. She points
out that she applied
to the National Disability Insurance Agency so that their
mother would receive much needed care support as her cognition declined.
she who arranged for care to be provided to their mother, before and after she
moved to live with Liza’s family.
the next 18 months it will be necessary to sell the Sandra’s home to
fund the refundable aged care deposit payable to
the facility in which Mr Z
resides. It is improbable that Liza and Victor will be able to reach agreement
on the myriad of decisions
that will need to be made to enable that to occur.
are satisfied that there is a need for another person to manage her financial
Is it in Sandra's best interests that a financial
management order be made?
circumstances where Sandra is unable to manage her finances, there is a need for
another person to do so, and, where the EPoA has
become unworkable, we find that
it is in Sandra’s best interests that a financial management order be
are satisfied that the preconditions to making a financial management order are
met. We decided to exercise the discretion to make
a financial management order
in respect of Sandra.
Who should be appointed to manage
Sandra’s estate?
urges us to commit the management of Sandra’s affairs to the NSW Trustee
and Guardian. Liza submits that the EPoA should
be permitted to continue, and,
in the alternative, if NCAT decides to make a financial management order, she
seeks to be appointed
as manager. She contends that she has diligently managed
her mother’s financial affairs for the past two or so years and if
appointed manager would continue to do so.
appears to have the necessary knowledge and organisation skills to act as
manager of her mother’s estate. However, we could
not be satisfied that if
she were to be appointed as manager that she would comply with the obligations
owed by a manager to the
person the subject of the financial management order.
As discussed above, we find that Liza lacks an appreciation that the
relationship
between an attorney and the principal is in the nature of a
fiduciary relationship with consequent duties owed under that relationship.
an attorney, a manager owes the obligations of a fiduciary to the principal, the
person who appointed them as attorney:
P v NSW Trustee and Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 579
. We could not be reasonably satisfied that Liza
would comply with those obligations if appointed as manager.
other individual has nominated to act as manager of Sandra’s estate.
Therefore, her estate must be committed to the management
of the NSW Trustee and
the application seeking review of the EGA, Victor requested the Tribunal to make
a guardianship order and to appoint the NSW Public
Guardian. He said Liza failed
to consult him in relation to any decision she made in respect of their mother.
He claims that in April
2025, Liza removed their mother from hospital against
medical advice.
oral submissions, Victor said he agreed with Liza that their mother was settled
and happy living with Liza’s family, that
the services being provided to
Sandra were appropriate and that her health care needs were being well managed.
His main complaint
was Liza’s failure to consult him about decisions she
had made in exercise of her authority as enduring guardian. While not
put, we understood from his submission made at the hearing that he no longer
pressed for the EGA to be revoked.
powers available to us on review of the EGA include:
(1) to confirm the EGA and vary or not vary the functions given to the enduring
guardians under that appointment:
Guardianship Act
(2) if requested by Victor or Liza, or if we consider it to be
in Sandra’s best interests, to revoke their respective appointments:
Guardianship Act
ss 6K(1)(a)
(3) if we consider that it is in the best interests of Sandra, to deal with the
review as if it was an application for a guardianship
Guardianship
ss 6K(1)(a)
only example given by Victor of a concerning decision made by Liza about their
mother’s personal affairs was the decision
to remove Sandra from hospital
in April 2025. Liza gave a reasonable explanation for removing her mother from
hospital before a formal
discharge decision was made. Reasonable minds might
differ about the merit of that decision. However, of itself that could not be
said to evidence that Liza lacked judgment, was unable to discharge the
functions of an enduring guardian in a manner consistent
with the obligations to
give paramount consideration to Sandra’s interests.
Victor conceded, he has no concerns about any other decisions made by Liza in
respect of their mother’s personal affairs,
only the lack of consultation.
Given that Victor has now indicated a greater willingness to be involved in
decisions about his mother’s
personal affairs, we recommend that he
and Liza endeavour to reach agreement on the types of decisions he wishes to be
this stage, poor communication between the guardians of itself does not warrant
exercising the power to revoke the EGA. In reaching
that conclusion we consider
significant that there is no evidence which might tend to suggest that
Sandra’s welfare and interests
have been adversely affected by any
decision made by her daughter in exercise of her power as enduring guardian or
the lack of communication
between the guardians.
decided to confirm the EGA.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (287 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter