URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMPSC/2015/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v Kennedy, Thompson, Parker and Dowsett [2015] NSWNMPSC 2 (29 May 2015)
HCCC v KENNEDY, THOMPSON, PARKER AND DOWSETT
[2015] NSWNMPSC 2
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 171
WENDY ANN KENNEDY, STEWART THOMPSON, CHRISTOPHER LESLIE PARKER, JISNU
MATTER NUMBERS: 2015/02 REGISTRATION NUMBERS
KENNEDY -NMW0001254789
THOMPSON -NMW0001249608 PARKER -NMW0001281769 DOWSETT -NMW0001152097
REASONS FOR DECISION
HCCC v Kennedy, Thompson, Parker and Dowsett
[2015] NSWNMPSC
PARTIES: NSW Health Care Complaints Commission (Complainant) represented by Mr
Feneil Shah, solicitor, Health Care Complaints Commission.
Wendy Kennedy, Stewart Thompson, Christopher Parker and Jisnu Dowsett
(Respondents) represented by Ms Katherine Doust, NSW Nurses
and Midwives'
Association
FILE NUMBER: 2015/02
TRIBUNAL: Ms Belinda Baker (Chairperson) Mr Kurt Andersson-Noorgard (Nurse
Ms Leigh Schalk (Nurse Member) Ms Babette Smith (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 26 -28 May 2015
DATE OF DECISION: 29 May 2015
DATE OF ORDERS: 29 May 2015
13 February 2013, Patient A was admitted to Lismore Base Hospital following a
suicide attempt from carbon monoxide poisoning.
He was then admitted into the
High Dependency Unit ("HDU") of the Lismore Adult Mental Health Inpatient Unit
("LAMHU") within Lismore
Base Hospital on the following day. Five days later, at
approximately Sam on 20 February 2013, and whilst he was still a patient
HDU, Patient A was found by nursing staff of the HDU to have taken his own
Nurses Wendy Kennedy, Stuart Thompson, Christopher Parker and Jisnu Dowsett
("the Respondents") were each rostered on duty
on the night and day shifts of 19
and 20 February 2013. Respondents Kennedy and Thompson were the nurses rostered
on the night shift
of 19/ 20 February 2013. Respondents Parker and Dowsett were
two of the nurses rostered on the day shift of 20 February
have been made against the Respondents in respect of their care of Patient A
over the period of 19/ 20 February 2013. In
particular, the complaints concern
the adequacy of the observations that were performed in respect of Patient A
over the night of
19 February 2013 and into the morning of 20 February 2013, and
the documentation of those observations.
position of the Respondents has been complicated by a number of factors: first,
at the time of Patient A's death, a number of
fixtures in the HDU were broken,
making the Respondent's tasks more difficult; second, the relevant policies and
forms at the time
that applied to the LAHMU were contradictory and
Professional Standards Committee ("Committee") found that each Respondent is
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct. Consequential
orders were
CONSTITUTION
OF THE PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE
Committee was convened on 26 - 28 May 2015 to inquire into four complaints made
by Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings, Health
Care Complaints Commission
("HCCC") made on 12 December 2014 in relation to the Respondents under the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) ("the
National Law"
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
· 7. Patient A was admitted to Lismore Base Hospital on 13 February
2013. He had recently been suspended from his employer
as a result of a police
investigation, which concerned allegations of a serious and sexual nature. It
appears that Patient A's suicide
attempt was precipitated by the police
investigation.
Patient A was initially admitted to Lismore Hospital, there were no beds
available in the HDU, and Patient A remained in the
Emergency Department
overnight. When a bed became available the following day, Patient A was admitted
to the HDU.
HDU is an eight bed unit. On the evening of 19/ 20 February 2013, six of the
eight beds were occupied. Patient A was located in
Room 5, which was the room
closest to the Nurse's Station.
Committee has heard evidence that a number of fixtures in the HDU were broken at
the time of the events in question. In particular,
a number of doors within the
HDU were broken, including the fire door near the Nurse's Station and the door
to Room 5. The door to
room 5 did not close properly - it would jam closed, so
that opening it required one to "slam" the door open. This would cause a
noise, which often woke the patient in that room. In addition, whilst the doors
of patient's rooms had viewing windows, the
louvre blinds on many of the windows
(including the door for Room 5) were broken, which meant that the windows could
not be effectively
used to view the patients in their
A's treatment team determined that, in view of his risk of self-harm, Patient A
should be assigned a Care Level of 2. (This
was a standard care level for
patients within the HDU.) Patient A's Care Level did not change throughout his
admission. A Care Level
''.frequent"
observations from nursing
staff. As will be discussed further below, NSW Health and HDU policies required
15 minute observations during
the day, and 30 minute observations at
A's condition was relatively unremarkable over the period from 14 February 2013
until 19 February 2013. The clinical notes
for 19 February 2013 at 1230 hours
records that Patient A was
"occupying himself by watching tv. Selectively
socialising. Cooperative. Adequate diet and fluid intake."
At 2000 hours,
Patient A was described as
"mostly sitting quietly in communal areas watching
lawyer. Wishes to see social worker re accommodation
issues. Polite and cooperative. Adequate food and
.fluid intake. Message
left for Marcus (SW) [
social worker]
accommodation."
the evening of 19 February 2013, Patient A's discharge was imminent. A decision
had been made by Patient A's treating team that
he would be discharged after he
had received an MRI, provided that the MRI was clear.
Because of the serious charges that were alleged against him, Patient A was to
be released into police custody. It appears that Patient
A had been told that he
would be released into police custody on his discharge.
Respondents
Kennedy and Thompson commenced the night shift at 2130 hours on 19 February
2013. They were told at handover that Patient
A was likely to be discharged the
following day, but that Patient A was not to be informed of this. (It was
generally considered
that Patient A would be of greater risk to himself if he
was aware that his discharge into police custody was
A was awake and in the lounge area when Respondents Kennedy and Thompson
commenced the shift. However, over the period from
2200 hours to 2300 hours,
Patient A was in the process of readying himself for bed, and he ultimately
retired to his room at approximately
2300 hours. From that time until 0600 hours
on 20 February 2013, neither Respondent Kennedy nor Respondent Thompson went
into Patient
A's room to check on him. However, both said that they saw him get
up and go to the toilet at around 0200 hours, and both said that
they heard him
snoring loudly during the night.
after 0600 hours on 20 February 2013, Respondents Kennedy and Thompson saw
Patient A as he walked to the toilet. At 0629,
Respondents Kennedy and Thompson
checked on Patient A in his room. At this time, Patient A was lying in his bed.
He was breathing
(but not snoring).
0700 hours, there was a changeover between the night and day shifts. The
handover occurred outside of the HDU. At the handover,
Respondent Thompson (for
the HDU) told the incoming day shift that Patient A had had a settled evening,
that he was likely to be
discharged, but that Patient A was not to be informed
at the handover were the nurses who were about to commence the HDU day shift
(namely Respondent Dowsett, Respondent Parker
and RN Horton), the NUM of the day
shift (who left as soon as the handover was completed) and nurses from the
neighbouring Al ward.
Respondent Kennedy stayed in the Nurses Station of the
HDU. During the handover, Patient A remained in his room. Because of the HDU
policy that staff were not permitted on the floor of the HDU alone, Respondent
Kennedy was unable to perform any observations of
Patient A during the
is a dispute about when the handover was completed (this will be addressed
further below). It is common ground that as soon
as the handover ended (sometime
between 0717 hours and 0727 hours), RN Horton and Respondent Parker immediately
checked on Patient
A in his room. At this time Patient A was in his bed, facing
the wall. His bedclothes were pulled up. The bed was positioned such
Patient A's feet were facing the door. Respondent Parker and RN Horton looked
through the door, which was slightly ajar. Respondent
Parker could not see the
Patient clearly, but RN Horton told Respondent Parker that he (RN Horton) had
seen Patient A move. On the
basis of the information that he had received
from RN Horton,
Respondent Parker signed the clinical observations chart in the space allocated
for the 0730 observation.
next check of Patient A (again, the time is disputed) was approximately 30
minutes after the check by RN Horton and Respondent
Parker. At that time (which
was between 0744 hours and 0754 hours) Respondent Dowsett checked on Patient A.
He did this by looking
through the viewing window into Patient A's room (because
Respondent Dowsett is tall, he was able to see over the top of the broken
venetian blinds in the viewing window).
Approximately
15 minutes later (that is, between 0800 and 0810 hours), Respondent Dowsett
again checked on Patient A. This time, he
went into Patient A's room. After
approximately 4 - 5 seconds, Respondent Dowsett began to exit the room, but then
went back into
the room again. At this time, Respondent Dowsett realised that
there was a problem with Patient A. He immediately ran to get Respondent
The two nurses rolled Patient A over. Patient A's facial features were darkened
and his eyes were bulging. There was blood
on his pillow. A ligature, made from
the seam of a tom bedsheet, was wound around Patient A's neck. This ligature was
difficult to
see, as it was hidden by large folds of skin in Patient A's neck
area. Respondent Dowsett and Respondent Parker attempted to activate
duress buttons, but these did not activate. The rapid response team ("RRT") was
called from the Nursing Station by Respondent
Dowsett. CPR was commenced by
Respondent Parker. The RRT arrived and immediately attempted to revive Patient
A. Tragically, those
efforts were unsuccessful and Patient A was declared to be
deceased at 0836 hours on 20 February 2013.
SUPPRESSION ORDERS
Chairperson of the Committee made a Suppression Order in relation to the name of
the Patient in accordance with provisions of
Clause 7 of Schedule
the National Law. The name of the Patient is indicated in the schedule annexed
hereto and marked "A" and any infom1ation that may
identify him is not to be
published. Annexure A will only be attached to the original Reasons for Decision
held by the Registry and
must not be reproduced.
complaints allege that the Respondents, being registered nurses under the
National Law,
are guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within
the meaning of s. 139B of the
National Law
in that they (i) engaged in
conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by them
in the practice of nursing is significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
or experience, and/ or (ii) that they engaged in improper or unethical
conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of
the first day of the hearing, the HCCC sought leave to amend each of the
complaints. The proposed amendments were not opposed by
the Respondents, and
leave to amend each complaint was granted by the
Respondent Kennedy
particulars of the amended complaint in respect of the Respondent Kennedy are
"1. The "LA1\1HU High Dependency Service Procedure" (Aug 2011) policy (The
HDU policy) and the "Care Levels within MNCLHN and NNSWLHN
Mental Health
Inpatient Units" NC-AREA-PoL-4493-09 (June 2011) policy (the NSW Health Policy)
required that as a Care Level 2 patient,
Patient A had to be sighted at least
eve1y 30 minutes during the night shift. During the night shift the Practitioner
failed to sight
Patient A at least every 30 minutes in that he only sighted
Patient A, or ensured that Patient A was sighted by another nurse, at
hours on 19 February 2013, 2317 hours on 19 February 2013,
0145 hours on 20 February 2013, 0619 hours on 20 February 2013 and/ or 0629
hours on 20 February 2013, contrary to section 6a of
the HDU policy and the
Appendix 1 of the NSW Health Policy.
NSW Health policy required Patient A to be checked .'for signs of life (eg
respiration) eve1y 30 minutes during the night shift.
During the night shift the
Practitioner failed to check or properly check Patient A for signs of life eve1y
30 minutes including
depth and effort of breathing and skin colour, or ensure
that Patient A was checked for signs of life by another nurse, other than
on 20 February 2013, 0619 hours on 20 February
2013 and/or 0629 hours on 20
February 2013 contrary to section 6.3.5 and Appendix 1 of the NSW Health
Practitioner made an inaccurate entry in Patient A's health record for 0515
hours on 20 February 20 February 2013, indicating
that Patient A was 'observed
to be sleeping on all nursing rounds
in circumstances where the
Practitioner and/or Nurse Thompson had not observed Patient A during all the
nursing rounds and Patient
A was not sleeping throughout the night shift In
doing so, the Practitioner acted contrary to section 2.2(j) and (m), NSW Health
"Health care records
Documentation and Management" PD2012 069 (Dec
Practitioner failed to maintain an adequate standard of documentation in Patient
A 's record during the night shift, or failed
to ensure that Nurse Thompson had
so documented, in that she failed to document a full mental state exam whilst
Patient A was awake.
In doing so, the Practitioner acted contrary to section 8.a
of the HDU policy."
Respondent Thompson
amended particulars of the complaint m respect of the Respondent Thompson
"l. The "LAMHU High Dependency Service Procedure" (Aug 2011) policy (The HDU
policy) and the "Care Levels within MNCLHN and NNSWLHN
Mental Health Inpatient
Units" NC-AREA-PoL-4493-09 (.June 2011) policy (the NSW Health Policy) required
that as a Care Level 2 patient,
Patient A had to he sighted at least eve1y 30
minutes during the night shift. During the night shift the Practitioner failed
Patient A at least every 30 minutes in that he only sighted Patient A,
or ensured that Patient A was sighted by another nurse, at
19 February 2013, 2317 hours on 19 February 2013.
0145 hours on 20 February; 2013, 0619 hours on 20 February 2013 and/ or 0629
hours on 20 February 2013, contrary to section 6a of
the HDU policy and the
Appendix 1 of the NSW Health Policy.
NSW Health policy required Patient A to be checked for signs of life (eg
respiration every 30 minutes during the night shift.
During the night shift the
Practitioner failed to check or properly check Patient A for signs of life eve1y
30 minutes including
depth and effort of breathing and skin colour, or ensure
that Patient A was checked for signs of life by another nurse, other than
2317 hours on 19 February 2
0145 hours on 20 February 2013, 0619 hours on 20 Fehrua1y 2013 and/or 0629 hours
on 20 February 2013 contrary to section 6.3.5
and Appendix 1 of the NSW Health
Practitioner signed the Care Level Observation Chart/or Patient A approximately
every 15 minutes, from 2200 hours on 19 February
2013 up to and
0700 hours on 20 February 2013, in circumstances where (other than at -about
2200 hours on 19 February 2013, 2317 hours on 20 February
2013, 0145 hours on 20
February 2013, 0619 hours on 20 February 2013 and/or 0629 hours on 20 February
2013) the Practitioner had
not performed the Care Level observations of Patient
A documented nor had he confirmed that they had been performed by Nurse Kennedy.
In doing so, the Practitioner acted contrary to section 2.2(j) and (m), NSW
Health "Health care records Documentation and Management
PD 2012_069 (Dec
Practitioner failed to maintain an adequate standard of documentation in Patient
A 's record during the night shift, or failed
to ensure that Nurse Kennedy had
so documented, in that she [ sic] failed to document a full mental state exam
whilst Patient A was
awake. In doing so, the Practitioner acted contrary to
section 8.a of the HDU policy.
Respondent Parker
amended particulars of the complaint in respect of the Respondent Parker are
"1. The "LAMHU High Dependency Service Procedure" (Aug 2011) policy (The HDU
policy) and the "Care Levels within MNCLHN and NNSWLHN
Mental Health Inpatient
Units" NC-AREA-POL-4493-09
(June 2011) policy (the NSW Health Policy)
required that as a Care Level 2 patient, Patient A had to be sighted at least
minutes during the day shift. On 20 February 2013 from
approximately
hours until 0800 hours, the Practitioner failed to sight Patient A at
least every 15 minutes in that he only sighted Patient A, or
ensured that
Patient A was sighted by another nurse, at about 0717 hours on 20 February 2013
and 0744 hours on 20 February 2013,
contrary to section 6a of the HDU policy and
the Appendix 1 of the NSW Health policy.
20 February 2013 from
approximately 0717
hours until 0800 hours, the
Practitioner failed to check or properly check Patient A for signs of life,
including depth and effort
of breathing and skin colour, or ensure that Patient
A was checked for signs of life by another nurse, contrary to section 6.3.5
the NSW Health policy."
Respondent Dowsett
amended particulars in respect of the Respondent Dowsett
"l. The "LAMHU High Dependency Service Procedure" (Aug 2011) policy (The HDU
policy) and the "Care Levels within MNCLHN and NNSWLHN
Mental Health Inpatient
Units" NC-AREA-POL-4493-09 (June 2011) policy (the NSW Health Policy) required
that as a Care Level 2 patient,
Patient A had to be sighted at least every 15
minutes during the day shift. On 20 February 2013 from
approximately 0717
hours until 0800 hours, the Practitioner failed to sight Patient A at least
every 15 minutes in that he only sighted Patient A, or
ensured that Patient A
was sighted by another nurse, at about 0717 hours on 20 February 2013 and 0744
hours on 20 February 2013,
contrary to section 6a of the HDU policy and the
Appendix 1 of the NSW Health policy.
20 February 2013 from
approximately 0717
hours until 0800 hours, the
Practitioner failed to check or properly check Patient A for signs of life,
including depth and eff ort
of breathing and skin colour, or ensure that Patient
A was checked for signs of life by another nurse, contrary to section 6.3.5
the NSW Health policy."
practitioner signed the Care Level Observation Chart for Patient A at 0730 hours
on 20 February 2013, in circumstances where the
Practitioner had not confirmed
that he had sighted Patient A at or around that time. In doing so, the
Practitioner acted contrary
to section 2.2(j), NSW Health care records
Documentation and Management" PD2012 069 (Dec
APPLICABLE LAW
Legislation
139B(l)(a) of the
National Law
provides as follows:
"139B Meaning of "unsatisfactory professional conduct" of registered
health practitioner generally [NSWJ
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
of a registered health
practitioner includes each of the following-
Conduct significantly below reasonable sta11dard
Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of the
practitioner's profession
is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training
or experience.
Other improper or unethical conduct
Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported
practice of the practitioner's profession. "
"significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience"
defined in the
National Law.
However, in
Re A Medical Practitioner and
the Medical Practice Act
(unreported, NSWMT, 3 September 2007), Deputy
Chairperson Judge Freeman stated (in relation to legislation in the same terms
139B of the
National Law)
"As a general principle, the use of the term "significant" may in lm11 be
taken to mean not trivial, of importance, or substantial."
finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct does not require a level of
"criticism"
to be expressed. In
Medical Tribunal of NSW Re: Dr T P
(9 December 1994), the Tribunal stated:
"The important thing is that we hold that evidence of strong disapproval is
not a necessary ingredient of unsatisfactory professional
conduct.... It is here
alleged that the conduct constituting unsatisfact01y conduct is conduct
demonstrating a lack of 'skill, judgment
If the respondent's
conduct does demonstrate such a lack then this Tribunal
rules that it
could be unsatisfactory. If it is further proved to be such a
skill etc as would attract the strong reprobation of peers of good standing,
then it would amount to professional misconduct.
Standard of Proof Required
the standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction is
the civil standard, because of the seriousness
of the allegations and the
gravity of their consequences, the Committee must be
"comfortably satisfied
that the particulars of the Complaint have been established:
Bannister v
(1993) 30 NSW LR 699.
In these matters, the HCCC bears the onus of
[1938'1 HCA 34;
(1938) 60 CLR 3
Dixon J said at 362-363:
"The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. In such matters 'reasonable satisfaction' should not be produced by
inexact proofs,
indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences
does not mean that some standard of persuasion is fixed intermediate between the
satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt required
upon a criminal inquest and the
reasonable satisfaction which in a civil issue may, not must, be based on a
preponderance of probability.
It means that the nature of the issue necessarily
affects the process by which reasonable satisfaction is attained.
principle applies to the quality or sufficiency of the
evidence available, as Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane and Gaudron JJ held in
Holdings Pty v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
"...the strength of the evidence necessary to establish a fact or facts on
the balance of probabilities may vary according to the
nature of what it is
sought to prove. Thus, authoritative statements have often been made to the
effect that clear or cogent or strict
proof is necessary 'where so serious a
matter as fraud is to be found
Statements to that effect should not,
however, be understood as directed to the standard of proof "
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
folders of documents were tendered by the HCCC. These folders included the
complaints, interviews (both with the Respondents
and other hospital personnel),
a DVD containing CCTV footage of the corridor in which Patient A's room was
located in the HDU at
the times in question, a statement relating to that CCTV
footage and relevant policies and procedures. The HCCC's evidence also included
a statement of a peer reviewer, RN Michael Blair, which commented on the
appropriateness of the actions of the Respondents.
folder of documents was tendered on behalf of each of the Respondents (that is,
there were four folders in total). These folders
included statements and
curricula vitae of each of the Respondents, together with character references
and other relevant documents,
such as complaint and performance
addition to the documentary evidence, the Committee also heard oral evidence
from RN Blair (the peer reviewer), Mr Stewart Rollans
(the security officer who
was responsible for the CCTV footage at the time of the incident) and each of
the Respondents.
Relevant Policies
Health Policy
6.3.5 of the NSW Health Policy provides that:
"Periodic monitoring of physical health status including evaluation and
monitoring of vital signs, rate rhythm and effort of breathing,
skin colour,
muscle tone and level of consciousness are essential components of
observation."
1 of the "Care Levels within MNCLHN and NNSWLHN Mental Health Inpatients Units"
NC-AREA-POL-4493-09 (June 2011) ("NSW
Health Policy") provides that a Patient
with Care Level 2 requires
''.frequent observation".
The indications of a
Care Level 2 patient are:
"Patient assessed as
high or moderate risk
for suicide or self harm
Patient is at risk of absconding
Significant risk to patient's risk to patient 's reputation, financial
affairs or sexual safety.
1 of the NSW Health Policy requires that a patient within an HDU be sighted
"at least every 15 minutes until night shift commences when patients must be
sighted at least every 30 minutes until night shift ends."
The Policy also
stated that
"Patient checks for signs of life (eg respiration) maintained
every 30 minutes during the night."
the heading
"General comments",
it is further stated
''periodic monitoring of physical health status including evaluation and
monitoring of vital signs, rate, rhythm, depth and effort
of breathing, skin
colour, muscle tone and level of consciousness are essential components of
observation."
is also stated in Appendix 1 that
"Handover of patients on Care Levels 1
3 must be done in the Unit where patients can be observed and
confidentiality maintained. Staff should always be informed of any notable
change in the patients behavior which may identify an increased risk potential.
6a of the LAMHU High Dependency Service Procedure (Aug 2011 ) policy ("HDU
Policy") provides:
"a Care Levels
Observation is essential in ensuring the physical and emotional safety of the
patient. The purpose of observation is to detect changes
in the mental status,
behaviour and level of engagement to protect the patient from
potential harm to themselves and others, and promote a therapeutic
Staff observation of the HDU will be either observing from the office or
present in the unit itself. When the staff are inside the
HDU, (2) two staff are
required to be present at all times. The HDU ·will be under constant
observation at all times.
The care levels utilised within the HDU are Care level one, two and three,
with care level two being the standard These care
levels are based on risk
assessment, which are conducted on a daily basis by the treatment team
Whilst a patient [is] in HDU, the patient must be sighted and documented
every 15 fifteen minutes on a Care Level 2 form. Visual
observation must be
maintained with privacy taken into consideration ·when the patient is
bathing, changing or attending toilet
facilities. On night shift, the
requirement for constant observation is waived in circumstances where patients
are confirmed to be
sleeping and intermitted
thirty minute
(30) observations will be maintained. Where the patient is awake, then
fifteen minute (15) visual observations are initiated ...
8a of the HDU policy provides:
"a Daily entry
Due to the nature of the patient residing in HDU, it is necessary to document
a full mental state exam whilst awake on every shift
to communicate:
Changes in mental state
Behaviour displayed, including interactions with others and attention
Any physical issues
Issues on a social level
Mental state documentation can be completed either by sticker prompt, or by
direct entry into the notes by free hand
Documentation Policy
2.2(j) of the NSW Health Policy Directive PD 2012_069 "Health Care
Records-Documentation and Management: (21 December 2012)
"Documentation in health care records must comply with the following:
(j) Be accurate statements of clinical interactions between the patient/
client and their significant others, and the health care
to assessment; diagnosis; care planning; management/ care/ treatment/
services provided and response/ outcomes; professional advice
provided; observation taken and results.
(m) distinguish between what was observed or performed, what ·was
reported by others as happening and/or professional opinion.
SUBMISSIONS
HCCC was represented by Mr Shah, solicitor, of the HCCC. The Respondents were
represented by Ms Doust, solicitor. The Committee
was greatly assisted by both
representatives' submissions.
Respondents each made appropriate factual admissions. In the main, the
Respondents admitted the facts alleged in the complaints.
The Respondents also
each stated that they would act differently if confronted with a similar
situation again. However, it was submitted
on behalf of each Respondent that
their conduct did not fall
"significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience.
Areas of Factual Dispute
of the account as to what happened on 19/ 20 February 2013 was common ground. In
particular, there was a deal of common ground
between the HCCC and the
Respondents as to the checks that were done, and the circumstances in which
those checks were made. There
were, however, some areas of factual dispute
between the Respondents and the position of the HCCC. In
particular:
(a) There was dispute as to the timing of the checks during the morning
(b) There was a dispute as to whether the Respondents knew, or should have
known, that (i) Patient A was to be discharged into police
custody on 20
February 2013; and (ii) whether Patient A was aware of this fact.
Committee ultimately does not consider that the resolution of any of the
complaints turns upon the answers to these questions.
Nonetheless, it is
convenient to address these matters which are relevant to the context of the
complaints before turning to a consideration
of the particulars of the
complaints.
Timing of the morning checks
footage of the corridor in the HDU in which Patient A's room was located was in
evidence before the Committee. The CCTV camera
in question responded to changes
in light and movement. (It is clear that the CCTV footage did not record all
movement in the corridor
throughout the shift. It
was explained that
"occasionally movements of shorter duration
be detected, especially if the light source is weak. For instance if the
subject was wearing dark clothing or the space is dark".)
CCTV footage recorded the following as to the timing of the morning
0717 - Two nurses (identified as RN Horton and Respondent Parker) are seen to
briefly stop at Patient A's room (duration two seconds).
0744 - One nurse (identified as Respondent Dowsett) is seen to briefly look
through Patient A's window (duration one second).
0800 - One nurse (identified as Respondent Dowsett) are seen to enter Patient
A's room, return to door, re-enter room, and then leave.
0805 -RRT is seen to enter Patient A's room.
Respondents disputed the accuracy of the time stamp on the CCTV footage. They
explained that, in February 2013, the 7am handover
required an account of each
of the patients in the HDU and the patients in the neighbouring Al ward
(approximately 16 in number).
They said that such an account would take
approximately 1 - 2 minutes per patient. It was also explained that the handover
commenced before 7am, as the staff for the day shift did not arrive until
that time. It was submitted that given these matters, it
would not have been
possible for RN Horton and Respondent Parker to have commenced their rounds by
0717 hours, as was recorded by
the CCTV. Rather, it was suggested that this was
more likely to have occurred at a time up to 0725 hours. It was suggested that
CCTV time stamp was some 5 - 10 minutes early.
Committee also observes that there is a document in the clinical notes which
appears to have been created by the RRT ("the RRT
record"). The RRT record
appears to have been created contemporaneously, in that the times stated on it
are precise. The RRT records
that Patient A was cannulated at 0815 hours.
However, the CCTV footage records the RRT as entering Patient A's room at 0805
As it is unlikely that there was a significant delay in cannulation after
the arrival of the RRT, this document provides some corroboration
Respondents' contention that the CCTV time stamp was early by some 3 - 10
the other hand, the Committee heard oral evidence from Mr Stewart Rollans in
respect of the CCTV footage. Mr Rollans is currently
employed as Acting Senior
Security Officer, at Lismore Base Hospital. He was employed as Acting Security
Officer (Team Leader), Lismore
Base Hospital, in February 2013. Mr Rollans
stated that to the best of his knowledge, the CCTV accurately recorded the time
in February
201 3. However, in cross­ examination, he conceded that he was
not aware of whether the CCTV system had been recently (or ever)
calibrated, or
Committee acknowledges that none of the Respondents could state the duration of
the handover with any certainty. In respect of
all events, the Respondents were
(in Respondent Parker's words)
[rather than]
looking at the
However, the Committee considers that it is extremely unlikely that
the handover of more than 20 patients could be completed within
15 minutes, so
as to leave sufficient time for Respondent Parker and RN Horton to commence the
first nursing round by 0717. In circumstances
where there was no evidence as to
when the CCTV camera had been calibrated (or if it had ever been calibrated),
the Committee considers
that it is likely that the CCTV footage was early by a
period of between 3 and 10 minutes.
outlined below, as it is conceded by both parties that any inaccuracy would be
constant over the periods in question, the accuracy
of the time stamp of the
CCTV is not critical to the determination of any of the
complaints.
Discharge into police custody
57. At the evening handover on 19 February 2013, Respondents Kennedy and
Thompson were told that Patient A was to be discharged once
he had received the
results of an MRI. They were also told that Patient A would be discharged into
police custody. They were instructed
that for Patient A's risk and safety
reasons, they were not to inform Patient A that he would be discharged into
police custody the
following day. Both Respondents Kennedy and Thompson gave
evidence that if they had known that Patient A was aware that he was to
discharged into police custody, they would have escalated his Care Level status
to level 1 (also known as a "special"). Level
1 or "special" status required
constant supervision.
is evidence before this Cornn1ittee that suggests that Patient A was aware that
he was to be discharged into police custody
and that Patient A may have been
aware that this discharge was imminent. In particular, Patient A's solicitor
said that the possibility
of discharge into police custody was
with Patient A.
there was nothing in the clinical notes that definitively stated that Patient A
was aware that he was to be discharged on
20 February 2013. Indeed, the
instructions given in handover that Patient A was not to be informed of the
imminence of his likely
discharge was predicated on Patient A having not been
told of the timing of his discharge. In these circumstances, the most that
be said is that the Respondents should have contemplated that there was a
possibility that Patient A had become aware that his
discharge into police
custody was imminent.
Consideration of the complaints
is now appropriate to turn to a consideration of the complaints. In this
respect, the Committee must first determine whether it
is comfortably satisfied
that each of the factual allegations in the particulars of the complaints have
been proved. If the Committee
is so satisfied, the Committee must then consider
whether the. conduct overall amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct. The Committee can look at all the conduct found proven
either separately or cumulatively when making a determination
as to whether the
conduct amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct:
Duncan v Medical
Disciplinary Committee
[1986] NZCA 465
[1986] 1 NZLR 513
at 545, 546 and 547, cited
HCCC v Rahimpanah
[2014] NSWMPSC 4
Respondent Kennedy
Kennedy obtained a certificate in mental health nursing in 1980, after
completing her training at Cumberland Hospital in
Parramatta. From 1985 until
2008, she was employed in a variety of non-nursing positions. In 2008, she
commenced work as an RN at
Lismore Base Hospital in the LAHMU. She resigned from
this position in February 2015. She now works as a disability support
Particulars 1 and 2: Adequacy of checks over the night shift
Kennedy admitted that she did not sight Patient A every 30 minutes during the
night shift of 19/ 20 February 2013.
Kennedy stated that when she first arrived in the HDU at approximately 2200
hours on 19 February 2013, she saw Patient
A talking to one of the day shift
nurses in the lounge area. Respondent Kennedy said that Patient A's body
language was relaxed and
she had no particular concerns about Patient A's state
of mind. Respondent Kennedy stated that she then saw Patient A a few times
between 2200 hours and 2300 hours, as he got ready for bed. Respondent Kennedy
said that she also saw Patient A at approximately
0200 hours and again at
approximately 0600 hours when he got up to the toilet and have a drink. She
said that on each of these
occasions, she saw Patient A from a distance (from
the Nurse's Station).
Kennedy also stated that she recalled hearing Patient A snore on a number of
occasions when she was outside the Nurse's
Station. This loud snoring reassured
Respondent Kennedy that Patient A was alive and breathing during the
Kennedy stated that it was not her usual practice to rely on snoring as an
adequate check on a patient, even at the time
of the incident in 2013. She
explained that the door to Patient A's room was broken, and that it could not be
opened without 'slamming"
it open and waking the patient. She said that a number
of complaints had been made to management about the broken door, but that
action had been taken by management to fix the door. Respondent Kennedy stated
that the door to Patient A's room was jammed shut
during the night. (It should
be noted that this evidence was inconsistent with the evidence of Respondent
Thompson, who stated that
he was of the view that the door must have been ajar
for them to hear Patient A snoring.)
Kennedy also said that she had experienced patients becoming very aggressive
when they had been woken during the night
by the door slamming open when she
entered to do the nightly checks. This latter evidence was confirmed by
Respondent Thompson, who
gave evidence of a patient who had become particularly
aggressive after she had been woken during the observations the previous
Kennedy stated that, in February 2013, she believed that her observations of
snoring, together with her visual observations
of Patient A when he went to the
toilet, satisfied the relevant NSW Health Policy and the HDU Policy concerning
the level of observations
that were required of the Patient. Respondent Kennedy
accepted that, in this regard, she interpreted the NSW Health Policy
incorrectly.
Before the Committee, she acknowledged that the policy requires a
visual check of the patient, such visual check being sufficient
to determine the
patient's skin colour, rate, rhythm, depth and effort of
summary, Respondent Kennedy admitted that her only checks of Patient A between
1lpm and 6am on 19/ 20 February 2013 were auditory
checks (namely, hearing him
snoring) and a visual check when Patient A went to the toilet at 2am. The
Committee is satisfied that
this is a breach of both the HDU and NSW Health
Policies, each of which requires 30 minute observations during the course of the
night shift.
Committee acknowledges that the failure of hospital management to arrange for
the repair of the door to Patient A's room placed
Respondent Kennedy in an
invidious position: assuming that the door was jammed shut, Respondent Kennedy
was forced to decide between
performing the checks required by the Policies (and
which were necessary to ensure the safety of Patient A); and waking Patient A
every 30 minutes to perform the observations (a course which itself would not be
conducive to Patient A's mental health).
Committee also acknowledges that Respondent Kennedy's misconception about the
quality of observations to be performed during the
night shift is also partly
attributable to a lack of clarity in the Policies. The
"General Comments"
section of Appendix 1 of the NSW Health Policy stated that
monitoring of physical health status including evaluation and monitoring of
vital signs, rate, rhythm, depth and effort
of breathing, skin colour, muscle
tone and level of consciousness are essential components of observation".
However, under the heading "Description of observation", it was said that
"Patient checks for signs of life (eg respiration) maintained every 30
minutes during the night."
The Committee considers that the distinction
"checking for signs of life "
in the night time checks as opposed
"observations"
was apt to create confusion, and may have suggested
that auditory observations were sufficient, at least for the 30 minute night
Nonetheless,
the Committee considers that, even taking into account the difficulties with
Patient A's door, a period of effectively
7 hours where the only visual
observation of Patient A was a single observation of him travelling from his
room to the toilet is
insufficient, particularly in view of the policies which
required 30 minute observations.
it was open to Respondent Kennedy to discuss with Patient A the prospect of
leaving the door slightly ajar (a course which
Respondent Thompson believed had
in fact occurred), or the prospect of moving Patient A to another room where
proper observations
could occur. It is also significant that although Respondent
Kennedy stated that observations had been made of Patient A, those observations
were not made during clinical rounds, but were rather "ad hoc" observations that
were made whilst Respondent Kennedy was attending
to other tasks. In those
circumstances, the Committee is of the view that both the frequency (Particular
1) and the quality (Particular
2) of Respondent Kennedy's observations from 2300
hours until 0600 hours were deficient. As RN Blair stated, the purpose of 30
observations is essential to ensure the wellbeing of a potentially
suicidal patient. By limiting the observations to "ad hoc" observations
snoring and his visits to the toilet, Respondent Kennedy did not ensure the
wellbeing of a suicidal patient.
view of the above, the Committee finds that the conduct of Respondent Kennedy
was significantly below the standard reasonably expected
of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience, and amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Accordingly, the Committee is comfortably satisfied
that Particulars 1 and 2 are proved and that those particulars amount to
unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 3: Failure to record observations
Kennedy's only entry in the clinical notes was at 0515 on 20 February 2013, when
she recorded:
[Patient A]
observed to be sleeping on all nursing
Kennedy explained that the statement that she had
that Patient
"sleeping on all nursing rounds"
was a reference to Patient A's
snoring, which she had heard at various times during the
Kennedy admitted that she did not record in the clinical notes that she observed
Patient A getting up to go to the toilet
during the night. Respondent Kennedy
explained that because she did not interact with Patient A when he went to the
toilet, she did
not consider that it was necessary to document that this had
occurred. The note was also deficient in that if Respondent Kennedy's
"nursing rounds"
is to be read as a reference to her general
observations during the course of the night shift, the 0515 hours entry does not
to Patient A being awake in the lounge and readying himself for bed over
the period from 2200 hours to 2300 hours on 19 February
is no doubt that the clinical note entered by Respondent Kennedy could have been
much clearer. The reference to Patient A being
"observer!'
to be sleeping
"nursing rounds"
conveys the impression that Respondent Kennedy
had visually observed Patient A to be sleeping during formal observations. Her
was not thorough and it should have been more
detailed. However, in circumstances where Patient A had been readying himself
for bed at the commencement of the shift, and where
his trips to the toilet did
not represent full wakefulness, the Committee is of the view that Respondent
Kennedy's failure to make
a more thorough entry in the Clinical Notes
not constitute unsatisfactory professional conduct. Accordingly, the Committee
finds that Particular 3 is not proved.
Particular 4: Failure to document a full mental state exam
8a of the HDU Policy requires the documentation of a full mental state exam
"whilst awake on every shift"
in order to communicate changes in mental
state, behaviour displayed, physical and social issues. However, there was no
mental state
exam documented in respect of Patient A from (at least) 1100 hours
on 19 February 2013 until the time of his death after 0800 hours
on 20 February
Kennedy admits that she did not document a "full mental state exam" on Patient A
at all during the night shift of 19/ 20
February 2013. Respondent Kennedy
explained that Patient A was awake and getting ready for bed when she commenced
the night shift.
At the beginning of her shift, she observed Patient A speaking
to another nurse (from the evening shift). She said that she observed
to be in good spirits (talking and laughing), and was informed at handover that
Patient A had not expressed suicidal ideation
and was settled. In these
circumstances, Respondent Kennedy did not consider that a mental state exam was
required. Respondent Kennedy
also stated that she considered that it would not
be in Patient A's best interests to be subjected to a full mental state exam
before he went to sleep.
Kennedy also stated that whilst Patient A did get up to go to the toilet on a
number of occasions during the shift, he
immediately went back to bed and to
sleep. She said that she saw no behavior of concern that would prompt her to
wake Patient A to
perform a full mental state exam.
is entirely unsatisfactory that a suicidal patient, who was scheduled for
discharge in the near future had not been subject to
a full mental state
examination for period approaching almost 24 hours (and potentially longer).
However, Respondent Kennedy had
satisfied herself as a result of the information
provided in handover and as a result of the information contained in the
notes that Patient A's risk of harm was not critical. As outlined below
in respect of Respondent Thompson, the information provided
during handover of a
sufficient detail for her to infer that a mental state exam had been conducted.
In addition, the Committee accepts
that there were good reasons not to perform a
mental state exam immediately before Patient A's retirement to bed. Questioning
immediately before they went to bed would not be conducive to the
patient's sleep. In these circumstances, the Committee considers
failure of Respondent Kennedy to perform a mental state examination during the
course of the evening shift
does not constitute unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Accordingly, the Committee finds Particular 3 not
Respondent Thompson
Thompson obtained a Certificate in Psychiatric Nursing after completing training
at Rydalmere Psychiatric Hospital. Respondent
Thompson obtained his registration
to practice as a psychiatric nurse in 1979. He worked as a psychiatric nurse at
Rydalmere Psychiatric
Hospital from 1981 to 1987 he was employed at Morrisset
Hospital. Respondent Thompson commenced employment at Lismore Base Hospital
Registered Nurse. He has worked in the High Dependency Unit ("HDU") of the
Lismore Adult Mental Health Unit ("LAHMU") since
its completion in
Particulars 1 and 2: Adequacy of checks
Thompson admitted that he did not sight Patient A every 30 minutes during the
shift. He says that he saw Patient A going
to the toilet on approximately four
occasions. He also recalled hearing Patient A snore while he was outside the
Nurses Station.
Respondent Thompson said that because of his experience with a
near assault the night before, he was very cautious about disturbing/
patients while they were asleep. Indeed, he said that he did not perform any
observations of any patients in their rooms on
the evening of 19/ 20 February
Thompson stated that, at the time of the incident, he thought that it was
sufficient to make auditory observations. Respondent
Thompson accepts that he
interpreted the NSW Health Policy incorrectly in this
outlined above, the Committee acknowledges that the Policies were apt to create
a degree of confusion in respect of the quality
of observations that were to be
undertaken at night. Nonetheless, the Committee considers that, even taking into
account the difficulties
with Patient A's door, a period of effectively 7 hours
where the only visual observation of Patient A was a single observation of
travelling from his room to the toilet is insufficient, particularly in view of
the policies which required 30 minute observations.
noted above, it is also significant that the observations that were made of
Patient A were "ad hoc" observations that were made
whilst Respondent Kennedy
and Respondent Thompson were attending to other tasks. In those circumstances,
the Committee is of the
view that both the frequency (Particular 1) and the
quality (Particular 2) of Respondent Thompson's observations from 2300 hours
until 0600 hours were deficient.
view of the above, the Committee finds that the conduct of Respondent Kennedy
was significantly below the standard reasonably expected
of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience, and amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Accordingly, the Committee is comfortably satisfied
that Particulars l and 2 are proved and that those particulars amount to
unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 3: Incorrect completion of Care Level Observation Chart
Thompson initialed the Care Level Observation Chart for Patient A approximately
every 15 minutes from 2200 hours on 19
February 2013 up to 0700 hours on 20
February 2013.
outlined above, Respondent Thompson admitted that apart from seeing Patient A
get up to go to the toilet during the night, he did
not visually observe Patient
A at all between the hours of 2300 hours on 19 February 2013 and 0600 hours on
20 February 2013. Rather,
he said that he would have backfilled the entries each
time he saw Patient A get up to the toilet.
Thompson said that it
"was not uncommon for a round to be missed and back
filled ·when we were busy providing individual care to patients."
said that there was
"never any intention to deliberately
Thompson said that in February 2013, his understanding of the purpose of the
Care Level Observation Chart was to document
that the patient was alive at a
particular point of time. He said that if he had observed a patient to be alive
at, say 4am, it followed
that the patient was alive at 3:45am, 3:30am and 3:
15am. In these circumstances, he thought that it was acceptable to "backfill"
the entries for 3:45am, 3:30am, and 3:15am, even though he had not sighted the
patient at these times. Respondent Thompson said that
he thought that other
nurses within the HDU adopted a similar practice, but added that he did not
think that management were aware
of this practice.
addition to "backfilling" on the night/ morning in question, Respondent Thompson
also initialed the Care Level Observation Chart
for 0700 hours on 20 February
2013. He acknowledged that he had not observed Patient A since approximately
0630 hours on that day,
and that it was inappropriate for him to initial the
0700 entry in those circumstances.
Thompson presented as an honest and frank witness. In his evidence, he made
appropriate concessions, many of which were
against his interests. The Committee
accepts that Respondent Thompson did not intend to mislead or deceive when he
backfilled the
Care Level Observation Chart. It must also be acknowledged that
the Chart itself encouraged a degree of backward or forward filling,
prescribed entries on the half hour during the night
Nonetheless,
the Committee considers that, as an experienced nurse, Respondent Thompson
should have appreciated the importance of
accurate documentation and should have
understood that it was not appropriate to "backfill" the Care Level Observation
Chart to include
entries for times that he had not in fact observed a patient.
The Committee further considers that the entry for 0700 hours had a
capacity to mislead, as it would be read as indicating that Respondent Thompson
had in fact observed Patient A to be alive
when Respondent Thompson's last
observation was made shortly after 0630 hours.
peer reviewer, RN Blair, was strongly critical of the Respondent's failure to
maintain accurate records of his observations. The
Committee finds that the
conduct of the Respondent is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience, and
amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Accordingly, this Committee
is comfortably satisfied that the Particular
proved and that
it amounts to unsatisfactory professional
Particular 4: Full mental state health exam
Sa of the HDU Policy requires the documentation of a full mental state exam
[the Patient was]
awake on every shift "
in order to
communicate changes in mental state, behaviour displayed, physical and social
outlined above, it is entirely unsatisfactory that a suicidal patient, who was
scheduled for discharge in the near future had not
been subject to a full mental
state examination since (at least) 1100 hours on 19 February. However, the HDU
Policy only requires
the completion of a mental state exam whilst the patient is
awake. It was accepted by the HCCC that it was not necessary or appropriate
Respondent Thompson to wake Respondent Thompson in order to perform the mental
state exam. Accordingly, it is necessary to consider
the opportunities that
Respondent Thompson had to perform a mental state exam on the night shift whilst
Patient A was awake.
A was awake between 2200 hours and 2300 hours, albeit in the preparation of
retiring to bed. Respondent Thompson accepted
that, with the benefit of
hindsight, this period was a time when he could have performed a mental state
exam on Patient A. Respondent
Thompson acknowledged that he could have made
some of the observations required for the examination without speaking to
but also said that Patient A would have been required to answer some
questions in the course of the assessment. After 2300 hours,
Patient A was, to
Respondent Thompson's knowledge, asleep (apart from some trips to the
particular can only be made out if Respondent Thompson should have performed the
mental state exam between 2200 hours and 2300
hours. In this respect, the
Committee considers that the handover was sufficiently detailed for Respondent
Thompson to infer that
a mental state examination had been performed during the
evening shift.
course, a perusal of the Clinical Notes would have revealed that if a mental
state exam had been performed, it had not been documented.
Respondent Thompson
had not read the Clinical Notes prior to Patient A retiring to bed at 2300
hours. Of concern, Respondent Thompson
said that, in February 2013, he may not
have read the Clinical Notes at all during the shift, but may have relied on
what was told
to him by other nurses (this is a practice which he said that he
has now changed). Nonetheless, the Committee does not consider
that it was
incumbent on Respondent Thompson to read the Clinical Notes of
of the patients in the HDU in the first hour of his shift. In these
circumstances, the Committee accepts that Respondent Thompson
was not required
to perform a mental state exam between 2200 hours and 2300 hours on the evening
of 19 February 2013.
addition, the Committee accepts that there were good reasons not to perform a
mental state exam immediately before Patient A's
retirement to bed. Questioning
a patient immediately before they went to bed would not be conducive to the
patient's sleep. In these
circumstances, the Committee considers that the
failure of Respondent Kennedy to perform a mental state examination during the
of the evening shift
does not constitute unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Accordingly, the Committee finds that Particular 4 is not
Respondent Parker
1975, Respondent Parker obtained his certificate in psychiatric nursing after
completing training at Larundel Psychiatric Hospital
in Melbourne. Respondent
Parker was first registered as nurse in 1986. Respondent Parker has worked in a
variety of mental health
settings and in aged care. In 2006, he was authorised
as a Mental Health Practitioner in Queensland. Respondent Parker completed
Masters in Forensic Mental Health at Griffith University in
2008, Respondent Parker commenced employment at Lismore Base Hospital in the
LAHMU where he worked as an RN and Clinical Nurse
Specialist until June 2014. In
2014, Respondent Parker was re-authorised as a Mental Health Practitioner while
he was working as
a clinical nurse in community mental health (a rural setting
for the Roma Mental Health Service, which is a part of the South West
and Health Service in Queensland). He has recently moved to Darwin, where he is
employed on a contract as a mental health
Particulars 1 and 2: Adequacy of checks during the day
Parker commenced the day shift at 0700 hours on 20 February 2013. Immediately
after the conclusion of the handover, Respondent
Parker checked on Patient A
with RN Horton. Following this check, Respondent Parker went and made toast for
the patients' breakfast.
Respondent Parker had no further contact with Patient A
until he was alerted to Patient A's condition shortly after 0800
CCTV footage records the check by RN Horton and Respondent Parker as occurring
at 0717 hours. As outlined above, the Committee
is of the view that the time
stamp of the CCTV footage was early. However, nothing turns on this for the
purposes of the determination
of this aspect of the complaint. Whether the CCTV
was accurate, or early, it is clear that after Patient ·A was checked by
Parker and RN Horton, he was not checked again for a further 26
minutes (the next recorded check being that of Respondent Dowsett,
recorded on the CCTV at 0744 hours).
to Particular 1
: Mr Shah explained that Particular 1 of this complaint
relates to the failure of Respondent Parker to check Patient A during the
minute period between his check (recorded as 0717) and Respondent Dowsett's
check (recorded as 0744). Both the HDU policy and
the NSW Health policy required
that a nurse check - or ensure that another nurse had checked - each Category 2
patient every 15 minutes
during the day.
the Committee observes that the delay in question here - of 27 minutes, rather
than 15 minutes - was not overly lengthy.
Moreover, at the time that the check
was due to be performed, Respondent Parker was occupied cooking toast for the
patients. There
were other nurses on the ward (Respondents Dowsett and RN
Horton) who were able to do the check. As the Hospital's Root Cause Analysis
observed the "team care model" adopted by the HDU at that time did not place
responsibility for checking a particular patient on
any particular staff member.
In these circumstances, the Committee considers that Respondent Parker's failure
to ensure that Patient
A was checked between the times recorded on the CCTV as
0717 hours and 0744 hours
does not amount to unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Accordingly the Committee finds that Particular 1 is not
to Particular 2
, Mr Shah clarified that Particular 2 of this complaint
relates to the adequacy of the check that Respondent Parker performed with
Horton (recorded on the CCTV at 0717 hours).
this respect, Respondent Parker admits that he did not personally observe
Patient A to be alive when he checked on him with RN
Horton. RN Horton stepped
into Patient A's room, while Respondent Parker remained outside the room. RN
Horton did not proceed very
far into the room. Patient A's room was somewhat
dark (indeed, Respondent Horton acknowledged that he
''probably did need a
torch at this time").
Patient A was facing the wall, with his feet towards
the door. He had his bedclothes up around his face. Respondent Parker asked if
the patient was breathing. RN Horton replied
"his foot moved so its alright"
(in evidence before this Committee, Respondent Parker stated that RN Horton
may not have specifically referred to Patient A's foot).
Although Respondent
Parker had not seen the movement himself, he relied on the information provided
by RN Horton, and initialed the
Care Level Observation Checklist in the 0715
Parker said that he now understands that this was not good practice. In
particular, Respondent Parker said that he would
now only initial the care level
check list if he had sighted the patient himself. Respondent Parker also
accepted that he should
not have initialed the Care Level Checklist in the 0715
space when the check occurred closer to 0730 hours.
NSW Health Policy and the HDU Policy each required that visual observations be
made of Care Level 2 patients every 15 minutes
during the day. Although Patient
A was due to be discharged on 20 February 2013, his risk factors for suicide had
not decreased during
his hospitalisation. As Mr Shah submitted, Patient A had
"committed a serious crime for which he was
deeply embarrassed resulting in an attempt at suicide,
prospect of a public trial and police custody
a risk to himself
the closer he reached to his discharge."
In short, there was no basis to
decrease the frequency or level of observations: Patient A remained a real risk
to himself at all
times during his hospitalisation, and given that Patient A
was to be discharged into police custody, it was arguable that he was
risk the closer he came to discharge.
those circumstances, the Committee is of the view that the observation of
Patient A conducted by Respondent Parker was inadequate.
Respondent Parker had
been present when RN Horton had checked on Patient A. He knew that the room was
not well lit and that RN Horton
had not entered the room far enough to view
Patient A's face or respiration. In these circumstances, the information
provided by
RN Horton, namely, that he had seen Patient A's leg moving, was not
a sufficient basis upon which to conclude the observation of
Committee finds that the conduct of Respondent Parker was significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner
of an equivalent level of
training or experience, and amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Accordingly, this Committee is comfortably satisfied that Particular 2 is
proved and that it amounts to unsatisfactory professional
Respondent Dowsett
Dowsett was the most junior of the nurses who are the subject of these
complaints. In November 2009, Respondent Dowsett
completed a Bachelor of Nursing
at Southern Cross University Lismore. From March 2010 to June 2010, he worked a
four month graduate
rotation at LAMHU. From June 2010 until October 2010, he
worked a new graduate rotation at Lismore Base Hospital in the Surgical
October 2010, he commenced a new graduate rotation at Ballina Rehabilitation.
From February 2011 until September 2011, he
was employed as a casual nurse at
LAHMU. From September 2011, he was employed in a permanent part-time position at
Particulars 1 and 2: Adequacy of the morning checks
Dowsett was on the morning shift on 20 February 2013. He was present in the
handover, which commenced at approximately
0700 hours. As outlined above,
immediately after this handover, RN Horton and Respondent Parker checked on
Dowsett performed the next check of Patient A alone. The CCTV footage records
this check as occurring at 0744 hours. As
outlined above, the Committee is of
the view that the CCTV time stamp is likely to be early by some 3 - 10 minutes.
However, nothing
turns on this for the purposes of this complaint.
time of his first observation (recorded as being at 0717 hours), Respondent
Dowsett checked on Patient A by looking through the
viewing window of Room 5. As
noted above, Respondent Dowsett is a tall man, and he explained that he was able
see over the broken
venetian louvres in the viewing window. The CCTV footage
records Respondent Dowsett looking through the window for approximately
second before moving on.
Approximately
15 minutes later (the CCTV footage records this as occurring at 0800 hours),
Respondent Dowsett again checked on Patient
A. The CCTV footage shows Respondent
Dowsett entering Patient A's room, then appearing to begin to exit, before
proceeding back into
the room again. It was at this time that Respondent Dowsett
discovered that Patient A was unconscious and not
: As with Respondent Parker, Particular 1 relates to the frequency of the
checks undertaken by Respondent Dowsett on the morning of
20 February 2013.
Specifically, this particular relates to the failure of Respondent Dowsett to
check Patient A during the 26 minute
period between the check by Respondent
Parker and RN Horton (recorded at 0717 hours) and Respondent Dowsett's first
check (recorded
at 0744 hours). As outlined above, both the HDU policy and the
NSW Health policy required that a nurse check - or ensure that another
checked - each Category 2 patient every 15 minutes during the
the Committee observes that the delay in question here - of 27 minutes, rather
than 15 minutes - was not overly lengthy. There
was another nurse on the ward
(RN Horton) who was able to do the check. In these circumstances, the Committee
finds that Respondent
Dowsett' s failure to ensure that Patient A was checked
between the times recorded on the CCTV as 0717 hours and 0744 hours
amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct. Accordingly the Committee finds
that Particular 1 is not proved.
relates to the adequacy of Respondent Dowsett's first check. As outlined
above, Respondent Dowsett's first check consisted of him
looking through the top
of the broken venetian louvre in the viewing window for a period of one second
or so. Respondent Dowsett
did not have any recollection of what he saw when he
looked through the viewing window in his first check of Patient A. Respondent
Dowsett explained that his later memory of finding Patient A to be unconscious
had subsumed his previous memory of what he had seen
at the first check.
Respondent Dowsett said that his practice at the time was only to move on when
he was satisfied that he had seen
or heard signs of life, such as rolling over
or coughing. However, he said that he could not now recall what had satisfied
Patient A was alive at the time that he moved on. He acknowledged that
his checking at that time did not involve observing a patient's
depth and effort
of breathing and skin colour.
an interview some three months after the incident in question, Respondent
Dowsett was asked about his memory of the 0744 observation.
He said that his
fairly hazy",
but added that
"from memory, Patient A
lying facing the wall
[away from the door]". He said that he could see
Patient A's cheek. Respondent Dowsett also added that Patient A was
obviously dead".
On behalf of the HCCC, Mr Shah submitted that this account
given by Respondent Dowsett in the interview was more reliable than his
before the Committee, the interview being the closest in time to the incidents
in question. Respondent Dowsett gave evidence
that he had been under acute
stress at the time that he was interviewed. He said that he thought that he may
have been remembering
Patient A's position at the 0800 observation. Ms Doust
submitted that Respondent Dowsett's answers in the interview should be given
little weight.
Shah also submitted that Respondent Dowsett's initial check at or after 0800
hours was also
"evidence of the respondent's poor practice'',
although Patient A's skin was by that time dark, and he was not breathing,
Respondent Dowsett initially began to walk out
of the door, before returning to
check a second time.
Committee considers that the first check of Patient A performed by Respondent
Dowsett was seriously deficient. His observation
was through the top of a
viewing window into a semi-darkened room, where the patient was facing away from
him. The check was very
short in duration - less than 'a second. Even if
Respondent Dowsett had been reassured by a movement of Patient A (and any
of movement is at this stage only speculative), the Committee considers
that an observation of one second of movement under the conditions
described is
not sufficient.
Committee finds that the conduct of Respondent Dowsett was significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner
of an equivalent level of
training or experience, and amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Accordingly, this Committee is comfortably satisfied that the Particular 2 is
proved and that it amounts to unsatisfactory professional
Particular 3
Dowsett initialed the Care Level Observation Chart in the spaces for 0730 hours
and 0745 hours on 20 February 2013. Respondent
Dowsett explained that these
entries related to his observations of Patient A at or after 0745 hours and at
or after 0800 hours.
He said that he could not now recall exactly when he made
those entries. He said that he thought that he would have made the 0730
entry shortly after his first observation (which occurred after 0745 hours). He
said that he would have made the 0745 hours
entry after he found Patient A to be
deceased at 0800 hours.
entries in the Care Level Observation Chart by Respondent Dowsett were
inaccurate. Accurate documentation in respect of Care Level
Observations for
suicidal patients is important for the wellbeing of those
Committee finds that the conduct of Respondent Dowsett was significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner
equivalent level of training or experience, and amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct. Accordingly, this Committee is
comfortably satisfied
that the Particular 3 is proved and that it amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
ONE STAGE PROCESS
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[201 1] NSWCA 3
Court of Appeal (per Handley AJA and McColl JA) determined that the Medical
Tribunal breached its duty of procedural
fairness by ordering deregistration
without giving the appellant the opportunity to adduce evidence and make
submissions on the appropriate
orders consequential on the Tribunal's findings
(see at paras [202]-[205]). However, in
Sudath v Health Care Complaints
[2012] NSWCA 171
, Basten JA explained that
whether there is a need for a separate hearing will depend upon the nature of
the complaint and the circumstances
of the particular complaint under
consideration.
the HCCC and the Respondents accepted that a
"one stage process"
liability and consequential orders (if appropriate) are considered together
would be appropriate in the circumstances of
this case. In circumstances such as
these, where there are significant concessions made on behalf of the
practitioner and the practitioner
does not suggest that there would be any
disadvantage in adopting a one stage process, the Committee is of the view that
a one stage
process is appropriate.
these reasons, the Chairperson indicated to the parties on the first day of the
hearing that a one stage process would be adopted.
Accordingly, evidence was
elicited by both parties in respect of both liability and the appropriate orders
to be made in the event
that liability was established. Submissions were also
made both as to liability and to the appropriate orders to be made in the event
that liability was established.
outlined above, the Committee is of the view that each of the Respondents are
guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within
the meaning of s.
139B(l)(a) of the
National Law.
Accordingly, it is appropriate to now
consider the orders that should be made with respect to
CONSEQUENTIAL ORDERS
General principles
[2014] NSWCA 307
, Meagher JA held (at
"The objective of protecting the health and safety of the public is not
confined to protecting the patients or potential patients
of a particular
practitioner from the continuing risk of his or her malpractice or incompetence.
It includes protecting the public
from the similar misconduct or incompetence of
other practitioners and upholding public confidence in the profession. That
is achieved by setting and maintaining those standards· and,
where appropriate, by cancelling the
registration of practitioners who are not competent or otherwise not fit to
practices, including those who have been guilty of serious
misconduct.
Denouncing such misconduct operates both as a deterrent to the individual
concerned, as well as to the general body of
practitioners.
was noteworthy that each of the Respondents has proactively engaged in education
and improvement since the events in question.
They have each identified the
areas in which their prior practice was deficient, and have each directed
education specifically towards
rectifying these deficiencies. The HCCC has not
submitted that it is necessary for the Respondents to undertake education
specifically
directed at matters such as suicide risk assessment and
documentation. In view of the education which the Respondents have proactively
completed, the Committee also agrees that further education in these respects is
not necessary to protect the public interest.
Education/ Mentoring
HCCC submitted that, in the event that unsatisfactory professional conduct was
established, it would be appropriate for this Committee
to order that Respondent
Thompson and Respondent Parker each complete the one day Master Class on
Leadership run by the Australian
College of Nursing. This was not opposed by
either Respondent. The Committee considers that it would be appropriate for the
of the public for Respondents Parker and Thompson to complete a
course in leadership. However, the Committee considers that a more
course in leadership would be the
"Nurses as Leaders"
course run by
Ausmed Education. In the event of there being any impediment to the completion
of this course, either Respondent may
identify another suitable course in
leadership, subject to the approval of the Nursing and Midwifery
HCCC also submitted that it would be appropriate for Respondent Kennedy and
Respondent Dowsett to undergo mentoring. This was
not opposed by either
Respondent Kennedy or Respondent Dowsett. The Committee agrees that mentoring
would be appropriate for the
protection of the public.
the HCCC further submitted that each Respondent should be reprimanded. It was
submitted on behalf of the Respondents that
a reprimand was unnecessary and that
a caution would suffice.
Reprimand/ Caution
reprimand differs from a caution in that a reprimand is an
"official rebuke
for past wrong/id conduct, ·whereas a caution is a reminder to take care in
the future and avoid repetition":
Psychologists Board of Australia v Coleman
(Review and Regulation)
[2013] VCAT 738.
respect of the allegations of failing to adequately check, the Committee
observes that the conduct of the Respondents had the potential
to seriously
jeopardise the safety of a vulnerable mentally ill patient. However,
Committee also observes the following matters:
(a) In respect of Respondent Kennedy, it is observed that the failure was not a
complete failure to check Patient A, as she observed
him snoring over the course
of the night shift and also observed him attending the toilet on a number of
occasions. In respect of
Respondents Dowsett and Parker, it is observed that the
failure to adequately check was on a single occasion;
(b) In respect of the failure of Respondent Dowsett to accurately complete the
Care Level Observation Chart, the Committee observes
that the entries in
question covered a period that was limited in duration (less than half an hour).
Moreover, it is likely that
the 0745 entry was completed after the death of
Patient A, which was an extremely stressful occasion for the Respondent. The
also notes that Respondent Dowsett was a relatively inexperienced
nurse at that time;
(c) In addition, the Committee considers that there was a degree of confusion in
the Policies as to whether direct visual observations
were required at night or
whether it was sufficient to confirm through observations (whether visual or
aural) that the Patient
was breathing;
(d) Each of the Respondents provided character references, which attested to
the Respondents' professional skill and judgment.
Respondent Dowsett was
described as an
"Extremely good nurse who deals astutely with crisis
management and displays leadership qualities above and beyond his years
experience."
Respondent Parker has been singled out for
"his level of
skill and work in the High Dependency Unit and his professionalism and
knowledge."
Respondent Thompson was described as
"Knowledgeable,
professional and caring"
"respectful team player".
Kennedy was described as a
"kind, caring and considerate person"
"high personal, ethical and professional standards."
(e) The Committee also observes that a number of the Respondents have
demonstrated initiative in improving patient safety and care,
both before and
after the incident in question. For example, before the incident, Respondent
Parker identified that there was a need
for non-tear linen in the HDU and
initiated the purchase of such tear proof linen. Regrettably, whilst the tear
proof linen was been
purchased, it had not been distributed to the HDU at the
time of Patient A's death. Similarly, Respondent Dowsett has taken on the
responsibility not only of educating himself, but also ensuring that his
colleagues are informed of what he has learnt, both in respect
of the issues
giving rise to this incident, and also in the area surrounding diabetes falls
and management.
(t) Finally, the Respondents have also each given evidence as to the profound
effect that the death of Patient A has had on them,
and the way in which his
death has caused them to reflect upon and improve their practices. It is
significant that each Respondent
has undertaken proactive step to identify
deficiencies in their knowledge relating to this incident and to
remedy those deficiencies with education: see similarly
Venneri, Dr James
[2014] NSWMPSC 15
view of the above matters, this Committee is of the view it is appropriate to
caution rather than reprimand Respondents Kennedy,
Dowsett and
the Committee considers that Respondent Thompson is in a different position to
the other Respondents. In addition to his
failure to adequately observe Patient
A during the course of the night shift, Respondent Thompson both backfilled the
Observation Chart, and filled in an entry for 0700 hours, when he had
last observed Patient A at approximately 0630 hours. Respondent
Thompson is an
experienced nurse, and he should have been aware of the inappropriateness of
this conduct. The Committee considers
that there is a particular need for
denunciation and deterrence in respect of this conduct. For this reason, this
Committee is of
the view that it is appropriate for Respondent Thompson to be
reprimanded.
THE COMMITTEE ORDERS:
Respondent Kennedy
(1) The Practitioner is cautioned.
(2) The Practitioner is to inform the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW ("the
Council") at least 30 days before returning to work
as a mental health
(3) If the Practitioner returns to work as a mental health nurse, she is to
establish a mentoring relationship as approved by the
Council. The mentoring is
to be undertaken with the following arrangements:
(a) The mentoring is to be undertaken by a Council approved senior Registered
Nurse (Mentor).
(b) The Practitioner is to write to the Council within 30 days of the date of
her return to practice as a mental health care nurse
providing the name of a
senior RN who has indicated a willingness to act as a Mentor in accordance with
this Mentoring Order, together
with a copy of the proposed Mentor's curriculum
vitae and contact details for the proposed Mentor;
(c) Within 28 days of receipt of the written approval by the Council of the
Mentor, the Practitioner is to provide written confirmation
to the Council that
she has undertaken an initial meeting with the Mentor and agreed on a plan for
the mentoring (Mentoring Plan).
The Practitioner is to forward a copy of the
Mentoring Plan to the Council along with a copy of a written authority and
to the Mentor to provide reports to the Council as outlined in (d)
(d) The Practitioner is to authorise and direct the Mentor in writing to provide
written reports to the Council on a third monthly
basis detailing the issues
addressed during mentoring, progress made by the Practitioner and advising of
any concerns relating to her practice;
(e) The Practitioner is to provide written reports to the Council on a third
monthly basis detailing the activities undertaken during
the mentoring
progress with the Mentor, the issues addressed during mentoring as well as a
self-reflection on the progress made
by the Practitioner during this mentoring
(f) The Practitioner is to participate in mentoring activities with the Mentor
for a minimum of two hours every month and thereafter
as determined by the
Mentor and the Council. The contact is to include some face to face (or Skype)
While the focus of the mentoring is to address
the deficits in the Practitioner's practice identified in the Reasons for
it may also be extended to discuss work related issues and appropriate
continuing professional development.
(g) If the Mentor is unwilling or unable to continue in the role of Mentor the
Practitioner is to advise the Council immediately
she becomes aware of same and
the process of requesting the Council's approval of another Mentor must be
undertaken by the Practitioner
in accordance with this Mentoring Order.
(h) The Practitioner is to meet all costs associated with compliance with this
Mentoring Order.
(3) The Practitioner is responsible for the costs associated with complying with
the conditions.
(4) The Council is the appropriate body for the purposes of ss 163 - 163C of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
("National Law ")
when the registrant's principal place of practice is in New South
(5) Section 125 - 127 of the
National Law
are to apply should the
registrant's principal place of practice be anywhere in Australia other than in
New South Wales, so that the
appropriate review body in those circumstances is
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of Australia.
Respondent Parker
(1) The Practitioner is cautioned.
(2) The Practitioner is subject to the following conditions on his
registration:
(a) The Practitioner must successfully complete, within 12 months from the date
of these Orders, or such other time as the Nursing
and Midwifery Council ("the
Council") approve, the
"Nurses as Leaders"
course run by Ausmed Education
or a similar course as approved by the Council ("the course"); and
(b) The Practitioner must provide written evidence to the Council of
successful completion of the course outlined in this condition within one month
of completion of the course.
(3) The Practitioner is responsible for the costs associated with complying with
the conditions.
(4) The Council is the appropriate body for the purposes of ss 163 -163C of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
("National Law")
when the registrant's principal place of practice is in New South Wales.
(5) Section 125 - 127 of the
National Law
are to apply should the
registrant's principal place of practice be anywhere in Australia other than in
New South Wales, so that the
appropriate review body in those circumstances is
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of Australia.
Respondent Dowsett
(1) The Practitioner is cautioned.
(2) The Practitioner is to inform the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW ("the
Council") at least 30 days before returning to work
as a mental health
(3) The Practitioner is to establish a mentoring relationship as approved by the
Council. The mentoring is to be undertaken with
the following arrangements:
(a) The mentoring is to be undertaken by a Council approved senior Registered
Nurse (Mentor).
(b) The Practitioner is to write to the Council within 30 days of the date of
his return to practice as a mental health care nurse
providing the name of a
senior RN who has indicated a willingness to act as a Mentor in accordance with
this Mentoring Order, together
with a copy of the proposed Mentor's curriculum
vitae and contact details for the proposed Mentor;
(c) Within 28 days of receipt of the written approval by the Council of the
Mentor, the Practitioner is to provide written confirmation
to the Council that
he has undertaken an initial meeting with the Mentor and agreed on a plan for
the mentoring (Mentoring Plan).
The Practitioner is to forward a copy of the
Mentoring Plan to the Council along with a copy of a written authority and
to the Mentor to provide reports to the Council as outlined in (d)
(d) The Practitioner is to authorise and direct the Mentor in writing to provide
written reports to the Council on a third monthly
basis detailing the issues
addressed during mentoring, progress made by the Practitioner and advising of
any concerns relating to
her practice;
(e) The Practitioner is to provide written reports to the Council on a third
monthly basis detailing the activities undertaken during
the mentoring progress
with the Mentor, the issues addressed during mentoring as well as a
self-reflection on the progress made by the Practitioner during this mentoring
(f) The Practitioner is to participate in mentoring activities with the Mentor
for a minimum of two hours every month and thereafter
as determined by the
Mentor and the Council. The contact is to include some face to face (or Skype)
While the focus of the mentoring is to address
the deficits in the Practitioner's practice identified in the Reasons for
it may also be extended to discuss work related issues and appropriate
continuing professional development.
(g) If the Mentor is unwilling or unable to continue in the role of Mentor the
Practitioner is to advise the Council immediately
he becomes aware of same and
the process of requesting the Council's approval of another Mentor must be
undertaken by the Practitioner
in accordance with this Mentoring Order.
(h) The Practitioner is to meet all costs associated with compliance with this
Mentoring Order.
(3) The Practitioner is responsible for the costs associated with complying with
the conditions.
(4) The Council is the appropriate body for the purposes of ss 163 -163C of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
("National Law" )
when the registrant's principal place of practice is in New South Wales.
(5) Section 125 - 127 of the
National Law
are to apply should the
registrant's principal place of practice be anywhere in Australia other than in
New South Wales, so that the
appropriate review body in those circumstances is
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of Australia.
Respondent Thompson
(1) The Practitioner is reprimanded.
(2) The Practitioner is subject to the following conditions on his
registration:
(a) The Practitioner must successfully complete, within 12 months from the date
of these Orders, or such other time as the Nursing
and Midwifery Council ("the
Council") approve, the
"Nurses as Leaders"
course run by Ausmed Education
or a similar course as approved by the Council ("the course"); and
(b) The Practitioner must provide written evidence to the Council of successful
completion of the course outlined in this condition
within one month of
completion of the course.
(3) The Practitioner is responsible for the costs associated with complying with
the conditions.
(4) The Council
is the appropriate body for the purposes of ss 163 -163C of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law
("National Law")
registrant's principal place of practice is in New South Wales.
(5) Section 125 - 127 of the
National Law
are to apply should the
registrant's principal place of practice be anywhere in Australia other than in
New South Wales, so that the
appropriate review body in those circumstances is
the Nursing and Midwifery Council of Australia.
Belinda Baker
Chairperson
29 May 2015
Leigh Schalk
Nurse Member
Kurt Andersson-Noorgard Babette Smith
Nurse Member Lay Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.05 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (4.53 MB)
Plain text (ASCII) (32.3 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter