URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2009/391.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sydney Water Corporation v Caruso and Ors [2009] NSWCA 391 (3 December 2009)
NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL
Sydney Water Corporation
v Caruso and Ors
[2009] NSWCA 391
FILE NUMBER(S):
6 October 2009
JUDGMENT DATE:
Sydney Water Corporation
Nicola Caruso
Giuseppe Polito
Maria Polito
Domenico Caruso
JUDGMENT OF:
Allsop P Tobias JA Sackville AJA
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION:
Land & Environment Court
COURT FILE NUMBER(S):
L&E 30692/07, 30693/07, 30694/07, 30765/07 and
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER:
LOWER COURT DATE
OF DECISION:
12 December 2008, 23 December 2008
LOWER COURT MEDIUM
NEUTRAL CITATION:
Caruso and Ors v Sydney Water Corporation
[2008] NSWLEC
Caruso and Ors v Sydney Water Corporation (No 2)
(2008) NSWLEC
A: John Webster SC / Mark Seymour
R: Bret Walker SC /
Ian Hemmings
SOLICITORS:
A: Bartier Perry, Sydney
Hunt, Sydney
CATCHWORDS:
REAL PROPERTY – Compulsory Acquisition
of land – Compensation – Assessment – Market value –
affection or betterment of adjoining property – Whether increase
in value of residue land was by reason of the carrying out
of or proposal to
carry out the public purpose for which land was acquired
Highest and best
use – Acquired land located in flood zone – Council had adopted
policies to use land for trunk drainage
scheme involving detention basins
– Whether hypothetical purchaser would be prepared to add value on the
basis that a cut and
fill scheme was likely to be approved by the Council and
implemented so to enable development on flood affected land
question of law – Whether error of law constituted by statement of primary
judge that where expert evidence is conflicting,
doubts are to be resolved in
favour of claimant – Whether finding vitiated by error of law
an inherent characteristic of the acquired land was that it be used only for
trunk drainage
Whether primary judge erred in determining underlying zoning
of acquired land
Stamp duty – Claim under s 55(d) and s 59(d) of
Acquisition (Just Terms Compensation) Act 1991
for loss attributable to
disturbance due to stamp duty costs incurred in connection with purchase of a
replacement property –
Land Acquisition (Just Terms
Compensation) Act 1991
on stamp duty claim where market value is assessed on
basis of potential use that is more valuable than actual use of land prior
acquisition
LEGISLATION CITED:
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
Baulkham Hills Local Environmental Plan 2005
Land Acquisition (Just
Terms Compensation) Act 1991
Land and Environment Court Act 1979
Environmental Planning Policy (Housing for Seniors or People with a Disability)
Supreme Court Act 1970
Sydney Water Act 1994
Principal judgment
CASES CITED:
AMP Capital Investors Limited v
Transport Infrastructure Development Corporation
[2008] NSWCA 325
Archibald v
Byron Shire Council
[2003] NSWCA 292
(2003) 129 LGERA 311
Balenzuela v De
[1959] HCA 1
(1959) 101 CLR 226
Bisley Investment Corporation Ltd v
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
(1982) 59 FLR 132
Boland v Yates Property
Corporation Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 64
(1999) 74 ALJR 209
Cassidy v Sydney Water
Corporation
[2008] NSWLEC 223
Collins v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
[1981] FCA 147
(1981) 58 FLR 407
Commissioner of Succession Duties (SA) v Executor,
Trustee & Agency Co of South Australia Ltd
[1947] HCA 10
(1947) 74 CLR
Costantino and Maric v Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales
[2006] NSWLEC 248
Cook and Edwards v City of Sterling
(1991) 4 WAR
Crisp & Gunn Co-Operative v Hobart Corporation
[1963] HCA 55
110 CLR 538
Damjanovic v Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales (No
[2005] NSWLEC 371
Director-General of Social Services v Hales
[1983] FCA 81
Fenton Nominees Pty Ltd v Valuer-General
(1981) 47 LGRA
Glenorchy City Council v Tacon Pty Ltd
[2000] TASSC 51
Hamod v Suncorp
Metway Insurance Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 243
HG v The Queen
[1999] HCA 2
Housing Commission of New South Wales v Falconer
[1981] 1 NSWLR
Leichhardt Municipal Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
(1981) 48 LGRA
McBaron v Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales
(1995) 87 LGERA
McDonald v Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales
[2009] NSWLEC
Minister Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v Deerubbin Local Aboriginal
Land Council
(1998) 43 NSWLR 249
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1982] FCA 99
(1982) 63 FLR 441
Morales v Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs
(1995) 60 FCR 550
Parkmore Investments Pty Ltd v Acer
Forester (Darwin) Pty Ltd
[2005] NTSC 9
Peter Croke Holdings Pty Ltd v Roads
and Traffic Authority of New South Wales
(1998) 101 LGERA 30
[1990] HCA 42
(1990) 71 LGRA 1
Randwick Municipal Council v Manousaki
(1988) 66 LGRA
Re Refugee Tribunal; Ex parte Aala
[2000] HCA 57
(2000) 204 CLR
Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales v Hurstville City Council
[2001] NSWCA 11
(2001) 112 LGERA 223
Roads and Traffic Authority of New
South Wales v Mosca
[2006] NSWCA 159
(2006) 146 LGERA 335
Sapina v Coles
Myer Limited
[2009] NSWCA 71
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs v
Charlesworth Pilling & Co
[1901] AC 373
Stead v State Government
Insurance Commission
[1986] HCA 54
(1986) 161 CLR 141
Toll Pty Ltd v Craig
[2008] NSWCA 197
Tuite v Wingecarribbee Shire Council (No 2)
Vocisano v Vocisano
[1974] HCA 14
(1974) 130 CLR 267
Corporation Pty Ltd v Sydney Harbour Foreshore Authority
[2008] HCA 5
233 CLR 259
Yates Property Corporation Pty Ltd (In liq) v Darling Harbour
(1991) 24 NSWLR 156
TEXTS CITED:
A Hyam, The Law Affecting
Valuation of Land in Australia (4th Ed 2009 Federation Press)
Appeal and cross-appeal dismissed with costs
IN THE SUPREME COURT
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
CA 40094/09
CA 40095/09
CA 40096/09
CA 40097/09
CA 40098/09
SACKVILLE AJA
Thursday 3 December 2009
SYDNEY WATER CORPORATION v NICOLA CARUSO
WATER CORPORATION v DOMENICO & NICOLA CARUSO
SYDNEY WATER
CORPORATION v JOSEPH MESITI
SYDNEY WATER CORPORATION v JOHN
SYDNEY WATER CORPORTION v GUISEPPE POLITO & MARIA
By notice published in the Government Gazette on 23 March 2007, the
appellant compulsorily acquired part of the land owned by each
respondents (the acquired land) for the public purpose of the provision of a
trunk drainage scheme pursuant to the
Land Acquisition (Just Terms
Compensation) Act
(Just Terms Act).
The respondents lodged with
the Land and Environment Court objections to the amounts of compensation they
were offered.
Prior to 13 April 2006, the whole of the respondents’ lands were
zoned Rural 1(a) under Baulkham Hills Local Environmental Plan
2005 (the 2005
LEP). On the making of Amendment No. 5 the 2005 LEP on 13 April 2006, the
acquired land was zoned Special Uses 5(a)
whereas the residue of the
respondents’ land (the residue land) was zoned Residential. In order to
assess the market value
of the acquired land and any increase in the value of
the residue land caused by the acquisition it was necessary to determine the
underlying zoning of the area.
It was also necessary to determine the highest and best use to which the
acquired land could be put, given that part of this land
surrounded a creek and
was in a flood zone. Mr Bewsher, a hydrologist called on behalf of the
respondents, gave evidence that a
hypothetical purchaser of the acquired land
would be advised that it could be developed by implementing a regional drainage
within the creek corridor (the Bewsher Scheme). Dr Joliffe, the
hydrologist called on behalf of the appellant, gave evidence that
the Bewsher
Scheme was not likely to receive approval from Baulkham Hills Shire Council (the
Council) as it did not conform to the
Council’s drainage strategy for the
area. However, the experts agreed that detention basins that had been planned
area could be located elsewhere.
The primary judge relevantly
(1) disregarding any increase or decrease in the land value caused by the
carrying out of the public purpose for which the land was
acquired in accordance
with s 56(1)(a) of the Just Terms Act, at the date of the acquisition, the
underlying zoning of the acquired
land would have remained Rural 1(a);
(2) the rezoning of the residue land and any increase in value or
“betterment” of this land was not caused by the public
the appellant in undertaking trunk drainage works on the acquired land but
rather reflected the overall planning aims
and objectives of the Council;
(3) the prudent hypothetical parties to the sale of the acquired land would
have assigned value to it on the basis that they would
have been advised that
the highest and best use of the acquired land within the flood zone was its
development pursuant to the implementation
of the Bewsher Scheme, which would
not require rezoning, was likely to receive Council approval and was likely to
be implemented
on a property-by property basis rather than through cooperation
amongst property owners.
(4) she intended to adopt an approach whereby when expert evidence is
conflicting, all doubts are to be resolved in favour of the
claimant where
practicable in order to achieve a just result, in accordance with the passage
from the judgment of Talbot J in
McBaron v Roads and Traffic Authority of New
South Wales
(1995) 87 LGERA 238
at 244-245;
(5) it was not an attribute or characteristic of the lands within the flood
zone that these were required for catchment trunk drainage;
(6) the claims of (most of) the respondents for the costs of any stamp duty
incurred or proposed to be incurred by them in acquiring
property to replace the
acquired land were precluded by s 61(b) of the Just Terms Act.
appellant appealed under
Land and Environment Court Act
(the Court Act), and challenged the primary judge’s findings
numbered (2), (3), (4) and (5). The respondents cross-appealed
and sought to
challenge the findings numbered (1) and (6).
Held, dismissing the
appeal and the cross-appeal:
As to (1) – the underlying
Per Tobias JA, Allsop P and Sackville AJA agreeing:
finding as to the underlying zoning of the acquired is not a decision on a
question of law and is therefore unassailable on an appeal
under s 57(1) of the
As to (2) – the “betterment” of the
residue land
Per Tobias JA, Allsop P and Sackville AJA
Section 56(1)(a) of the Just Terms Act only applies to any
increase or decrease in the value of the acquired land, and does not apply
assessing the value of any residue land. Rather, s 55(f) of the Just Terms Act
is applicable to any question of “betterment”,
that is, any increase
in the value of land adjoining the acquired land by reason of the carrying out
of the public purpose for which
the land was acquired.
Whether the
rezoning of the residue land was due to the public purpose for which the land
was acquired so to engage s 55(f) of the
Just Terms Act
is a question of
fact and is therefore unassailable on an appeal under s 57(1) of the Court Act.
As to (3) – the acceptance of the Bewsher Scheme as the highest
and best use
Per Tobias JA, Allsop P and Sackville AJA
The finding that a prudent hypothetical purchaser was likely to
consider that it would be feasible to obtain development consent for
such as the Bewsher scheme on the basis that any detention basins otherwise
planned for the flood zone could ultimately
be located elsewhere was a finding
of fact and therefore unassailable on an appeal under s 57(1) of the Court Act.
As to (4) – the alleged misstatement of the principle in
(a) As to whether legal error was disclosed in the
reasoning of primary judge
Per Allsop P, Sackville AJA
The primary judge’s expression of principle that she
should resolve competing expert evidence in favour of the claimant involved
legal error. The general principle that in determining the compensation payable
to a dispossessed owner doubts should be resolved
in favour of a more liberal
estimate does not detract from the need to engage with and evaluate the evidence
of competing witnesses.
Per Tobias JA:
Where conflicting expert
evidence is given in relation to a hypothetical as distinct from a real
situation involving the use of land,
a primary judge is entitled to resolve
those doubts, like other doubts bearing upon value, in favour of the
dispossessed owner.
Archibald v Byron Shire Council
[2003] NSWCA
(2003) 129 LGERA 311
distinguished
(b) As to the test of
whether legal error vitiates a decision
Per Allsop P and Tobias JA,
Sackville AJA agreeing:
In order for a decision to be vitiated by error,
the error has to be one upon which the decision depends.
Municipal Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
(1981) 48 LGRA 409
(c) As to the burden of persuasion with respect to whether
legal error vitiates a decision
Per Allsop P:
A decision will
be vitiated if the error went to a central issue for consideration and the
appellate court cannot be persuaded to
a relevant degree of satisfaction that
the resolution of the central issue has not been materially
Yates Property Corporation Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v
Darling Harbour Authority
(1991) 24 NSWLR 156
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1981] FCA 147
(1981) 58 FLR 407
Bisley Investment Corporation Ltd v Australian Broadcasting
(1982) 59 FLR 132
Director-General of Social
Services v Hales
[1983] FCA 81
(1983) 78 FLR 373
AMP Capital Investors
Limited v Transport Infrastructure Development Corporation
[2008] NSWCA 325
Per Tobias JA:
It is for the party asserting error to
satisfy the appellate tribunal that the error has affected the relevant decision
in the sense
that it was one upon which the decision depended.
and Traffic Authority of New South Wales v Mosca
[2006] NSWCA 159
Hamod v Suncorp Metway Insurance Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 243
Vocisano v Vocisano
[1974] HCA 14
130 CLR 267
Per Sackville AJA:
It is not necessary for the purposes
of this case to decide where the burden of persuasion lies with respect to
establishing whether
a decision depended upon an error of law. In any event,
the nature of the inquiry occasioned by legal error may differ, depending
circumstances.
(d) As to whether the alleged error of law vitiated
the decision of the primary judge
Per Tobias JA, Allsop P and
Sackville AJA agreeing:
The finding that a hypothetical prudent purchaser
would be prepared to add value to the purchase price he or she would be prepared
to pay for the land in the flood zone on the basis that a scheme such as the
Bewsher Scheme may obtain development consent was not
one which depended upon
any alleged error involving the resolution of the conflicting expert evidence.
As to (5) – the inherent attributes of the land
Tobias JA, Allsop P and Sackville AJA agreeing:
A determination of the
characteristics or attributes of land involves a finding of fact and is
therefore unassailable on an appeal
under s 57(1) of the Court Act.
As to (6) – the stamp duty claim
Per Tobias JA,
Allsop P and Sackville AJA agreeing:
Under s 61(b) of the Just Terms
Act, if the market value of land is assessed on the basis that the land has the
potential to be used
for a purpose other than that for which it was used prior
to the acquisition, compensation is not payable for any financial loss
would necessarily have been incurred in realising that potential. Thus, s 61(b)
denies a claim under s 59(d) of the Just Terms
Act for stamp duty costs incurred
in connection with the purchase of land for relocation where such relocation is
necessary to enable
the realisation of a potential use of the acquired land for
a purpose other than that for which it was used prior to the acquisition.
Peter Croke Holdings Pty Ltd v Roads and Traffic Authority of NSW
(1998) 101 LGERA 30
Damjanovic v Roads and Traffic Authority of
New South Wales (No 2)
[2005] NSWLEC 371
McDonald v Roads and
Traffic Authority of New South Wales
[2009] NSWLEC 105
THE SUPREME COURT
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
CA 40094/09
CA 40095/09
CA 40096/09
CA 40097/09
CA 40098/09
SACKVILLE AJA
Thursday 3 December 2009
SYDNEY WATER CORPORATION v NICOLA CARUSO
WATER CORPORATION v DOMENICO & NICOLA CARUSO
SYDNEY WATER
CORPORATION v JOSEPH MESITI
SYDNEY WATER CORPORATION v JOHN
SYDNEY WATER CORPORTION v GUISEPPE POLITO & MARIA
: I have read the reasons of Tobias JA. I agree with the
orders that his Honour proposes. I respectfully disagree, however, with
important aspects of his Honour’s reasons.
2 The primary judge’s expression of principle (for that is what it was)
as to how she would resolve competing expert evidence
at [81] of her reasons was
wrong and revealed legal error for the purposes of the
Land and Environment
Court Act 1979
(NSW) (“LEC Act”), s 57.
3 The general principle that in determining compensation to a dispossessed
owner doubts should be resolved in favour of a more liberal
estimate is
well-known: see generally A Hyam
The Law Affecting Valuation of Land in
Ed 2009 Federation Press) at 316-318. That does
not, however, detract from the need to engage with and evaluate evidence and
witnesses. If, however, upon engagement and assessment, the judicial
valuer finds, for example, as Anderson J did in
Cook and Edwards v City of
(1991) 4 WAR 469
, that the reasoning of both valuers was not
fallacious, that their respective capitalisation rates were open, that none took
account irrelevant considerations and no errors otherwise appeared, the
proper conclusion might be that there are simply two open
views on the relevant
issue – as there can be in ascribing a value: cf
Fenton Nominees Pty
Ltd v Valuer-General
(1981) 47 LGRA 71
at 76-77. In such circumstances,
applying the general principle would be uncontentious.
4 It is not helpful to examine the scope of the general principle in the
abstract beyond saying that it is not a licence to accept
one expert over
another without undertaking the task of assessing the evidence in the usual way.
If a judge properly undertakes that
task, the evaluation of the evidence may
well persuade the judge to accept the evidence favouring the resuming authority.
be a product of assessing the evidence. That process is not to be
abandoned as the statement of the judge at [81] of her reasons
would suggest she
5 In my view, error was disclosed at [81] of the primary judge’s
6 The issue then arises as to how the consequences of that error should be
assessed. The submissions of the parties did not deal
with this issue in any
detail. It is however appropriate to say something of the matter because it is
the subject of my respectful
disagreement with the reasons of Tobias JA.
7 It is first necessary to recognise that the power of the Court on the
hearing of an appeal under the LEC Act s 57(1) is provided
for by s 57(2). The
Court may remit or make such other order as seems fit. Whilst these are wide
words, their content is to be
assessed by their place in the remedial
consequences of dealing with an error of law: see
Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs v Gungor
[1982] FCA 99
at 454-455 dealing
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth) (the “AAT
Act”), s 44. Nevertheless, whilst recognising this constraining context,
a degree of flexibility is conferred
upon the Court in its supervision of a
superior court of record: the LEC Act, s 5(1).
Leichhardt Municipal Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
48 LGRA 409
at 419, Moffitt P made the following statement that has been taken
as a guiding principle in later cases as to what needs to be shown
demonstrated legal error to lead to remedial consequences. Moffitt P was
dealing with the position of review for error of law
in the context of a stated
case. He said:
“I turn then to consider whether the appellant has demonstrated that, in
coming to his decision, Ash J erred in law, or more
correctly that such can be
established within the terms of a question which Ash J has stated in the case
before the court. It is
not sufficient to show that some error of law appears
in the judgment or during the course of the trial. The error has to be one
which the decision depends, so the decision is vitiated by the error. It will
not suffice to establish that one or some only
of a number of alternate findings
upon which the decision depends, so the decision is vitiated by the error. It
will not suffice
to establish that one or some only of a number of alternate
findings upon which the decision was given involved errors of law, if
alternative involved no error of law. Even if that alternative involved an
error the appellant will fail if the error is of
9 This passage might be seen to conceal an issue as to who bears the burden
of persuasion of the vitiating character of the error
and what that entails.
10 The passage of Moffitt P in
Seatainer Terminals
proposition that the person complaining of the order or decision must
“establish” (the word used by Moffitt
P) that there has been legal
error and that it vitiates the decision. What that entails is the issue.
11 This passage of Moffitt P has been applied by this Court on a number of
Yates Property Corporation Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v Darling
Harbour Authority
(1991) 24 NSWLR 156
at 177 (per Handley JA);
Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v Deerubbin Local Aboriginal Land Council
(1998) 43 NSWLR 249
at 254-255 (per Handley JA and Powell JA); and
Traffic Authority of New South Wales v Mosca
[2006] NSWCA 159
Handley JA, with whom Mason P and Bryson JA agreed).
, Handley JA after quoting from Moffitt P’s judgment
Seatainer Terminals
said the following at 177:
“The same approach has guided the Federal Court in the exercise of its
Appeals Tribunal for
errors of law: see
Collins v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1981] FCA 147
(1981) 58 FLR 407
Bisley Investment Corporation Ltd v Australian
Broadcasting Tribunal
(1982) 59 FLR 132
at 146, 156, 164;
Director-General of Social Services v Hales
[1983] FCA 81
(1983) 78 FLR 373
Commonwealth Banking Corporation v Percival
[1988] FCA 240
(1988) 20 FCR 176
13 It is important to the issue of what I will call the burden of persuasion
or satisfaction to recall what was said in the Federal
Court cases cited by
Handley JA in
, Fox J, Deane J and Morling J
were dealing with a deportation appeal under the AAT Act, s 44 which was an
appeal on a question of
law. The Court was given remedial power in s 44 (4) and
(5) in wide terms – see
, above, relevantly not unlike s
57(2) here. The Court in
, finding legal error in the
Tribunal’s approach, and notwithstanding that the decision was
“manifestly open to [the Tribunal]”
remitted the matter, saying at
“... But it would only be proper for us to dismiss the appeal if it did
not appear that his Honour placed weight on the Minister's
decision to deport an
applicant as distinct from the s 37 statement. As we have indicated, counsel for
the Minister conceded that
his Honour's reference to the Minister's decision was
a reference only to the decision to deport and was not a reference to the
to be found in the ministerial statement. On balance, it seems to us
that this concession was rightly made. We are therefore of the
opinion that we
must uphold the first submission made on behalf of the appellant.
In the circumstances, there is no alternative to sending the matter back to the
Tribunal for reconsideration.
It cannot be said with confidence that the
Tribunal would have come to the same conclusion if it had not placed any weight
upon the Minister's decision to deport the appellant
. That being so,
the appellant is entitled to have his application for review redetermined
without any weight being placed upon that
(emphasis added)
14 The emphasised passage would appear to support a
proposition that once legal error has been shown of an apparently material
the Court must reach a level of confidence that it has not affected
the outcome below, if the matter is not to be remitted.
, there was a legal error in the reasoning of the
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal. Lockhart J at 146 cited
Sheppard J at 156 relied on a passage from the reasons of Barwick CJ in
Vocisano v Vocisano
[1974] HCA 14
130 CLR 267
at 275, a case dealing
with wrongfully admitted evidence at a trial. The passage to which Sheppard J
referred from Barwick CJ’s
judgment in
was as follows:
“... In my opinion, before a new trial is ordered in a case where the
verdict is in accordance with the evidence,
it should be seen that the
inadmissible matter has been used by the judge in reaching his verdict.
Consequently, I have carefully scanned the reasons expressed by the trial judge.
Apart from the evidence of the witness Paragalli,
there was no evidence to
support the appellant's case if, as appears, no reliance was placed on the
answers to interrogatories. Indeed,
the writing admitted under s. 28 was
evidence that the respondent was not the driver at the time the car overturned.
His Honour did
not believe Paragalli. Unless it can be seen that the
inadmissible material influenced that conclusion, there is no ground
consistently
with what I have so far written for ordering a new trial. After
considering the reasons of the trial judge, I have come to the conclusion
they did not. Notwithstanding passages in the reasons for judgment to which the
appellant's counsel called attention, any use
which the trial judge made of the
inconsistent statements was at most merely confirmatory of an opinion which he
had independently
formed of the credit of Paragalli. Those passages do not
warrant the conclusion that in fact the trial judge used those statements
part of his estimation of that witness's credit or of the acceptability of his
(emphasis added)
Having referred to this passage (which tends to
support a proposition that it is for the moving party to persuade the Court that
error has affected the outcome) Sheppard J said the following in
“... After due reflection I have reached the conclusion that this case
differs from
case because of the real possibility, if not the
probability, that the apparent error of law pervaded the Tribunal's ultimate
and conclusions.”
This expression of the matter, referring to both a
“real possibility” and “probability” could support
proposition as to persuasion: that from
or that from
. Morling J in
referred to both
saying at 164:
“The question therefore arises whether the erroneous statement that
‘there is no prima facie notion ... that a shareholding
acquisition ...
beyond the prescribed interest is to be assumed in accord with public interest;
but rather the reverse’ amounts
to such an error of law as to warrant the
setting aside of the decision. I confess that I have not found this question
easy to decide.
case Barwick CJ said: ‘In my opinion,
before a new trial is ordered in a case where the verdict is in accordance with
the evidence,
it should be seen that the inadmissible matter has been used by
the judge in reaching his verdict’.
The same principle was referred to, though
with a slightly different
Collins v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
where it was said that an appellant who demonstrates that a matter has wrongly
been taken into account by the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal is entitled to a
redetermination of his application for review unless it can be said with
confidence that the Tribunal would
have come to the same conclusion in any
(emphasis added)
Morling J therefore employed both alternatives.
, whilst there was an error in the construction of the
relevant statute, Lockhart J refused relief saying at 401:
“Notwithstanding the Tribunal's error in its construction of s 140(1) and
the application of that interpretation to the facts
, I am satisfied that the
Tribunal's alternative finding of extreme hardship and scant chance of effective
recovery was a proper exercise
of its discretion in reviewing the
Director-General's decision, that this finding stands independently of the
erroneous finding and
is sufficient to support the Tribunal's ultimate decision
to set aside the Director-General's decision
and to remit the matter to him
for reconsideration with the direction that only so much of the overpayment
claimed by the Director-General
as is referable to the first pension year after
the review of Mrs Hales' pension in 1974 be recovered from her. In these
circumstances
I see no necessity to remit the matter to the Tribunal to be heard
and determined again.”
(emphasis added)
This approach tends to support the proposition
at 254-255 Handley JA and Powell JA simply restated
the relevant passage from the former’s judgment in
Seatainer Terminals
with approval.
, in dealing with the LEC Act, s 57 Handley JA (with whom
Mason P and Bryson JA agreed) said at [22]:
“[22] An appeal from a judgment of the Land and Environment Court in class
3 of its jurisdiction is limited to questions of
law (Land and Environment Court
Act s 57(1)). An appellant must not only establish an error of law,
also establish that the decision is vitiated by that error:
Municipal Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
(1981) 48 LGRA 409
(1991) 24 NSWLR 156
, 177. This Court must therefore review the
Judge’s reasoning to determine whether his assessment was affected by his
in principle.”
(emphasis added)
This restates the issue, which remains pregnant with the question as to what
establishing vitiation entails.
Hamod v Suncorp Metway Insurance Ltd
[2006] NSWCA 243
, Basten JA
(with whom Beazley JA and Santow JA agreed) in the context of an appeal
“in point of law” from the Local Court,
said at [11]:
“[11] Further, the error must be material to the outcome or, as is
sometimes stated, the decision must be one which is “vitiated
error”: see
Leichhardt Municipal Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
(1981) 48 LGRA 409
at 419 (Moffitt P), cited with approval in
Property Corporation Pty Ltd (In liq) v Darling Harbour Authority
at 177 (Handley JA). In
, McHugh J explained the consequence
of an assumed error in refusing an adjournment at [100]:
‘Even on this assumption, however, the appeal must fail unless this Court
is satisfied that
of the refusal of the adjournment has
probably resulted in the wrongful conviction of the appellant. Without such a
finding there
can be no basis for concluding that the refusal of the adjournment
brought about a miscarriage of justice. Where a jury has convicted
an appellant,
it is enough that the relevant error may have affected the outcome. But where a
judge has convicted the appellant and
given reasons, the appellate court is in a
position to examine the likely effect of the error. If the court is not
satisfied that
the error affected the outcome, it should dismiss the
These principles apply in relation to civil trials. Both under the general law,
and under Part 51, r 23 of the
Supreme Court Rules 1970
(NSW) a new trial should
not be ordered unless it appears to the Court that “some substantial wrong
or miscarriage has been
... occasioned” by the identified error of law:
Balenzuela v De Gail
[1959] HCA 1
(1959) 101 CLR 226
at 232-233 (Dixon
This might be seen to support the proposition from
20 The statement by Moffitt P in
Seatainer Terminals
has been taken as
stating the law in other parts of Australia: Tasmania
– Glenorchy City
Council v Tacon Pty Ltd
[2000] TASSC 51
per Cox CJ; and Northern
Territory –
Parkmore Investments Pty Ltd v Acer Forester (Darwin) Pty
[2005] NTSC 9
per Martin CJ.
AMP Capital Investors Limited v Transport Infrastructure Development
Corporation
[2008] NSWCA 325
a valuation case coming to this Court under the
LEC Act, s 57 Gyles AJA put the matter at [120] as follows:
“[120] There is a particular difficulty here, as the award of nil
compensation would have to be set aside and the amount attributed
value awarded if Hodgson JA is correct as to the point of statutory
construction. In my opinion that follows from the fact
that Hodgson JA has
demonstrated in considering the first cross claim that the respondent was
correct in contending that, in fixing
market value, the Land and Environment
Court proceeded upon an erroneous construction of the legislation as to a
fundamental question
– the nature of that which is to be valued.
was obviously an error on a question of law. Such an error would require the
finding based upon it to be set aside unless it
is clear that the result would
not change in the event of reconsideration.
It is not sufficient that some
basis may exist for upholding the decision. (cf.
Balenzuela v De Gail
[1959] HCA 1
101 CLR 226
Stead v State Government Insurance
[1986] HCA 54
161 CLR 141
Toll Pty Ltd v Craig Morrissey
[2008] NSWCA 197
per Beazley JA at [10]). In my opinion the difference between
valuing freehold on the one hand and a short-term leasehold on the
other is so
radical as to require re-hearing if the issue remains live. The issue would be
live if the point of statutory construction
were permitted to be raised and if
it were to succeed. The fact that a re-hearing on this point would or may be
necessary is a further
reason to decline to enter upon the issue.”
(emphasis added)
This supports the proposition from
22 It is necessary to say something, briefly, about the authorities referred
to by Gyles AJA. In
, the High Court dealt with the principles
governing the grant of leave for a new trial after the wrongful rejection of
One aspect of the discussion was the difference between the common
law and the judicature rule approaches in this regard. In that
context, the
Court discussed what I have referred to as the burden of persuasion: see in
particular Dixon CJ at 232-233. As Dixon
CJ said at 233-234, the issue is not
one of burden of proof of an issue by evidence, but is one based on reasoning of
the record, appears to have occurred at a trial or hearing. In
dealing with the question at common law, Dixon CJ said at 234-235:
“... If the question really be of any importance, resting as it does
rather on processes of reasoning than upon proof of an
issue of fact, the true
view, it may be suggested, is that at common law it was necessary to grant a new
unless the court felt some reasonable assurance that the error of law
at the trial whether in a misdirection or wrongful admission
or rejection of
evidence or otherwise was of such a nature that it could not reasonably be
supposed to have influenced the result
or because, in any case, as a matter of
law the same result must have ensued, while under the judicature rule the burden
is the other
(emphasis added)
The judicature rule (see now the mandatory terms of the
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
rule 51.53)
was recognised by
Dixon CJ at 235 “to indicate an intention that the court should not grant
a new trial unless it reached a
positive opinion, in other words unless it was
persuaded that a substantial wrong or miscarriage had been occasioned by the
Stead v State Government Insurance Commission
[1986] HCA 54
the Court was concerned with the principle to govern the ordering of a
new trial in circumstances of a denial of procedural fairness
at the first
trial. No statute or rule of court was referred to by the Court as governing
the position; thus, the Court can be taken
as expressing the principle at common
law. In stating the principle the Court (Mason J, Wilson J, Brennan J, Deane J
and Dawson J)
said at 147:
“Alternatively, if the Full Court is properly to be understood as saying
no more than that a new trial would probably make
no difference to the result,
their Honours failed to apply the correct criterion.
All that the appellant
needed to show was that the denial of natural justice deprived him of the
possibility of a successful outcome.
In order to negate that possibility, it
was, as we have said, necessary for the Full Court to find that a properly
conducted trial
could not possibly have produced a different result.
There is nothing in
Balenzuela v. De Gail
which compels us to a different
conclusion. Indeed there is much in that case that reinforces what we have said:
see the judgment
of Dixon C.J. at pp.232 et seq., esp. at p.235. There the Court
ordered a new trial because material evidence was wrongly rejected.
have been otherwise had the respondent been able to demonstrate that the
rejected evidence could have made no difference
to the result. Then it would
have emerged that the appellant had not lost a possible chance of obtaining a
verdict. However, that
was something which the respondent in
Balenzuela v. De
was unable to demonstrate. So it is here.”
(emphasis added)
(referred to by Gyles JA in
Capital Investors
– see [21] above)
judgment of Beazley JA (with whom Handley AJA and McDougall J agreed) which
concerned the proper approach of a Presidential member
of the Workers’
Compensation Commission upon concluding that an arbitrator had relevantly erred.
Beazley JA said at [10]:
“[10] ... The Deputy President then stated that notwithstanding the
arbitrator’s error, he was not satisfied that the
error would have
affected the outcome of the matter. That finding was, however, erroneous. By
stating the test that way, the Deputy
President, in effect, reversed the onus.
The correct test was that he should allow the appeal from the arbitrator, unless
of the arbitrator could not possibly have affected the result: see
Stead v State Government Insurance Commission
[1986] HCA 54
I leave aside the question whether, in accordance with
Sapina v Coles Myer
[2009] NSWCA 71
, the Deputy President’s approach was erroneous
for other reasons. Nevertheless, Beazley JA (in this different statutory
25 The statement of principle of Moffit P applied in
should be accepted as governing the operation
That said, these cases should be recognised for what they are
(judicial guidance to the exercise of power under, here, the LEC Act,
and for the proper content of the principle. The “vitiation of the
decision” referred to by Moffitt P should
be understood, as Handley JA
made clear in
(and thus also
embodying the kinds of considerations discussed in the Federal Court in
. As Dixon CJ said in
notions of onus of proof are unlikely to be of assistance. It
is an assessment based on reasoning from what, according to the record,
occurred. Here, it is assessing, from a judge’s reasons, what effect her
error had or may have had. The “vitiation”
of the decision (that is
its impairing, or spoiling, or corrupting or rendering invalid) is not
necessarily only made out by demonstrating
positively (if it can be) that the
result would have been different without the error. A decision will be
impaired, or spoilt or
corrupted or “vitiated” if the error went to
a central issue for consideration and the appellate court cannot be persuaded
a relevant degree of satisfaction that the resolution of the central issue has
not been affected.
26 No mechanical or fixed approach is warranted in exercising the power under
the LEC Act, s 57(2). The expressions of principle
in and based on
do not require any inflexible approach requiring the appellant to
establish positively that the decision would have been different.
They do not
say that. To establish “vitiation” one does not need to establish
that the decision would have been different.
What must be established is that
the error is sufficiently material or operative to warrant the large step of
setting aside in whole
or in part the decision below. In terms of what Moffitt
Seatainer Terminals
, as illuminated by what Handley JA said in
in his reference to the Federal Court cases, this requires the
establishment of the vitiation (viz impairing, spoiling, corrupting
invalidating) of a decision. Depending on the nature and quality of the error,
its relationship to the issues and the extent
and quality of the reasoning of
the tribunal an assessment must be made of the importance of the error and the
degree of affectation
of the decision. The burden or degree of persuasion will
depend upon the circumstances of each case.
27 In valuation cases, it is often difficult to be positive to the point of
clarity that the error has affected the outcome. This
can be a product of the
almost necessarily inexact and imprecise expression of reasons for views about
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs v Charlesworth Pilling
[1901] AC 373
at 391. If, however, the error goes to the heart of
the cognitive and evaluative process and one cannot be satisfied that it did
play a relevant or material part in the decision then the appellant has
established that the decision is vitiated.
28 It may be that the above views as to the proper scope and operation of the
LEC Act, s 57 are affected by the UCPR Pt 51 r 51.53.
There is an issue, it
seems to me, whether this rule speaks to the operation of a statutory provision
such as s 57 and if it does
what its effect is. This matter was not argued and
I leave it to one side.
29 Nevertheless, here, as the analysis by Tobias JA of the primary
judge’s reasons reveals, it can be concluded that the error
have referred did not affect the result. In these circumstances, I am
persuaded that the decision was not vitiated.
: By notice published in the Government Gazette on 23
March 2007, Sydney Water Corporation (the appellant) compulsorily acquired
pursuant to the
Land Acquisition (Just Terms Compensation) Act
Just Terms Act)
part of the land owned by each of Nicola Caruso, Domenico
Caruso, Joseph Mesiti, John Nati, Guiseppe Polito and Maria Polito (together
respondents) for the purposes of the
Sydney Water Act
. Before the
acquisition the respondent Nicola Caruso owned two parcels of land whilst the
other respondents owned one parcel each.
Accordingly the compulsory acquisition
affected six parcels of land comprising five properties in total (the acquired
31 The acquired land is located at Kellyville within the Rouse Hill
Development Area (the RHDA) being a large area of land earmarked
planning documents for rezoning to permit urban development. Strangers Creek
runs through each of the five properties.
Three of the properties fronted
Windsor Road (to which I shall refer as the Caruso properties and the Mesiti
land) whereas the other
two properties (to which I shall refer as the Polito
land and the Nati land) fronted Arnold Avenue. However the Arnold Avenue
lost that frontage on acquisition.
32 Being dissatisfied with the amounts of compensation offered in respect of
that part of their properties which had been compulsorily
acquired, the
respondents lodged with the Land and Environment Court objections to the amounts
of compensation so offered pursuant
to s 66 of the Just Terms Act.
33 The proceedings were heard by Pain J who delivered two judgments. The
first was delivered on 12 December 2008 and dealt with most
of the issues raised
in the proceedings (the first judgment). As there were some loose ends, as it
were, her Honour delivered a
further judgment on 23 December 2008 (the second
judgment) at the conclusion of which she made formal orders with respect to the
awards of compensation to be made to each of the respondents. The actual
amounts so awarded are not presently relevant. What is
relevant is that the
awards of compensation included amounts said to represent the market value of
each of the acquired parcels as
well as various amounts for disturbance.
References hereunder to paragraphs of her Honour’s judgments are to the
first judgment
unless otherwise stated.
The relevant issues before the primary judge and her determination of
(a) The underlying zoning issue
34 That part of the acquired land through which ran Strangers Creek was
within a flood plain and was subject to flooding in a 1:100
year flood (the
flood zone). The acquired land comprised part but not the whole of the land
within that flood zone. Prior to 13
April 2006, the whole of the
respondents’ lands were zoned Rural 1(a) under Baulkham Hills Local
Environmental Plan 2005 (the
2005 LEP). On the making of Amendment No. 5 the
2005 LEP on 13 April 2006, the whole of those lands were rezoned. The acquired
land was zoned Special Uses 5(a) (Existing and Proposed) whereas the residue of
the respondents’ lands were zoned Residential
2(a2) and Residential 2(b1).
35 Relevantly, those parts of the respondents’ lands located outside
the Special Uses 5(a) zone but within the flood zone were
zoned Residential.
This gave rise, both before her Honour and on the appeal, to the primary issue
as to whether so much of each
respondents’ residue land as was located
between the boundaries of the acquired land and the flood zone, and which was
Residential, constituted what was referred to in argument as
”. Her Honour was required, as the judicial
valuer, to have regard to that issue either pursuant to s 55(f) or, according to
the appellant, s 56(1)(a) of the Just Terms Act. Section 55 of the Just Terms
Act was in the following terms:
“In determining the amount of compensation to which a person is entitled,
regard must be had to the following matters only
(as assessed in accordance with
this Division):
(a) the market value of the land on the date of its
acquisition,
(b) any special value of the land to the person on the date of its
acquisition,
(c) any loss attributable to severance,
(d) any loss attributable to disturbance,
(e) solatium,
(f) any increase or decrease in the value of any other land of the person at the
date of acquisition which adjoins or is severed
from the acquired land by reason
of the carrying out of, or the proposal to carry out, the public purpose for
which the land was
36 At [10] the primary judge stated, relevantly, that the following issues
were common to the claim for compensation of all respondents:
“(i) [W]hat is the appropriate underlying zoning, which is linked to the
determination of the public purpose of the acquisition,
on which the market
value of the [acquired] land should be
determined?
(ii) In relation to the highest and best use of the [acquired] land, whether the
Bewsher scheme for filling the floodplain [that
is, land within the flood zone]
to enable development is advice a prudent hypothetical purchaser would obtain
and act on.”
37 The acquired land comprised the whole of the respondents’ land zoned
Special Uses 5(a). It was common ground that in determining
the first of the
issues to which I have referred, the public purpose for which the land was
acquired was to be disregarded by virtue
of the provisions of s 56(1)(a) of the
Just Terms Act which provided as follows:
“(1) In this Act:
market value
of land at any time means the amount that would have been
paid for the land if it had been sold at that time by a willing but not
seller to a willing but not anxious buyer, disregarding (for the purpose of
determining the amount that would have been
(a) any increase or decrease in the value of the land caused by the carrying
out of, or the proposal to carry out, the public purpose
for which the land was
acquired, ...”
38 The notices published in the Government Gazette on 23 March 2007 stated
that the relevant acquisitions were for the purpose of
Sydney Water
. It was accepted that the public purpose for which the land was
acquired gave rise to the Special Uses 5(a) zoning of the acquired
land at the
date of acquisition. The parties agreed that that zoning was to be disregarded
pursuant to
as it reflected the public purpose for which the land was
acquired. The market value of the acquired land therefore needed to be
on the basis of its underlying zoning which was in dispute. However, there was
also disagreement about what was to be disregarded
differences in how the parties defined the public purpose for which the land was
acquired. That difference also led to
different views about the appropriate
underlying zoning. The respondents argued that the underlying zoning was
Residential whereas
the appellant argued that it was Rural.
39 Her Honour determined that the public purpose for which the land was
acquired was the provision of a trunk drainage scheme to service
the RHDA in
general and what was later described as the Balmoral Road Release Area (the
BRRA) in particular and within which the
respondents’ lands were located.
There was no challenge to this finding.
40 After a consideration of the planning history of the area as well as the
expert evidence of the planners called by the appellant
on the one hand and the
respondents on the other, her Honour concluded (at [48]) that at the date of
acquisition the underlying zoning
of the acquired land would have remained Rural
1(a), being its zoning prior to the gazettal of Amendment No. 5 to the 2005
41 I interpose that it would appear that after her Honour delivered the first
judgment there was some doubt as to whether her finding
with respect to the
underlying zoning but for the acquisition applied only to the acquired land or
to so much of the residue lands
as were within the flood zone.
42 In the second judgment her Honour clarified the point (at [2]) by
“I should clarify that my finding [in the first judgment] that the
underlying zoning for the determination of market value
is rural applies to all
of the acquired land ... not only the land [in the flood zone] ... as I did not
make a specific statement
on that issue in my earlier
43 In my opinion, in this passage her Honour was confirming that as at the
date of acquisition she had found that the underlying zoning
of the whole of the
land within the flood zone (which would include the acquired land) would have
been Rural 1(a) under the 2005
44 The respondents have cross-appealed against this decision of the primary
judge contending that she erred in law by failing to find
that the underlying
zoning of the whole of the lands within the flood zone was Residential rather
than Rural 1(a).
(b) The Bewsher scheme issue
45 What was described in the proceedings as the Bewsher scheme formed a major
part of the appellant’s submissions both at trial
and on the appeal. Mr
Bewsher, a hydrologist, was called on behalf of the respondents. As her Honour
observed (at [59]), the respondents
submitted that the prudent hypothetical
parties to the sale of the acquired land would have been advised that the
highest and best
use of the land within the flood zone (including the acquired
land) was its development pursuant to the implementation of the Bewsher
46 That scheme involved the development of a regional drainage scheme within
the Strangers Creek corridor. That corridor was to be
excavated, re-vegetated
and the creek and its tributaries restored as a naturally functioning system.
The approximate width of the
corridor would be 60-65 metres. Filling would then
take place within the remainder of the land in the flood zone which would have
the effect of elevating existing, flood prone land lying beyond the creek
corridor to above the 100 year flood level thus making
it available for urban
development.
47 The design proposed a cut and fill exercise so that there would be no
adverse impact up or downstream. It was accepted that the
scheme was purely a
design concept and that a more detailed plan would be needed to support any
development application to the Baulkham
Hills Shire Council (the Council), whose
approval of the scheme would be required.
48 Mr Bewsher considered that a hypothetical prudent purchaser would be
likely to obtain advice from a hydrological engineer that
such a scheme could be
achieved. The scheme could be carried out in conjunction with other landowners
or separately on an individual
property basis. He considered that it was more
likely that the landowners would either co-ordinate their activities or sell
lands to a development company.
49 If the scheme was implemented, Mr Bewsher considered that 38,857m² of
the Caruso properties, 14,888m² of the Mesiti land,
15,314m² of the
Polito land and 15,513m² of the Nati land could be developed for
residential or other urban purposes permissible
under the assumed Rural 1(a)
zoning under the 2005 LEP which her Honour described (at [154]) as
unusually generous
50 At [62] her Honour referred to the evidence of Dr Joliffe (the hydrologist
called on behalf of the appellant) that because the
Bewsher scheme was a concept
design only, he could not determine if it was likely to receive Council
approval. However, he considered
that the scheme did not conform to the
regional drainage strategy for the area adopted in 2004 by the Council and would
require the Council to revise its planning principles and policies if
it was to be approved. Furthermore, it required the provision
of detention
storage or basins at locations outside the drainage corridor that had not been
previously considered by the Council.
It had other negative aspects.
51 At [63] the primary judge noted that the hydrologists had met and produced
three joint reports. According to her Honour (at [64]),
those experts had
agreed that it was possible to construct the Bewsher scheme so that it had no
adverse impact downstream. Further,
they had agreed that catchment detention
facilities could have been located other than in the main channel of Strangers
[68] her Honour said:
“The Bewsher scheme provides drainage only for the properties in the
relevant area along Strangers Creek and no catchment detention
facilities.
Catchment detention basins are proposed for this area but, if not constructed,
alternative detention basins could be
provided at other locations upstream of
Windsor Road.”
52 It is sufficient at this point to note that her Honour accepted (at
[82]-[83]) the following of the respondents’ submissions.
rezoning would not be required before the Bewsher scheme could be implemented.
Second, a hypothetical prudent purchaser
would have obtained advice from the
appropriate Council officer as to whether the Bewsher scheme was likely to be
considered for
possible approval and would have been informed that it would be
so considered and that it was adequate for pre-DA stage consideration
planning officers. Third, the Bewsher scheme was adequate for consideration by
a prudent hypothetical purchaser when
determining whether any value should be
added to the land within the flood zone based on an assessment by that purchaser
it was likely that the scheme would be approved.
53 Other findings of fact were made by her Honour the details of which are
not presently relevant but, generally speaking, they supported
her finding (at
[86]) that a prudent hypothetical purchaser would be prepared to add value to
the purchase price of the acquired
land (and, presumably, the residue land
within the flood zone) on the basis that the Bewsher scheme might receive
development consent
although that purchaser would not assume that all relevant
property owners would cooperate and carry out the scheme at the same time.
However, the purchaser would be advised that the scheme could be implemented on
a property-by-property basis.
54 Furthermore, at [156] her Honour acknowledged that a prudent hypothetical
purchaser would consider that there was uncertainty about
whether the Bewsher
scheme would gain development consent for any individual lot as a consequence
whereof she adjusted the rate per
square metre derived from the comparable sales
evidence which she proposed to apply to determine the market value of the
land to take account of that fact.
The appellant’s challenges to the primary judge’s
55 The appellant advanced a number of challenges to her Honour’s
finding as stated in the first sentence of [86] that
“there would be an assumption made [by the hypothetical prudent purchaser]
that the Bewsher scheme was likely to be considered
favourably by the
That finding with respect to issue (ii) (see [36] above) was further
summarised by her Honour at [178(ii)] in the following terms:
“(ii) the Bewsher scheme is a matter which a prudent, hypothetical
purchaser is likely to obtain advice about and he or she
would be likely to
assign value on the basis that such a scheme could be implemented on individual
properties, that is, development
in isolation, not at the same time as a whole
regional scheme ...”
56 Before dealing with the appellant’s challenges it is appropriate to
make some comments about its filed Grounds of Appeal.
With one now irrelevant
exception, the grounds were common to each respondent. Initially there were
eight Grounds of Appeal of
which Grounds 4 and 6 were abandoned at the
commencement of the hearing of the appeal. The other Grounds which were
maintained were
stated in the following terms:
“1. The trial judge erred at law in the application of s.56(1)(a) of the
Lands (sic) Acquisition (Just Terms Compensation)
Act 1991 (‘the LAJTC
Act’) in the determination of the probable zoning upon which the market
value of the acquired lands
and adjoining lands was to be assessed,
a. By determining that it was only in respect of the acquired land, and not
of the whole of the former parcel, for which the application
of s.56(1)(a) was
to require the disregarding of the present zoning and hence an investigation of
an ‘underlying’ zoning
b. By failing to determine that the existing residential zoning of the lands
within the 1:100 year flood extent was something to be
disregarded under
s.56(1)(a) of the LAJTC Act as something caused by the proposal of the Appellant
to carry out a public purpose
on the acquired land ([8] [9] (No 2));
c. By impermissibly disregarding under s.56(1)(a) of the LAJTC Act the
planning purpose of authorities other than the Appellant in
placing detention
basins on the subject land and thus using the whole of the former parcel for
trunk drainage purposes when those
purposes were not part of, or were
independent of, any proposal of the Appellant to carry out a public purpose on
the land to be
2. The trial judge erred at law in misdirecting herself as to what was the
highest and best use of the subject land and how compensation
was to be derived
under s.55 of the LAJTC Act as to the market value of the land in achieving that
highest and best use (at [55],
[80], [82], [83],
Particulars
a. The trial judge found that the present zoning of the subject land was a
matter to be disregarded under s.55(1)(a) of the LAJTC
Act, and that the
‘underlying zoning’ was one for rural purposes.
b. The trial judge failed to find that in order for the land to achieve its
highest and best use of residential development, a re-zoning
would be required
to change the zoning from its underlying rural designation to something
permitting residential development, injecting
elements of time and risk into the
determination of the appropriate compensation payable under s.55 of the LAJTC
[Act] on achieving
the highest and best use of the subject land;
c. The trial judge found that pursuit of a cut and fill scheme of land
development was itself the highest and best use of the subject
land without
making findings as to the higher purpose to which that scheme of land
development would be put or without finding that
a re-zoning application would
be a necessary pre-condition to achieving that higher purpose;
d. To the extent that the trial judge may be taken (at [154]) to have found
that the highest and best use of the residue land may
be for a form of rural
development such as under State Environmental Planning Policy (Senior’s
Living) 2004, or for some rural-commercial
purpose, her Honour misdirected
herself as to the test for determining the highest and best use or misdirected
herself on the evidence
by failing to take into account whether this purported
‘highest and best use’ or misdirected herself on the evidence
failing to take into account whether this purported ‘highest and best
use’ (sic) would be likely to obtain the consent
of the council given its
potential impacts on flood affected land containing endangered ecological
community vegetation.
e. The trial judge failed to make a finding that the cut and fill scheme of
land development would be carried out under some distinct
proposal for the rural
use of the land, being the highest and best use; meaning that the trial judge
either asked herself the wrong
question as to what was the highest and best use
of the subject land, or failed to take into account a relevant consideration of
how the cut and fill scheme was connected to a determined ‘highest and
3. The trial judge erred at law and misdirected herself as to the relevant test
for determining a ‘just’ amount of compensation
under the LAJTC Act
by finding that it was open to her to resolve an issue upon which the expert
evidence relating to hydrological
impacts of the scheme of cut and fill land
development conflicted by finding in favour of the Respondent in cases of doubt
5. The trial judge erred in finding that the land was not subject to an inherent
characteristic of being the only land in the catchment
suitable for use for
trunk drainage (at [52]).
Particulars
a. Her Honour found that the Appellant was required to show a
‘consistent coincidence’ between what was asserted to be
an inherent
characteristic of the land that it was uniquely suitable for a ‘use for
trunk drainage’ and the public purpose
for which the land was acquired,
which was a misunderstanding of the Appellant’s case and a misapplication
of s.56(1)(a) of
the LAJTC Act;
b. Section 56(1)(a) of the LAJTC Act would require the Court to disregard
increases or decreases in value by reason of the public
purpose proposed to be
carried out on the subject land but did not require the Court to disregard an
inherent characteristic of the
land that decreased its value when that decrease
was not brought about by the public purpose of the Appellant.
c. As the inherent characteristic of the land was not taken into account, the
trial judge failed to consider a relevant matter in
the determination of a just
amount of compensation to be paid by the Appellant under the LAJTC Act.
7. The trial judge erred at law in determining that the just compensation to be
determined under s.55 of the LAJTC Act was by use
of a piecemeal method of
valuation, because:
a. Having made all findings on the town planning, hydrology and ecology
evidence on the basis of a ‘before and after’
method of valuing the
acquired land, it was not reasonably open to her Honour to then adopt a
piecemeal method of land value (sic)
to finally determine the compensation
payable by the Appellant.
b. Her Honour failed to apply the provisions of a (sic) s.55(f) of the LAJTC
Act for a deduction for the increase in value of the
other land adjoining the
acquired land;
c. Her Honour relied upon a principle of valuation derived from the decision
Constantino v RTA
[2004] NSWLEC 517
(2004) 135 LGERA 365
which was not applicable to the
subject case.”
57 In opening the appeal, senior counsel for the appellant acknowledged that
by virtue of
Land and Environment Court
(the Court Act) any appeal from the primary judge’s orders was confined to
an appeal against her Honour’s decision on
a question of law. Senior
counsel therefore attempted in opening the appeal to fashion what he asserted
were four questions of law.
58 The first was whether, on the proper construction of s 56(1)(a) of the
Just Terms Act, her Honour was required to apply that sub-clause
only to the
acquired land or to the whole of the land (including the residue land) of each
of the respondents. This question of
law was said to be encompassed by Grounds
1(a) and (b) and Ground 7 of the filed Grounds of Appeal. Senior counsel
acknowledged
that it raised the question of “
59 The second asserted question of law was also founded on s 56(1)(a)
combined with s 55 and was to the following effect: having found
the underlying
zoning of the land within the flood zone to be Rural 1(a), her Honour erred in
then determining its highest and best
use without having any regard whatsoever
to the principles or policies adopted by the Council in 2004 to the effect, as I
the submission, that the whole of that land was required for a
regional trunk drainage scheme involving the location within that
number of drainage basins. In other words, notwithstanding her Honour’s
recitation of the planning history (which
included the proposed provision of
trunk drainage within the Strangers Creek area), she had in essence adopted the
Bewsher scheme
without taking into account that that scheme was inconsistent
with the Council’s adopted principles and policies with respect
drainage upon the land within the flood zone.
60 It was submitted that it was simply not open to her Honour to adopt the
Bewsher scheme in the face of the history of the Council’s
and Department
of Planning’s trunk drainage requirements for the area and which involved
the whole of the land within the flood
zone. It was asserted that Grounds of
Appeal 1(c) and 2 covered the foregoing submission.
61 The third question of law was said to arise out of her Honour’s
reliance upon a passage from the judgment of Talbot J in
McBaron v Roads and
Traffic Authority of New South Wales
(1995) 87 LGERA 238
at 244-245 when
determining whether to accept the evidence of Mr Bewsher with respect to the
prospects of his scheme being approved
by the Council in preference to the
conflicting evidence of Dr Joliffe who considered that it was unlikely that the
scheme would
be approved by the Council given the planning history and the
policies and principles with respect to trunk drainage adopted by the
(and which was the subject of the second asserted question of law). The
question of law so posed was said to be covered
by Ground of Appeal 3.
62 The fourth and final question of law, which was but faintly pressed,
asserted that her Honour, contrary to the decision of the
High Court in
[1990] HCA 42
(1990) 71 LGRA 1
, had failed to find, and then to take into account,
that it was an inherent characteristic of the acquired land (and presumably the
whole of the land within the flood zone) that it be used only for the purpose of
a regional trunk drainage scheme. Consequently,
as I understand the submission,
it was not open to her Honour to adopt the Bewsher scheme with respect to that
land. This question
of law was said to be covered by Ground of Appeal 5.
The respondents’ challenge to the filed Grounds of Appeal
63 The respondents submitted that Grounds of Appeal 2, 3 and 5 raised only
questions of fact and were not related to any decision
by her Honour on a
question of law. They further submitted that Ground of Appeal 1 was
misconceived insofar as it purported to assert
that s 56(1)(a) of the Just Terms
Act applied not only to the land acquired but also to any residue land within
the flood zone adjoining
the land acquired. Ground of Appeal 1(c) was also said
to be misconceived insofar as it purported to raise a question of construction
of s 56(1)(a).
64 Ground of Appeal 7 was also asserted to be misconceived as first, there
was no requirement for her Honour to apply what is referred
to in Ground of
Appeal 7(a) as the “
before and after
” method of valuation
and, second, Ground of Appeal 7(b) did not raise a question of law but only a
question of fact which had
been determined contrary to the appellant.
65 In my view there is substance in the respondents’ submissions, but
at the end of the day it is unnecessary to deal with the
respondents’
criticism of the individual Grounds of Appeal given the manner in which the
appellant sought to confine its case
on the appeal. In my view it is more
appropriate to limit these reasons to a consideration of the issues actually
advanced on the
hearing of the appeal rather than those articulated in the filed
Grounds of Appeal. I now turn to the former.
The first alleged question of law
66 I would reject the appellant’s submission that s 56(1)(a) of the
Just Terms Act applies to any increase or decrease in the
value of land other
than the acquired land. Any question of so-called “betterment” is
irrelevant to the determination
of the market value of the acquired land and it
is only the acquired land to which s 56(1) applies. This is made clear by the
of s 55(a) which requires regard to be had when determining the
amount of compensation to which a person is entitled to
“the market value of the land on the date of
acquisition”. (Emphasis added)
This is a clear reference to the market value of the acquired land. There
are other textual references in s 56(1)(a) itself which
in my view confines its
operation to the land compulsorily acquired.
67 Any question of “betterment” falls under s 55(f) which
relevantly provides that regard must be had to
“any increase or decrease... in the value of any other land of the person
at the date of acquisition which adjoins ... the
acquired land by reason of the
carrying out of, or the proposal to carry out, the public purpose for which the
land was acquired.”
68 It follows that the first question of law as framed by the appellant in
its opening is misconceived insofar as it seeks to raise
“betterment” issue. However, s 55(f) is raised, in a fashion, by
Ground of Appeal 7.
69 The primary judge did not deal with the issue of betterment in the first
judgment, but did so in the second judgment. The respective
arguments of the
parties were stated by her Honour in the second judgment as follows:
“3. The Applicants argue that a piecemeal approach is appropriate because
the before and after method will not provide the
market value to which the
Applicants are entitled under the [Just Terms Act]. Because the residue land is
currently zoned residential
following the rezoning of the land surrounding the
acquired land, the value of that residue land has consequently increased
substantially
in the after scenario. That rezoning was implemented at the same
time the zoning of the acquired land to special purposes was implemented
2006 amendments to [the 2005 LEP]. There is an unwarranted reduction in market
value if the before and after method is applied.
A piecemeal approach, which is
available on the evidence of the valuers, is therefore appropriate. This
approach is supported by
Constantino v Roads and Traffic Authority of New
South Wales
[2004] NSWLEC 517
(2004) 135 LGERA
4. The Respondent argues that a piecemeal approach is incorrect. A before and
after approach is the legally correct approach and
is the approach the valuers
took. The facts in
Constantino
are different from this matter and it
does not apply.”
70 It is a matter of judgment whether a “piecemeal approach” as
distinct from a “before and after” approach
is appropriate when
dealing with issues of injurious affection or betterment under s 55(f) of the
Just Terms Act. A “piecemeal
approach” involves the assessment of
the market value of the acquired land and accounts separately for any injurious
to or enhancement of the value of any retained land, whereas a
“before and after approach” involves calculating compensation
subtracting the market value of any retained land immediately after acquisition
from the market value of the entire land immediately
before acquisition. Both
approaches depend in the first place upon a finding that any increase or
decrease in the value of any residue
by reason of the carrying
out of, or the proposal to carry out,
the public purpose for which the
land was acquired
”. What is required is a connection between any such
increase or decrease in value and the carrying out, or the proposal to
out, the relevant public purpose, in the present case being the undertaking by
the appellant of trunk drainage works on the
acquired land.
71 The primary judge’s findings with respect to this issue were as
“8. As submitted by the [respondents’] counsel, the zoning of the
residue land as residential results in a substantial
increase in value of the
land in the after scenario if the before and after approach is used. I consider
that zoning is not linked
to any decrease or increase in value of the lands
resulting from the public purpose of the [appellant] in undertaking trunk
works on the acquired land, referring to the definition of market value
in s 56(1) of the [Just Terms Act]. Rather it reflects the
overall planning
aims and objectives of the Council and the Department of Planning in relation to
the urban development of the Strangers
Creek area generally. This issue was
discussed in detail in
Caruso No 1
in the context of determining the
underlying zoning of the acquired land at [35]-[49]. That it has relevance to
the residue land
was unfortunately not raised in the substantive hearing given
the issue has now been raised in the course of determining final
9. My conclusion that the zoning of the residue land is not linked to the public
purpose of the [appellant] is sustained by my earlier
findings in
in relation to the underlying zoning of the acquired lands. In
I held that the public purpose of the acquisition was that of the
[appellant] acquiring the [respondents’] lands for trunk
drainage. That
purpose was more limited in scope than the purpose contended for by the
[respondents]. As part of that finding I
held that the Council and the
Department of Planning had planning purposes and responsibilities in relation to
the provision of trunk
drainage and other services separate from the
[appellant]. The residential zoning of the residue land relates to those
purposes and responsibilities of those entities and is separate from
the public purpose of the
acquisition.”
72 The reference at [8] above is to [35]-[49] of the first judgment under the
Finding on underlying zoning
” which included,
relevantly, the following findings:
“40. ... The Department and the Council’s consideration of how
drainage for the BRRA including Strangers Creek would
be addressed was not to be
disregarded at the time that the [Sydney Water Board] assumed responsibility for
the provision of drainage
in 1991. ... The Council’s approach was that
land in creek corridors which was flood affected would be used for trunk
and this could not be disregarded. This approach would mean that the
rural zoning of the flood affected land which existed in 1991
continued until the date of acquisition.
42. ... The [appellant] had agreed by January/February 1991 that it would
construct and maintain the trunk drainage system for the
BRRA including the
maintenance of the [flood zone] to levels suitable for drainage purposes. In so
doing it adopted the existing
scheme as had been developed by the Department
through SREP 19 and the Kinhill scheme and the Council through its planning
and contributions to the regional planning for the RHDA and the BRRA
in particular. I agree with the [appellant’s] submissions
that the public
purpose of the [appellant] as manifested in 1991 in its agreeing to undertake
the delivery of a trunk drainage scheme
for the BRRA, inter alia, as part of the
RHDA does not mean that any trunk drainage use of the land is to be disregarded.
Given the responsibility of the state and local levels of government for
planning, particularly the Council in relation to the determination
(ultimately with the approval of the Minister for Planning for any local
environmental plan) the potential trunk drainage
use of the land existed
separately from the purpose of the [appellant] as the acquiring authority. That
responsibility for drainage
in the whole RHDA and the BRRA is reflected in the
planning instruments being developed from 1989 such as the SREP and the
LEP. The use of flood-liable land for drainage purposes was
referred to in these
43. ... The Kinhill Scheme developed in 1989 was at the request of the
Department and the Council and adopted the [flood zone] as
the area of land
required for trunk drainage with the use of natural creek lines as far as
All further reports and studies on the implementation of drainage
referred to in the chronology by the planners, while amending the
detail of the
implementation of that plan in relation to matters such as the location of
basins, have continued with that essential
44. The underlying zoning as at the date of acquisition in 2007 (but effectively
2005 when the LEP Amendment 5 was made) therefore
needs to be determined in
light of the broader planning context. That is not subsumed by the
[appellant’s] purpose of carrying
out trunk drainage on the acquired land,
inter alia.
45. ... An important document in the [respondents’] case is the Council
officer’s report dated 24 January 1991 which
states that the land zoned
Rural 1(a) to be acquired by Sydney Water for trunk drainage was to be zoned for
special use, areas to
be zoned open space would be acquired by the Council and
land in private ownership would be zoned in accordance with the adjoining
This would mean that the land [within the flood zone] not required for trunk
drainage would be zoned residential in this case and
be subject to development
controls relating to its flood prone nature.
The [appellant] argued that
[that] report had to be disregarded as it was driven by the public purpose of
the [appellant].
46. ... Subsequent studies concerning drainage were undertaken, in particular
the 2002 GHD report and the PPK report in which detailed
planning for trunk
drainage was undertaken. Based on these broader planning considerations and
informed by those studies, the Council’s
LEP was developed over several
years. ... The BRRA structure plan was exhibited in 2003, adopted in 2004 and
the LEP Amendment 5
which zoned the acquired land Special Uses 5(a) was then
made. The adjoining land was then zoned residential. That all occurred
light of the involvement of the [appellant] since 1991.” (Emphasis
73 The appellant submitted that the last sentence of [46] indicated a
connection between the zoning of the land adjoining the acquired
Residential and the involvement of the appellant since 1991 in the trunk
drainage proposals associated with Strangers Creek.
The respondents submitted
that the evidence established that the appellant’s
involvement
” to which her Honour was referring related to
and was a catalyst for the release of land in the Kellyville/Rouse Hill area
urban development including the means by which that release would be scheduled.
They contended that her Honour was not making
a finding that the Residential
rezoning effected in 2006 by Amendment No. 5 to the 2005 LEP was due to the
involvement of the then
Water Board.
74 When one reads the last sentence of [46] in the context of her
Honour’s findings in the preceding paragraphs including, in
particular,
her finding at [42] which I have emphasised, it is apparent that the
appellant’s contention as to what her Honour
was intending to convey in
that sentence must be rejected.
75 The appellant further submitted that the primary judge had failed to take
into account how the market value of the respondents’
residue lands had
been affected by the enhanced development potential of land within the flood
zone. This arose because of the acquisition
by the appellant of the land zoned
Special Uses 5(a) which resolved the drainage issues which had held up the
development potential
of those residue lands.
76 However, her Honour essentially rejected the appellant’s argument at
[8] and [9] of the second judgment which I have set
out at [71] above. Her
findings in those paragraphs were essentially findings of fact. They did not
involve any decision by her
Honour on a question of law.
77 Whether or not s 55(f) was engaged involved an evaluative judgment by the
judicial valuer in the light of the relevant historical
evidence. No question
of law was involved. The appellant’s real complaint is that her Honour
rejected the finding of fact
for which it contended. It was not suggested that
she had in any way misdirected herself as to the requirements of s 55(f). It
follows that the first challenge to her Honour’s decision on a so-called
question of law advanced by the appellant should be
The second alleged question of law
78 The essence of the appellant’s submissions with respect to the issue
raised was that, in finding that the highest and best
use of the acquired land
under its Rural 1(a) zoning was for one or more of the purposes permitted under
that zoning by the 2005
LEP (such as for a display home village or a retirement
village under
State Environmental Planning Policy (Housing for Seniors or
People with a Disability)
2004), her Honour had impermissibly disregarded
the drainage history of the land within the flood zone, the effect of which was
that land would not be made available by the Council for any form of urban
development as it would be required solely for trunk drainage
79 The issue so raised was directed at her Honour’s finding with
respect to the Bewsher scheme, as the approval by the Council
implementation of that or a similar scheme was necessary before any land within
the flood zone, and not otherwise required
for trunk drainage, was capable of
sustaining some form of urban development. Such development could not occur
unless that land
was filled to above the 100 year flood level.
80 At [55] under the heading “
Issue 2: highest and best use of the
land/advice to hypothetical purchaser/vendor
”, her Honour observed
that having made findings with respect to the underlying zoning of the acquired
land relevant to the
determination of its market value, it was then necessary to
determine the value of that land based on its highest and best use.
That raised
for determination the question of whether a prudent hypothetical purchaser and
vendor would have been advised that the
highest and best use of the land
included the implementation of the Bewsher scheme.
81 At [56] her Honour referred to the planners’ evidence (Mr Rowan for
the appellant and Mr Grech for the respondents) as to
whether filling within the
flood zone in accordance with the Bewsher scheme was likely to be allowed.
Reference was then made to
a meeting on 2 January 2008 between Messrs Rowan,
Grech, a Mr Gear (the Council’s Waterways Manager) and a Mr Rayner (the
Project Manager, Forward Planning) to discuss the Bewsher scheme
in light of what advice the Council would have provided to the hypothetical
purchaser in December 2007. (This date appears to be an error and was no doubt
intended as a reference to March 2007, the month
in which the acquisition
82 According to her Honour, the minute that summarised that meeting noted,
inter alia, that the Council’s primary consideration
was that any work on
the Strangers Creek watercourse would not impact on the upstream or downstream
flood behaviour and that the
Bewsher scheme diagrams were suitable only for
pre-DA discussions and more detailed material would need to accompany a
development
application to address the various issues including whether the
width of the drainage corridor provided in the scheme was likely
sufficient to achieve rehabilitation of the creek channels. Her Honour then
recorded (at [57] and [58]) Mr Rowan’s view
that it was unlikely that a
development application for the Bewsher scheme would be approved and the
contrary view of Mr Grech.
83 At [59]-[68] her Honour summarised the evidence of the hydrologists, Mr
Bewsher and Dr Joliffe, to which I have referred at [46]-[50]
[69]-[72] she summarised the respondents’ submissions to the effect that a
hypothetical prudent purchaser would
expect that the Bewsher scheme could be
implemented “
in some form
”, noting (at [69]) that she was not
required to embark upon the exercise of determining whether development consent
given. Rather, it was only necessary for her to consider the advice
that a willing but not anxious prudent hypothetical purchaser
84 At [73] her Honour recorded the appellant’s submission that the
Bewsher scheme would not have been approved for the development
of the land
within the flood zone. This was, in particular, due to the fact that the
proposal required the resiting of detention
basins into areas outside that zone
and onto land beyond that of the respondents. At [76] her Honour noted the
appellant’s
submission that
“... Dr Joliffe’s evidence is that the Bewsher scheme would not be
supported or approved by the Council”.
85 Under the heading “
Finding on Bewsher
”, her Honour
observed (at [78]) that, consistent with what she had said at [69], she must
“what advice a prudent hypothetical purchaser would obtain in relation to
the possible development of flood affected land and
whether that advice would
cause such a purchaser (and vendor) to add additional value for the flood
affected land on the assumption
that it is potentially
developable”.
86 At [79] her Honour relevantly said:
“Firstly, it is necessary to determine what information would be available
to a prudent, hypothetical purchaser (and vendor).
The RHIC flood information
[which indicated the extent of the flood zone] was generated as part of the
trunk drainage planning by
the Department and the Council and the RHIC ... That
information would be available to a hypothetical purchaser. In any event, the
experts agreed that a drainage strategy would have been developed to facilitate
development and that would be likely to be available
to a prudent
purchaser...”
87 At [80] the primary judge acknowledged Mr Bewsher’s oral evidence
that a strategy plan would need to be approved by the Council
before individual
owners could develop their lots using his scheme. She relevantly continued:
“While Dr Joliffe considered the Council would not approve the scheme
because the land was required for detention basins, the
joint report stated that
detention basins could go elsewhere in this region of Strangers Creek. ... Dr
Joliffe raised doubts in oral
evidence about whether other sites would be cost
effective but also agreed that there was no physical necessity for the detention
basins to be located in the [flood zone] provided that the water could drain
out. ... It therefore appears from this expert evidence
there is flexibility in
where the detention basins can go to accommodate the regional drainage needs of
the Strangers Creek area.”
88 Her Honour then made the following finding of fact (at [81]):
“I consider a prudent purchaser is likely to consider that it would be
feasible to get development consent for proposals such
as the Bewsher scheme on
the basis that any detention basins planned for the area could ultimately be
located elsewhere. Such a
purchaser is likely to obtain some advice from an
expert hydrologist such as Mr Bewsher or Dr
89 Relevant to the third question of law raised by Ground of Appeal 3 was the
following further passage at [81] which it is convenient
to record here:
“In this case the advice presented to the Court has been conflicting. Mr
Bewsher has proposed his scheme as one a prudent
hypothetical purchaser could
rely on. Mr (sic) Joliffe considered the proposal [as] unlikely to be approved
by the Council. Dr
Joliffe’s knowledge of drainage matters is greater
than the prudent, hypothetical purchaser and his adviser is likely to have,
given Dr Joliffe’s involvement in the planning of the trunk drainage
scheme for Strangers Creek including preparation of the
GHD report (2002). In
this case the level of technical debate and evidence from the hydrologists is
greater than a prudent hypothetical
purchase (sic) would have before him or her.
The [respondents] submitted that when expert evidence is conflicting all
doubts are to be resolved in favour of the claimant ‘
where practicable
in order to achieve a just result’
at 244-245 and
that is the approach I intend to adopt
90 Leaving to one side the reference to
, her Honour
“82. A prudent purchaser is likely to obtain the advice of a town planner
concerning the likelihood of obtaining consent for
a particular drainage scheme.
As identified above, the LEP allows extensive development on rural zoned land
including extensive display
a rezoning would be needed before Bewsher could be implemented, contrary to the
[appellant’s] submission. Filling in floodplains can be permissible under
the NSW Floodplain Manual and there is otherwise
no evidence (as opposed to
submissions) before me suggesting that drainage works in a floodplain would not
at least be considered
by the Council as permissible development given that the
scheme is designed not to have adverse flood impact
83. A purchaser would speak to a Council officer to obtain advice on whether a
scheme such as that of Mr Bewsher is likely to be
considered for possible
approval. In this case Mr Rowan attended a meeting with Mr Gear, Waterways
Manager with the Council, and
others on 2 January 2008 and the advice recorded
in a minute prepared by Mr Rowan was that a scheme such as the Bewsher scheme
be considered. That Council officer considered the Bewsher scheme, as
detailed to the same extent as in these proceedings, was adequate
for the pre-DA
stage. That suggests it is also adequate for consideration by a prudent
purchaser to determine if value should be
added based on an assessment of
whether it would be approved. The relevant time for advice is that likely to be
obtained by the
prudent hypothetical purchaser at the date of acquisition (March
2007). The advice from the Council officers is based on a meeting
January 2008. That advice is reasonably close in time to the date of
acquisition. As recognised in
Housing Commission of New South Wales v
[1981] 1 NSWLR 547
at 558 events after the date of acquisition
which confirm foresight can be relied on and I consider it is appropriate to
information in that minute into account as information that a prudent
hypothetical purchaser would be likely to
91 Notwithstanding that the five respondents had essentially joined forces
for the purpose of the present litigation and had Mr Bewsher
prepare his scheme
on the basis that 20 property owners would be minded to join together to
implement it at the same time, her Honour
acknowledged that it was necessary to
consider each of the respondents’ applications as a separate claim under
the Just Terms
Act. At [85] she found that a prudent, hypothetical purchaser
would not assume that the scheme would be implemented at the same
time with the
co-operation of all the necessary landholders and, further, that a hypothetical
prudent purchaser would not assume
that uniform agreement from all the
landholders would be achievable.
92 The primary judge’s conclusion with respect to her findings on the
Bewsher scheme are encapsulated at [86] in the following
A purchaser would be aware of the need to provide a riparian zone for
any development proposed, which further supports my finding
that there would be
an assumption made that the Bewsher scheme was likely to be considered
favourably by the Council
. While I consider that a prudent purchaser would
be prepared to add value to a purchase price on the basis that a scheme such as
the Bewsher scheme may get development consent, I do not consider that extends
to an assumption that all relevant property owners
would cooperate and carry out
the scheme at the same time. The Bewsher scheme is able to be implemented on a
property by property
basis according to Mr Bewsher. As represented on figure 2,
that would mean that filling would occur to a greater extent on the Mesiti
and Polito land, up to the dashed yellow line being the ‘development in
isolation’ option.” (Emphasis
93 Turning to the appellant’s submissions on the second alleged
question of law, it is plain in my view that her Honour’s
findings were
all ones of fact. In any event, it is tolerably apparent that she took into
account, and had regard to, the appellant’s
case based on the evidence of
Dr Joliffe that in view of the planning history, the Bewsher scheme would not be
supported or approved
by the Council, particularly because the land in question
was required for detention basins: see at [87].
94 Even if her Honour’s decision did involve some question of law which
(so far as is presently relevant) in my view it did
not, her findings with
respect to the Bewsher scheme were made in circumstances where she had
considered the attitude of the Council
towards that scheme contended for by the
appellant and which was encapsulated in the evidence of Dr Joliffe to the effect
Council was unlikely to approve it given its adoption in 2004 of a
trunk drainage scheme within the flood zone which included detention
within that zone.
95 However, the primary judge ultimately concluded that notwithstanding Dr
Joliffe’s opinion, and in the light of the joint
experts’ report
that detention basins could go elsewhere in the region of Strangers Creek, a
prudent hypothetical purchaser
was likely to consider that it would be feasible
to obtain development consent for a proposal such as the Bewsher scheme on the
that any detention basins otherwise planned for the flood zone could
ultimately be located elsewhere.
96 Whether or not this was a correct finding is irrelevant: it was a finding
of fact that had an evidentiary basis and therefore unassailable
on an appeal
under s 57 of the Court Act. I would therefore reject the appellant’s
challenge to her Honour’s decision
based on the second alleged question of
The appellant’s third question of law
97 The issue raised by Ground of Appeal 3 does raise a question of law. It
is founded upon the last sentence of [81] of her Honour’s
judgment that I
have emphasised at [89] above.
98 Her Honour had earlier referred to the decision in
when she said:
“My role in a valuation matter such as this is to act as the judicial
valuer. There is case law to suggest that doubts about
valuation matters are to
be resolved in favour of more liberal estimates for the dispossessed. The
[respondents] relied on
... in making that
submission.”
99 As so stated, no error is disclosed and her Honour’s statement is
unexceptional. It has been long established that in cases
such as the present,
doubts with respect to matters of value are to be resolved in favour of the
dispossessed owner. This is consistent
with the objective of the Just Terms Act
set out in s 3(1)(b) and the entitlement of that owner, subject to s 55, to be
justly compensate[d]”
as mandated by s 54(1).
100 Thus in
Commissioner of Succession Duties (SA) v Executor, Trustee
& Agency Co of South Australia Ltd
[1947] HCA 10
(1947) 74 CLR 358
373-374, Dixon J observed:
“In a case of compensation doubts are resolved in favour of a more liberal
estimate ...”
Boland v Yates Property Corporation Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 64
(1999) 74 ALJR 209
per Callinan J;
Cassidy v Sydney
Corporation
[2008] NSWLEC 223
per Jagot J.
101 However, it was submitted that her Honour misstated the principle in the
last sentence of [81] of her judgment which, for convenience,
“The [respondents] submitted that when expert evidence is conflicting all
doubts are to be resolved in favour of the claimant
‘where practicable in
order to achieve a just result’:
at 244-245 and that is the
approach I intend to adopt.”
Talbot J said at the pages referred to:
“Unless a head of compensation can be found within s 55, it cannot be
recovered under the [Just Terms Act] even if that means
the person will not be
justly compensated ... Nevertheless it is appropriate to seek to do justice by
adopting a generous approach
in favour of the resumee to ensure that just
compensation is paid so far as the Act allows. Therefore any discretion should
be exercised
in favour of the claimant where practicable in order to achieve a
just result.”
103 I would understand the discretion to which his Honour was referring as
being the evaluative judgment called for in determining
the relevant elements of
value to be adopted for the purpose of assessing an appropriate award of
compensation.
104 It was submitted that the principle (if that be its correct description)
referred to has no application to the process of accepting
or rejecting
conflicting evidence of fact or opinion. Reliance was placed upon the following
observation of Sheller JA, with whom
Beazley JA agreed, in
Archibald v Byron
Shire Council
[2003] NSWCA 292
(2003) 129 LGERA 311
“Where a dispute, such as this one, involves something in the nature of an
intellectual exchange with reasons and analysis
advanced on either side, the
parties are entitled to have the judge enter into the issues canvassed before
the Court and to an explanation
by the judge as to why the judge prefers one
case over the other. This is particularly so where there is disputed expert
105 The respondents conceded that the statement of the primary judge in the
last sentence of [81] involved an error of law. They
contended, however, first,
that although her Honour indicated that that was the approach she intended to
adopt, there was nothing
in the succeeding paragraphs of the first judgment that
indicated that she had in fact favoured the evidence of Mr Bewsher over that
Dr Joliffe because to do so would achieve a more just result. Second, it was
submitted that her Honour did not need to resolve
and did not in fact resolve
the conflict between Mr Bewsher and Dr Joliffe so to prefer the view of one to
that of the other.
106 It was submitted that all her Honour found (at [86]) was that a prudent
hypothetical purchaser would be prepared to add value
to the purchase price of
the relevant land on the basis that the Bewsher scheme might receive development
consent which, when determining
(at [156]) the appropriate rate per square metre
to apply to that land, she discounted to take account of the fact that such a
would consider that there was uncertainty about whether the Bewsher
scheme would in fact obtain development consent for any individual
107 In these circumstances, so it was submitted, notwithstanding the
erroneous statement of principle to which reference has been
made, it is
apparent that her Honour did not apply the approach that she had indicated she
intended to adopt in making her findings
with respect to the Bewsher scheme.
108 The relevant principle as to the effect of an error of law such as that
asserted by the appellant is well established. In
Leichhardt Municipal
Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
(1981) 48 LGRA 409
compensation case like the present), Moffitt P stated:
“It is not sufficient to show that some error of law appears in the
judgment or during the course of the trial. The error
has to be one upon which
the decision depends, so the decision is vitiated by the error. .... It will
not suffice to establish
that one or some only of a number of alternative
findings upon which the decision was given involved errors of law, if one
alternative
involved no error of law.”
109 This statement has been repeated and applied in numerous cases including
in this Court: see
Yates Property Corporation Pty Ltd (In liq) v Darling
Harbour Authority
(1991) 24 NSWLR 156
at 177 per Handley JA;
Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v Deerubbin Local Aboriginal Land Council
(1998) 43 NSWLR 249
at 255 per Handley and Powell JJA;
Roads and Traffic
Authority of New South Wales v Hurstville City Council
[2001] NSWCA 11
(2001) 112 LGERA 223
per Mason P with whom Sheller and Powell JJA
agreed. In the last-mentioned case the President said:
“An error of law must vitiate the operative determination before it will
ground an appeal.”
AMP Capital Investors Limited v Transport Infrastructure
Development Corporation
[2008] NSWCA 325
(also a compulsory acquisition
case) at [120], Gyles AJA held that where there was an error on a question of
law, that error would
require any finding based upon it to be set aside unless
it was clear that the result would not change in the event of reconsideration.
It was not sufficient (to avoid the setting aside of the relevant finding) that
some basis may exist for upholding the decision.
111 The relevance in the present case of the foregoing observations of Gyles
AJA is the requirement that the finding sought to be
set aside must be based
upon the relevant error. This is consistent with the statement of Moffitt P in
Seatainer Terminals
that the error must be one upon which the challenged
finding depends.
112 Finally, in
Tuite v Wingecarribbee Shire Council (No 2)
, Preston CJ, having found that a commissioner erred in law in his
determination of an appeal against the refusal by a council of
a development
application, observed (at [33]):
“However, it is well settled that it is not sufficient to establish merely
that the decision under appeal discloses an error
of law; that error must be of
such significance as to vitiate the ultimate
113 The issue which therefore arises in the present case is whether her
Honour’s alleged error in stating that she intended
to adopt an approach
with respect to the conflicting expert hydrological evidence whereby all doubts
were to be resolved in favour
of the respondents where practicable in order to
achieve a just result, had relevantly infected her finding in the first sentence
of [86] (which I have extracted at [92] above) that there would be an assumption
made by the hypothetical prudent purchaser that
the Bewsher scheme was likely to
be considered favourably by the Council.
114 As I noted at [55] above, that finding was summarised in more detail by
her Honour at [178] as including the following:
“(ii) The Bewsher scheme is a matter which a prudent, hypothetical
purchaser is likely to obtain advice about and he or she
would be likely assign
value on the basis that such a scheme could be implemented on individual
properties, that is, development
in isolation, not at the same time as a whole
regional scheme.”
115 Although the appellant’s submissions focussed on the finding in the
first sentence of [86] as being a finding based upon
the relevant error, in my
view it is important to read that sentence in conjunction with that which
immediately follows it, namely:
“While I consider that a prudent purchaser would be prepared to add value
to a purchase price on the basis that a scheme such
as the Bewsher scheme
get development consent, I do not consider that extends to an assumption
that all relevant property owners would cooperate and carry
out the scheme at
the same time.” (Emphasis added)
116 Furthermore, the finding also has to be read in the context of her
Honour’s discounting (at [156]) of the rate per square
metre to be applied
in determining market value
“to take into account that a prudent hypothetical purchaser will consider
there is uncertainty about whether the Bewsher scheme
would gain development
approval for any individual lot.”
117 I have already referred (at [86]) to her Honour’s reference at [79]
to an agreement by the hydrology experts that a drainage
strategy would have
been formulated to facilitate development and that that would be likely to be
available to a prudent purchaser.
118 Again, at [80] her Honour observed that while Dr Joliffe considered that
the Council would not approve the Bewsher scheme because
the land in the flood
zone was required for detention basins, the joint report of the experts stated
that detention basins could
go elsewhere in the Strangers Creek region. She
therefore concluded from the joint expert evidence that there was flexibility as
to where the detention basins could go to accommodate the regional drainage
needs of the Strangers Creek area.
119 Her final finding prior to her reference to
first sentence of [81] where she stated that she considered a prudent purchaser
was likely to consider that it would be
feasible to obtain development consent
for proposals such as the Bewsher scheme on the basis that any detention basins
planned for
the area could ultimately be located elsewhere.
120 It was therefore not until the end of [81] that her Honour referred to
what she regarded as the
principle which she stated in the
context of the Court having been presented with conflicting evidence from the
expert hydrologists
as to the advice which would be provided to the hypothetical
purchaser. As she noted, Mr Bewsher proposed his scheme as one that
purchaser could rely on, whereas Dr Joliffe considered that the scheme was
unlikely to be approved by the Council.
121 After indicating at the end of [81] that she intended to adopt an
approach whereby the doubts raised by the conflicting expert
evidence were to be
resolved in favour of the respondents “
where practicable in order to
achieve a just result
”, her Honour proceeded to make findings with
respect to the advice which a prudent hypothetical purchaser would obtain from
town planner (not a hydrologist) in terms of the permissibility of implementing
a scheme such as the Bewsher scheme which involved
filling, observing (at [83])
that such a purchaser would speak to a Council officer to obtain advice on
whether a scheme such as
that of Mr Bewsher was likely to be considered for
possible approval. Her Honour then referred to the meeting between the experts
and Council officers on 2 January 2008 and to the minute of that meeting
prepared by Mr Rowan (the appellant’s expert town
planner) to the effect
that a scheme such as the Bewsher scheme “
122 It was in the context of the foregoing findings that her Honour then
concluded (at [86]) that a hypothetical prudent purchaser
would assume that the
Bewsher scheme was likely to be considered favourably by the Council.
123 It is clear from her Honour’s findings which followed the statement
that she intended to adopt the
approach in resolving doubts with
respect to the conflicting expert evidence that she did not expressly state that
those findings
were based upon that approach. Of course, her ultimate finding
that a hypothetical prudent purchaser would be prepared to add value
purchase price he or she would be prepared to pay for land within the flood zone
was based on a scheme such as the Bewsher
scheme in respect of which development
consent was at least a possibility.
124 There is no doubt that that was a critical finding, as the relevant land,
being in the flood zone, would have had no potential
for any form of urban
development if it was unable to be filled. In one sense it could be said that
that finding involved a rejection
of Dr Joliffe’s evidence had it been
that the Bewsher scheme had no chance of being approved. But his evidence was
necessarily
more circumspect than that. Her Honour found that Dr Joliffe
considered only that the scheme was “
unlikely to be approved by the
125 Assuming that the last sentence of [81] contained an error of law, the
issue which arises for consideration is whether the primary
finding in the first sentence of [81] and repeated in the first sentence of
[86], was based or depended upon that error.
126 As I have noted at [123] above, there was no express reference by her
Honour to her resolving doubts between the conflicting views
of the hydrologists
in favour of those of Mr Bewsher.
127 Furthermore, her finding in the first sentence of [81] follows on from
her findings at [79]-[80] which, in large part, were based
upon the agreement
between the hydrologists as to the possible alternative location of detention
basins to accommodate the regional
drainage needs of the Strangers Creek
128 Of significance is that immediately following the alleged error of law in
the last sentence of [81], her Honour at [82] and [83]
proceeded to deal with
the planning evidence, giving particular weight to the meeting of 2 January 2008
(apparently instigated by
the appellant’s planner, Mr Rowan) and from the
minutes of which she concluded that a scheme such as the Bewsher scheme
would be considered
”. In other words, the hypothetical
purchaser would not have been informed that the scheme would have been rejected
rather he or she would have been informed that, subject to the making
of a detailed development application, it would at least be
considered for
possible approval
129 Finally, her Honour in the first sentence of [86] found that the
hypothetical purchaser would be aware of the need to provide
a riparian zone for
any development proposed, this being, it would seem, a reference to the 60-65
metre wide drainage corridor to
be provided under the Bewsher scheme. That
finding, she said, provided further support for her finding that there would be
an assumption
made that the Bewsher scheme was likely to be considered
favourably by the Council. This was a reference back to her finding in
first sentence of [81].
130 As I have already noted at [115] above, those findings need to be read in
conjunction with her Honour’s further finding
in the second sentence of
[86]. When [79]-[86] are read as a whole, it appears to me that the primary
judge’s critical finding
that a hypothetical prudent purchaser would be
prepared to add value to the purchase price he or she would be prepared to pay
the land in the flood zone on the basis that a scheme such as the Bewsher
may get development consent
” was not one which
depended upon her Honour resolving the conflicting evidence of Mr Bewsher and Dr
Joliffe in favour of the
131 Accordingly, I am not positively satisfied of any such dependence. In
the absence of that satisfaction it cannot be said that
her Honour’s
finding with respect to the hypothetical purchaser’s attitude to and
assessment of the Bewsher scheme so
as to inform the price which that purchaser
would be prepared to pay for the land within the flood zone, was vitiated by the
132 Since preparing these reasons I have had the benefit of reading in draft
the judgment of Allsop P. I am grateful for his Honour’s
more thorough
recitation and analysis of the relevant authorities going to the issue of when
an error of law by a judge will vitiate
his or her decision. As will be
appreciated from my own more cursory discussion of the issue, I am of the view
that it is for the
party asserting error to satisfy the appellate tribunal that
the error has affected the relevant decision in the sense that it was
which the decision depended. As the President acknowledges, there is support
for this view in the passage from the reasons
of Barwick CJ in
which his Honour has emphasised at [14] of his reasons as well as in the passage
from the judgment of McHugh J in
cited by Basten JA (with the
agreement of Beazley and Santow JJA) in
and extracted by the
President at [18] of his reasons.
133 Although I generally agree with the remarks of the President at [54] and
[56] of his reasons, I am unable, with respect, to agree
with his Honour’s
proposition at [41] and the last sentence of [52] that a decision will be
vitiated by error unless the appellate
court can be persuaded to the relevant
degree of satisfaction that the issue to which it is alleged the error related
was not affected
by that error.
134 I accept that there are passages in some of the authorities to which the
President has referred which support the proposition
which his Honour has
adopted and which finds its genesis in
However, with respect,
the preponderance of opinion in this Court is that the burden of persuasion of
the vitiating character of
the error lies upon the party who asserts it: see,
for example, the passage emphasised by the President from the judgment of
JA (with whom Mason P and Bryson JA agreed) in
[17] of the President’s reasons.
135 The point the President then makes is that the placing of the onus on the
party asserting error does not answer the question as
to what establishing
vitiation entails. It is at this stage of the debate that we part company. The
President’s proposition
based in particular on the Federal Court
authorities he cites, is that a decision is only vitiated if it cannot be
established that
the asserted error did not “
” the relevant finding or was not operative in
bringing it about.
136 The difficulty I have is that his Honour’s proposition requires
proof of a negative and thereby places the burden of persuading
an appellate
court that the error did not affect the judge’s finding with respect to
the relevant issue upon the party seeking
to defend that finding. In my
respectful view, that reverses the onus and is inconsistent with the proposition
established in
Seatainer Terminals
that the error must be one upon which
the finding or decision depends. It is that element of dependence that
constitutes vitiation
of that finding or decision.
137 The problem which I have sought to identify is acutely illustrated by the
present case. The asserted error is that the primary
judge indicated that she
proposed to resolve the doubts raised by the conflicting opinions of Mr Bewsher
and Dr Joliffe as to whether
a hypothetical prudent purchaser would take into
account the Bewsher scheme, in favour of the respondents as the dispossessed
As I have noted at [123] above, her Honour did not expressly state that
her findings with respect to this issue were based upon
the approach she said
she intended to adopt. Further, as I have sought to demonstrate, there are a
number of findings (particularly
at [107] to [111] of the primary judge’s
reasons) which support the impugned finding and which, on analysis, do not
any reliance upon or application of the error disclosed in her
indication as to how doubts should be resolved.
138 It follows that in a case such as the present, there is the risk that
notwithstanding that there may be a correct chain of reasoning
findings which support the impugned finding, it could nevertheless prove
impossible to state with any degree of satisfaction
that the judge was not
influenced, consciously or subconsciously, by the particular error asserted for
one simply would not know
and, therefore, could not say that the judge’s
findings were not, to some unknown degree, based upon that error. As it
in my view in this particular case, her Honour’s reasoning
process was such that I can be satisfied that the negative proposition
by the President is established. But I can easily imagine cases similar to the
present where it would be more difficult
to come to that conclusion. Such is
the consequence of having to establish a negative proposition.
139 Thus even if the President’s proposition is accepted, in the
circumstances of the present case and in light of my analysis
of the primary
judge’s reasoning process which I have detailed at [113] to [130] above, I
would be satisfied that her Honour’s
finding to which I refer at [131]
above was not dependent or affected in the relevant sense by the error alleged.
This accords with
the approach of Lockhart J in
referred to by the
President at [15] of his reasons. In other words, the primary judge’s
reasoning process which leads to her
ultimate finding with respect to the
Bewsher scheme stands independently from the asserted error.
140 Before leaving this part of the appeal I should indicate that
notwithstanding the concession of the respondents to the contrary,
significant doubt as to whether, when read in context, the primary judge did in
fact err in the last sentence of [81]. The
expert evidence to which she was
there referring was that of Mr Bewsher and Dr Joliffe, the hydrologists called
by the parties.
Their evidence conflicted only in the sense that each opined as
to whether, in the hypothetical situation they were asked to consider,
likely that the Council would, in light of the planning history of the area,
favourably consider the Bewsher scheme or some
variation of it.
141 Unlike expert evidence given in other types of cases, the opinions of Mr
Bewsher and Dr Joliffe were expressed with respect to
a hypothetical as distinct
from a real situation. To that extent, and though based on a factual planning
history, their opinions
were in a sense speculative. This is so because
although Mr Bewsher and Dr Joliffe were expert hydrologists, it is not entirely
clear that the opinion of the latter with respect to the prospects of the
Council approving a particular drainage strategy was within
his area of
expertise as a hydrologist. Rather, if anything, it was within the expertise of
Messrs Grech and Rowan, the town planners
called by the parties. The primary
judge seemed to recognise this when she said in the opening sentence of
”A prudent purchaser is likely to obtain the advice of a town planner
concerning the likelihood of obtaining consent [from
the Council] for a
particular drainage scheme.”
142 The relevance of the evidence of the hydrologists was, as their joint
report indicated, that the detention basins planned for
the area could be
located elsewhere as her Honour found at [80], the relevant part of which I have
extracted at [87] above.
143 The passage from the judgment of Sheller JA in
upon by the appellant to which I have referred at [104] above was made in the
context of an issue with respect to the intensification
of the use of a quarry.
The expert evidence directed to that issue, and which was described by his
Honour as technical and complex,
was from expert surveyors who expressed
opinions as to what each considered to be the extent to which the quarry was
physically used
at various times. That evidence involved, amongst other things,
the use and interpretation of aerial photographs as well as physical
the site. The reliability of the techniques adopted by each of the witnesses
was very much in issue. There was nothing
hypothetical about the opinions
144 Unlike in
, the opinions expressed in the present case by
the hydrologists based on the planning history of the area did not involve an
intellectual exchange
”. It was purely the expression of
different opinions with respect to a hypothetical situation, namely, the
likelihood of the
Council giving favourable consideration to the Bewsher
145 Furthermore, as the primary judge noted at [69], which I have recorded at
[83] above, she was not required to accept one opinion
or the other as to
whether the Council would consent to the Bewsher scheme: that was not a choice
she had to make. The issue which
she was required to determine was what advice
the prudent hypothetical purchaser would take into account with respect to the
within the flood zone and whether that purchaser would be prepared to add
value to the purchase price on the basis that a scheme
such as the Bewsher
scheme may receive development consent. This exercise involved an evaluative
judgment in the course of which
her Honour was entitled to resolve doubts in
favour of the respondents as the dispossessed owners.
146 In my opinion, the principle for which
was cited at [7]
extended to the so-called conflict between the advice which each of the
hydrologists opined would be given to the
hypothetical purchaser by a
hypothetical hydrologist and, for that matter, a hypothetical town planner. The
evidence of those experts
falls, in my view, into the same category as the
opinion evidence of expert valuers. In the normal course, in a case such as the
present (and indeed in the present case), the valuers called by the respective
parties would take and analyse comparable sales to
determine a rate per square
metre to apply to the acquired land. Each would express an opinion as to
whether the rate derived from
the comparable sales should be adjusted up or down
to take account of, for instance, the potential highest and best use of that
and its other characteristics to the extent to which they differed from the
sales evidence. In determining a rate to be adopted,
the judicial valuer was
required to resolve the doubts or conflicts raised in the expert evidence as to
the rate to be derived from
the analysis of the sales and the adjustments, if
any, to be applied to that rate, in favour of the dispossessed owner.
147 The conflicts in the evidence of Mr Bewsher and Dr Joliffe involved the
extent to which, if at all, the hypothetical purchaser
would receive advice as
to the possibility of the Council considering favourably a scheme such as the
Bewsher scheme. The primary
judge was entitled to resolve those doubts, like
other doubts bearing upon value, in favour of the respondents. She stated the
in unexceptionable terms at [7] and I do not believe that she was
intending to refer to or rely upon a different principle in the
last sentence of
148 In my opinion, therefore, I would not be prepared to accept that in the
context in which her Honour stated the principle or approach
she intended to
adopt in that sentence, she erred in law. Her choice of words when referring to
a conflict in the expert evidence
may have been better expressed but that should
not be taken as evidencing an erroneous statement of a well-established
of valuation.
149 It thus follows from the foregoing that either no error of law is to be
found in the last sentence of [81] or, if error there
be, it had no operative
effect on any relevant finding of fact. I would therefore reject the
appellant’s third ground of challenge.
The fourth alleged question of law
is authority for the proposition that when determining the
value of land compulsorily acquired, the judicial valuer is required to
into account the effect on the value of any relevant attribute or inherent
characteristic of that land. At 4 the Court (comprising
Mason CJ, Brennan,
Deane, Gaudron and McHugh JJ) said:
“Of course, a characteristic or attribute of the land which affects its
value must be taken into account in the assessment
of compensation even if the
planning restriction which is a step in the process of resumption is dependent
upon or directed to that
characteristic or
attribute.”
151 The appellant submitted to the primary judge that the use of the
respondents’ land within the flood zone for trunk drainage
characteristic thereof that affected its value and was required to be taken into
account in the planning process. At [52]
her Honour rejected that
submission.
152 At [26] her Honour had said
“... while the [respondents’] lands are flood affected it is not an
attribute or characteristic of the lands that these
are required for catchment
trunk drainage. The [appellant] cannot show a consistent coincidence between
the characteristic of a
‘use for trunk drainage’ and the public
purpose. The evolving nature of the trunk drainage schemes since that proposed
by Kinhill demonstrates that there is no necessity for the scheme to be located
on the [respondents’] lands. It is an entirely
artificial construction
designed to accept increased flow in water because of yet to be carried out
upstream development.”
153 Her Honour returned to the issue at [52] observing that her rejection of
the argument that an inherent characteristic of the land
within the flood zone
was that it be used for trunk drainage was made in light of
“evidence considered in detail in the next section of the judgment
concerning whether the Bewsher scheme could be implemented
and would be
considered by the Council for development approval. As submitted by the
[respondents], based on the agreed hydrological
evidence, parts of such a scheme
such as the detention basin could be located other than on the
[respondents’] lands. While
the use of lowlying, flood liable land for
trunk drainage may well be a preferable option, that does not suggest it is an
characteristic of the land which would mean that the
[respondents’] lands had to be used for trunk
154 The findings to which I have referred above are, clearly, findings of
fact. There can be no doubt that any determination of the
characteristics or
attributes of land involve a finding of that character. It follows that the
appellant’s complaint is in
relation to a finding of fact in respect of
which no appeal lies. Accordingly, this fourth challenge should be
The respondents’ cross-appeal
155 The respondents Mr and Mrs Caruso raise two issues on their cross-appeal.
The first is that the primary judge erred in the first
judgment in determining
the market value of the acquired land on the basis that the underlying zoning
thereof was Rural rather than
Residential. The second was that her Honour erred
in the second judgment in rejecting the claim of the respondents other than Mr
and Mrs Polito for stamp duty payable upon the actual or proposed acquisition of
a property to replace the land which had been compulsorily
acquired. In this
respect, each of the Caruso respondents had sworn an affidavit in which it was
stated that they had been market
gardeners, had used the compulsorily acquired
land as a market garden and that they were searching for a new property to
the compulsorily acquired land so that they could continue their market
garden activities.
156 The respondent Mr Mesiti deposed that he intended to purchase another
property to replace his compulsorily acquired land, whereas
the respondent Mr
Nati deposed that he had in fact replaced his compulsorily acquired land by
purchasing a property at Galston for
the price of $1.65 million. There was no
evidence as to whether the respondents Mr and Mrs Polito proposed acquiring a
replacement
property. It would appear that in relation to the respondents other
than Mr and Mrs Polito, the amount of stamp duty was agreed
but not their
entitlement to it.
The Residential rezoning issue
157 The respondents submitted that in finding that the underlying zoning of
the land within the flood zone was Rural 1(a), the primary
judge erred on the
basis that the evidence established that notwithstanding the residential release
of surrounding land, the acquired
land was held back from being so zoned until
the process by which the issue of trunk drainage was to be dealt with was
158 Reliance was placed upon the Council memo of 24 January 1991 extracted by
her Honour at [15(xiv)] which proposed the following
amendments to the then
“Land previously zoned Rural 1(a) will be given one of the following
designations:
¦ Special Uses 5(a) (Trunk Drainage) to be acquired by the Water
¦ Open Space 6(a) (Existing and Proposed Public recreation) to be acquired
by Council; and
¦ Under private ownership in accordance with adjoining zone and subject to
Special Development controls, i.e. restricted development
The development of land below 1:100 year flood will require the concurrence of
the Water Board.”
Her Honour referred in some detail to this memo at [45].
159 The effect of this memo, so it was submitted, was that land not required
for trunk drainage purposes would have the same zoning
as the immediately
adjoining land notwithstanding that the former was within the flood zone. Once
the trunk drainage position was
resolved, Amendment No. 5 to the 2005 LEP in
fact released the land outside that zoned Special Uses 5(a) for acquisition by
the appellant
and rezoned it Residential.
160 It followed, therefore, that once the Special Uses 5(a) zoning is
disregarded, the finding was open to her Honour that the whole
of the land
within the flood zone would have been zoned Residential.
161 In my opinion this challenge to her Honour’s finding should be
rejected. That finding did not involve a decision on a question
of law unless,
at the very least, the evidence was all one-way. It was not, given her
Honour’s finding at [48] which was based
on her preference for the
evidence of Mr Rowan to that of Mr Grech which she had summarised at [47].
162 Even if her finding as to the underlying zoning were perverse or
unreasonable, no error of law would be disclosed:
Randwick Municipal Council
v Manousaki
(1988) 66 LGRA 330
at 333 per Clarke JA, with whom Hope and
McHugh JJA agreed.
The stamp duty issue
163 At [176] the primary judge referred to the claims by the respondents,
other than Mr and Mrs Polito, to stamp duty, noting that
they were made under s
59(f) of the Just Terms Act
Section 55 requires the judicial valuer,
when determining the amount of compensation to which a person is entitled, to
have regard
“(d) any loss attributable to disturbance
That expression is defined by s 59 to mean any of the following:
(a) legal costs reasonably incurred by the persons entitled to compensation in
connection with the compulsory acquisition of the
(b) valuation fees reasonably incurred by those persons in connection with the
compulsory acquisition of the
(c) financial costs reasonably incurred in connection with the relocation of
those persons (including legal costs but not including
stamp duty or mortgage
(d) stamp duty costs reasonably incurred (or that might reasonably be incurred)
by those persons in connection with the purchase
of land for relocation (but not
exceeding the amount that would be incurred for the purchase of land of
equivalent value to the land
compulsorily
(e) financial costs reasonably incurred (or that might reasonably be incurred)
by those persons in connection with the discharge
of a mortgage and the
execution of a new mortgage resulting from the relocation (but not exceeding the
amount that would be incurred
if the new mortgage secured the repayment of the
balance owing in respect of the discharged
(f) any other financial costs reasonably incurred (or that might reasonably be
incurred), relating to the actual use of the land,
as a direct and natural
consequence of the
acquisition.”
164 Her Honour noted that based on a number of single judge decisions of the
Land and Environment Court commencing with
Peter Croke Holdings Pty Ltd v
Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales
(1998) 101 LGERA 30
respondents’ claim was unavailable. However, her Honour deferred making
any finding with respect to this issue to be
dealt with in the second
165 The appellant’s resistance to the claims for stamp duty was based
upon s 61 of the Just Terms Act which is in the following
“If the market value of land is assessed on the basis that the land had
potential to be used for a purpose other than that
for which it is currently
used, compensation is not payable in respect of:
(a) any financial advantage that would necessarily have been forgone in
realising that potential, and
(b) any financial loss that would necessarily have been incurred in realising
that potential.”
Peter Croke
, Bignold J considered that s 61 prohibited a claim
for disturbance under s 55(d) because the market value of the acquired land had
been determined on the basis of a higher and more valuable use than its use at
the time of acquisition. The appellant argued that
s 61 applied in the present
case because the determination of market value for lands zoned Rural 1(a) under
the 2005 LEP included
as her Honour found, potentially more valuable uses of the
lands than their pre-acquisition use.
167 At [18] of the second judgment her Honour noted that the current use of
the respondents’ land was as rural home sites.
However, she had
determined the market value of the acquired land by taking into account its
potential for development under its
assigned Rural 1(a) zoning, including its
use for seniors’ living facilities and specified commercial types of
development
permissible within that zone. It was common ground that the
relevant lands were not being used for those purposes at the date of
acquisition.
168 Her Honour’s conclusions with respect to this issue were as
“19. Section 61 operates where the assessment of market value of land is
on the basis of a purpose other than that for which
it is being used occurs, as
it has in this case. While the underlying zoning of the land is rural and the
current use is for a rural
basis of comparable sales which included sales based on a more valuable
use as a seniors’ living facility. Market value was determined
at a higher value than the current use of the land as a rural
Section 61 does not refer to zoning but to use for a purpose. In
Peter Croke
and numerous other cases which have applied the findings in this Court
similar circumstances have resulted in a claim for stamp duty
not being upheld
because of s 61. I do not consider there is a clear legal basis put forward by
the [respondents] relying on general
statements in
statements in
to overcome the specific language used in s 61 and its
consistent application since
20. I agree with the [appellant’s] submission that as the market value has
been assessed on the basis that the land has the
potential to be used for a
purpose other than its current use, compensation (which includes disturbance
under s 55(d)) cannot include
the [respondents’] claims for stamp duty
under s 59(f).”
Although her Honour did not expressly find that the respondents would
necessarily have incurred stamp duty in realising the potential
of the acquired
land to be used for seniors’ living facilities, such a finding is implicit
in her reasoning.
169 Although it would appear that before her Honour the respondents placed
reliance upon the decision of the High Court in
Walker Corporation Pty Ltd v
Sydney Harbour Foreshore Authority
[2008] HCA 5
(2008) 233 CLR 259
statements of Hodgson JA in
AMP Capital Investors Pty Ltd v Transport
Infrastructure Development Corporation
[2008] NSWCA 325
such reliance was placed upon those decisions in the respondents’ written
or oral submissions on the appeal. They can
therefore be put to one side.
Peter Croke
, Bignold J (at 36-43) traced the history relating
to the award of compensation for loss caused by a compulsory acquisition of the
land upon which a business had been conducted. The authorities to which his
Honour referred established the principle that compensation
for compulsory
acquisition should include not only the market value of the land acquired but
also any personal losses imposed upon
the owner by the forced sale. Thus in
Housing Commission of New South Wales v Falconer
[1981] 1 NSWLR 547
563, the following proposition (omitting citations), amongst others, was stated
by Glass JA as part of the relevant law relating
to the assessment of
compensation in compulsory acquisition of land cases:
“The compensation recoverable could also extend to consequential losses
suffered over and above the market value of the land
such as costs for removal,
loss of profits etc. Actual losses caused by the forced acquisition are
described as claims for disturbance.
The principle of compensation includes
such losses in the compensation assessed together with the market value of the
land because
otherwise the owner will not be fully
compensated.”
171 At 41 of
Peter Croke
his Honour asserted that compensation for
disturbance loss
” under s 55(d) and s 59 was subject to the
effect of s 61. He observed that it was apparent that the latter section was
to deny certain entitlements to compensation which would otherwise be
claimable. Those entitlements were required to be sourced
in s 55 (which
provided for compensation to be assessed in accordance with Division 4 of Part 3
of the Just Terms Act which included
ss 59 and 61) and the most obvious source
any loss attributable to disturbance
” contained in s
55(d) as defined in s 59.
172 Of particular significance to his Honour’s construction of s 61 was
the decision of the High Court in
Crisp & Gunn Co-Operative v Hobart
Corporation
[1963] HCA 55
(1963) 110 CLR 538
, at 547-548, where the Court
(comprising McTiernan, Taylor and Windeyer JJ) observed:
“Further we are of the opinion that the requirement of the statute that
regard should be had in assessing compensation to a
number of factors including
‘disturbance and any other matter not directly based on the value of the
land’ does not justify
the award of any amount for disturbance in addition
to the market value of the land where, as here, that value exceeds the
use’ value by an amount in excess of any loss resulting
from disturbance.”
173 At 43 of
Peter Croke
Bignold J then noted that s 61 merely
recognised the fact that the assessment of market value in accordance with s
56(1) of the Just
Terms Act could proceed on one of two bases, namely, (i) its
present use, or (ii) a higher (and more valuable) use for which the
possesses the potential and for which it is advantageously adaptable.
174 His Honour then continued in the following terms:
“Usually of course, the estimation of ‘market value’ will
adopt basis (ii) because it yields the higher value.
However, where that basis
for assessing ‘market value’ is adopted, s 61 precludes the recovery
of additional compensation
with respect to (a) financial advantage that would
necessarily have been foregone in realising the potential (for the higher use);
and (b) financial loss that would necessarily have been incurred in realising
that potential.”
175 It followed that on the facts of the case before him
“... if the first applicant’s claim to compensation which is founded
on the entitlement to the ‘market value’
of the land (s 55(a)) were
to lead to an assessment of compensation on the basis of a higher and more
valuable use of the acquired
land than on the basis of its existing use (being
the use made by the second applicant, as lessee or tenant, in the conduct of its
business) and that assessment on the basis of the higher use was predicated upon
the termination of the second applicant’s
tenancy of the land and the
cessation of conducting its business thereon, the second applicant would not be
entitled to compensation
in respect of ‘loss attributable to
disturbance’ because (i) the financial advantage of continuing in
occupation and
in the conduct of the business would necessarily have been
foregone in realising that (higher) potential; and (ii) the financial
the second applicant of ceasing to conduct the business, or of having to
relocate the business, would necessarily have been
incurred in realising that
(higher) potential.”
176 It is to be noted that in
Peter Croke
the claim which was
disallowed related to business losses, being financial costs incurred pursuant
to ss 59(c) and (f). In
Damjanovic v Roads and Traffic Authority of New
South Wales (No 2)
[2005] NSWLEC 371
, the applicants conducted a poultry
business upon the land which was compulsorily acquired. The acquired land was
valued upon the
basis of its potential to be used for a purpose other than its
current use, namely for egg production. The applicants wished to
continue with
that business and acquired a replacement property with the intention of
relocating their existing egg production business.
They claimed legal costs and
stamp duty incurred on that purchase. Bignold J rejected the claim applying his
decision in
Peter Croke
177 At [23] his Honour observed that s 61 applied in that case as the market
value of the compulsorily acquired land was determined
upon the basis that it
had potential to be used for a purpose other than that for which it was used
prior to the acquisition so that
in realising that potential (both with respect
to the compulsorily acquired land and the residue land) the financial advantage
continuing the existing development (i.e. the poultry business and the
ancillary dwelling houses) “
would reasonably have been
” as would any financial loss of having to relocate that
business and those dwelling houses which “
would reasonably be incurred
in realising that potential
178 Accordingly, compensation for disturbance loss in respect of the
relocation of the poultry business was not recoverable; nor was
applicant’s disturbance claim with respect to legal costs and stamp duty
incurred in respect of the acquisition of an alternative
property. His Honour
considered that there was nothing unfair or unjust in such a conclusion where
the compensation awarded for
market value based upon a higher potential use far
exceeded the land’s value based upon its current or existing use for a
Costantino and Maric v Roads and Traffic Authority of New South
[2006] NSWLEC 248
, Pain J (at [94]) considered that the words
” where used in s 59 and the word
” where used in s 61 were, in fact, interchangeable
given the context in which they were used. Her Honour referred to and applied
the decision of Bignold J in
holding that s 61 operated to
prevent recovery of compensation under s 59.
180 Most recently, in
McDonald v Roads and Traffic Authority of New South
[2009] NSWLEC 105
, Biscoe J analysed the relationship between ss 59
and 61 in, relevantly, the following terms:
”94. The market value of land in s 55(a) and any loss attributable to
disturbance in s 55(d) are separate components of compensation.
The former is
assessed in accordance with the hypothetical exercise required by the definition
of market value in s 56(1)(a). The
latter is assessed by reference to the actual
costs and fees specified in s 59, which are qualified by a reasonableness
requirement
and subject to the limitations on the recovery of loss in s 61 ... .
123 Section 61(b) precludes a claim for disturbance costs to the extent that it
is inconsistent with a claim for market value based
on the potential use of the
land. Otherwise the applicant would be unjustly compensated. Thus, s 61(b)
precludes compensation for
financial loss based on the existing use if that use
would necessarily be terminated in realising that potential:
Peter Croke
Holdings Pty Ltd v Roads and Traffic Authority of NSW
(1998) 101 LGERA 30
44 (Bignold J);
Serbian Cultural Club v Roads & Traffic Authority of New
South Wales
[2007] NSWLEC 673
, [123] (Jagot J). In
at 44 Bignold J said that, although s 61(b) must be interpreted
according to its own terms, its apparent effect:
‘[is] to deny recovery of compensation for disturbance loss where a
claim to such compensation is inconsistent with another
claim to compensation
based upon the market value of the land, where that value is assessed on the
basis of a potential higher use
of the land than the existing use and where the
realisation of that potential necessarily terminates (or postulates the
termination
of) that existing use.’
124 This principle of excluding inconsistent claims is a longstanding one in
resumption legislation. The decision of a majority of
the English Court of
Horn v Sunderland Corporation
[1941] 2 KB 26
influential. In that case a resumed farm was worth $X as building land but much
less as agricultural land. The Court of
Appeal held, by a majority, that the
dispossessed owner farmer was entitled to no more than $X unless the value of
the land as agricultural
land together with the amount of the disturbance costs
exceeded $X, in which case he was entitled to $X and the amount of the excess.
The decision was based on the view that in order to realise the value of $X, it
would have been necessary for the farmer to sell
the farm and go out of
possession. ...
125 The conclusion reached in
was explained in
Commonwealth v
[1953] HCA 6
(1952-1953) 90 CLR 157
at 165 per Dixon CJ and Kitto J:
‘The conclusion reached was that when land being used for agricultural
purposes is ripe for building, and compensation for its
compulsory acquisition
is fixed on the basis of its value as building land, compensation for
disturbance of the agricultural business
should only be awarded to the extent
(if any) that the value of the land for agricultural purposes together with the
compensation
for disturbance exceeds the compensation payable on the basis of
the land being building land.’
126 Some examples (adapted from examples given in
at 36) illustrate
the meaning of “financial loss” in s 61(b). Assume that the
applicant is voluntarily selling her land
for its existing rural use for
$500,000, that it will cost her $100,000 to move to [a] replacement property,
and that the replacement
property costs $500,000. She will have suffered a
financial loss of $100,000. If the case were one of compulsory purchase, it
would be obvious that unless she receives $100,000 for
disturbance, she would,
to that extent, have suffered financial loss. To take an example within s 61(b),
now assume that she sells
the land for its potential as residential subdivision
land for $900,000, that it will cost her $100,000 to move, and that she
the replacement property for $500,000. She is $300,000 better off than
she would have been if she had continued to farm on the land.
She has suffered
no financial loss. If the purchase were a compulsory one, and she was awarded
$100,000 for disturbance in addition
to the $900,000, she would be $400,000
better off. In such a case, the $100,000 is not an element of financial
within s 61(b), but merely a diminution of the profit which
she obtains by giving up an inferior economic use of the land and realising
higher economic value. The extra value which she could realise could only be
realised by ceasing the existing rural use and would
more than compensate her
for the cost of relocating to another
I would respectfully adopt his Honour’s reasoning.
181 The respondents’ submission was that s 61 was limited to the
assessment of market value alone and was not referrable to
the other heads of
compensation claimable under s 55 including compensation for disturbance. In
their written submissions it was
submitted that the correct approach to the
assessment of loss attributable to disturbance – where s 61 is properly
– was to apply s 59(f) which had been construed to be a
” provision which permitted the recovery of stamp
duty incurred as a consequence of the acquisition of replacement land.
182 However, on the hearing of the appeal, the respondents abandoned any
claim to disturbance under s 59(f) and confined their claim
to the recovery of
stamp duty under s 59(d). That change created its own problems given that the
respondents’ claim for stamp
duty was confined before the primary judge to
s 59(f). Consequently, she was not called upon to determine any factual issue
s 59(d) including, in particular, the correct construction of the words
in connection with the purchase of land for relocation
183 As I have observed, the respondents submitted that s 61 only regulated
the market value of the land in respect of which compensation
was payable
pursuant to s 55(a) of the Just Terms Act. It was submitted that it had no
impact upon a claim for loss attributable
to disturbance pursuant to s 55(d) and
which was otherwise recoverable in accordance with s 59(d). Section 61 merely
qualified the
determination of market value in accordance with the definition of
that expression in s 56(1).
184 In my view those submissions should be rejected. They are inconsistent
with the reasoning of Bignold J in
Peter Croke
and the many cases which
have applied it since 1998. In particular, the submissions are inconsistent
with the reasoning in
which I consider to be correct. In my
view s 61 deals with the consequences of the assessment of compensation under s
than s 55(a)) where the market value of the acquired land has been
determined pursuant to s 56(1) in accordance with its highest
and best use when
that use exceeds the market value of the land upon the basis of its actual use
as at the date of acquisition.
The section does not purport to deal with market
value as such. However, s 61(a) may deny a claim for special value pursuant to
s 55(b) and s 57 just as s 61(b) may deny a claim for loss attributable to
disturbance pursuant to s 55(d) and s 59.
185 Of course, it does not necessarily follow that if s 61 applies it trumps
each of the sub-paragraphs of s 59. Relevantly to the
present case, it only
denies compensation for disturbance where the relevant costs in respect of which
a claim is made under s 59
would necessarily have been incurred in realising the
potential to which s 61(b) refers. Thus, s 61 would not prevent a claim for
disturbance under ss 59(a) and (b). But where stamp duty is incurred by persons
entitled to compensation in connection with the
purchase of land for relocation
where that relocation is necessary to enable the potential to which s 61 refers
to be realised, then
in my view s 61 denies a claim under s 59(d).
186 In expressing the above opinion, I have not lost sight of the change in
language between s 59 and s 61 in that the former in sub-paragraphs
(e) and (f) refers to “
” reasonably incurred whereas s
61(b) refers to the incurring of financial “
”. However,
I agree with Pain J in
that there is no relevant difference
between the use of the word “
” in four of the
sub-paragraphs of s 59 and the use of the word “
61. Her Honour’s construction is supported by the opening words of s 59,
which provides that “
loss attributable to disturbance
amongst other things, the incurring of financial costs, or stamp duty costs.
187 Although, as the respondents submit, s 61 refers only to the assessment
of the market value of land on the basis of its potential
to be used for a
purpose other than that for which it is currently used, paragraphs (a) and (b)
in my view are not directed to that
assessment. In particular, it seems to me
that paragraph (b) is directly related to financial losses which might otherwise
within s 59 and which would necessarily be incurred in realising the
potential of the land upon the basis on which its market value
188 Accordingly, in my view her Honour was correct to find that s 61(b) had
the effect of denying to the relevant respondents compensation
for the costs of
any stamp duty incurred or proposed to be incurred by them in acquiring other
property as a replacement for the
land which was compulsorily acquired.
189 In my view the challenges to the decision of the primary judge by both
the appellant and the respondents should be rejected.
I would therefore propose
that both the appeal and cross-appeal be dismissed with costs.
190 SACKVILLE AJA
: I have had the advantage of reading the draft
judgments prepared by Allsop P and Tobias JA. Subject to what appears below, I
with the judgment of Tobias JA.
191 I agree with Allsop P that error was disclosed in [81] of the primary
Judge’s reasons. However, I also agree with the view
expressed by Tobias
JA and adopted by Allsop P, that regardless of who bears the burden of
persuasion, the error made by her Honour
did not affect the decision she
ultimately reached. Accordingly, the decision was not
” by reason of the error as required by
Leichhardt Municipal Council v Seatainer Terminals Pty Ltd
(1981) 48 LGRA
, at 419, per Moffitt P.
Balenzuela v De Gail
[1959] HCA 1
(1959) 101 CLR 226
, at 234, Dixon CJ
pointed out that there had been:
“inconsistent judicial statements ... as to where the burden lies of
satisfying the court of the tendency, or lack of tendency,
of the misdirection
[to the jury] or misreception of evidence or other error at the trial to affect
the result.”
Later his Honour said (at 234-235) that:
If the question really be of any importance, resting as it does rather
on processes of reasoning than upon proof of an issue of fact
view, it may be suggested, is that at common law it was necessary to grant a new
trial unless the court felt some reasonable
assurance that the error of law at
the trial whether in the misdirection or wrongful admission or rejection of
evidence or otherwise
was of such a nature that it could not reasonably be
supposed to have influenced the result or because, in any case, as a matter
law the same result must have ensued, while under the judicature rule the burden
is the other way”. (Emphasis added.)
193 The opening words of the latter passage reflect Dixon CJ’s
scepticism as to whether correctly locating the burden of persuasion
in relation
to a process of reasoning, as distinct from locating the burden in relation to
the proof of a fact in issue, is likely
to be a matter of importance. I would
prefer to leave the resolution of the issue discussed by Allsop P and Tobias JA
in which it is important and in which the Court has had the benefit of
full argument on the point.
194 Nonetheless, in the light of what my colleagues have said, I wish to make
some brief observations.
195 Courts have to address the significance of legal error by a trial judge
or by an administrative tribunal in a variety of contexts.
The issue can arise,
for example, where a judge has incorrectly rejected or admitted evidence in a
civil jury trial (as in
), in a civil trial by
judge alone (as in
Vocisano v Vocisano
[1974] HCA 14
(1974) 130 CLR 267
Suncorp Metway Insurance
[2006] NSWCA 243)
or in a criminal trial (as in
HG v The Queen
[1999] HCA 2
197 CLR 414)
; where a judge has denied
procedural fairness to a party in a civil trial (as in
Stead v State
Government Insurance Commission
[1986] HCA 54
161 CLR 141)
; where a judge
has committed an error of law in a non-jury trial (as in
Roads and Traffic
Authority of NSW v Mosca
[2006] NSWCA 159
146 LGERA 335
Administering the
Crown Lands Act
v Deerubbin Local Aboriginal Land Council
(1998) 43 NSWLR 249)
; where an administrative tribunal or decision-maker has
made an error of law in the course of determining a claim (as in
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1981] FCA 147
(1981) 58 FLR 407
Investment Corporation Ltd v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
(1982) 59 FLR
; or where an administrative tribunal or other decision-maker has denied
procedural fairness to a claimant (as in
Re Refugee Tribunal
[2000] HCA 57
204 CLR 82).
196 A court dealing with what is said to be legal error might be exercising
original jurisdiction (for example, in the case of judicial
review of an
administrative decision) or appellate jurisdiction (for example, on an appeal
from a trial judge sitting alone). The
limited, as in the present case, to entertaining an appeal against a decision of
a court on a question
Land and Environment Court Act
L&E Court Act
, s 57(1). Alternatively, the
court may have jurisdiction to set aside decisions on a range of grounds going
beyond an error of law
(for example, in judicial review proceedings under the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act
Supreme Court Act
197 Further, the statutory powers of a court, once a relevant error is
established, may be more or less extensive. In the present
case, on the hearing
of an appeal the Court must either remit the matter to the Land and Environment
Court for determination in accordance
with the decision of the Supreme Court or
make such other order in relation to the appeal as seems
L&E Court Act,
s 57(2); cf
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act
Morales v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
(1995) 60 FCR 550
, at 560-562.
198 It should also be borne in mind that the nature of the inquiry occasioned
by legal error may differ, depending on the circumstances.
The inquiry may
involve what in other contexts is referred to as a
counter-factual
”. This is so, for example, where a court
asks whether a jury would or might have reached a different verdict had wrongly
evidence been admitted. A court undertaking such a counter-factual
inquiry does not have the advantage of the jury’s reasons
for its verdict.
Where a court asks whether a trial court or an administrative decision-maker
would have reached the same decision
had there been no denial of procedural
fairness, it is also addressing a counter-factual (which is perhaps one reason
courts tend
to be reluctant to ask such a question). On the other hand, where a
court determines that the decision of a trial court or administrative
was or was not affected by legal error, made in the course of his or her
judgment, the court is not asking what might have
occurred in a counter-factual,
but what actually did occur in the proceedings. The Court undertaking such an
inquiry in relation
to a trial court will of course have the advantage of the
judge’s reasons for his or her decision.
199 The existence of legal error, whether by a court or an administrative
decision-maker, can give rise to a variety of questions.
Is the legal error
material if it
affected the decision or only if it did
fact affect
the decision? Who bears the burden of persuading the court that
the error did (or did not) affect the decision, or that it might
(or might not)
have affected the decision? If the error did or might have affected the
decision, nonetheless would the decision
have been the same had the error not
occurred? Who bears the burden of persuasion on that question? In my view, the
these questions will not necessarily be the same in all
circumstances. If this is correct, it follows that judicial observations
these issues in one context will not necessarily provide reliable guidance on
apparently similar issues arising in a different
200 I agree with the orders proposed by Tobias JA.
3 December 2009
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (278 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter