URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/44.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Charalambous v Yeung (RLD) [2013] NSWADTAP 44 (27 September 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Charalambous v Yeung (RLD)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 44
Hearing Date(s):
9 August 2013
Decision Date:
27 September 2013
Appeal Panel - Internal
M Chesterman, Deputy President
P Molony, Judicial Member
Non-judicial Member
1. The appeal is dismissed.
2. Any application by the Respondent for the costs of these appeal
proceedings must be filed and served within 28 days, along with
submissions and any additional submissions he may wish to make as to the costs
of the proceedings at first instance. Any
submissions in reply by the Appellant
must be filed and served within a further 28 days. These matters of costs will
then be determined
'on the papers', pursuant to
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
, unless the Appeal Panel decides that a hearing is
Catchwords:
Retail lease - whether lessee liable for damage caused by fire in premises
Civil Liability Act 2002
- identification of relevant risk of harm
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Civil Liability Act 2002
Retail Leases Act 1994
Cases Cited:
Chapman v Hearse
[1961] HCA 46
(1961) 106 CLR 112
Charalambous v Yeung
[2013] NSWADT
Garzo v Liverpool/Campbelltown Christian School
[2012] NSWCA 151
Jolley v Sutton London Borough Council
[2000] UKHL 31
[2000] 3 All ER 409
(2005) 223 ALR 228
[2005] HCA 79
Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v
Miller Steamship Co Pty Ltd
[1966] UKPC 1
[1967] AC 617
Pitt Son & Badgery Ltd v
Proulefco SA
(1984) 153 CLR 645
Shoalhaven City Council v Pender
Sibraa v Brown
[2012] NSWCA 328
Tame v New South Wales;
Annetts v Australian Stations Pty Ltd
(2002) 211 CLR 317
[2002] HCA 35
Wyong Shire Council v Shirt
(1980) 146 CLR 40
[1980] HCA 12
Principal judgment
Neophytous Charalambous (Appellant)
Eric Au Yeung (Respondent)
Representation
N Allan (Appellant)
R Perla (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Bicknell & Moneith Lawyers (Appellant)
Turks Legal
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
Retail Leases Division
- Date of Decision:
24 April 2013
- Citation:
Charalambous v Yeung
[2013] NSWADT 86
- Court File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Introduction
this appeal, the Appellant, Neophytos Charalambous, challenges a decision in the
Retail Leases Division of the Tribunal (
Charalambous v Yeung
dismissing his claim for damages against the Respondent, Eric Au
1 May 2009, the Appellant granted to the Respondent a lease ('the Lease')
relating to premises ('the Premises') on the ground floor
of a building that he
owned in Matraville. The Lease had a term of three years, with an option to
renew for a further three years,
and was governed by the
Retail Leases Act
'). The monthly rent was $1,584.92.
accordance with the terms of the Lease, the Respondent operated a laundromat in
the Premises. Late in the evening of 5 July 2010,
or in the early hours of the
following morning, a fire broke out at the Premises. It caused extensive damage,
rendering them unusable
for a considerable period. The Respondent did not return
to them in order to recommence his business. After repairing them, the Appellant
granted a lease to a new tenant commencing on 16 May 2011.
an Application for Original Decision filed in the Tribunal on 14 June 2012, the
Applicant-Appellant claimed the amount of $62,688.24
from the Respondent for
expenses allegedly incurred on account of the fire. The principal components of
this amount were the cost
of the repairs ($28,926.00) and the rent lost between
2 August 2010 and 15 May 2011 ($15,031.18).
hearing before the Tribunal took place on 5 and 6 February 2013. On 24 April
2013, the Tribunal delivered its decision in favour
of the Respondent.
Appellant filed a Notice of Appeal on 21 May 2013. The appeal was heard before
us on 9 August 2013. Mr Allan of counsel appeared
for the Appellant and Mr Perla
for the Respondent.
this hearing, we indicated that, in our decision on the appeal, we would give
directions as to the filing of submissions regarding
the costs of the hearings
at first instance and on appeal.
The legal basis of the Appellant's claim
paragraph 16 of his Application, the Appellant outlined as follows the basis of
his claim against the Respondent:-
16. The fire was caused by the actions of the Respondent, his
servants, employees or agents.
PARTICULARS
a. Heated articles which had not sufficiently cooled were left in a
b. Those articles self ignited causing the fire.
c. The Respondent failed to take proper steps to ensure that heated items
were sufficiently cooled before placing them in a container.
d. The Respondent left the container in a place and a container which was not
sufficient to enable the heated items to cool down.
e. The Respondent left the heated items in place in close proximity to other
items which could catch fire.
its decision at [8], the Tribunal indicated that during the course of the
hearing and in submissions, the Applicant's claim was
confirmed as being based
upon a breach by the Respondent of both his common law duty to take reasonable
care in the operation of
his business at the premises ('the common law claim')
and certain conditions of the Lease ('the contractual claim').
Tribunal held that the provisions of the Lease that might support the
contractual claim were paragraphs (a) and (m) of clause
3 (it considered two
other provisions, but ruled that they were irrelevant). This clause appeared
under the heading 'Special Covenants
by Lessee'. The significant passages within
paragraphs (a) and (m) are as follows:-
Repair of Premises during Lease
(a) The Lessee shall at his expense keep and maintain the demised premises
and appurtenances... in good and tenantable repair and
in good and efficient
working order and condition and in a state of cleanliness fair wear and tear and
damage by fire lightning storm
flood tempest earthquake act of God riots civil
commotions or act of war and without any neglect or default on the part of the
or by any agents invitees or persons authorised by the Lessee excepted
and shall effect repairs to the demised premises and appurtenances
including the
above as may be necessary...
Lessee to indemnify Lessor against damage etc
(m) That the Lessee will indemnify and save harmless the Lessor from all loss
and damage to the demised premises... caused... by the
Lessee's negligent use or
misuse... or by or through any other means neglect or default happening in the
demised premises...
Tribunal held that while it had jurisdiction to determine the contractual claim
based on these two paragraphs, it did not have
common law claim. Its reasoning was as follows: (a) a common law claim for
damages for negligence,
arising between a lessor and a lessee of retail shop
premises, does not fall within the definition of 'retail tenancy dispute' in
, even though this definition is acknowledged in the
case law to be broad in scope; and (b) a claim of this type is therefore not
'retail tenancy claim' as defined in
section 70.
agree that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to deal with the contractual claim, but
would respectfully differ from its ruling regarding
the common law claim. Our
reasons are as follows.
definition of 'retail tenancy dispute' in
is in the following
retail tenancy dispute
means any dispute concerning
the liabilities or obligations (including any obligation to pay money) of a
party or former party to
a retail shop lease or former lease, being liabilities
or obligations which arose under the lease or former lease or which arose
connection with the use or occupation of the retail shop to which the lease or
former lease relates...
paragraph (a)(i) of
, the term 'retail tenancy claim' is defined so as
to include -
a claim in connection with a liability or obligation with which a
retail tenancy dispute is concerned, being:
(i) a claim for payment of money (whether or not stated to be by way of debt,
damages, restitution or refund)...
we see it, the Appellant, in maintaining the common law claim, sought to enforce
a liability that 'arose in connection with the
use or occupation of the retail
shop' to which the Lease related. The dispute between the parties regarding this
claim was therefore
a 'retail tenancy dispute' and the claim, being a claim for
damages, fell within the scope of paragraph (a)(i) of the definition
tenancy claim' in
section 70.
fact that our opinion on this question diverges from that of the Tribunal is not
of significance for the outcome of this appeal,
because the principles to be
applied in determining the common law claim are for practical purposes the same
as apply to the contractual
claim. They derive (as the Tribunal held) from the
Civil Liability Act
present purposes, the important provisions of this Act are
. So far as relevant, they state:-
5 Definitions
In this Part:
means harm of any kind, include the following:
(a) personal injury or death,
(b) damage to property, and
(c) economic loss
means failure to exercise reasonable care and
5A Application of Part
(1) This Part applies to any claim for damages for harm resulting from
negligence, regardless of whether the claim is brought in tort,
in contract,
under statute or otherwise.
5B General principles
(1) A person is not negligent in failing to take precautions against a risk
of harm unless:
(a) the risk was foreseeable (that is, it is a risk of which the person knew
or ought to have known), and
(b) the risk was not insignificant, and
(c) in the circumstances, a reasonable person in the person's position would
have taken those precautions.
(2) In determining whether a reasonable person would have taken precautions
against a risk of harm, the court is to consider the following
(amongst other
relevant things):
(a) the probability that the harm would occur if care were not taken,
(b) the likely seriousness of the harm,
(c) the burden of taking precautions to avoid the risk of harm,
(d) the social utility of the activity that creates the risk of harm.
5C Other principles
In proceedings relating to liability for negligence:
(a) the burden of taking precautions to avoid a risk of harm includes the
burden of taking precautions to avoid similar risks of harm
for which the person
may be responsible...
his written submissions for the Appellant in the appeal, Mr Allan suggested that
might not after all be applicable to the contractual claim. He
pointed out that the issue of negligence was not a component of this
only arose because the Respondent, relying on the phrase 'neglect or default' in
clauses 3(a) and (m), sought to introduce
it. In his oral submissions, however,
Mr Allan did not press this proposition.
our judgment, the clear intent of
section 5A(1)
is to bring within the purview
any contractual claim for damages in which the question whether
the respondent or defendant is liable depends upon a finding as to
whether he or
she was negligent. The contractual claim, as well as the common law claim, must
therefore be determined under this
Relevant conclusions of the Tribunal
substantial proportion of the Tribunal's decision was devoted to explaining lay
and expert evidence relating to the likely cause
of the fire in the
findings with regard to the lay evidence included the following (at [35], [40],
[49], [51 - 52] and [62]):-
35 In cross examination, the Applicant agreed that there had never
before been any fire-related incidents in the years since 2003
Respondent had first commenced occupation of the premises...
40 The Respondent also recalled that on the night of the fire he took some
washing out of the dryers at some time before 7.00 pm and
took some of these
items to the back of the shop. He agreed that there was quite a lot of clothing
within the premises on the night
of the fire. He could not agree or disagree as
to whether 5 or 6 nylon bags containing clothing or other laundered items, were
within the shop for collection at a later time.
49 Another relevant factor which emerged from cross-examination of the
Respondent was that one of the customers of his laundromat
business was a
massage studio and that the towels left by the massage studio for laundering
could from time to time contain massage
oil. The Respondent's evidence was that
any such oil would of course be removed in the course of the towels being
laundered, washed
with detergent and rinsed, but his evidence did not exclude
the possibility that there could still be oil present within the laundered
material when it was placed in the dryers or later left for collection within
the premises.
51 There was no evidence to establish that such towels were in fact
laundered, dried and then left at the premises on the evening
in question, that
oil was likely to still remain in those towels after they had been laundered,
the likely composition of such oil,
or whether such oil was especially flammable
or likely to induce spontaneous combustion.
52 The dryers at the premises did not have a cooling process. The Respondent
agreed that clothes would... sometimes contain heat when
they were removed from
the dryers. He also gave evidence that he would usually fold clothes and other
items after removing them from
the dryer because otherwise they would be
creased, and that they would then be stacked...
62 Some relevant factors which emerge from the evidence are that the
Respondent had been operating his laundromat business at the
premises for quite
a number of years, that he had been consistently adopting the same work methods,
including methods of washing,
drying and storing clothes, and that there had
been no incidence of any fire.
Tribunal gave consideration to reports prepared by three expert witnesses. The
sole expert called by the Appellant was Mr Kelly,
a forensic investigator. He
inspected the Premises on 23 August 2010 and wrote two reports, dated 24 August
2010 and 7 November 2011
respectively. The Respondent called Mr Munday, who was
also a forensic investigator, and Mr Gardner, an electrical engineer. Mr Munday
wrote two reports, dated 22 September and 11 December 2012 respectively. Mr
Gardner inspected the Premises on 7 July 2010 and wrote
a report dated 9 July
these reports, three possible causes of the fire were discussed: spontaneous
combustion (or 'self-ignition') of items that had
been laundered, dried and
stacked in an identified yellow trolley (which itself suffered substantial fire
damage); an electrical
malfunction; and arson committed by an intruder. The
Tribunal observed that the first of these explanations, for which Mr Kelly
attracted support from Mr Munday in his second report.
[53 - 54], the Tribunal arrived at a finding in line with Mr Kelly's explanation
for the fire (and indeed with the particulars
set out in paragraph 16 of the
Appellant's Application for Original Decision):-
53 Having considered all of the evidence, the Tribunal is persuaded
that spontaneous combustion of items which had been laundered
and left in the
premises is a more probable cause of the fire than the other causes suggested by
the experts.
54 The above finding, that self-heating laundered items is a more likely
cause of the fire than the other two alternative factors
suggested, does not
necessarily then lead to a finding that it is more probable than not that this
was the cause of the fire; however,
the available evidence is so weak in support
of any other possible causes that the Tribunal is also persuaded that it is more
than not that this was the cause of the fire.
[56 - 60], the Tribunal referred, adding some observations of its own, to
passages within Mr Kelly's second report that are of
significance in this
56 The expert Mr Kelly has set out, within paragraphs 8.1, 8.2 and
9.1 of his second report dated 7 November 2011, that his experience
and that knowledge has also been acquired by him from others in his field, that
spontaneous combustion of laundered items
has occurred in commercial laundries
as a result of sheets, towels and other materials self-heating and that (at
paragraph 8.1) "in
more recent years" such fires have occurred "far more readily
as a result of the laundering of materials and especially towels that
associated with either cafes or massage centres where oils are used".
57 Mr Kelly also relates in paragraph 8.1 of this second report that, as at
the time of making this report in November 2011, there
had been two recent fires
in commercial laundries and that preliminary investigations by officers had
indicated that these fires
had "developed as a result of ignition of towelling
materials following them being heated in a dryer". He also relates that this
situation has "in more recent years" more readily occurred "as a result of the
laundering of materials and especially towels that
have been associated with
either cafes or massage centres where oils are used".
58 Paragraphs 8.2 and 9.1 of Mr Kelly's second report go on to describe that
commercial laundry operators commonly continue to remove
laundered materials
"folding them or even stacking them straight out of a dryer into a washing
basket", and that "it has been well
reported by others and on numerous occasions
by myself that fire has developed as a result of heated material, and
particularly towel,
that has not be (sic) allowed to cool before it has been
stacked or placed in containers which has later led to self heating/ spontaneous
combustion."
59 Mr Kelly also states at paragraph 9.1 of his second report that such fires
"tend to occur after hours when the laundry is unoccupied"
and suggests that
"the scenario..... tends to indicate more readily" a special role of massage oil
in the subsequent process of spontaneous
combustion; unfortunately, no factual
or empirical information is supplied to support this assertion. An evidentiary
conclusion cannot
be made, without acceptable proof, that the fact that a fire
occurs due to spontaneous combustion after a laundry is closed suggests
massage oil played a role in the onset of that fire.
60 The knowledge which has been acquired by Mr Kelly in the course of his
experience investigating fires as to the incidence of apparent
spontaneous
combustion in commercial laundries appears to have largely arisen in "recent
years". Apparently, Mr Kelly may only have
become aware of this incidence in the
period following the date of his first report on 24 August 2010 because it was
not mentioned
in his first report; this was, of course, after the fire. Further,
and perhaps more importantly, the extent to which Mr Kelly's knowledge
imparted to commercial laundry operators such as the Respondent is unknown.
Tribunal then stated as follows at [61]:-
61 The available expert evidence does not of itself establish that
spontaneous combustion of laundered items represented a foreseeable
respect of which the Respondent failed to take reasonably available steps.
the ensuing paragraphs, the Tribunal summarised an argument put by the Appellant
in the following terms: (a) in view of the manner
in which the Respondent
carried on his business, the risk of a fire starting in the Premises was
'reasonably foreseeable' at all
times, even though the possibility that this
might actually occur was 'remote'; (b) the Respondent could have averted this
taking relatively simple precautions, but failed to do so: (c) it
followed, having regard to the 'general principles' stated in
, that the Respondent's conduct involved a failure to exercise reasonable
care and therefore constituted negligence as defined in
following extracts from the Tribunal's decision (at [63], [66], [68], [77], [78]
and [81]) set out the main components of this
argument put by the
Appellant:-
63 The Applicant submits that:
"The Respondent conducted a business clearly at risk of fire, full as it was
of flammable clothes in plastic dry cleaner's bags. Those
clothes were
side-by-side with power boards and electrical devices, some of the fabrics
contained oil, and some of the fabrics hung
above fuel in the form of plastic
washing baskets. Those fabrics were industrially heated so as to dry.
In summary, there was heat and fuel all around the laundromat
(emphasis added in the Tribunal's decision)
66 That a risk may be remote yet still foreseeable was stated In
Shire Council v Shirt
, where the point was also made that a foreseeable risk
may nevertheless involve a low duty of care; Mason J also made this
observation:
"(15) The considerations to which I have referred indicate that a risk of
injury which is remote in the sense that it is extremely
unlikely to occur may
nevertheless constitute a foreseeable risk. A risk which is not far-fetched or
fanciful is real and therefore
foreseeable but, as we have seen, the existence
of a foreseeable risk of injury does not in itself dispose of the question of
of duty. The magnitude of the risks and its degree of probability remain
to be considered with other relevant factors."
68 The Applicant submits that "running the laundromat (for a number of years)
brought with it the foreseeability of loss by fire.
Indeed, all of the
particular fire risks identified by the experts were also foreseeable, as was
the risk of a significant spread
of the fire given the available fuel."
77 The Applicant contends that there was also a risk of significant spread of
the fire given the available fuel, and that the Respondent
failed to take
reasonably available steps such as dividing and sectioning the shop's flammable
contents in order to prevent the fire's
spread. The Applicant asserts that
"clothes, linen and nylon bags were everywhere and upon (and underneath) one
another"; this assertion
is based upon the state of the premises after the fire
when there had been considerable disruption caused by attending fire personnel,
and is disputed by the Respondent...
78 It is also submitted on behalf of the Applicant that "plugs should have
been regularly checked to see that they were properly seated
in power outlets.
Electrical equipment should have been switched off when not in use and it should
not have been allowed to run unattended.
Items which had to run unattended
should have been electrically checked to see that they were fit for such use ...
these were all
costless measures. The fact that the fire occurred in itself
suggests strongly that controls were missing."
81 The Applicant also submits that "It would have cost little in time and
money not only to let the clothes cool down but to keep...
clothes isolated from
one another"...
Tribunal rejected this line of argument, essentially on four grounds.
it pointed out (at [69]) that the Court of Appeal, in
Sibraa v Brown
[2012] NSWCA 328
, stipulated that
'requires risks to be
assessed prospectively' since 'as a matter of ordinary language a "risk of harm"
relates to harm that has not
yet happened'.
it rejected in the following manner (at [71]) the submission that a risk of
'loss by fire' was the relevant 'risk of harm'
in these proceedings:-
71 The Applicant submits that the simple fact of running a
laundromat for a number of years creates the foreseeability of loss by
this bald proposition is not supported by any evidence. What needs to be
examined is whether there is evidence to establish
that the Respondent knew, or
should reasonably have known, that the stacking of clothes after removal from
the dryer at the premises
carried with it a risk of spontaneous combustion.
having formulated the 'risk of harm' in this different way - i.e., as the risk
of spontaneous combustion occurring in clothes
stacked after removal from a
dryer - the Tribunal held that the evidence fell short of demonstrating that the
Respondent should reasonably
have been aware of it. The Tribunal stated this
conclusion in different ways more than once: for example, at [73]:-
73 There is no evidence to establish that the Respondent knew, or
that a person in the Respondent's position should reasonably have
known, of the
risk of spontaneous combustion occurring in commercial laundries, or the steps
available to avoid or minimise that
and finally, the Tribunal, at [77], [79] and [81], rejected submissions
identifying specific precautions that the Respondent
(according to the
Appellant) should have taken, but failed to take. These are the precautions that
the Tribunal described in the
extracts from paragraphs [77], [78] and [81] that
we have just quoted:-
77 There is ... no evidence to identify exactly what "flammable
contents" should have been quarantined nor any expert evidence as
to how this
should have been done in order to prevent spread of a fire...
79 The suggested preventative steps set out above in paragraph 78 do not
relate to the cause of the fire as urged by the Applicant,
and accepted in this
decision, that self-heating of clothing was a more probable cause of the fire
than electrical malfunction. Those
steps, combined with the suggested steps set
out in paragraph 77, also appear to contain a significant proportion of
hindsight rather
than foresight.
81... there is no evidence to show that, even if self-heating was a
reasonably foreseeable risk, such a step as dividing clothes into
separate piles
would have averted or minimised loss to the Applicant.
Tribunal summed up its principal conclusions at [82]:-
82 The risk that there would be a fire in the premises caused by
spontaneous combustion of laundered items, or the risk that such
fire would be
accelerated by the manner in which items were located or left by the Respondent
within the premises, are not risks
which have been shown to be reasonably
foreseeable by a person in the position of the Respondent in the period prior to
of the fire. Negligence on the part of the Respondent as a cause of
the fire has therefore not been established; the contractual
therefore fail, and the Application dismissed.
The parties' submissions
the Notice of Appeal and the submissions put by Mr Allan, it was claimed that
the Tribunal erred in law in two respects, namely,
in stipulating that evidence
was needed to demonstrate foreseeability of the relevant risk of harm and in
defining the risk of harm
too narrowly. Three other matters also received his
attention: the onus of proof, the Tribunal's interpretation of a part of Mr
evidence and an observation by the Tribunal as to the foreseeability of
loss by fire.
role of evidence in establishing foreseeability.
The first alleged error by
the Tribunal, as formulated in paragraph 16 of Mr Allan's written submissions,
was that of treating the
question whether the relevant risk of harm was
reasonably foreseeable to a person in the Respondent's position as a matter to
'proved' or 'demonstrated' by a 'piece' of evidence. Mr Allan argued that the
Tribunal should instead have regarded all the evidence
in the case, 'to every
last piece of information', as relevant to this question. It should have made a
'determination' on foreseeability
based on a 'global' look at all the
circumstances. These circumstances should have included the following (to quote
again from paragraph
16 of the submissions):-
... the fact the respondent was running a business, the fact his
lease specifically adverted to fire, the fact dryers were being used
on the shop
floor, the acknowledged heat of that process, the absent cool cycle compared to
domestic drying machines, the number
of dryers working to maximise business, the
push to get through as much clothing as possible (and a same day service) the
and storing of clothes everywhere, using flammable dry cleaning bags,
dealing in flammable clothes, and taking on the peculiar responsibilities
bailee for reward.
making this submission, Mr Allan referred to a statement by the Privy Council,
Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Miller Steamship Co Pty Ltd
[1966] UKPC 1
[1967] AC 617
at 641, that a decision as to reasonable foreseeability is 'not a primary
finding of fact but an inference from the other findings'.
He also cited the
following dictum of Lord Steyn in a House of Lords case,
Jolley v Sutton
London Borough Council
[2000] UKHL 31
[2000] 3 All ER 409
The issue whether an accident of the particular type was reasonably
foreseeable is technically a secondary fact but perhaps it is
more illuminating
to call it an informed opinion by the judge in the light of all the
circumstances of the case.
response, Mr Perla relied on a passage in a recent Court of Appeal case decided
Shoalhaven City Council v Pender
[2013] NSWCA 210.
this case, the appellant was employed by a company that operated a car ferry
service between Nowra and an island nearby. He slipped
and fell on a ramp
forming part of a wharf at Nowra owned and occupied by the appellant council.
His evidence included an allegation
that at the time of his accident the ramp
was dry and smooth and a 'surmise' that this was because dry algae was present
trial judge held that the ramp was slippery, that the appellant,
which knew that it regularly became slippery, should have taken
(but did not
take) the simple and inexpensive precaution of cleaning it from time to time and
that liability was therefore established
Court of Appeal upheld the council's appeal and entered a verdict for the
appellant. The passage cited by Mr Perla as showing
that evidence may be
required to establish the foreseeability of a risk under the Act appears in the
judgment of McColl JA at [88],
[89] and [91 - 93]:-
88 In some cases, it can be inferred as a matter of common sense
and common knowledge, that particular surfaces will ordinarily be
particularly when wet: see
Indigo Mist Pty Ltd v Palmer
[2012] NSWCA 239
(at [6]) per Macfarlan JA (Beazley JA agreeing); see also
Neill v NSW Fresh
Food & Ice Pty Ltd
[1963] HCA 4
(1963) 108 CLR 362
(at 368) per Taylor
and Owen JJ. The same cannot be said about dry surfaces.
89 This was not a case where common experience enabled the primary judge to
infer that the respondent's injury arose from the appellant's
negligence: cf
Jones v Dunkel
(at 305) per Dixon CJ. It was not a shopping centre case
where the presence of a greasy substance on a floor in an area adjacent
food court but in respect of which there was no system for periodic inspection
and cleaning, there being thereby admitted breach,
enabled a conclusion on the
probabilities as to when the greasy substance was dropped on the floor: cf
Strong v Woolworths Ltd
91... The risk posed by the dry ramp was, in my view, a matter which required
evidence as to the nature of the risk posed and the
steps the appellant ought
reasonably have taken to obviate it: see
Arabi v Glad Cleaning Service Pty
[2010] NSWCA 208
(at [40] - [41]) per Sackville AJA (Hodgson JA and
Harrison J agreeing).
92 Further, the evidence did not, in my view, establish that the appellant
was aware that there was a foreseeable risk of persons
slipping on the dry ramp.
There was no evidence that anyone had slipped on the ramp's dry surface prior to
the respondent's fall.
The evidence relating to Mr Wallace's falls did not
afford any evidence as to why he slipped.
93 There was no explanation as to the nature of dry algae, why, if it was
present, it was imperceptible to view and why apparently
imperceptible dry algae
might be slippery. It was by no means apparent on the evidence, in my view, that
the appellant knew, or ought
to have known, that a dry surface of the ramp which
to all intents and purposes appeared to be merely concrete posed a foreseeable
risk of harm.
on this statement of principle, Mr Perla argued as follows: (a) there was no
evidence that the Respondent knew of the risk
that stacked clothes might
self-ignite spontaneously following their removal from a dryer; (b) the question
to be resolved was therefore
one of constructive knowledge, i.e., whether the
Respondent ought to have known of this risk; (c) the phenomenon of self-ignition
in these circumstances was not a matter of common knowledge; (d) accordingly, it
was appropriate for the Tribunal to treat this question
as one to be determined
after considering relevant evidence on the matter.
the 'risk of harm'.
The second alleged error by the Tribunal was one on
which Mr Allan placed greater emphasis. It was that the Tribunal formulated the
relevant 'risk of harm' in unduly narrow terms. The risk that it identified was,
to quote from its decision at [82], that 'there
would be a fire in the premises
caused by spontaneous combustion of laundered items'. The relevant risk should,
according to Mr Allan,
have been formulated in distinctly broader terms: namely,
as the risk of damage to the premises by fire.
Allan submitted that in the common law of negligence it was well accepted that
even 'remote' risks may have to be regarded as 'reasonably
foreseeable'. He
quoted the following dictum of Mason J in
Wyong Shire Council v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
(1980) 146 CLR 40
at 48 (which the Tribunal also quoted): 'A risk which is not
far-fetched or fanciful is real and therefore foreseeable...' He also
to the following passage in the judgment of Murphy J in that case (at 49):-
Most traffic and industrial accidents result from circumstances in
which the chance of an accident occurring is extremely slight.
Under modern
urban conditions, most people habitually drive carelessly. One only needs to
observe peak-hour traffic in and out of
a city to notice that almost every car
is driven unsafely close to the car in front; speed limits are also habitually
exceeded. The
chances of an accident from any breach of traffic rules is very
slight, but, if harm does result (and if the court concerns itself
"foreseeability"), it is treated as foreseeable.
Allan further argued that if the relevant risk was formulated too narrowly, the
'second stage' of determining a negligence claim
- that of deciding whether a
breach of the duty of care had occurred - might not be reached. The court would
not be required to adopt
what he described as the '
whereby it weighs up the following factors listed by Mason J in
Wyong Shire
Council v Shirt
The magnitude of the risk and the degree of the probability of its
occurrence, along with the expense, difficulty and inconvenience
alleviating action and any other conflicting responsibilities which the
defendant may have.
way of illustrating the need to define the 'relevant risk' in broad terms, Mr
Allan relied on four further cases on common law
negligence. The relevant
features of these cases are as follows.
Pitt Son & Badgery Ltd v Proulefco SA
(1984) 153 CLR 645
broker retained wool that it had sold to a buyer in a wooden store. An intruder
set fire to the store and destroyed the wool.
He or she had gained access
through a gap in the surrounding fence. The High Court affirmed a decision of
the Court of Appeal holding
the broker liable to the buyer on the basis that, as
a bailee for reward, it was obliged to take reasonable care of the wool. At
Gibbs CJ said:-
Secondly, Mr Staff [counsel for the broker] pointed to the evidence
which showed that arson was a rare occurrence in wool stores -
indeed, it may
have been quite unknown - and submitted that it was not unreasonable to fail to
guard against it. However, the duty
of the appellant was not simply to guard
against arson. It was to take reasonable care to keep the wool safe, and
therefore to prevent
damage from any sort of intruders, whether thieves, vandals
or the unexpected arsonist.
Jolley v Sutton London Borough Council
[2000] UKHL 31
[2000] 3 All ER 409
defendant council left a boat on council property where young children could
gain access to it. Two young boys propped up the
bow of the boat with a car
jack, got underneath it and tried to repair it. One of them was injured when the
boat fell on him. He
sued the council. The Court of Appeal reversed the primary
judgment in his favour on the ground that it was not reasonably foreseeable
an accident would occur as a result of the boys deciding to work under a propped
up boat. But the House of Lords restored the
judgment, saying that neither 'the
precise manner in which the injury came about' nor its 'extent' had to be
foreseeable (Lord Steyn
at 417) and that 'the foreseeability is not as to the
particulars but the genus' (Lord Hoffmann at 418).
in the High Court case of
Tame v New South Wales; Annetts v Australian
Stations Pty Ltd
(2002) 211 CLR 317
[2002] HCA 35
, Gummow and
Kirby JJ said, in the context of proceedings for damages in negligence on
account of psychiatric injury, that 'liability
does not depend upon "the
capacity of a reasonable man to foresee damage of a precise and particular
character or upon his capacity
to foresee the precise events leading to the
damage complained of"'. (The phrase in quotation marks is extracted from
Chapman v Hearse
[1961] HCA 46
(1961) 106 CLR 112
fourth and final case of common law negligence on which Mr Allan relied was
Manley v Alexander
(2005) 223 ALR 228
[2005] HCA 79.
Here the driver of
a tow truck ran over and seriously injured a man early one morning. The man was
intoxicated, dressed in dark clothing
and lying on the road. The High Court
affirmed by majority a decision of the Court of Appeal of Western Australia
holding the driver
liable in negligence. The majority judges (Gummow, Kirby and
Callinan JJ) said at 231 [12]:-
It may readily be accepted that the possibility that someone would
be found lying on a roadway like Middleton Beach Road at 4.00 am
is properly to
be described as remote. But the reasonable care that a driver must exercise when
driving a vehicle on the road requires
that the driver control the speed and
direction of the vehicle in such a way that the driver may know what is
happening in the vicinity
of the vehicle in time to take reasonable steps to
react to those events.
Allan acknowledged that in the present proceedings the applicable principles
relating to negligence were those laid down in the
, not in the common
law. He maintained, however, that according to the cases decided under this Act,
it was similarly recognised that
a 'risk of harm' should not be defined too
narrowly. In this connection, he referred to two decisions of the Court of
first of these was
Garzo v Liverpool/Campbelltown Christian School
In this case, the appellant sued the respondent school for damages
for injuries suffered as a result of slipping and falling on one
of the broad
painted strips on a 'zebra' crossing of a road within the school grounds. In
July 2007, about five months before her
accident, the crossing had been
repainted with a line-marking paint that was commonly used for painting narrow
lines on sporting
fields. Its slip-resistance was below the level recommended
for a pedestrian crossing in a Slip Resistance Handbook (HB 197:1999)
by Standards Australia. There was evidence to suggest, however, that the painted
strip had become weathered and therefore
more slip-resistant by the time of the
appellant failed at first instance, on the ground that the relevant 'risk of
harm' was not one of which the school or its maintenance
knew or ought to have
known, and was therefore not foreseeable as required by
section 5B(1)(a)
noted in Tobias AJA's judgment in the Court of Appeal at [119], the trial judge
identified the risk of harm as 'the risk of a person,
such as the [appellant],
when using the particular pedestrian crossing by walking normally, in its then
condition, slipping on the
painted surface and suffering personal injury'. In
their judgments in the appeal, however, both Meagher JA and Tobias AJA indicated
that in their opinion this formulation was too narrow.
the judgment of Meagher JA, the following passage at [22 - 27] should be
22... As the primary judge notes, the provisions of
Civil Liability Act
are directed to questions of breach of duty:
Adeels Palace Pty Ltd v Moubarak
[2009] HCA 48
(2009) 239 CLR 420
Harmer v Hare
[2011] NSWCA 229
(2011) 59 MVR 1
sections assume an allegation of breach of duty resulting from negligence which
is or can be formulated in terms of a failure
to take precautions against a risk
of harm. The question which
requires be answered favourably to the
plaintiff is whether in the face of a risk of harm which was foreseeable and not
insignificant,
a reasonable person in the defendant's position would have taken
those precautions having regard to, among other relevant things,
considerations in
To address the questions and considerations in
it is necessary to formulate a plaintiff's claim in a way which takes account of
the precautions which it is alleged should have
been taken and identifies the
risk or risks of harm which the plaintiff alleges eventuated and to which those
precautions should
have been directed.
23 One way in which the appellant put her case at trial was that the
respondents were negligent in failing to ensure that the crossing
was surfaced
with a non-slip paint or other material. The construction of the pedestrian
crossing by painting a strip of the internal
roadway within the School grounds,
invited pedestrians to cross the roadway at that point. A risk which had to be
addressed in relation
to the installation and maintenance of the crossing was
whether a person might slip on the painted or asphalt surface of the crossing
when wet. It was argued that the respondents should have used a paint or other
material, when repainting the surface of the crossing
in July 2007, which
complied with the recommendation in Table 3 of HB197:1999.
24 The relevant "risk of harm" for the purposes of the application of
taking into account the precaution which the appellant alleged should have been
taken in July 2007 in relation to the repainting
of the crossing, was
sufficiently described as being that of a person slipping on the surface of the
crossing when wet and thereby
suffering injury.
25 The primary judge defined that risk of harm more narrowly and in a way
which focused (by use of the words "in its then condition")
on the condition of
the pedestrian crossing at the time of the appellant's fall in November 2007: at
[66]. In doing so, the primary
judge excluded from the precautions which might
have been taken against that risk, the precaution of using in July 2007 a paint
complied with the recommendation in Table 3. A consequence of the trial
judge defining the risk of harm in this way was that he did
not address one
formulation of the appellant's case. Had he done so, his answers to the
questions required to be addressed by
and (b) are likely to have been
different and favourable to the appellant in respect of that way in which her
case was put.
26 I agree with Tobias AJA that the risk of harm to a person slipping on the
wet surface of the crossing was foreseeable and not insignificant.
Each of those
matters, addressed to this broader formulation of the risk of harm, was conceded
by the respondents in oral argument.
The primary judge, addressing the more
narrowly defined risk of harm, held that it was not foreseeable and that it
could not be described
as "not insignificant": at [98] and [115]. Each of those
conclusions followed from the more narrow description of the risk that he
adopted. For example, at [110] and [111] the primary judge addressed the
question posed by
by reference to what was known or ought to have
been known by the respondents concerning the condition of the crossing in
2007. In doing so he observed that there was "no obvious defect in the
crossing in November 2007 at the time of Mrs Garzo's fall"
and that there had
been no "unusual external events, storms, road repairs, spillages of oil in the
area of the crossing or the like,
which meant that one might expect the crossing
to be particularly dangerous".
27 I also agree with Tobias AJA that there was a failure to take reasonable
precautions when repainting the surface of the crossing
in July 2007...
[123], after having quoted the trial judge's formulation of the 'risk of harm'
and referred to alternative formulations suggested
by counsel for the parties,
Tobias AJA said:-
123 In my opinion the risk can be identified as that of a person
slipping on the painted surface of the crossing and thereby suffering
I do not think that the risk needs to be articulated in any greater detail than
[7], the third member of the Court, Basten JA, suggested a formulation closer to
that of the trial judge:-
Civil Liability Act
(NSW) requires
identification of a risk of harm, against which a person has failed to take
precautions. Given its context, the risk
must be that which materialised in the
case of the injured person seeking to claim in negligence. That is because
is dealing with a breach of a duty of care, being the duty of care owed by the
defendant to the injured plaintiff. The relevant risk
in the present case was
the risk which materialised when the appellant slipped and fell. The harm
suffered by the appellant, if it
arose from the condition of the crossing at
all, arose from the condition of the crossing as at the date of her fall. To
a breach of duty, she needed to establish that the crossing was unduly
slippery on that date.
appellant failed in her appeal. Basten JA held that she had not established that
the crossing was 'unduly slippery' at the time
of the accident or that the
school should have realised that this was or might be the case and have taken
precautions such as having
it professionally tested or repainting it. Meagher JA
and Tobias AJA held that the school, when repainting the crossing in July 2007
with unsuitable paint, had failed to take reasonable precautions against the
'risk of harm' as formulated by their Honours. But they
held also that, having
regard to the likelihood that the crossing had become more slip-resistant in the
ensuing five months, the
Appellant had not established that the school's breach
of duty caused her to slip and fall.
Allan's submission relating to this case was that the judgments of Meagher JA
and Tobias AJA made it clear that for the purposes
'risk of harm' should be broadly defined.
second case that Mr Allan mentioned was one to which we have already referred,
Shoalhaven City Council v Pender
[2013] NSWCA 210.
her judgment in this case, McColl JA discussed at some length the question of
how the relevant 'risk of harm' to the respondent
should have been defined. Her
discussion included the following passages, extracted from paragraphs [51] to
Breach of duty
51 Acceptance that the appellant owed the respondent a duty of care did not
answer the questions whether that duty was breached or
whether any breach caused
the respondent's injury...
52 Further, "[a] person does not breach his or her duty of care merely
because there are steps that he or she could have taken to
avert the risk that
actually materialised":
Thornton v Sweeney
[2011] NSWCA 244
per Sackville AJA (Campbell JA and Tobias AJA agreeing); see also
Liability Act
55 Despite its appearance in that part of the
Liability Act
"Duty of care", section 5B engages with the issue of breach of duty of care.
56 Thus, s 5B(1) sets out three preconditions that must co-exist before
liability in negligence arises, while s 5B(2) provides a non-exhaustive
factors the court is required to take into account in deciding whether the third
of those preconditions exists:
Roads and Traffic Authority of NSW v
Refrigerated Roadways Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWCA 263
(2009) 77 NSWLR 360
[173]) per Campbell JA (McColl JA agreeing); see also (at [443]) per Sackville
57 The effect of s 5B(1), accordingly, was that the appellant was not
negligent in failing to take precautions against a risk of harm
unless the risk
was one of which it knew or ought to have known, the risk was not insignificant,
and in the circumstances, a reasonable
person in the appellant's position would
have taken those precautions.
58 Section 5B(1)(c) invokes the notion of foreseeability as it is relevant to
breach of duty of care. Reasonable foreseeability of
the class of injury the
plaintiff suffered is also an essential condition of the existence of the duty
to take care for the benefit
of another. However the nature of the
foreseeability inquiry differs depending upon the stage at which it is being
considered.
Shirt v Wyong Shire Council
[1978] 1 NSWLR 631
(at 639 - 640)
Glass JA said that "[t]he inquiry to be made in relation to duty or no duty [of
care] relates to the foreseeability
of harm resulting to the plaintiff from the
conduct of the defendant, considered quite generally", whereas "[t]he conduct
to the breach inquiry is the foreseeability of harm resulting from the
acts or omissions of the defendant, or its servants, proved
to have occurred."
Thus, the foreseeability inquiry at the duty and breach stages raises different
issues which progressively decline
from the general to the particular:
Minister Administering the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
San Sebastian Pty Ltd
[1983] 2 NSWLR 268
(at 295) ("San Sebastian") per
Glass JA; see also
Vairy v Wyong Shire Council
(at [70] - [73]) per
Gummow J...
62 At common law, the plaintiff did not have to establish the precise and
particular character of the injury or that the precise sequence
leading to the injury was foreseeable; it was sufficient if the kind or type of
injury was foreseeable:
Rosenberg v Percival
[2001] HCA 18
(at [64]) per Gummow J. Nothing in the Act dictates any different
approach when considering the requirement of
that the risk be "not
insignificant":
Shaw v Thomas
[2010] NSWCA 169
(at [43]) per Macfarlan JA
(with whom Beazley and Tobias JJA agreed).
63 Nevertheless, as Basten JA emphasised in
Hoffmann v Boland
(at [3]) "[t]he focus of [s 5B] is upon the 'risk of harm' and the
'precautions' which might be taken against such a risk."
64 Thus the breach inquiry required the primary judge to identify accurately
the actual risk of injury the appellant faced as it was
only through the correct
identification of the risk that her Honour could determine what a reasonable
response to that risk would
Roads and Traffic Authority of New South
Wales v Dederer
(at [18], [59]) per Gummow J. As Gummow and Hayne JJ
explained in
Graham Barclay Oysters Pty Ltd v Ryan
(at [192]), the
inquiry as to breach "involves identifying, with some precision, what a
reasonable person in the position of the
defendant would do by way of response
to the reasonably foreseeable risk". In so saying, their Honours referred with
approval to
Isaacs A-CJ's observation in
Metropolitan Gas Co v City of
[1924] HCA 46
(1924) 35 CLR 186
(at 194), that "[n]o conclusion
of negligence can be arrived at until, first, the mind conceives affirmatively
what should have been
Identifying the risk of harm
66 The influence of Gummow J's statement in
Roads and Traffic Authority of
New South Wales v Dederer
concerning the need to identify the relevant risk
of harm accurately for the purposes of
is apparent in recent decisions.
Shaw v Thomas
concerned, relevantly, the question whether the
occupiers of a home had breached their duty of care to a 10 year old visitor who
suffered serious head injuries when he fell whilst descending from the top level
of a bunk bed. The parties were at issue as to how
the risk of harm should be
characterised for the purpose of
Macfarlan JA held (at [45]) that the risk
was sufficiently defined as one of the plaintiff "falling and injuring himself
whilst descending
from the top bunk of the bed", a risk his Honour regarded as
"not insignificant [because] [t]here is always some risk of injury when
climb up to and down from elevated surfaces."
Honour then quoted (at [68 - 71]) from the passages in the Court of Appeal's
judgment in
that we have reproduced above. At [72], she added the
following observation:-
72 As is apparent all formulations of the risk of harm in
focused on the condition or particular nature of the surface (the
painted strip of the pedestrian crossing) on which the appellant
JA's discussion of how the relevant 'risk of harm' in the proceedings before the
Court should have been defined appeared in
paragraphs [84 - 87] of her
84 If the primary judge accepted the respondent's evidence in this
respect, she then had to identify the risk of harm for the purposes
That required her Honour, as I have said, to identify accurately the risk of
harm of which the appellant knew, or ought to have known.
85 The primary judge identified the risk of harm merely as a slippery ramp. A
formulation pitched at that level of generality failed,
in my view, accurately
to identify the risk of harm the respondent faced. It also distracted the
primary judge from determining the
significance of the risk and what a
reasonable response to that risk was.
86 As is apparent from the previous discussion, in a case such as the
present, identifying the risk of harm for
purposes required focus on the
nature of the surface on which the respondent slipped. Having regard to the
respondent's evidence
as to his observations of the surface of the ramp (and
giving him the benefit of his surmise concerning the presence of dry algae),
risk of harm was, in my view, that of slipping and falling on dry algae on the
87 Had her Honour identified the risk of harm in the terms I propose, she
would have realised that, save as to the respondent's allegation
of his fall on
dry algae, there was no evidence that there was a risk of slipping on the dry
part of the ramp, even if dry algae
was present.
[151] and [153 - 158], Ward AJA dealt as follows with the question of
identification of the 'risk of harm':-
151 It is not disputed that Mr Pender was required to establish
that there was a "not insignificant" risk of harm of which the Council
ought to have known and to which it ought reasonably to have responded. In
Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales v Dederer
[2007] HCA 42
(2007) 234 CLR 330
Gummow J at [59]-[61] referred to the need for there to be a
correct identification of the risk of harm in order for an assessment
reasonable response to be made.
153 Ms Norton [counsel for the respondent] submits that the relevant risk of
harm was the risk that a person would slip on the ramp
and thereby suffer
injury; and that there was no need to articulate it more clearly than that,
referring to
Garzo v Liverpool/Campbelltown Christian School
[2012] NSWCA
[24] and [123]. In
, Tobias AJA had considered at [123] that the
risk of harm could be sufficiently identified as that of a person slipping on
the painted
surface of the crossing and thereby suffering an injury.
154 It is implicit in [the trial judge's] findings that the risk of harm her
Honour had identified was, at its broadest, the risk
that a person in the
position of Mr Pender would slip on the ramp and suffer harm. The finding at
[30.2] that it was not reasonably
foreseeable that a person in Mr Pender's
position would have gone onto the ramp for the particular purpose that he did,
i.e. to check
the underneath of the ferry for ferry clearances, is not
necessarily inconsistent with the implicit finding that there was a risk
person in his position might go onto the ramp, for whatever reason, and fall.
155 The Council was clearly on notice that ferry operators might from time to
time walk on the ramp since it was on notice of at least
two earlier incidents
involving ferry operators falling on the ramp. Therefore, I do not accept the
submission that the finding at
[30.2] should have led to a finding of no
negligence.
156 In oral submissions, it was argued by Mr Sexton that a more specific risk
of harm (by reference to the state of the ramp's surface
rather than by
reference to the purpose for which someone might go onto the ramp) was the risk
that had to be identified, namely
the risk of a workman slipping on
(imperceptible) dry algae, so as to enable focus to be made on the question what
should have been
done to prevent the risk or to take precautions against the
risk. That accords more closely with the way in which the risk of harm
identified in
and focuses attention on the relevant enquiry, which
is what the Council ought reasonably to have done to address that risk. I would
accept that finding such a risk of harm was necessary in order to give rise to a
claim in negligence as contended for by Mr Pender.
157 Nevertheless, having regard to the measure her Honour referred to as
available to remove the risk, i.e., pressure cleaning, it
is implicit in her
Honour's overall reasons that the risk of harm identified by her Honour was that
of slipping on a ramp that was
slippery because of dirt or some kind of
covering, such as algae, on the ramp. Whether or not the Council could
reasonably have foreseen
that dry algae was slippery, there was clearly a basis
for the finding that it was reasonably foreseeable by the Council that if
ramp became slippery by reason of slime or contaminants or algae growth of some
kind, then someone in the position of Mr Pender
could slip and fall.
158 Ultimately, although not precisely identified, the risk of harm was
sufficiently clear from her Honour's reasons as a whole.
third member of the Court, Barrett JA, expressed his agreement with the
judgments of McColl JA and Ward JA and did not address
the question of how the
risk of harm should be identified.
Allan put forward two submissions based specifically on the judgments in
. The first was that we should bear in mind McColl JA's statement
(at [62]) that under the
, as well as at common law, a plaintiff does not
have to 'establish the precise and particular character of the injury or that
precise sequence of events leading to the injury was foreseeable', since it
is sufficient that 'the kind or type of injury' is foreseeable.
Secondly, he
maintained that her Honour's observations as to formulation of the risk of harm,
while warning against defining this
risk 'in the abstract', also demonstrate
that it should not be defined in excessive detail.
to Mr Allan, the Tribunal's error in defining the risk of harm too narrowly
induced it to ignore evidence of a substantial
risk of fire within the Premises
that it should have taken into account. This included evidence that during the
Respondent's occupation
of them the temperature was frequently very high and, as
a number of photographs clearly demonstrated, much of the available space
occupied by garments and other flammable items. In this context, Mr Allan
maintained (in paragraph 39 of his written submissions)
that since the
Respondent was a bailee for reward of the items entrusted to him by his
customers, there were 'social and economic
reasons for treating a reasonable
person in his position as one who responds vigilantly to the mere possibility of
response to these submissions, Mr Perla argued that in a number of paragraphs
that we have quoted from McColl JA's judgment in
, her Honour was
concerned to emphasise that the risk of harm should not be defined too broadly.
He drew our attention specifically
to paragraphs [66], [68 - 72] and [84 - 87].
further authority on which he relied was paragraph [41] of the judgment of
Campbell JA in
Sibraa v Brown
[2012] NSWCA 328
(from which the Tribunal
quoted an extract in its decision at [69]):-
requires risks to be assessed prospectively. As a
matter of ordinary language a "risk of harm" relates to harm that has not yet
That is consistent with the requirement in
that the risk of
harm be "foreseeable", which happens when a person knows or ought to know that
there is a risk that harm might arise
in the future. The "risk of harm" to which
refers is harm that might be suffered by anyone to whom the defendant
owes a duty of care, as a consequence of the failure to take
the precautions
referred to in
Mr Perla argued that the Tribunal, appropriately, had 'imported the articulation
of the risk' that the Appellant had himself
put forward in his Application for
Original Decision, but now sought to abandon - namely, the risk that recently
dried clothes that
were left in a container might self-ignite.
onus of proof.
In paragraphs 4 and 11 of his written submissions in the
appeal, Mr Allan raised the argument that in defending the contractual claim
Respondent bore the onus of showing that the fire was not attributable to
negligence on his part. The relevant passages were
as follows:-
4. Basically the premises were the respondent's responsibility
while he remained tenant. He could only escape responsibility for damage
could show that there was no 'neglect or default' on his part leading to that
11. The covenant in the lease was an absolute promise to keep the premises in
good repair. To not do so was to breach the lease, leading
to a claim for
damages. The respondent could exculpate himself by showing that disrepair was
not a product of his neglect or default.
In other words, the parties agreed that
the respondent would carry an onus of proof should damage occur to the
his oral submissions in the appeal, Mr Allan did not elaborate on this argument.
This question of onus was not mentioned in Mr
Perla's submissions, in the
Tribunal's decision or (as far as we can ascertain) in the parties' submissions
to the Tribunal.
Tribunal's interpretation of evidence given by Mr Kelly
. The passage in the
Tribunal's decision to which this submission of Mr Allan was directed comprised
the first two sentences of paragraph
60 The knowledge which has been acquired by Mr Kelly in the course
of his experience investigating fires as to the incidence of apparent
spontaneous combustion in commercial laundries appears to have largely arisen in
"recent years". Apparently, Mr Kelly may only have
become aware of this
incidence in the period following the date of his first report on 24 August 2010
because it was not mentioned
in his first report; this was, of course, after the
Allan argued that the Tribunal misrepresented what Mr Kelly had said in the
relevant part (paragraphs 6.2 and 6.3) of his first
report. He had shown that at
the time of this report he was fully aware of the risk of spontaneous combustion
of heated cloth materials
in commercial laundries.
Perla did not respond to this argument in his submissions.
Tribunal's observation regarding the foreseeability of loss by fire
observation to which this submission by Mr Allan refers was the following
statement in the Tribunal's decision at [71]:-
71 The Applicant submits that the simple fact of running a
laundromat for a number of years creates the foreseeability of loss by
this bald proposition is not supported by any evidence...
his oral submissions, Mr Allan described as 'odd' the proposition that there was
no evidence that the conduct of a laundromat business
created a foreseeable risk
of loss by fire.
was another argument to which Mr Perla did not respond.
Discussion and conclusions
our opinion, this appeal must be dismissed, for the reasons that follow. In
these reasons, we deal with all the significant points
raised in the parties'
appeal submissions, though not in the order in which we have just outlined
major plank of the Appellant's case on appeal was his contention that the
Tribunal, in applying the provisions of
, defined the
'risk of harm' too narrowly.
our opinion, however, the two authorities cited to us that bear most directly on
this question -
Garzo v Liverpool/Campbelltown Christian School
Shoalhaven City Council v Pender
[2013] NSWCA 210
indicate that a formulation such as the Tribunal adopted was entirely
appropriate and that the formulation urged by Mr Allan -
the risk of damage to
the Premises by fire - would have been unduly broad. This is the case even
though Mr Allan sought to rely on
and claimed that according to
McColl JA's judgment in
broad definitions of the 'risk of harm'
should be formulated.
Undoubtedly,
both Meagher JA and Tobias AJA in
believed that the definition used
by the trial judge in that case was too narrow. But they nevertheless adopted
definitions that were
not substantially broader and that focused on the specific
risk alleged to have been created by the respondent school's conduct with
to the pedestrian crossing. They did not define the risk simply as that of a
person slipping while on the crossing. Instead,
Meagher JA referred to 'a person
slipping on the surface of the crossing when wet and thereby suffering injury'
and Tobias AJA to
'a person slipping on the painted surface of the crossing and
thereby suffering an injury'. Basten JA defined it as 'the risk which
materialised when the appellant slipped and fell', adding that 'the harm
suffered by the appellant, if it arose from the condition
of the crossing at
all, arose from the condition of the crossing as at the date of her fall'.
, McColl JA's comment (at [72]) on the formulations arrived at in
is telling. She said that all of them 'focused on the condition or
particular nature of the surface (the painted strip of the pedestrian
on which the appellant had slipped'.
reasoning in defining the 'risk of harm' in the factual circumstances arising in
conveyed a similar message. This is well illustrated in the
following extracts from paragraphs [85] and [86] of her judgment:-
85 The primary judge identified the risk of harm merely as a
slippery ramp. A formulation pitched at that level of generality failed,
view, accurately to identify the risk of harm the respondent faced...
86 ... identifying the risk of harm for
purposes required focus on the
nature of the surface on which the respondent slipped. Having regard to the
respondent's evidence
as to his observations of the surface of the ramp (and
giving him the benefit of his surmise concerning the presence of dry algae),
risk of harm was, in my view, that of slipping and falling on dry algae on the
formulation favoured by Ward AJA, at [185], was 'the risk of a workman slipping
on (imperceptible) dry algae, so as to enable
focus to be made on the question
what should have been done to prevent the risk or to take precautions against
the risk'. Her Honour
added that this 'accords more closely with the way in
which the risk of harm was identified in
and focuses attention on
the relevant enquiry, which is what the Council ought reasonably to have done to
address that risk'.
last observation by Ward AJA echoes a point made in the following extracts from
paragraph [22] of Meagher JA's judgment in
[Sections 5B and 5C of the
] assume an allegation of breach
of duty resulting from negligence which is or can be formulated in terms of a
failure to take precautions
against a risk of harm... To address the questions
and considerations in
, it is necessary to formulate a plaintiff's claim
in a way which takes account of the precautions which it is alleged should
have been taken
and identifies the risk or risks of harm which the plaintiff
alleges eventuated and
to which those precautions should have been
(emphasis added).
to the Application for Original Decision, the precautions that the Respondent
should have taken, but failed to take, were
described as follows, under the
heading 'Particulars', in subparagraphs (c), (d) and (e) of paragraph 16:-
c. The Respondent failed to take proper steps to ensure that heated
items were sufficiently cooled before placing them in a container.
d. The Respondent left the container in a place and a container which was not
sufficient to enable the heated items to cool down.
e. The Respondent left the heated items in place in close proximity to other
items which could catch fire.
Subparagraphs
(a) and (b) gave the following description of the risk that these precautions
would allegedly have averted:-
a. Heated articles which had not sufficiently cooled were left in a
b. Those articles self ignited causing the fire.
primary focus in these five subparagraphs is on a risk that a fire might
in a particular way, and on the precautions required to prevent
this happening. Only subparagraph (e) refers to a different risk
- that a fire,
once started, might
- and it does so only in relation to a fire
starting amongst 'heated items' through self-ignition, as described in
subparagraphs
(a) and (b).
Appellant's written submissions to the Tribunal included claims that the
Respondent carried on his business in such a manner that
any fire, no matter how
it started, would spread throughout the Premises. The following passage, which
the Tribunal quoted (at [63])
from page 7 of submissions filed by the Appellant
before the Tribunal hearing, provides an example:-
The Respondent conducted a business clearly at risk of fire, full
as it was of flammable clothes in plastic dry cleaner's bags. Those
clothes were
side-by-side with power boards and electrical devices, some of the fabrics
contained oil, and some of the fabrics hung
above fuel in the form of plastic
washing baskets. Those fabrics were industrially heated so as to dry.
In summary, there was heat and fuel all around the laundromat.
down on the same page of these submissions, the Appellant argued:-
It is important to recall that the respondent was under a duty to
take reasonable care to avoid damaging the applicant's
in the original). Damage to the premises was as much a result of fuel sources
above the trolley as it was the ignition
and fuel in the trolley and the trolley
itself. The respondent did not divide and section the shop's flammable contents
to prevent the fire's spread. Clothes, linen and nylon bags were
everywhere and upon (and underneath) one another.
Just as a driver must control her vehicle so she can reasonably react to
remote possibilities (
, [11]), so too a tenant must organise his
shop to reasonably prevent fire and its spread. This the respondent did not do.
have cost little in time and money not only to let clothes cool down
but to keep piles of clothes isolated from one another
Liability Act 2002
submissions to the Tribunal filed after the hearing, the Appellant referred on a
couple of occasions to this argument that the
Respondent had failed to take
steps to prevent the spread of fire, but did not further develop this theme.
in these passages quoted from the Appellant's submissions or in the Tribunal's
decision suggests that the Appellant sought
and obtained leave to add to the
case pleaded in the Application a separate allegation that the Respondent failed
to take reasonable
precautions to prevent the spread of any fire occurring in
the Premises, including fires originating from causes (such as an electrical
fault) for which he would not be responsible. The submissions asserting that the
Respondent failed to take precautions to prevent
fires spreading were only
concerned, as was subparagraph (e) of paragraph 16 of the Application, with
fires originating through the
self-ignition of 'heated items' in a container, as
pleaded in subparagraphs (a) and (b).
follows from this reasoning that the Tribunal, in defining the 'risk of harm' as
the risk of spontaneous combustion occurring in
clothes stacked after removal
from a dryer, complied with the principle, stated by Meagher JA in
at [22], that the risk should be formulated 'in a way which takes account of
the precautions which it is alleged should have been
taken and identifies the
risk or risks of harm which the plaintiff alleges eventuated and to which those
precautions should have
been directed'.
Accordingly,
we conclude that the Appellant's claim of error by the Tribunal in defining the
'risk of harm' is not made out.
leaving this topic, we would make one further observation. This is that we do
not see how a legal concept mentioned in Mr Allan's
submissions - namely, the
duty of care owed by a bailee for reward - can be considered relevant to the
duties owed by the Respondent
under the contract contained in the Lease, under
the general law of negligence or under the statutory version of these duties
into these proceedings by the
the basis that the relevant risk of harm was the risk of spontaneous combustion
occurring in clothes stacked after removal from
a dryer, it is clear, in our
opinion, that the Tribunal was correct in concluding that evidence was required
to establish that the
Respondent should have been aware of it. It had found that
he had no actual knowledge of such a risk. There was no suggestion that
time of the fire the existence of such a risk was 'a matter of common sense and
common knowledge' (to quote from McColl JA's
judgment in
Accordingly, to adapt her Honour's words at [91], the risk was 'a matter which
required evidence as to the nature of the
risk posed' and the steps that the
Respondent 'ought reasonably have taken to obviate it'.
evidence, we should add, would not necessarily be the sole material to be taken
into account in deciding whether the Respondent
should have foreseen this risk.
But in the circumstances that we have outlined, a finding that he should have
foreseen it could not
be made (as indeed the Tribunal determined) in the absence
of any evidence at all on the matter.
proposition advanced but not pressed significantly by Mr Allan must be
considered at this juncture. It is that in the context of
the contractual claim
brought by the Appellant under clauses 3(a) and 3(m) of the Lease, the onus lay
on the Respondent to 'exculpate
himself' by showing that disrepair was not a
product of his 'neglect or default'.
have given careful consideration to this proposition, on which we unfortunately
did not have the benefit of sustained argument.
Our conclusion is that it is not
maintainable, for the following reasons.
Mr Allan argued, the primary obligation imposed by clause 3(a) was an obligation
on the lessee to 'keep and maintain' the Premises
'in good and tenantable repair
and in good and efficient working order and condition'. But the repair of damage
arising from fire,
or from any one of a number of other occurrences, was
expressly excluded from the scope of this obligation, unless there was 'neglect
or default' on the lessee's part. The clause states in this fashion that prima
facie, in the event of damage by fire, the lessee
is not under any liability to
effect or pay for the necessary repairs. It is only when the cause of the fire
was the lessee's 'neglect
or default' that the lessee is made liable for
repairs. It appears to us that this phraseology implicitly requires the lessor
establish the facts that give rise to such a liability of limited scope.
clause 3(m), the onus more clearly lies on the lessor. He or she must establish
that the loss or damage for which indemnity
is claimed was caused by 'the
Lessee's negligent use or misuse... or by or neglect or default happening in the
demised premises'.
the present case, the Appellant did in fact adduce evidence bearing to some
degree on the question whether the Respondent should
have foreseen and guarded
against the risk of spontaneous combustion in materials that had recently been
laundered and dried. This
was the evidence in Mr Kelly's reports relating to the
incidence of this phenomenon in commercial laundries.
indicated above at [72], Mr Allan argued that the Tribunal misrepresented what
Mr Kelly said in his first report, dated 24 August
2010, about the incidence of
this phenomenon. Mr Allan disputed the Tribunal's statement, at [60], that Mr
Kelly appeared to have
only become aware of such 'incidence' in the period
following this report.
relevant passages in the report (paragraphs 6.2 and 6.3) appear at the end,
under the heading 'Conclusion'. It was here that Mr
Kelly first expressed the
opinion that the likely cause of the fire was, as he expressed it in the latter
paragraph, 'the actions
of the tenants in... placing heated materials and piling
them into some configuration which has led to the self heating ignition
did not, however, make any statement in this report regarding the incidence of
this phenomenon of 'self heating ignition'. The
Tribunal was correct in so
indicating. As it said in its decision at [56 - 58] (quoted above at [25]) his
observations on this specific
topic were all contained in his second report,
dated 7 November 2011.
Tribunal's conclusion (at [61]) that the 'available expert evidence' did not 'of
itself establish that spontaneous combustion
of laundered items represented a
foreseeable risk in respect of which the Respondent failed to take reasonably
available steps' followed
both from its evaluation of the foregoing aspects of
Mr Kelly's reports and from the consideration that, as it said at [60], 'the
extent to which Mr Kelly's knowledge has been imparted to commercial laundry
operators such as the Respondent is unknown'.
accordingly agree with Mr Perla's submission that the absence of evidence,
expert or lay, to support the proposition that at the
time of the fire a person
in the Respondent's position ought reasonably to have known of this risk of
spontaneous combustion constituted
an 'evidentiary gap' in the Appellant's case.
this gap would still exist even if, for the purposes of
section 5B(1)
, the correct formulation of the 'risk of harm' was, as submitted by Mr
Allan, the risk of 'damage by fire'. In order to make good
the case that the
Appellant pleaded, it would still have been incumbent on him to establish, as
required by paragraph (c) of
section 5B(1)
, that the precautions that 'a
reasonable person in the Respondent's position would have taken' included
ensuring, so far as possible,
that a fire would not start through spontaneous
combustion - for example, by cooling laundered materials down after they had
dried or not leaving them stacked on top of each other in containers such
as the yellow trolley. But in the absence of evidence that
the Respondent knew
or ought reasonably to have known of the risk of spontaneous combustion in piles
of recently dried materials,
the Appellant would have failed to satisfy this
requirement.
[71], as Mr Allan submitted, the Tribunal purported to identify another
'evidentiary gap'. It stated that a 'bald proposition'
put forward by the
Appellant - namely that 'the simple fact of running a laundromat for a number of
years creates the foreseeability
of loss by fire' - was 'not supported by any
evidence'. We agree with Mr Allan that this statement is open to doubt. But any
of the Tribunal in making it is not of significance because 'the
foreseeability of loss by fire' was not a question requiring determination.
the foregoing reasons, the appeal should be dismissed.
we indicated near the beginning of this decision, questions as to the costs of
the proceedings at first instance and on appeal
must still be determined.
Submissions have already been filed relating to the costs of the former
proceedings.
regard to the fact that the Respondent to the appeal has been successful in both
sets of proceedings, we give the following
directions regarding costs:-
Any application by the Respondent for the costs of these appeal
proceedings must be filed and served within 28 days, along with supporting
submissions and any additional submissions he may wish to make as to the costs
of the proceedings at first instance. Any submissions
in reply by the Appellant
must be filed and served within a further 28 days. These matters of costs will
then be determined 'on the
papers', pursuant to
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
, unless the Appeal Panel
decides that a hearing is required.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (348 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter