URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2008/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Huynh S [2008] NSWPB 2 (9 January 2008)
[2008] NSWPB 2
9 January 2008
Kym Ayscough v Steve Huynh
The complaint of professional misconduct related to the supply of
pseudoephedrine tablets and anabolic steroids from the pharmacist’s
pharmacy. It was alleged that the pharmacist had supplied about 4,600 packets
of Actifed tablets, 30 pack size to the public in
a 7 month period in 2002 from
his pharmacy. Actifed tablets are a combination pseudoephedrine product. The
pharmacist was the sole
proprietor and pharmacist in charge of the pharmacy at
the relevant time. It was alleged that the supply of these tablets occurred
circumstances that the pharmacist knew or ought to have known the
pseudoephedrine was an active ingredient of Actifed tablets
pseudoephedrine was a precursor substance used in the illicit manufacture of
amphetamines. It was also alleged that in relation
to such supplies that the
pharmacist could not be satisfied that each supply was in a quantity or for a
purpose in accordance with
recognized therapeutic standards, contrary to clause
23(a) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
1994 and clause
22(a) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Regulation).
The complaint regarding anabolic steroids alleged the supply of such products
to 3 customers in quantities and for a purpose other
than in accordance with
recognized therapeutic standards contrary to clause 53 of the Regulation. It was
also alleged that the pharmacist
had supplied anabolic/androgenic steroids on
prescriptions which were non compliant with the Regulation. The pharmacist
the particulars of the complaint and that those particular amounted to
professional misconduct.
The complaint was formally made when the pharmacist was registered but at the
time of the disciplinary hearing Mr Huynh had been removed
from the register for
failing to renew his registration.
Each particular of the
complaint was proven and the pharmacist has demonstrated a lack of adequate
skill, knowledge, judgment or care
in the practice of pharmacy and has engaged
in other improper or unethical conduct in relation to the practice of pharmacy
to section 19A(a) and
section 19A(g)
Pharmacy Act 1964
There were tragic personal
circumstances in the pharmacist’s life that had adversely affect his
practice of pharmacy.
The pharmacist had
demonstrated remorse regarding his conduct and had insight into his wrongdoing.
He had through his counsel apologized
unreservedly for his conduct.
Section 19B
(the Act), which deals with complaints about former pharmacists is to
be read purposely and consistently with the objects of the
Act and the
protective nature of the Board’s role as highlighted in
Act. Accordingly,
section 19B
should be interpreted to include a reference to a
person in the Respondent’s position in that pharmacists registered up to
years prior to the complaint are subject to the powers exercisable by the Board
section 20.
The pharmacist was
reprimanded and it was recommended that before he return to practice that he
develop for submission to the Board,
procedures for the management and supply of
Schedule 2 & Schedule 3 products and anabolic steroids. It was also
recommended
that the pharmacist continue his medical consultations for a period
of at least 18 months and consent to reports being provided to
Upon any application for
restoration of the pharmacist to the register it is proposed that conditions be
placed on this practice including
engaging the services of a mentor for 1 year,
inspection and audit of any pharmacy business in which he has a pecuniary
for a period of 3 years, educative orders and a requirement to maintain
professional memberships.
The costs of complying with these conditions is to be
borne by the pharmacist.
Findings of a Board of Inquiry held on 30 October 2007 into a complaint of
professional misconduct made under the provisions of the
Pharmacy Act 1964
") by Kym Ayscough, nominal complainant ("the Complainant"),
against Steve Huynh ("the Respondent"), formerly of 64 King Georges Road,
Park 2195, in the State of New South Wales, a pharmacist registered in New South
THE COMPLAINT
The Complaint dated 15 November 2006 ("the Complaint"), alleges that the
Respondent has been guilty of professional misconduct pursuant
section 19A
, in that the Respondent:
Demonstrated a lack of adequate
knowledge, skill, judgment or care in the practice of pharmacy,
Has engaged in improper and/or unethical
conduct relating to the practice of pharmacy.
PARTICULARS OF THE COMPLAINT
The particulars of the Complaint are:
The Respondent was at all relevant times
the pharmacist in charge and the sole proprietor of Wiley Park Pharmacy, 64 King
Road, Wiley Park, New South Wales, 2195 ("the Pharmacy")
During the period from May 2002 to 20
December 2002, the Respondent ordered from and was supplied by pharmaceutical
wholesaler Faulding
Healthcare Pty Limited a total of 5,119 packs of Actifed
tablets, 30 pack size.
As at 23 December 2002 the
Respondent’s Pharmacy had 434 packets of Actifed tablets, 30 pack size on
The supply of the quantities referred to
in paragraph 2, less the quantities referred to in paragraph 3, to the public,
occurred in
circumstances where:
the Respondent knew or ought to have
known that pseudoephedrine is an active ingredient in the tablets referred to in
paragraph 2
the Respondent knew or
ought to have known that pseudoephedrine is the primary precursor substance used
in the illicit manufacture
amphetamines;
the Respondent knew or ought
to have known that during the relevant period community pharmacies were being
targeted as a source of
pseudoephedrine for the purposes in sub-paragraph (b)
the Respondent could not be
satisfied that in relation to each supply that the supply was in a quantity
and/or for a purpose in accordance
with recognized therapeutic standards,
contrary to clause 23(a) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
1994 and clause 22(a) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
During the period from 1 September 2002
to 7 February 2003, the Respondent supplied the prescribed restricted
substances, namely,
anabolic/androgenic steroids as detailed in Annexure "A"
attached to this Complaint:
in a quantity
and/or for a purpose not in accordance with appropriate therapeutic standards,
contrary to clause 53 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
(the Regulation); and
in circumstances where the Respondent
knew or ought to have known that such anabolic/androgenic steroids were abused
for a non-therapeutic
purpose, namely to achieve greater muscle
During the period from 1 September 2002
to 7 February 2003, the Respondent supplied anabolic/androgenic steroids and a
pituitary hormone,
listed in Annexure "B" to this Complaint, on prescriptions,
which were not in the form required by Division 3 of the Regulation,
in that the
prescriptions:
failed to specify the address of the
patient, contrary to clause 34(1)(b) of the Regulation;
appeared to have been altered other
than by Dr Maher Milad, the issuing medical practitioner, contrary to clause
39(1) (f) of the
Regulation.
During the period from 1 September 2002
to 31 January 2003, the Respondent supplied on a repeat basis, Schedule 4
Appendix B substances,
namely Sustanon and Deca-durabolin ampoules on the
prescriptions referred to in Annexure "B" to this Complaint, which prescriptions
failed to specify the intervals at which the substance may be supplied, contrary
to clause 38(3) of the Regulation.
During the period from 5 November 2002 to
31 January 2003, the Respondent supplied on 5 occasions, human chorionic
gonadotrophin,
namely, Pregnyl 50000iu for Mr Abualrub on the dates listed
in Annexure "C" hereto, in a quantity and/or for a purpose not in accordance
with appropriate therapeutic standards, contrary to clause 53 of the
Regulation.
The following documents were tendered in evidence:
For the Complainant:
The Complainant’s tabulated bundle of documents containing; the
complaint; the Health Department investigation report including
a Notice under
section 35(1)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
respondent’s response; patient medication histories; pharmaceutical
wholesaler information; correspondence passing
between the Legal Officer for the
Board and the prescriber; a peer review report and professional guidelines and
articles concerning
pseudoephedrine abuse and misuse.
For the Respondent:
References from Mr David Johnson and Ms Phung
The Respondent did not give evidence at the hearing and no witnesses were
required by either party for cross-examination.
THE RESPONDENT
The Respondent was first registered as a pharmacist in New South Wales on 7
June 1995 and remained so registered until 10 January
2007 when his name was
removed from the register for not paying the relevant fees. At all material
times he was a registered pharmacist.
The Respondent is 36 years of age. He was born into a family of nine children
in Vietnam and was the youngest child. By the age of
5, the Respondent had
experienced the separation of family members through many dangerous boat escapes
and had spent time in various
refugee camps.
The Respondent arrived in Sydney from Vietnam in March 1980. Following his
arrival in Australia the Respondent experienced two tragic
events. On 10 October
1987, in his presence, his parents, two of his sisters and one brother were
murdered by somebody else who then
attempted to commit suicide, and that person
also attempted to kill the Respondent. The Respondent was shot during the
incident but
managed to escape with two of his sisters. The Respondent spent two
months in hospital recovering from the physical injuries and
three months
recovering at home.
A few months after the incident the Respondent moved into public housing with
his sisters. The Respondent persisted with his studies
and graduated with a
Bachelor of Pharmacy degree from the University of Sydney in 1993. The
Respondent was employed in various pharmacies
in Darwin, Minto and in the
Australian Capital Territory until he became a managing pharmacist at
Campbelltown in 1996, the year
when he also married.
Four years later, tragedy struck again. The Respondent accidentally killed
his two year old son, Sean, whilst reversing his car in
the driveway. The
Respondent was so affected by the incident that he was unable to work for some
time thereafter.
In 2001 the Respondent purchased the Pharmacy where the conduct, the subject
of the Complaint, took place. The Respondent went heavily
into debt to purchase
the Pharmacy. He also had two more children.
In 2005 the Respondent ceased work at the Pharmacy and sold it in October of
that year. The Respondent did some part-time real estate
work during 2007, but
is not presently doing that.
The Respondent, through his counsel, admitted each and every particular of
the Complaint and that such conduct amounts to professional
misconduct within
the meaning of the
Counsel for the Complainant and the Respondent addressed on penalty and
mitigating factors at the hearing before the Board.
REPORT OF DR ADRIENNE MARY GOULD
During the Respondent’s counsel’s submissions, it became apparent
that the Respondent had been treated by a psychiatrist,
Dr Adrienne Mary Gould.
Ms Gould first saw the Respondent in September 2004 when he had been referred by
his LMO, Dr Richard Sue,
who was concerned about the Respondent’s stress
and unhappiness. This information was not presently known to the Board. At
Board’s invitation, the Respondent’s legal representatives arranged
for Dr Gould to prepare a report to the Board
dated 7 November 2007.
Dr Gould reports that when she first saw the Respondent in September 2004 he
reported that for the 8 months prior he had been depressed,
anxious and
irritable with poor concentration and sleep disturbances including nightmares.
There was also lethargy, amotivation,
erratic appetite and suicidal ideation
although no plans.
Dr Gould reports that the nightmares were about the death of the
Respondent’s parents and siblings during the incident that
occurred when
he was 13 years old, as well as in relation to the death of his son, Sean.
Dr Gould reports that the Respondent has
tried to avoid thinking about the
events, although he acknowledged that there were occasions, such as
Father’s Day, that he
felt particularly distressed. The Respondent’s
strategy to cope has been to try to work harder for his family, but he found
running the pharmacy very stressful and anxiety provoking. The situation was
compounded when his wife was no longer able to help
in the pharmacy once the
children were born.
Dr Gould is of the opinion that the Respondent is suffering from Major
Depression with melancholic features, as well as Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder
– Chronic when first seen in 2004.
Dr Gould was uncertain as to whether the Respondent was suffering from the
same conditions in 2002 and 2003 when the conduct, the
subject of the Complaint,
took place. However, she suspects that these conditions have been present to
some degree ever since the
death of the Respondent’s parents.
Dr Gould also reports that the Respondent has a high level of guilt and
avoidance and this has made it hard for him to ask for any
Dr Gould reports that the Respondent has been treated with a combination of
anti-depressant and cognitive-behavioural therapy and
that the Respondent has
attended for sessions with Dr Gould regularly since 2004.
Dr Gould reports that the Respondent has responded well to prescribed
medication with improvement in mood, sleep, energy, motivation
concentration.
Dr Gould reports that the Respondent has also benefited from planning his day
and a more goal-orientated approach to managing his
time. He has also become
more active in his Buddhist community and had found that helpful.
Dr Gould reports that when last seen in September 2007 the Respondent was
anxious about the upcoming hearing before the Board. However,
the Respondent
told her that he could learn from his mistakes and be a better pharmacist. He
also told her that he was keen to return
Dr Gould is of the opinion that the Respondent is clinically well enough to
Dr Gould recommends that due to the Respondent’s strong avoidance and
feelings of guilt he would operate better in a structured
and supervised
environment where he could obtain accurate feedback about his performance.
Dr Gould also recommends that due to the loss of the Respondent’s
parental figures at a crucial developmental time in his life,
the Respondent
would benefit from having a mentor who could educate and nurture him through his
is of the view that a long-term mentor would
be worthwhile. Dr Gould also recommends that the Respondent remain on the
Mirtazapine
for at least a further 12 months, that he continue to use a
structured planning approach to managing his time and maintains regular
psychiatric review for an extended time.
The Board invited the parties to make written submissions in relation to the
report of Dr Gould. The parties advised the Board that
they had formed the
view that written submissions and further hearing time were of no utility.
Instead, the parties provided draft
consent orders in lieu of written
submissions.
FINDINGS & ORDERS
There are, in effect, two areas of complaint, supply of pseudoephedrine and
the supply of anabolic steroids.
In relation to the pseudoephedrine complaint, it is undoubtedly a serious
complaint. The profession had been aware for some years
prior to 2002 that they
were being targeted for pseudoephedrine products which would then be diverted
into the illicit manufacture
of methylamphetamine. This was not new information
in 2002. In addition to being advised of the risk of being targeted, pharmacists
were also provided with information about how best to protect themselves and
their pharmacies, and indeed store and supply those
products in a way that was
consistent with their professional obligations, so there was certainly
information available to the Respondent
so as to take measures to ensure that he
was supplying only those amounts of products which were consistent with his
professional
obligations.
The conduct occurred over some seven months. It was not isolated and the
quantities involved are significant, some 4.600 packets over
a seven month
period. The peer reviewer, Mr A Vincent, reports that it is most disconcerting
that the Respondent was ordering Actifed
tablets, 30 pack size, in quantities of
1 and 2 gross on a weekly basis during the months of August and September 2002.
to Mr Vincent, to have sold each packet in the knowledge that the
customer was going to use the product in accord with the therapeutic
defies credulity. Applying basic mathematics, the Respondent was selling up to
50 packets of Actifed tablets, 30 pack size,
each day during August 2002. Mr
Vincent strongly disapproved of such conduct and expressed the view that such
conduct would also
attract a strong degree of disapproval from his reputable and
competent colleagues.
In relation to the anabolic steroids, whilst also serious that a pharmacist
such as the Respondent can permit substances of this sort
to be used by persons
for purposes, again not in accordance with recognized therapeutic standards,
this complaint involves only three
customers and it involves a relatively short
period of time and a relatively small amount of substances.
However, there were clear defects in a number of the prescriptions which
should have come to the attention of the Respondent and which
should have meant
that he either took further action to confirm their legitimacy or otherwise did
not dispense the medication. Therefore
the complaint is serious, and consistent
with the admission which has been made by the Respondent, constitutes
professional misconduct.
Accordingly, the Board finds that the Respondent has demonstrated a lack of
adequate knowledge, skill, judgement or care in the practice
of pharmacy, and
has engaged in improper and/or unethical conduct relating to the practice of
The Board finds each of the particulars proved and that the Respondent is
guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of
The Complaint is dated 15 November 2006 at which time the Respondent was
still registered as a pharmacist. However, as noted earlier,
Respondent’s name was removed from the register pursuant to
section 19(3)
on 10 January 2007 when he failed to pay the requisite fee.
Accordingly, the Respondent did not appear at the hearing before the
registered pharmacist. There are a number of matters that flow from that.
Section 19(4)
provides that:
If the name of any pharmacist is or has been removed from the register
under this section or section 8 of the Pharmacy Act 1897–1957
, the Board
shall upon application in writing and if it is satisfied that the pharmacist is
of good character restore the pharmacist’s
name to the register upon
payment of the fee fixed by the Board. The regulations may provide for the
waiver of such part of such
fee as the Board may in any particular case deem
It is therefore available to the Respondent to seek to have his name restored
to the register at some time in the future. The criteria
the Board must then
apply to that application is to be satisfied that the Respondent is of good
character and on obtaining that satisfaction
restore his name.
Section 19B of the Act states:
19B Complaints about former pharmacists
A complaint may be made under
this Act about a person who, although not a pharmacist when the complaint is
made to, or lodged with,
the Health Care Complaints Commission or the registrar,
was registered as a pharmacist not more than 5 years before that
For the purposes of this Act,
a reference to a pharmacist against whom a complaint has been made includes a
reference to a person
against whom a complaint has been made pursuant to this
A strict literal reading of section 19B might initially suggest that the
Respondent is not a pharmacist for the purposes of section
20 because he was
registered at the time of the complaint, but is no longer registered. However,
the Board is of the view that section
19B should be read purposively and
consistently with the objects of the Act and the Act as a whole. If one does
that and takes into
account the protective nature of the Board in section 5 of
the Act then section 19B can be interpreted so as to include reference
pharmacist in the Respondent’s position, that is, that even though he is
not currently registered and was so at the time
of the making of the Complaint,
the intention of that section is that pharmacists registered up to five years
prior to the complaint
are nevertheless subject to the powers exercisable by the
Board under section 20.
Section 20 of the Act provides the consequences of a Board making a finding
that the subject matter of a complaint of misconduct is
The jurisdiction is a protective one and the principle of protecting the
public is the principle which guides the Board in determining
which powers to
exercise in relation to section 20.
The purpose of an order is not to punish the Respondent, but to ensure that
the public is adequately protected from not only him but
others who might be
inclined to stray from their professional obligations.
It was not disputed by the Complainant that the tragic incidents in the
Respondent’s past have undoubtedly had an adverse impact
on the Respondent
and his capacity to work to the normally usual professional standards and in the
submissions of counsel for the
Complainant and the Respondent it was appropriate
for the Board to take those matters into account when determining what would be
the most appropriate order under section 20.
The Respondent, through his counsel at the hearing, also expressed his deep
regret in relation to his actions and apologized for them
to the Board without
reservation. The making of an apology is not some arcane ritual. It can be seen
as a statement which indicates
insight into wrongdoing and thus a positive sign
to the profession that the risk to the public is somewhat diminished for the
The Board has also been guided by the two references tendered on behalf of
the Respondent and importantly, the findings and recommendations
in the report
of Dr Gould.
The Board finds that the draft consent orders prepared by the parties are
appropriate in the circumstances and accordingly makes the
following orders:
Mr Steve Huynh is
reprimanded.
It is recommended that before Mr Huynh
returns to practice as a pharmacist that Mr Huynh develops and submits to the
Board satisfactory
written procedures for the management and supply of Schedule
2 and Schedule 3 products and anabolic/androgenic steroids.
Mr Huynh is to continue to attend on a
regular basis upon Dr Adrienne Gould, or such other medical practitioner
nominated by Mr Huynh
and approved by the Board for a period not less than 18
months from the effective date of these orders. Mr Huynh is to provide all
necessary consents to enable the treating medical practitioner(s) to report to
the Board every six (6) months confirming the dates
that Mr Huynh has attended
such medical consultations over the immediately preceding six (6) months.
Upon Mr Huynh being restored to the register of pharmacists,
the following conditions are to be placed on his practice:
Mr Huynh is to agree to use the services
of a pharmacist mentor approved by the Board for a period of 1 year. The mentor
with Mr Huynh on a quarterly basis at a mutually suitable time and
place. Following such meetings the mentor is to furnish a written
report to the
Board within 1 month of each meeting.
For a period of 3 years, in respect of
any business of a pharmacist in which Mr Huynh acquires a pecuniary interest, Mr
Huynh is to
agree to the annual inspection and audit of such pharmacies by a
pharmacist or pharmacists approved by the Board. The Board approved
pharmacist(s) is to submit a written report to the Board within 1 month of each
inspection and audit.
Mr Huynh is to complete at least 20 hours
per year, for three years of Board approved, Continuing Professional Education
at least 10 hours of which per year must be face to face activity. Mr
Huynh is to provide the Board on an annual basis with documents
completion of the CPE activities no later that 31 December next following
completion of the required annual CPE.
For a period of 3 years, Mr Huynh is to
do all things necessary to obtain and maintain membership of the Pharmaceutical
Australia (NSW Branch). Proof of such membership is to be provided to
the Board by 30 June in each of the 3 years.
Whilst Mr Huynh holds a pecuniary
interest in the business of a pharmacist, Mr Huynh is to do all things necessary
to obtain and maintain
membership of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia. Proof of
membership is to be provided to the Board by 30 June in each of the 3 years
following acquisition of such pecuniary interest(s).
The costs of complying with the above orders are to be borne by Mr Huynh.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (61 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter