URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATGD/2024/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Janet (a pseudonym) [2024] NSWCATGD 28; (3 December 2024)
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Janet (a pseudonym)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWCATGD 28
Hearing Date(s):
3 December 2024
Date of Orders:
3 December 2024
Decision Date:
3 December 2024
Guardianship Division
R H Booby, Principal Member
Dr B McPhee, Senior Member
(Professional)
M Watson, General Member (Community)
The Tribunal consents to the following special medical treatment being
provided to Janet subject to the opinion of the respiratory
team that the
anaesthetic risk is acceptable:
laparotomy, drainage and excision
of left pelvic abscess including oophorectomy with bilateral salpingectomy and,
if necessary, hysterectomy
and insertion of drainage tubes and any necessary
treatment that would normally be provided in association with or directly
upon the above treatment.
This consent is effective for
a period of three month(s) from the date of this order.
Catchwords:
CONSENT TO MEDICAL TREATMENT – application for laparotomy,
hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy – 38-year-old
possible ovarian or gynecological malignancy – cause uncertain without
proposed treatment – proposed treatment
is special medical treatment
– person incapable of giving consent to treatment – condition poses
serious risk to person’s
health – person has pulmonary condition
which increases risk of death or serious harm – alternative treatment
but potentially ineffective – alternative strategies have been
trialled without success – proposed treatment recommended
by treatment
team and NSW Health Guidelines – consent to treatment provided –
effective for a period of three months.
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship Act 1987
Cases Cited:
None cited.
Texts Cited:
None cited.
Principal judgment
004: Consent to Special Medical Treatment
Renae (applicant)
Andrew (carer)
Belinda (carer)
Representation:
File Number(s):
NCAT 2021/00242615
Publication Restriction:
Decisions of the Guardianship Division of the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal have been anonymised to remove any information that
may identify any
person involved in the Tribunal’s proceedings:
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
REASONS FOR DECISION
is 38 years old and prior to hospitalization had lived for a short time in
supported accommodation in regional NSW where she
was supported by support
workers. She previously lived with her parents, Belinda and Andrew. At the time
of the hearing, she was
a patient at a public hospital.
Tribunal received an application from Renae, a Fellow in Gynecological Oncology,
seeking urgent consent for treatment for Janet.
The proposed treatment was
laparotomy, hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in the context of a
possible ovarian/gynaecological
malignancy.
THE HEARING
the end of these Reasons is a list of witnesses. [Appendix removed for
publication.]
was present in her hospital bed during the hearing but seemed unable to
understand or participate in the hearing. Her parents
advised that they had not
discussed the proposed procedure or the hearing with her because she would be
unable to understand the
matters and would become distressed.
had evidence from medical and allied health practitioners indicating that Janet
has a global intellectual impairment and we were
satisfied on the evidence that,
consistently with her presentation during the hearing, she was not able to
effectively participate
in the hearing.
WHAT MUST BE
medical treatment is defined in
Guardianship Act 1987
(NSW) as including:
33 Definitions
any treatment that is intended, or is reasonably likely, to have the effect of
rendering permanently infertile the person on whom
it is carried out ...
If a person is incapable of giving informed consent to special
medical treatment, then only the Tribunal may provide consent:
Guardianship Act
s 36(1)(b).
Guardianship Act
, a person is incapable of giving consent
to the carrying out of medical treatment if the person:
(1) is incapable of understanding the general nature and effect of the proposed
treatment; or
(2) is incapable of indicating whether or not he or she consents or does not
consent to the treatment being carried out.
Guardianship Act
requires that the Tribunal
give consent
to the carrying out of special treatment unless it is satisfied that the
treatment is necessary to (a) save the patient’s
life or (b) to prevent
serious damage to the patient’s health:
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Act
imposes a further consideration on the Tribunal in
of that Act. That section directs that if consent is to be given to
medical or dental treatment, the Tribunal must be satisfied that
“appropriate for the treatment to be carried out” and must have
regard to the views of the patient, the person
who is proposing that medical
treatment be carried out on the patient and any persons responsible for the
Tribunal must also take into account matters set out in
Guardianship Act
(1) the grounds on which it is alleged that the patient is a patient to whom
this Part applies;
(2) the particular condition of the patient that requires treatment;
(3) the alternative courses of treatment that are available in relation to that
(4) the general nature and effect of each of those courses of treatment;
(5) the nature and degree of the significant risks (if any) associated with each
of those courses of treatment; and
(6) the reasons for which it is proposed that any particular course of treatment
should be carried out.
summary, therefore, the issues for determination by the Tribunal are as
(1) Is the treatment proposed by the applicant “special medical
treatment”?
(2) Is Janet incapable of giving consent to the proposed special treatment?
(3) Is the treatment necessary to save Janet’s life or is the treatment
necessary to prevent serious damage to Janet’s
(4) Is the proposed special treatment the most appropriate form of treatment for
promoting and maintaining Janet’s health and
well-being?
Is the proposed treatment ‘special treatment’?
a Health Professional Report Form for Special Medical Treatment, Renae states
that the hysterectomy would mean that Janet was unable
to carry a pregnancy and
the bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy would mean that she was menopausal. Based on
this information the Tribunal
is satisfied that the proposed treatment is
reasonably likely to render Janet permanently infertile and that it is special
treatment as defined in the
Guardianship Act
Janet incapable of providing consent to the proposed treatment?
Guardianship Act
provides that a person is incapable of
giving or withholding consent to medical or dental treatment if the
(1) is incapable of understanding the general nature and effect of the proposed
treatment; or
(2) is incapable of indicating whether or not he or she consents or does not
consent to the treatment being carried out.
a letter dated 20 June 2016, a Genetics Fellow and a Clinical Geneticist,
indicate that Janet has a chromosomal microdeletion that
results in a number of
factors including an intellectual disability with global developmental delay.
her application and Health Professional Report Form, Renae indicates that due to
her intellectual disability Janet is not able
to understand the treatment and
its consequences.
Behavior Support Plan dated 27 March 2024, and an Occupational Therapist report
dated 16 July 2024 refer to Janet as being unable
to carry the functions of
daily living. The latter report also refers to a recent diagnosis of autism
spectrum disorder and to a
significant decline over the previous 12 months in
Janet’s cognitive and physical capacity.
was present in her hospital bed during the hearing but seemed unable to
understand or participate in the hearing. Her presentation
was consistent with
the descriptions referring to developmental delay and some physical impairments.
We were satisfied that due to
her intellectual disability Janet is unable to
understand the nature and effect of the proposed treatment.
is the particular condition of the patient that requires treatment?
provided the following information about Janet’s condition:
(1) Janet has a complex pelvic mass with differential diagnoses of malignancy or
tubo-ovarian abscess. She also has pulmonary emboli.
(2) Biochemical analysis had shown an increase in markers for infection despite
the use of intravenous antibiotics and a CT had shown
increased size of the
pelvic mass and possibly increased pelvic infection. These indicators suggest
that Janet’s condition
was deteriorating.
Z, a gynaecologist and gynaecological oncologist, said that:
(1) The most recent scans suggest that Janet’s condition is due to an
abscess of increasing size that is pressing on her pelvis
and is adversely
affecting her kidney function. However, a malignancy was possible;
(2) Whilst the cause of the mass was uncertain, once Janet was undergoing
surgery it would be possible to determine if the cause
was an abscess and if it
could be removed without removing the uterus. However, in his experience it is
unusual for inflammation
to occur spontaneously in the absence of a malignancy;
(3) Surgeons would attempt to retain an ovary but it might be necessary to
remove both ovaries;
(4) There is an interplay between the pelvic mass and the pulmonary emboli due
to a thrombotic relationship resulting from the inflammation.
The pulmonary
condition increases the risk of death or serious harm to Janet’s health.
What are the alternative options for treatment that are available?
her Health Professional Report Form, Renae advises the following:
(1) An alternative treatment would be a laparotomy and drainage and the
insertion of a pelvic drain with prolonged intravenous antibiotics.
be difficult for Janet to manage given her co-morbidities and would leave the
potential malignancy untreated.
(2) There is a risk that the failure to remove the source of the inflammation
(presumed to be the ovaries and uterus) would not cure
the infection. If the
mass is malignant, failure to remove the uterus and ovaries would contribute to
progressive cancer.
Z advised that alternative strategies had been trialed but had been
unsuccessful. He referred to unsuccessful treatment
over the past month with
intravenous antibiotics and said that in his opinion the surgery was necessary.
Why is it proposed that the treatment should be carried
advised that the treatment had been recommended by the Gynaecology Oncology
Multi-Disciplinary team. She also indicates that
the Agency for Clinical
Innovation and the NSW Health Guidelines for management of gynaecological
cancers recommend total abdominal
hysterectomy and bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy if there is a concern about ovarian cancer, and that
“significant benefit
might be expected with radical debulking particularly
if all the macroscopic disease can be resected”.
indicated above, Professor Z thought that the mass might be an abscess, but in
any case, was of the view that that removal of the
uterus and at least one ovary
might be necessary to control the inflammation. A decision about removal of the
uterus and ovaries
would need to be made during the surgical procedure when the
nature of the mass and its location in respect of other organs could
Are there any risks associated with the proposed
the application Renae lists risks including pain, bleeding, infection, possible
damage to surrounding organs and the usual risks
of a general anesthetic. She
also advised that due to Janet’s pulmonary embolism she was not considered
low risk for a general
anesthetic. Despite this she had been assessed by the
anesthetics team as suitable for surgery and had in previous days undergone
several anesthetic procedures.
are satisfied that the risks of the procedure are not greater than is reasonable
having regard to Janet’s differential diagnoses
and risks to her life
caused by the diagnosed possible conditions.
How will the
proposed treatment promote and maintain the patient’s health and
are satisfied that whether or not the growth is malignant it poses a serious
risk to Janet’s health and wellbeing and needs
to be excised, and to do so
may require the proposed treatment.
Is the proposed treatment
necessary to save the patient’s life or prevent serious damage to
are satisfied that if the growth is malignant, its removal and the removal of
the uterus and at least one, possibly two, ovaries
is required to prevent
metastases and would therefore be lifesaving. We are also satisfied that if the
growth is an abscess, its
removal is necessary to treat infection and to prevent
serious damage to Janet’s organs. We are satisfied that it is possible
that the removal of the abscess will require removal of the uterus and ovary or
Consent to treatment
regard to Janet’s compromised pulmonary condition we made consent subject
to the opinion of the respiratory team that
the anaesthetic risk is acceptable.
regard to the need for decisions to be made once surgery has commenced, we
consented to laparotomy, drainage and excision of
left pelvic abscess
including oophorectomy with bilateral salpingectomy and, if necessary,
hysterectomy and insertion of drainage
tubes. We gave these consents to
facilitate appropriate decision-making once the growth is examined during
surgery. We also consented
to any necessary treatment that would normally be
provided in association with or directly consequent upon the above
was proposed to conduct the surgery within days of the Tribunal’s consent,
but to allow for difficulties in operating schedules,
the consent is effective
for a period of three months from the date of this order.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (255 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter