URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2024/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Malley v BlueScope Steel (AIS) Ltd [2024] NSWDDT 8 (28 June 2024)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
O’Malley v BlueScope Steel (AIS) Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWDDT 8
Hearing Date(s):
28 June 2024
Date of Orders:
28 June 2024
Decision Date:
28 June 2024
Russell SC DCJ
Ex tempore reasons given in court
(1) Order that Sparke
Helmore be granted leave to separately appear in the interests of Coal Mines
Insurance, to defend the plaintiff's
claim arising from his alleged exposure to
respirable coal and/or respirable silica dust whilst employed by the First
Bluescope Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd, at the Wongawilli Colliery.
Costs reserved left to the discretion of the trial judge to be appointed to hear
and determine the proceedings.
Catchwords:
PROCEDURAL – application for separate representation –
solicitor has a conflict of interest – consideration of adverse
consequences of separate representation – order made
Legislation Cited:
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors Conduct
Procedural rulings
Robert O’Malley (Plaintiff)
Bluescope Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd (First
Representation:
A Giurtalis (Plaintiff)
D Andersen (solicitor) (First
Solicitors:
Maurice Blackburn (Plaintiff)
HWL Ebsworth
(First Defendant)
File Number(s):
DDT 2023/201924
this matter the plaintiff sues by an amended statement of claim dated
2 October 2023. He alleges that between 1954 and 1964 he
was employed by
the first defendant BlueScope Steel at the Port Kembla Steelworks. He alleges
that between 1964 and 1976 he was employed
by the first defendant at the
Wongawilli Colliery. He alleges that between 1976 and 1989 he was employed by
the second defendant
at the Huntley Colliery. He alleges that between 1990 and
1994 he was employed by the fourth defendant ARA Electrical as an electrical
fitter, and that several days per fortnight he was required in the course of
that employment to go to the Port Kembla Steelworks.
amended statement of claim pleads that as a result of exposure to asbestos,
silica and coal dusts the plaintiff suffers from mixed‑dust
fibrosis. That
is a divisible condition.
allegation of breach of duty of care is made against the defendants as employers
and, where relevant, as occupiers of the sites
where the plaintiff carried out
is a cross‑claim filed on 7 June 2023 by which BlueScope seeks
contribution from Amaca and Wallaby Grip Ltd in relation
to the first period of
employment at the Port Kembla Steelworks.
an amended notice of motion dated 12 June 2024, BlueScope seeks this order:
“That Sparke Helmore be granted leave to separately appear in the
interests of Coal Mines Insurance to defend the plaintiff's
claim arising from
his alleged exposure to respirable coal and/or respirable silica dust whilst
employed by the first defendant,
BlueScope Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd at the Wongawilli
amended notice of motion also seeks this order:
“Costs left to the discretion of the trial judge to be appointed to hear
and determine the proceedings.”
reason for the application for a separate representation order appears very
plainly from the first affidavit of Mr Andersen, DX1.
In para 4 of
that affidavit, he says:
“BlueScope is self‑insured for its alleged liability arising from
the asbestos exposure. BlueScope is insured by Coal
Mines Insurance, CMI, for
its alleged liability for the rock dust exposure.”
Mr Andersen
goes on to say in para 5:
“In my opinion, there is an irreconcilable conflict in that as the
solicitor for BlueScope as a litigating party, I owe duties
to BlueScope, but I
also owe corresponding duties to CMI. BlueScope's interests are to minimise any
potential liability arising from
the asbestos exposure, whereas CMI's interests
are to minimise any potential liability arising from the rock dust exposure.
of BlueScope and CMI are entitled to my best exertions to pursue their
opposing interests. I cannot serve both interests.”
Mr Andersen's
affidavit points out that Sparke Helmore already act for CMI and have filed an
appearance for the second defendant,
CMI being the insurer in respect of the
Elcom Colliery. In para 7 of the affidavit, Mr Andersen says:
“Sparke Helmore and CMI support an application permitting Sparke Helmore
to separately appear in the interests of Coal Mines
Insurance as BlueScope's
insurer for the rock dust exposure at the Wongawilli Colliery.”
plaintiff opposes the order for separate representation. In the affidavit of E
Mawson, 14 June 2024 (PX1), Ms Mawson, a solicitor,
Mr O'Malley is 84 years of age and is in ailing health. To her
observation in the last 12 months, his condition has deteriorated.
para 30 of that affidavit, Ms Mawson raises several considerations
relevant to whether an order should be made for separate representation.
first consideration is that she is concerned that separate representation may
result in the plaintiff being required to respond
to further requests for
particulars. I think that is a valid concern.
Nevertheless,
it is clear from DX3, Mr Andersen's affidavit of 27 June 2024, that
Sparke Helmore, on behalf of the second defendant,
have already administered an
extensive request for particulars to the plaintiff's solicitors, and there has
been a response to that
request. In part, that response refers to a detailed
statutory declaration of the plaintiff setting out fine detail in relation to
his exposure to dust at the second defendant's colliery.
I can foresee that there will be another request for particulars, either that
request will come from Mr Andersen, if he is forced
to remain on the record
for BlueScope in the interests of Wongawilli Colliery, or it will come from
Sparke Helmore if I grant separate
representation. The plaintiff will be in a
position to answer the request no matter who it comes from.
second concern raised by Ms Mawson is this: that the plaintiff may be
required to attend further medical examinations on behalf
of Coal Mines
Insurance. That may be so. I am not aware of the extent of any dispute about
medical matters except as disclosed in
the reports annexed to Mr Andersen's
second affidavit, DX2.
Helmore have already arranged a medical examination for the plaintiff, and any
mixed‑dust fibrosis that he suffers through
exposure at the Elcom Colliery
will be the very same disease that he suffers if he was exposed to coal and
silica dust at the Wongawilli
Colliery. There may or may not be another medical
examination, and there may be a valid reason for the plaintiff to decline to go
to a further medical examination at the behest of Sparke Helmore, if they have
already had medical matters adequately investigated.
third concern of Ms Mawson is that the plaintiff will be forced to
correspond with an additional firm of solicitors. As it turns
out, that will not
be the case. Sparke Helmore are already on the record for the second defendant,
and thus there will not be yet
another firm of solicitors engaged in the matter,
and whether or not correspondence comes from Mr Andersen, if he continues
to represent
BlueScope in relation to Wongawilli, or whether it comes from
Sparke Helmore, there will have to be a certain amount of correspondence
with one way or the other by the plaintiff.
next concern of Ms Mawson is that the involvement of Sparke Helmore on
behalf of CMI in the interest of Wongawilli Colliery will
result in increased
legal costs and disbursements to the plaintiff. That may be so, but there are
two answers to that concern:
(1) If the plaintiff wins his case, then those costs will be covered by a costs
(2) The second answer is that the second order in the amended notice of motion
asks for costs of separate representation to be dealt
with by the trial judge.
If there is an order for separate representation, and it results in some
duplication of effort or some unnecessary
incurring of costs, the trial judge
will be in the perfect position to craft an order to meet such matters.
matters raised in opposition to the application for separate representation come
from the submissions of Mr Giurtalis. Mr Giurtalis
submits that if
there is discovery on behalf of BlueScope required, will Mr Andersen be
providing it on part of the steelworks, but
then who will provide discovery on
the part of BlueScope in relation to Wongawilli? The answer to that is whichever
solicitor appears
in the interests of BlueScope in relation to the Wongawilli
Mr Giurtalis
does raise a point about interrogatories. His submission was there will be no
safety net to prevent inconsistent answers
to interrogatories by different
solicitors answering interrogatories for the one party, BlueScope. I think that
that concern is not
well founded. Interrogatories administered to BlueScope in
relation to the steelworks will be answered by Mr Andersen. The
interrogatories
that deal with the Wongawilli Colliery will be answered by
whatever solicitor is instructed to appear ultimately for BlueScope in
interests of Wongawilli Colliery. After today, there will be clarity as to who
appears in which interest for BlueScope, and it
may well be that separate
interrogatories should be administered to BlueScope in respect of the
steelworks, which can be directed
to Mr Andersen, and if there is separate
representation, separate interrogatories can be directed to the separate
representative
in relation to Wongawilli.
Mr Giurtalis
raises an issue about costs. He posits the theoretical position: what if the
plaintiff succeeds against BlueScope in
relation to the steelworks exposure but
fails in relation to the Wongawilli Colliery? On the face of it, that does
present a dilemma
because the plaintiff would obtain a judgment, which would
normally result in costs following the event. However, under s 98 of the
Civil Procedure Act, the broad powers of any court include a power to order
costs on separate issues. Even if Mr Anderson were to
remain on the record
for both arms of BlueScope, if I can describe the steelworks and Wongawilli in
that way, if the plaintiffs failed
in relation to Wongawilli, there could be an
application made that only part of the plaintiff's costs be ordered against
or that the plaintiff be ordered to pay BlueScope's costs in relation
to its successful defence of that part of the claim, being
the separate issue
for Wongawilli Colliery.
next submission of Mr Giurtalis was that Sparke Helmore, if it comes on the
record for BlueScope in respect of Wongawilli, will
have a conflict of interest
because it is already acting for the second defendant. With respect, I fail to
see why there would be
a conflict of interest. CMI is the insurer with the
statutory monopoly on coal mines insurance in this State. If Sparke Helmore
onto the record for Wongawilli, then it will defend that part of the claim
in relation to these ten years of exposure, and it will
remain on the record to
defend the 13 years of exposure at the Huntley Colliery. I can see no room
for conflict on the part of Sparke
Helmore in so acting, and as I have said,
Sparke Helmore has indicated that they are willing to accept appointment as a
representative in the interests of CMI for Wongawilli.
next submission of Mr Giurtalis was that the fact that there may be
different damages regimes against BlueScope for the steelworks
exposure as
opposed to the coal mines exposure means that there could be a differential
assessment of damages, but there would ultimately
only be one single verdict
against BlueScope. That is going to arise as a very interesting issue in this
case, whether or not Mr
Andersen appears for both arms of BlueScope or only
for one. I frankly confess that the answer to that dilemma is not immediately
apparent to me, but it is something that can be sorted out by the trial judge.
next submission of Mr Giurtalis was that this application should have been
made by Sparke Helmore or by CMI. I do not accept that
submission as
Mr Andersen is making the submission in his own interests, perceiving that
he has a conflict of interest, and he has
put on evidence to show that Sparke
Helmore and CMI do support the application for separate representation.
Mr Andersen's
conflict is, to my mind, a real and serious one. The
Legal Profession
Uniform Law Australian Solicitors Conduct Rules 2015
(NSW) provide as
follows in r 11:
“11.1. A solicitor and a law practice must avoid
conflicts between duties owed to two or more current clients.”
pause to remark that while Mr Andersen presently acts for one party,
BlueScope, if he remains on the record for all of BlueScope,
he will have two
clients, being BlueScope as a self‑insurer and CMI as the insurer for
BlueScope on the Wongawilli Colliery.
I do not read the word "client" as a party
to litigation. The reality is that any solicitor appearing for a defendant in
proceedings
in this Tribunal is almost always instructed by an insurer, and the
insurer is the client to whom duties are owed.
reads as follows:
“If a solicitor or a law practice seeks to act for two or more clients in
the same or related matters where the client's interests
are adverse, and there
is a conflict or potential conflict of the duties to act in the best interests
of each client, the solicitor
or law practice must not act, except where
permitted by r 11.3 and 11.4.
recited those rules, they do no more than advance a proposition put forward
2,000 years ago: “No man can serve two masters
for either he will
hate the one and love the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the
find that it is appropriate to make the order for separate representation in
these proceedings in the form set out in the amended
notice of motion. It may
add to the cost and time and expense in the proceedings, but that can be covered
by an appropriate costs
order. If the plaintiff wins on all of the causes of
action put forward, that issue will not even arise because the plaintiff will
obtain a costs order to follow the event.
orders are as follows:
(1) Order 2, as per amended notice of motion filed 12 June 2024;
(2) Order 4, as per amended notice of motion filed on 12 June 2024.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (231 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter