URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/455.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Military Bank Limited v Pike [2025] NSWDC 455 (7 November 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
Australian Military Bank Limited v Pike
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 455
Hearing Date(s):
11-14 August 2025
Date of Orders:
7 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Habib SC DCJ
(1) The sum of $728,324.49 paid into the Court pursuant to
orders made by Andronos SC DCJ on 20 August 2024 and all interest accrued
thereon be paid to the Second Cross-Claimant
(2) The First Cross-Claim is
(3) The Parties are to inform my Associate within
7 days if they require an oral hearing on the question of costs. If the Parties
indicate that they do not require an oral hearing, and are content for the Court
to deal with the question of costs on the papers
and in Chambers,
(a) Nathan is to serve his submissions on costs,
together with any affidavits in support, within 7 days of notice being given by
both Parties to my Associate that an oral hearing is not required. Without
leave, the submissions are to be no more than 5
(b) Kevin is to serve his submissions on costs,
together with any affidavits in support within 7 days of receipt of
submissions. Without leave, such submissions are to be no more
than 5 pages.
Catchwords:
BANKING AND FINANCE — Banks — Banker and customer relationship
— creation of relationship – identification
AGENCY — Creation of agency — Signing
documents — authority of agent — Ratification
– Trusts – Express trusts – Resulting trusts
Legislation Cited:
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Minors (Property and Contract)
Act 1970 (NSW) ss 6(1)(m), 17, 18, 19, 46
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
(NSW) r 14.26(2)
Cases Cited:
Australian Blue Metal Ltd v Hughes
(1961) 79 WN (NSW)
Australian Military Bank Ltd v Pike
[2025] NSWDC 311
Television Ltd v Bateman
[1971] NZLR 453
Bennett v Strauss
(2016) 341 ALR
[2016] NSWCA 24
Bosanac v Commissioner of Taxation
(2022) 275 CLR 37
[2022] HCA 34
Brockway v Pando
[2000] WASCA 192
Brown v Forrest
Browne v Dunne (1893) 6 R 67
Brun-Smits v Bank of Queensland
[2015] FCA 362
Davison v Vickery’s Motors Ltd (In Liq)
[1925] HCA 47
Electricity Generation Corporation v Woodside Energy
(2014) 251 CLR 640
[2014] HCA 7
Fountain v Alexander
[1982] HCA 16
(1982) 150 CLR 615
626 (Gibbs CJ), 634 (Mason J);
[1982] HCA 16
Haythorpe v Rae
[1972] VicRp 73
Hewer v Bryant
[1970] 1 QB 357
Irwin v Pamplin (No 4)
[2024] NSWSC
Jones v Dunkel
(1959) 101 CLR 298
[1959] HCA 9
Keighley, Maxsted and
Co v Durant
[1901] UKLawRpAC 21
[1901] AC 240
[2025] NSWCA 227
Lederberger v
Mediterranean Olives Financial Pty Ltd
[2012] VSCA 262
(2012) 38 VR 509
Lordianto v
Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police
(2018) 100 NSWLR 630
[2018] NSWCA
McLaughlin v City Bank of Sydney v
(1912) 14 CLR 684
Mills v Walsh
[2022] NSWCA 255
National Australia Bank Ltd v Dionys
[2016] NSWCA 242
Nelson v Nelson
(1995) 184 CLR 538
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas
(2004) 78 ALJR 1045
Pearson v Pearson
[1961] VicRp 108
[1961] VR 693
Perry v Perry
[2021] NSWSC 1669
French Caledonia Travel
(2013) 59 NSWLR 361
[2003] NSWSC 1008
Maylor & Co Ltd (1894) 10 TLR 412
Robinson v Midland Bank Ltd
Russell v Scott
(1936) 55 CLR 440
[1936] HCA 34
Arabian Money Agency v Dresden Bank AG
[2004] EWCA Civ 1074
Shao v Crown
Global Capital Pty Ltd (in prov liq) [2025] HCA 43
Soliman v University of
Technology, Sydney
[2009] FCAFC 159
Stoney Stanton Supplies (Coventry) Ltd v
Midland Bank Ltd [1966] 2 Lloyd Rep 373
The Venture
[1908] UKLawRpPro 9
Thomson v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1949) 80 CLR 344
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd (2004) 219 CLR 165;
Tonna v Mendonca
[2019] NSWSC 1849
Uttamchandani v Central Bank of
(1989) New Law Journal 222
Winau Aust Pty Ltd v LCC Property
Development Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWSC 434
Texts Cited:
G E Dal Pont (ed), Law of Agency (3rd ed, 2014, LexisNexis
Butterworths)
J D Heydon and M J Leeming (eds), Jacobs’ Law of Trusts
in Australia (8th ed, 2016, LexisNexis Butterworths)
Principal judgment
Australian Military Bank (Plaintiff)
Kevin James Pike (First Defendant /
First Cross-Claimant)
Nathan Pike (Second Defendant / Second
Cross-Claimant)
Representation:
A Crossland (First Defendant / First Cross-Claimant)
KC and A Oakes (Second Defendant / Second
Cross-Claimant)
Solicitors:
N Christiansen (Plaintiff)
Digital Age
Lawyers (First Defendant / First Cross-Claimant)
W Advisers (Second Defendant
/ Second Cross-Claimant)
File Number(s):
2024/109487
Publication Restriction:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
Facts not in dispute or otherwise established by
contemporaneous documents
Kevin’s case
Nathan’s Case
Parties’ submissions on witnesses
Nathan’s submissions
Kevin’s submissions
Court’s Approach to the witnesses
The Parties
Other witnesses
Contentious factual Issues
Did Kevin deposit money into accounts in
Nathan’s name in lieu of paying child support payments?
Did Kevin speak to Nathan from time to time about
accounts at ADCU or AMB in Nathan’s name?
Did Nathan give money from his piggy bank to Kevin
for deposit into accounts in his name and did Kevin so deposit? Did Nathan
approximately $500 in $0.50 pieces from his grandmother and was it
deposited into accounts in his name?
Was there a joint account in the name of Kevin and
Nathan in addition to the Access Account?
Did Nathan or Kevin sign Nathan’s name in the
Authority Document?
Legal basis of the Parties’ claims
Nathan’s Claim
Kevin’s Claim
Consideration
Banker-Customer Relationship
Identity of contracting Parties
Parental Power and the Access Account
Agency and the Access Account
Ratification
Post-contractual conduct
The Term Deposit
Trust Claim
Kevin’s Case
Nathan’s claim for payment by Kevin of
AMB’s costs
Introduction
20 August 2024, the Plaintiff, Australian Military Bank Limited (AMB), was
granted relief by way of interpleader in relation to
an amount in the name of
the Second Defendant in an account ending in “0095” (the Term
Deposit). Orders were made which,
amongst other things, ordered AMB to pay that
amount (subject to a deduction for AMB’s costs) into Court. The amount
Court was $728,324.49 (the Fund).
Interpleader
relief was granted by this Court because two people claimed legal and beneficial
entitlement to the amount held in the
Term Deposit. Those two people were the
First Defendant, Mr Kevin Pike, and the Second Defendant, Mr Nathan Pike. They
and son respectively. In this judgment, for convenience and with no
disrespect, I will refer to them as Kevin and Nathan.
Kevin and Nathan brought competing cross-claims, each claiming entitlement to be
paid the Fund.
summary, Kevin’s claim is that he, at all times, was the legal owner of
the Term Deposit (and other relevant accounts) and
his beneficial interest
followed his legal ownership. Kevin did not bring any alternative claim that if
Nathan was the legal owner
of the Term Deposit, Nathan held that legal ownership
on trust for Kevin, whether by way of an implied, resulting, or constructive
summary, Nathan’s claim is, in substance, that he, at all times, was the
legal and beneficial owner of the Term Deposit (and
other relevant accounts).
Alternatively, Nathan claims that if Kevin was the legal owner of the Term
Deposit, Kevin held the Term
Deposit on trust for Nathan.
the beginning of the hearing of this matter I delivered an interlocutory
judgment on the question of the Court’s jurisdiction
to hear the matter. I
concluded that the Court did have jurisdiction and that
Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) was not engaged. That judgment appears at
Facts not in dispute or otherwise established by
contemporaneous documents
was born in February 1976 to Kevin and his then wife, Izabela Pike (again, with
no disrespect, I will refer to her as Izabela).
Kevin and Izabela separated in
July 1976 and divorced in October 1978. They had lived in Giralang in the
Australian Capital Territory.
After their separation, Izabela and Nathan moved
to live in Orange, New South Wales. Kevin later moved to Orange and worked as a
journalist at the Central Western Daily. He later moved to Sydney.
26 March 1979, the Family Court of Australia made maintenance orders that
required Kevin to pay $20 per week for Nathan’s
maintenance, commencing on
8 April 1979. Prior to that time, the Court had made orders requiring
maintenance of $15 per week.
1982, Kevin joined the Australian Navy. As a member of the Defence Force, he
became a member of the Australian Defence Credit Union
(ADCU) on 23 August 1983.
He was given member number “xxx535” and he opened an account in his
name with ADCU which he
described as his military account (Military
around 1983, when Nathan was living in Orange, Kevin opened a bank account in
Nathan’s name at the Commonwealth Bank of Australia
April 1986, Kevin’s son, Jack Pike, was born (again, with no disrespect, I
will refer to him as Jack).
January 1989, Kevin’s son, Benjamin Pike, was born (again, with no
disrespect, I will refer to him as Benjamin).
14 August 1989, Kevin signed an application for membership and a share in ADCU
(the 1989 Application). The application form had
various boxes in which details
of the applicant were to be inserted. In this application, within the box headed
the name “Pike” with an initial
“N” was recorded. In the box headed “Christian Names”,
“Kevin Pike in trust for Nathan Pike” were recorded. In
the box headed “Occupation” the word “child”
recorded. The address recorded in the application was Kevin’s address in
Potts Point, New South Wales. Immediately above
Kevin’s signature, the
following words were recorded:
“I hereby apply for membership and one $2.00 share in the Australian
Defence Credit Union. I agree to pay any charges required by the credit union
listed in the rules and further agree to be bound by
the rules of the credit
union and by any alterations thereof registered in accordance with the credit
In a section of the application containing the words “Office Use
Only”, next to the words “Account No”, is
“xxx671” (“Nathan’s membership number”). Other
documents of ADCU describe that number as
a “member number”.
on 14 August 1989, an account (later described by ADCU as the
“S1-Access” account) was opened with ADCU in the name
Nathan”. The initial passbook for that account records a deposit on 14
August 1989 of $5. Next to the name “Pike
Nathan” the following
words appear on the passbook: “Kevin Pike To Operate”. The passbook
had a section into which
was inserted a member number. The number
“xxx259” was initially inserted but then crossed out and
Nathan’s membership
number was inserted. There is no direct evidence as to
who inserted and then crossed out the initial member number and inserted the
second member number, however, I infer it was someone at ADCU.
26 October 1990, a document titled “Authority to Operate Account”
was executed (the “Authority Document”).
The document had two
signature points – one above the words “Member’s
signature” where the name “N.Pike”
appeared and one above the
words “Signature of Authorised Agent”, where Kevin’s signature
appeared. There is a
dispute between the parties as to who wrote the words
“N.Pike” and I will address that issue below. The document states
the following:
“I have authorised Kevin Pike to sign on my behalf withdrawal
forms/notices
on my account number “xxx671”. Specimen signatures
appear hereunder. Therefore, until you have received written notice
contrary, please act upon all withdrawal forms/notices so signed. All previous
authorities are hereby superseded, except as
regards withdrawal forms/notices
already signed”.
S1-Access account started to be known by that name in 1991. At a much later
point, ADCU changed from being a credit union to becoming
a bank with the name
AMB. AMB, at a point in time, started to describe accounts not only by the name
of the account type and by membership
numbers, but also by reference to a BSB
number and an account number (which was different from the membership number).
For example,
in account statement 110, for the period ending 30 September 2017,
the S1-Access account had an account number ending in “4688”
associated with it. Ultimately, the account became to be identified on
statements by reference only to the account number ending
and the word “Access”. Although Kevin did not concede this to be the
case, the documents clearly
bear this out. In this judgment, I use the term
“Access Account” to refer to this account (that is, the S1-Access
which became the account ending in “4688”). Neither party
submitted, or otherwise suggested, that the change from ADCU,
a credit union, to
AMB, a bank, had any impact on the legal and beneficial ownership of the Access
Account from its inception to
the date of the interpleader relief.
always operated the Access Account prior to 2022. He deposited money into the
account and withdrew and transferred money out
of the account. He used money
from the account to open a series of term deposits with ADCU and AMB. On
maturity of those term deposits,
he ordinarily instructed that the matured
amounts be deposited back into the Access Account.
organised term deposits over time in his name, and in the names of Jack and
Benjamin. Each of Kevin, Jack, and Benjamin had
separate membership numbers
associated with the term deposits in their respective names.
also organised a series of term deposits with ADCU and then AMB in the name
“N Pike”. Initially ADCU issued certificates
in relation to each of
the term deposits. Each certificate had details of the deposit date and the
maturity date and relevant interest
rate for that term deposit. Each certificate
also had terms and conditions set out in the certificate. Early certificates
a condition that, unless contrary written instructions were received
before the maturity date, ADCU would direct the funds in accordance
instructions received at the time of the investment. Later certificates
contained a statement that, if ADCU did not hear from
the depositor, the term
deposit would be automatically renewed for the same term at the rate applicable
on maturity.
first certificate relating to a term deposit in Nathan’s name that was in
evidence was one that had a deposit date of 6
September 1994. That term deposit
was in the amount of $2,590. The Term Deposit into which the disputed funds were
invested was opened
on 28 March 2019 in the amount of $675,000. The $675,000
deposited into the Term Deposit was withdrawn from the Access Account. On
October 2019, $20,000 was added to the Term Deposit, drawn from the Access
Account. On 30 December 2020, $40,000 was added to the
Term Deposit, again drawn
from the Access Account. The Term Deposit was in the name of “N
Pike”. In evidence there are
statements (being account summaries addressed
to “Mr N Pike”) bearing Nathan’s membership number which,
among other
things, record details for the Access Account and the Term Deposit.
Against the Term Deposit are the words “Owner/s: Mr N Pike”.
31 December 2020, Kevin emailed AMB with instructions to reinvest $740,000 in
the Term Deposit for another 6 months and, on maturity,
to return the principal
plus interest to the Access Account. On the same day, AMB emailed Kevin and told
him that it could not take
instructions to move the principal of the Term
Deposit on maturity to the Access Account. AMB advised that such action would be
as closing the term deposit, and that if he wished to do so, the bank
would require a signed form from the “main account holder”
plainly a reference, by AMB, to Nathan. At some point, it appears that AMB
changed its practice so that it would not move
funds from a term deposit into
the Access Account without Nathan’s signature on the relevant bank form.
For at least two decades
prior to this time, ADCU and then AMB were prepared to
do that on Kevin’s instructions.
14 January 2021, Kevin emailed AMB requesting a form to turn
“Nathan’s account into a joint account”. On the
same day, AMB
emailed Kevin, declining his request to turn “Nathan’s
account” into a joint account. AMB indicated
it could not change the
“relationship” mid cycle (this was apparently a reference to the
Term Deposit).
6 February 2022, AMB emailed Kevin, indicating that it was seeking, in relation
to accounts in Nathan’s name, to meet its
obligations under the
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
the “AML/CTF Rules” which, it said, required AMB to have in place
customer identification processes and procedures.
There is no evidence that AMB
engaged in any such identification processes and procedures in relation to
Nathan prior to 2022.
13 December 2022, Nathan requested AMB to remove Kevin as an authorised
signatory. AMB did so. AMB notified Kevin of his removal
the next day. By this
stage, the dispute between Kevin and Nathan in relation to the amount in the
Term Deposit was before Australian
Financial Complaints Authority (AFCA).
28 December 2022, AMB emailed Kevin and said that he was no longer an
“authority to operate" on the Term Deposit, however,
remained an
‘authority to operate on the access account’. It also said that the
Term Deposit and Access Account were
both in Nathan’s name.
funds that were invested in the Term Deposit continued to be rolled over on
maturity until 30 August 2024 when the Term Deposit
account was closed. The
amount then standing to that account was $801,233.92. That amount was then
credited to account number “xxxxxx208”
which had, on the account
summary for Nathan’s membership number, the words “owner/s Mr N
Pike”. That account appears
to have been opened on or about 1 July 2024
pursuant to a request from Nathan. However, I infer that the payment into this
was merely an administrative action by AMB to place itself in a position
to pay the funds into Court because the payment into Court
from that account
occurred on the same day as the money was credited to the account. That is, I do
not take anything from the fact
that AMB placed the funds from the Term Deposit
into another account in Nathan’s name before paying that amount into
That amount, less an amount of $72,909.43 on account of AMB’s costs
of the interpleader proceedings, was paid into Court pursuant
Court’s orders. The amount paid into Court was $728,324.49.
did not engage with AMB in any way in relation to the opening of any of the term
deposits or in relation to the instructions
to be adopted at maturity until
December 2022. Nathan emailed AMB both in December 2022 and in June 2023 seeking
to give AMB certain
instructions in relation to the Term Deposit. There is no
evidence that AMB acted upon those instructions. Nathan by email dated
2023 sought the transfer of the funds in the Term Deposit on maturity to an
account in his name in a different financial
institution. AMB did not carry out
those instructions and the dispute between the parties in relation to the Term
Deposit crystallised.
factual issues were raised by Kevin and Nathan. I set out below, in summary, the
evidence of the witnesses called by them.
I do not, however, generally refer to
the evidence related to the facts set out paragraphs [
] above. I proceed to
make findings only in relation to those factual disputes that I consider
relevant to a determination of the
legal issues raised in the
proceedings.
Kevin’s case
was the only witness in his case who prepared an affidavit. Ms Colwell,
Kevin’s second ex-wife gave evidence pursuant
to leave granted during the
hearing. I will deal with that evidence below.
relied on four affidavits he made in the proceedings. In summary, he gave the
following evidence in his affidavits:
(a) After his separation from Izabela, he attempted to see Nathan on various
occasions but his access to Nathan was made difficult
by Izabela and her mother.
In around late 1978 to early 1979, he moved to Orange to work as a sports
reporter for the local newspaper.
He remained in Orange until he joined the Navy
in 1982. Izabela continued to make Nathan unavailable for visits;
(b) In 1982, he moved from Orange to Sydney. He did not see or speak to Nathan
again during his childhood and the next time he saw
him was on Father’s
Day just before Nathan was finishing high school or had just started
university;
(c) He opened an account for Nathan at CBA because he believed Izabela was
receiving a parenting payment or subsidies from the government
for having Nathan
and he wanted to ensure that at least some of that money was set aside for
(d) He opened passbook accounts in the name of Nathan, Jack, and Benjamin with
himself listed to operate the accounts. He opened
those accounts to put aside
money so that it could pass to his sons when he died. He periodically put money
into the separate account
of his three sons. He gave evidence about the source
of the money he deposited in term deposits. His evidence was that the money
from various sources, being his savings; a long service payment of about $80,000
that he received in 1998; the money in the
passbook accounts; and a lump sum
superannuation payment of about $500,000 that he received in 2005. His evidence
with respect to
the superannuation payment was shown to be incorrect during his
cross-examination. In fact, none of the money related to his superannuation
payment was deposited into any term deposits but rather used to receive an
ongoing superannuation pension, and otherwise towards
his mortgage on his home
at Rushcutters Bay. With respect to the $80,000 long service payment, his
affidavit evidence is unreliable
because, in cross examination, he said he would
have deposited it into his Military Account and invested it
Accordingly, that amount may or may not have found itself
into the Access Account or a term deposit;
(e) He did not speak to Nathan about the Access Account or the term deposits in
Nathan’s name. In about 2017, upon maturity
of the then extant term
deposits that he had set up in his sons’ names, he gave directions that
all the funds in all the term
deposits be deposited into his Military Account.
He said that by 2016, the Access Account (which he described as an account
in “4688”) contained a substantial sum, being the combined
sum of the separate term deposits he had made in each of his
sons’ names.
He then used that substantial amount to create new term deposits, and
ultimately, the Term Deposit.
was cross-examined. During his cross-examination:
(a) He accepted that from time to time he would enter term deposits in his name,
separate to those entered in the name of Nathan,
Jack, or Benjamin;
(b) He agreed that when he applied for membership in 1989, he was applying for
membership for Nathan, because he was already a member.
He first said he did not
write the words “in trust” on the application. He then said he must
have written those words.
Ultimately, he settled on the position that he was not
sure whether he wrote the words “in trust” but accepted that he
signed the application with those words on it. He said that he arranged $20 per
week payments into Nathan’s account until 2005.
He said he thought the
payments would have finished when he left the Navy because he arranged it during
that time. It was not until
he was in the witness box that he said he did not
know the payments continued. He thinks that the payments continued to be made
he did not stop it;
(c) He said he attended Orange Courthouse to pay child support until it came out
of his pay;
(d) Contrary to evidence given by Nathan, he said he never saw a piggy bank
owned by Nathan from which Nathan gave him money to deposit
into his account at
CBA and ADCU. Indeed, he was very firm that Nathan never gave him any money;
(e) He did not tell Izabela about the CBA account. He said in cross-examination
(though not in his affidavit) that the account also
had the purpose of
depositing his money;
(f) He was shown a Centrelink application dated 5 April 2013. He accepted that
he signed the application on 3 April 2013. He did
not recall the application. He
accepted that the application contained what he believed was his mobile number
and email address at
the time. He accepted that the application recorded his
account number and member number with ADCU, and that it was his signature
declaring that the information on the application form was complete and correct.
He accepted that even if he had not actually written
the information on the
application form, he would have checked the form before signing the declaration.
On the application form in
response to a request for the inclusion of savings
accounts, cheque accounts, term deposits, joint accounts including accounts held
in trust or under any other name, he recorded his account with ADCU under his
own membership number, accounts with two other banking
institutions, but did not
record the Access Account nor any term deposits in Nathan’s name. He did
not record any of the accounts
in Jack’s or Benjamin’s name. He gave
various responses in cross-examination as to why he did not record those
First, he said he did not include the accounts because he was managing
the accounts. Secondly, he said that the accounts or the money
in the accounts
“wasn’t for me at that stage”. Thirdly, he said it was his
money but, because he was managing the
money, he thought he did not have to tell
Centrelink. Ultimately, he said that he neglected to tell Centrelink and that it
to be a mistake;
(g) With respect to the payment of tax, he said that he never told the
Australian Taxation Office that the accounts in Nathan’s
name belonged to
him and he said that was so because he was managing the account and that
“it didn’t belong to me”.
He caused a tax file number to be
issued for Nathan and told ADCU and AMB about that;
(h) He said that he never mentioned any account with Nathan and that Nathan
would not have known about the accounts until the bank
told him in 2022. He said
that none of his sons knew that there were accounts;
(i) With respect to a phone call to Nathan in 2013 when he was at Oxford (to
which reference will be made below), he said that he
called because AMB wanted
proof that Nathan existed. He said that he was going to ring up and ask Nathan
to send him a copy of his
passport, but he was not going to tell Nathan about
any accounts;
(j) He was taken to an account statement for the period ending 31 December 2022
in which the Access Account was described as access
account “K and N
Pike”. Kevin persisted with his evidence that he established a joint
account and put all the money from
the different accounts into that joint
account which then funded term deposits in Nathan’s name. Notwithstanding
being shown
documents that plainly established that the Term Deposit was drawn
from the Access Account, Kevin would not accept that there was
no separate joint
account from which the money was drawn. He did not accept that the S1-Access
account was eventually given an account
number ending in “4688” but
rather said the “4688” account was the joint account for
“Kevin and Nathan
Pike”. He claimed that for some reason the bank
had just put that account in Nathan’s name. His evidence was that it
incorrect to describe the Access Account as being owned by Nathan or in his name
but rather it should have been in the name “K
and N Pike”. He was
taken to an email chain from January 2021 which included an email from him to
AMB dated 14 January 2021
in which he asked the bank for a form to turn
Nathan’s account into a joint account. It appears that, between June and
2021, the account name was changed from “N Pike” to
“K and N Pike” and it still had that joint name for the
period ending 31 December 2021. However, in the statement for the period ending
31 March 2023, the account name was changed
times, the account was described on the account statements as owned by
(k) With respect to Nathan’s evidence that his grandmother told him she
was gifting him $80,000, he said his mother, whom he
described as a pensioner
living week-to-week, would not have had $80,000 in her whole lifetime. She sold
her house for approximately
$40,000, of which she gave Kevin $10,000 and his
brother $20,000 and she moved in with his brother. He described the notion,
by Nathan, as “ridiculous”;
(l) In relation to the Authority Document, he claimed (for the first time in the
proceedings during cross-examination), that he printed
Nathan’s name. He
said he had permission from AMB to use Nathan’s name. He said Nathan did
not know anything about any
Colwell gave evidence without an affidavit having been served. She was
Kevin’s wife for 11 years from 1983 to 1994. She had
not had any contact
with Kevin since the divorce. She gave evidence that during her marriage she
recalled that Kevin had made child
support payments at Orange Courthouse. She
recalls Kevin telling her that he walked past the Courthouse with Nathan and
that Nathan
would say to his grandmother, that “we” go in there (the
Courthouse) and “get some money because that’s where
Mum used to
pick it up from”. She said the discussions about child support occurred in
the context of their budget. Once they
were married, she said the child support
payments were digitally paid directly from Kevin’s pay. Ultimately, in
cross-examination,
she accepted that her understanding about child support
payments derived from what Kevin told her. She could not give any direct
evidence of payments being made by way of child
Nathan’s Case
relied on his two affidavits and also an affidavit of Izabela.
his affidavit, he gave evidence that:
(a) He had limited contact with his father throughout his childhood. He said
that when his father moved to Sydney, he saw him approximately
three to four
times a year;
(b) He recalled numerous occasions when he waited at CBA in Orange while his
father spoke to people at the bank (Kevin denies that
he took Nathan to CBA);
(c) He had a piggy bank when he was a child and placed in it cash gifts he
received from relatives and friends during his childhood.
He estimated he would
receive approximately $200 per year. He said he received other money from time
to time, including money from
cherry picking when he was 10 to 14 years old. He
said he would give his piggy bank to his father and ask him to deposit the money
in the CBA account. He gave evidence that, when he was around seven or eight
years old, he received a large number of coins from
his grandmother which were
mostly made up of $0.50 pieces. He recalls that his grandmother told him it was
around $500. He said that
Kevin told him that he would deposit those coins into
the CBA account;
(d) His mother had told him that Kevin did not make child support payments as he
was required by the Court to do, and that his father
sometime in the early to
mid-1980s said to him not to worry because he was depositing money into
Nathan’s account for him.
Kevin denied that this occurred;
(e) Sometime after his father moved to Sydney, he had a conversation with his
father about opening an account at ADCU. He said the
conversation was in person
at Orange and his father had said that Nathan was better off having his money
deposited with ADCU because
it paid high interest rates. In relation to the
Authority Document, his evidence was that it was his signature on the document
that he recalled signing the document;
(f) From around the age of 13 or 14 years, and onwards, he was not aware of the
specifics of his account or accounts with ADCU and
AMB, however, he was aware
that his father was managing them. He recalled his father from time to time
referring to his accounts
as a “term deposit”;
(g) At some point, his father arranged his money in the CBA account to be
transferred to ADCU, and he gave evidence that he recalled
that his father told
him that around $3000 was in the CBA account. He gave evidence that he
remembered going to ADCU with his father
wearing his navy uniform and recalled
other people in the branch wearing uniforms. He gave evidence that, in the early
1990s, during
a visit with his paternal grandmother, his grandmother said she
had gifted him a large amount of money, namely $80,000. It was his
evidence that
his grandmother had told him she put the money in his term deposit. He gave
evidence that, from time to time, his father
told him that he had made deposits
into his term deposit;
(h) He gave evidence of a conversation with his father in which his father told
him that he need not worry about child support because
he was putting money into
his account and that the money would be there when Nathan needed;
(i) He gave evidence that in 2013 his father left a voicemail while he was
lecturing at Oxford in which Kevin said that there was
almost $500,000 in the
term deposit. Nathan tendered an email that he sent on 24 November 2013 to his
mother in which he wrote the
following: “I had a voicemail in zoology from
dad: there’s almost half a million in my credit union account
(j) Between 2002 and 2022, Nathan resided in England.
was cross-examined. In summary, the salient matters arising from
cross-examination were the following:
(a) He said it was not his experience that his mother made it difficult for
Kevin to visit him. While he accepted that he did not
know anything about his
mother denying visits to Kevin, he did not accept that she limited Kevin’s
(b) He was firm in his evidence that he remembered visiting CBA in Orange with
his father. With respect to the $0.50 pieces given
by his grandmother he said it
was a few buckets full. He said there were several buckets of $0.50 pieces which
he saw adults carrying
to a car. He said what he saw was not anything to do with
CBA. He accepted he did not ultimately see what was done with the $0.50
With respect to the piggy bank, he did not have a firm sense of how many
occasions it was given to Kevin, but he thought
it was more than the three
occasions mentioned by his mother. He accepted, however, he had no reason to
doubt her recollection given
that she was an adult at the time and he was a
child. He accepted he does not have a single clear recollection but rather a
recollection of giving his piggy bank to Kevin on many occasions.
Ultimately, however, there is no evidence that either any piggy
bank money or
the $0.50 pieces were ever deposited into any account;
(c) He accepted that prior to 2022, no term deposit certificates were addressed
to any address that he had lived in. He accepted
he did not have any copies of
any passbooks related to accounts in his name at either ADCU or AMB. He accepted
he never personally
made a deposit;
(d) He said that his father regularly and throughout his life mentioned term
deposits and that it was something he felt his dad was
proud of. He thought his
father wanted him to know that he was being looked after. Nathan accepts that he
only had generalised recollections
of such conversations rather than
recollections of specific occasions;
(e) In relation to the Authority Document, he said that he recalled that he was
with a friend painting a fence and that his father
came and indicated that he
wanted him to sign a document. He said he felt very special to be asked to sign
a bank document which
is why he remembers it. That aspect of his evidence is not
contained in his affidavit. He cannot be certain that the document he
the Authority Document, although he remembers signing a document that his father
said was to give him power over his account;
(f) He accepted that his evidence was that he spent his whole adult life not
knowing any details about the money in the accounts
but having an expectation
that he would receive it at some point in the future. He said that his
understanding was that the money
was there when he needed it and he did not know
when he was going to need it. He said he saw the term deposit as a safety net.
never asked how the amounts in the term deposits grew to such a large amount.
was called and cross-examined. She gave evidence that, although Kevin made some
maintenance payments during their divorce
proceedings, he stopped making
payments after the proceedings concluded and never provided any financial
support to Nathan or her
following the divorce. She gave evidence that her
greatest wish, after the divorce, was for Kevin to leave Nathan and her alone so
she could be free from him. She gave evidence that she feared him, especially
after he had been drinking. She gave evidence of a
conversation with Kevin in
Orange in which he explained that he was not paying maintenance but that he
would look after Nathan in
his own way. She gave evidence that she recalled on
three occasions where she saw Nathan giving his piggy bank to Kevin.
gave evidence that in the early 1990s, Nathan had told her that his grandmother
had given him an $80,000 gift. She said that she
had subsequently called
Nathan’s grandmother, thanking her for the gift and that the grandmother
said, “I hope that he
continues playing piano. He might like to use it to
buy a piano.” She gave evidence that in early 1994, she called Kevin on
the telephone from Orange to ask if he could help with Nathan’s tuition
and accommodation costs as he was attending college
at the University of Sydney.
She said the gist of Kevin’s response was that he declined to provide that
financial assistance
but said there will be money there when Nathan needs it and
that there was a very healthy account for Nathan when he turns 18 or
needs money.
cross-examination, Izabela accepted that when she thought Kevin might be coming
to see Nathan in Orange, she would take Nathan
away so he could not see him. She
said her relationship with Kevin improved years later. She accepted that she did
not have a good
recollection of events from 1979 in relation to child support
payments. She recollected that Kevin did pay child support payments
for a time,
but her recollection was that at some point he may not have been paying
childcare. She accepted that she did not have
a clear recollection of the
timing, duration and dates concerning the matters to which she gave evidence.
She accepted that she could
not be sure of everything she gave evidence about.
She did not know anything about Nathan having experience of getting money at
Courthouse. She said she never went to the Courthouse to pick up money.
She said she received child support payments into her bank
account for a short
period, however, once they stopped, they did not resume. Her evidence concerning
the $80,000 was that Nathan’s
grandmother was very old at the time and had
been in hospital for two weeks. She did not how Nathan’s grandmother had
said that she did not speak to Kevin very often, but she recalled him saying
that he was looking after Nathan in his own way.
She did not know the details of
any bank account for Nathan other than that it existed from things that Kevin
Parties’ submissions on witnesses
Nathan’s submissions
submitted that Kevin was an unreliable, and at times, untruthful witness. He
submitted that Kevin was willing to shape his
evidence when he thought it would
assist his case. Nathan submitted that Kevin’s evidence should only be
accepted where it
is supported by objective evidence, inherently plausible, or
against his own interest. He submitted that his testimony was frequently
evasive, inconsistent with contemporaneous documents, and coloured by a
sustained tendency to assert ownership of the funds regardless
of the legal and
factual premise been put to him. He gave the following examples:
(a) He submitted that Kevin’s evidence that he did not know the $20
deposits into the Access Account continued for many years
is unbelievable;
(b) He suggested that Kevin had a striking lack of memory but also a tendency to
invoke a lack of memory selectively when questions
became difficult;
(c) He submitted that Kevin’s evidence on the account arrangements was
both combative and implausible. He pointed to Kevin’s
insistence that
there was a separate joint account with Nathan notwithstanding being taken
step-by-step through the account name
and numbering changes of the Access
Account. When pressed on the inconsistency of the documents to his evidence,
Kevin resorted to
blaming the bank, saying that the bank did strange things;
(d) He submitted that Kevin’s evidence on child support payments was vague
and consisted of shifting accounts;
(e) He submitted that Kevin’s evidence in cross-examination conflicted
dramatically with his evidence in his affidavits. He
relied on Kevin’s
evidence concerning his superannuation and long leave payments referred to
(f) He submitted that Kevin’s demeanour reinforced the impression of an
argumentative and self-serving witness;
(g) He submitted that Kevin was willing to bend the truth to suit his own
purposes and that this was demonstrated in his communications
with AMB and AFCA
upon discovering he could not move the disputed funds into an account in his
name. In an email to the bank on 17
December 2021, Kevin said “...we have
a term deposit this month. Please return to our joint account. Kevin and Nathan
Nathan submitted that the email implied that Kevin was writing with
specific approval of Nathan which was not the case. On 16 May
2022, Kevin sent
an email to AMB in which he explained the lack of contact with Nathan and his
mother was because he had remarried
and had no contact with them. However, as at
May 2022, Kevin had been divorced from his second wife for 26 years.
Ultimately,
Nathan submitted that the Court should approach Kevin’s evidence with
considerable caution.
also submitted that the Court should draw inferences in accordance with the
principles in
because Kevin
failed to call his other sons, Benjamin or Jack, to give evidence that he never
discussed accounts with either of them.
There was no reason they could not have
given evidence in support of Kevin. However, to the extent discussions about
accounts are
relevant to the issues in this proceeding, those discussions relate
to the accounts in Nathan’s name. There is no suggestion
that either
Benjamin or Jack could have given any material evidence relevant to those
issues. I do not consider that it is appropriate
to rely on their failure to
give evidence for the drawing of any inferences in these proceedings.
respect to his own evidence, Nathan submitted that he was a credible and
reliable witness and that his evidence was consistent
with contemporaneous
documents, wherever such documents existed. While his recollection was
imperfect, he said he made concessions
when appropriate rather than attempting
to reconstruct events. I accept that Nathan sought to give evidence
truthfully.
submitted that Izabela did her best to assist the Court with her evidence. He
submitted that although her memory was limited,
there was no basis to reject any
part of her affidavit that was not the subject of specific
Kevin’s submissions
submitted that his evidence was given consistently, curmudgeonly, and
laconically. He submitted he was affected by having understandable
problems by the passing of time. He also submitted that although he was,
perhaps, affected by a misplaced certainty on certain
matters, he did not,
assessed objectively, come across as lying in general to the Court. Kevin notes
that King’s Counsel for
Nathan did not on many instances consider it
appropriate to expressly put to Kevin that he was lying. Allegations of untruths
did not feature greatly in the way the cross-examination was
notes that in cross-examination, Nathan was unable to say with certainty that it
was his signature on the Authority Document.
particular, Kevin submitted that the Court ought not find that he was lying when
he gave evidence that he signed “N Pike”
in the Authority Document.
He advanced the following reasons:
(a) He gave evidence that ADCU allowed him to sign under the agreed management
and that evidence was not challenged;
(b) In those circumstances, he says that Nathan is not permitted to submit that
Kevin’s evidence ought not to be accepted in
his evidence;
(c) The evidence was not so implausible or ridiculous that it should be rejected
in the absence of challenge. In this regard, Kevin
observes that the conduct
generally of the ADCU/AMB over the history of its dealings was not characterised
by a close adherence to
the rules or formalities.
Kevin submitted that by reason of the rule in
Nathan’s ability
to submit that Kevin was lying with respect to his evidence concerning the
Authority Document is limited.
Kevin relied, in this regard, on the decision in
Soliman v University of Technology, Sydney
deal with that issue below.
Court’s Approach to the
The Parties
do not accept Nathan’s submission that Kevin’s evidence, as a whole,
should only be accepted where it is supported by
objective evidence, inherently
plausible, or against his own interest.
I consider that Kevin:
(a) Was reluctant to concede matters which he considered were adverse to his
case. I make this finding because:
(i) He continued to assert the existence of a joint account with Nathan
separately to the Access Account when the documentary evidence
before the Court
showed there was no separate joint account;
(ii) He did not accept that he ever spoke to Nathan about any account at ADCU or
AMB, despite being aware that Nathan had emailed
his mother about a voicemail
left by Kevin in which he refers to Nathan’s account (to which I refer
below). The contents of
that email strongly suggests that Kevin had spoken about
the account to Nathan prior to the date on which the voicemail was left;
(iii) He did not concede that the original S1-Access ultimately became account
ending in “4688” despite being taken through
the documentary record
which established that fact;
(b) Gave certain evidence that was implausible:
(i) With respect to the opening of the CBA account, he said he never mentioned
or discussed that account with Izabela. He could not
explain how it was that the
money paid to Izabela could find its way into the CBA account without Izabela
knowing of the existence
of the account;
(ii) He claimed that he did not know or appreciate that consistent deposits were
being made by him of $20 per week into the Access
Account (I infer from his own
military account) until shown bank statements whilst in the witness box. I do
not accept his evidence
in this regard given that those payments continued to be
made over several years and then ceased in 2021. I refer to this further
(c) Was not careful in his evidence. His evidence in his affidavits concerning
the source of money deposited into the Access Account
or term deposits was shown
to be materially incorrect;
(d) Was plainly affected by memory lapses, which were understandable given the
period of time since the important relevant events;
(e) Gave his evidence, at times, in a way which sought to advocate his case
rather than to do his best to assist the Court. I considered
his demeanour in
giving evidence reflected this approach. When confronted with bank documents
that were inconsistent with his evidence,
he had a tendency to suggest that the
problem emanated from the relevant institution (for example, saying that they
did some “strange
consider that Nathan was an honest witness who answered questions in
cross-examination thoughtfully and straightforwardly. He was
prepared to make
concessions in cross-examination. His evidence was affected by the fact that
some of the events occurred when he
was quite young, and thus some of his
recollections were generalised rather than specific. Nevertheless, I considered
his demeanour
to reflect a witness who was seeking to put the truth before the
Court without advocating for his position.
I do not accept Nathan’s submission referred to in paragraph [
] above (third
sentence), I proceed on the basis that where Kevin and Nathan’s evidence
conflict on matters concerning their
dealings, or asserted dealings, with each
other, I prefer the evidence of Nathan. I will accept his evidence in this
regard unless
it is inherently unlikely, unreliable, or otherwise contradicted
by objective material.
Other witnesses
Colwell was an honest witness. I accept her evidence.
I have noted earlier, Ms Colwell gave evidence without an affidavit having been
served from her. Nathan objected to leave being
granted to Kevin to call Ms
Colwell. I granted that leave because:
(a) Based on an outline provided to the Court, her proposed evidence was of very
short compass and unlikely to cause any delay to
the proceedings;
(b) Her evidence was directed to a specific event about which Kevin gave
evidence during cross-examination (and which he had not
referred to in his
affidavit), namely that he attended Orange Courthouse to physically make child
support payments;
(c) I considered it likely at the time leave was sought that Nathan would submit
that I should not accept Kevin’s evidence
in relation to his payments at
Orange Courthouse;
(d) Ms Colwell’s evidence was being called to corroborate Kevin’s
(e) Nathan would have an opportunity to cross-examine Ms Colwell;
(f) Given that the alleged child support payments at Orange Courthouse occurred
approximately 30 years ago, I considered it unlikely
that records of such
payments would exist;
(g) I was prepared to permit Ms Colwell’s evidence to be interposed
between Nathan’s evidence and Izabela’s evidence.
That is, Nathan
was able to call Izabela after Ms Colwell’s evidence so that she had an
opportunity to address that evidence;
(h) I did not consider it likely that there was any material prejudice to Nathan
by Ms Colwell giving evidence without an affidavit
having been served given the
limited scope of the evidence and the unlikelihood of objective records existing
of the alleged payments.
was an honest witness who had limited recall of the events in relation to which
she gave evidence. Nevertheless, she was able
to recall specific matters which I
accept and to which I refer below.
Contentious factual
I observed earlier, during the proceedings several factual disputes arose
between the Parties, however, I have confined my findings
on those matters that
are material to the legal issues raised by the Parties. I set out certain of
those findings below. Other findings
on material contentious matters are made,
otherwise, in the course of the judgment.
Did Kevin deposit money
into accounts in Nathan’s name in lieu of paying child support payments?
submitted that Kevin deposited money into accounts in Nathan’s name in
lieu of paying child support. He says that conduct
is consistent with him being
the legal and/or beneficial owner of the Access Account and Term Deposit.
Izabela’s memory in relation to child support payments was not good, she
was clear that although child support payments
were made for a period (which she
could not identify), Kevin ceased making those payments. I accept that
gave evidence that at one point, Kevin told him not to worry about child support
because he was putting money into “his
account”. There is no
contemporaneous note of this conversation and Kevin denies it. Nathan was only
around 10 years old at
the time, and there appears to have been no reason for
Kevin to bring up child support payments with Nathan, unless, perhaps, Kevin
believed Izabela was telling Nathan that he was not paying child support and he
wanted to allay any concerns Nathan had. However,
there was no evidence that
Kevin believed that to be the case or was otherwise told that. I do not consider
Nathan’s evidence
in this regard as reliable, and I am not satisfied that
Kevin said what Nathan attributed to him in this regard.
Access Account records regular deposits of $20. Kevin said that up to 2005, he
had arranged with the Navy to have an allotment
of $40 per fortnight paid into
the Access Account. He accepted that by 2011, there were payments of $20 per
week being paid into
the Access Account but he claimed that that continuation of
payments into the Access Account from his account occurred without his
knowledge. Indeed, he claimed that he only discovered that $20 per week had been
taken out for many years after 2011 whilst in the
witness box. He said he was
unaware that the payments kept being taken out of his pay. The payments stopped
in 2021, however, Kevin
said he had no idea how they came to be stopped. I
consider Kevin’s evidence in this regard as implausible. ADCU and AMB
were sent to Kevin’s address. I consider it highly unlikely
that he did not observe a regular $20 per week payment over many
particularly when those payments stopped at some point.
Nevertheless,
I do not find that these regular payments were made by Kevin in lieu of child
support payments. The evidence concerning
the extent to which Kevin made child
support payments is too vague to be able to draw any reliable inferences in this
this regard, I refer to the evidence of Ms Colwell. As I noted above, she was
Kevin’s second wife. Although her evidence
that Kevin made child support
payments was based on what Kevin told her (as opposed to direct knowledge), her
evidence that child
support payments were discussed between them as part of
conversations concerning their budget, supports an inference that during
time together (or at least during part of their time together), Kevin was making
such payments. I do not have any basis to
infer that Kevin was lying to his
second wife about his making of child support payments. No reason is advanced as
to why he would
have so lied.
is unnecessary to make any finding concerning Kevin’s evidence that he
made child support payments physically at Orange Courthouse.
Kevin speak to Nathan from time to time about accounts at ADCU or AMB in
Nathan’s name?
evidence is that Kevin, from time to time spoke to him about accounts in his
name. Kevin says he did not. I accept
Nathan’s evidence that throughout
his childhood, including after Kevin moved to Sydney, he saw or spoke to Kevin
to time, though their contact was limited. I refer to my finding in
did not give a cogent explanation, either in his affidavit or when giving his
evidence, why he would not have spoken to Nathan
Nathan’s name – either the CBA account, or the Access Account, or
term deposits. The effect of his
evidence is that, although he operated accounts
in Nathan’s name at CBA, ADCU, and subsequently AMB, he said nothing of
existence, even at a high level of generality, to Nathan.
evidence is that Kevin did speak to him, from time to time, about bank accounts
in his name including the account at
CBA, and at ADCU. He said Kevin, from time
to time, would refer to Nathan’s term deposit. Indeed, he said that he
conversations were a form of bonding between he and his father
– that is, it seemed to Nathan that Kevin took some pride in
the fact he
was “looking after” Nathan.
24 November 2013, Nathan sent an email to his mother which contained the
following words:
“I had a voicemail in zoology from Dad: there’s almost half a
million in my credit union account ...”
was not suggested to Nathan that he lied to his mother in this email. The email
is significant in several ways:
(a) It is consistent with Nathan’s evidence that his father spoke to him
(b) It entirely contradicts Kevin’s evidence that he did not speak to
Nathan about his accounts;
(c) It refers to “my account” which is consistent with Kevin having
described the account as Nathan’s account;
(d) It refers to an account at the “credit union” which is
consistent with Kevin having told Nathan that he had an account
at a credit
union and I consider it highly likely, in those circumstances, that Kevin would
have told Nathan that it was ADCU;
(e) The amount referred to in the email, namely “almost half a
million” is consistent with the ADCU statements concerning
deposit existing at the time. The September 2013 statement recorded the term
deposit at $405,000 whilst the December 2013
statement recorded the term deposit
at $442,000.
content of the email undermines Kevin’s evidence that he did not mention
to Nathan the existence of accounts that were in
Nathan’s name. I reject
Kevin’s evidence in this regard because:
(a) He gave no cogent reason as to why he would not have mentioned the accounts
to Nathan. He gave no explanation as to how it was
that Nathan was able to write
to his mother that “his account” at the “credit union”
had almost $500,000.
No suggestion was made that that information could have
come from any source other than Kevin;
(b) Nathan’s evidence about such discussions was consistent, and not
shaken in cross-examination;
(c) The email referred to above is objective, contemporaneous evidence
consistent with Nathan’s evidence and inconsistent with
(d) Of my findings at paragraph [
accept Nathan’s evidence, and find that, from the time to time over the
years since the opening of the CBA account, Kevin
did mention and speak to
Nathan about accounts opened by Kevin in Nathan’s name.
Did Nathan give money from his piggy bank to Kevin for deposit
into accounts in his name and did Kevin so deposit? Did Nathan receive
approximately $500 in $0.50 pieces from his grandmother and was it deposited
into accounts in his name?
evidence in regard to his piggy bank and the $0.50 pieces from his grandmother
is set out above.
vehemently denies receiving any money from Nathan. It was suggested to Kevin in
cross-examination that he was tailoring his
evidence to assist his case in this
accept Nathan’s evidence that he did, from time to time, give piggy bank
money to his father. Notwithstanding Kevin’s
strong denial, I make that
finding because:
(a) Of my finding at paragraph [
(b) Because Kevin facilitated the opening of an account at CBA in Nathan’s
name and that account, in Kevin’s words was
“for Nathan”;
(c) It was accepted that Nathan’s piggy bank did exist (Counsel for Kevin
observed that Nathan had brought it to Court);
(d) It is inherently plausible that a son would give piggy bank money to his
father to deposit into an account opened for him by
his father;
(e) I have rejected Kevin’s evidence that he never spoke to Nathan about
his accounts.
noted earlier, Nathan gave evidence that his grandmother gave him approximately
$500 in $0.50 coins. That would amount to 1000
$0.50 pieces. He said he recalled
several adults carrying buckets of coins to a car. Although Nathan said in his
affidavit that Kevin
said he would deposit the coins for him, there is no
evidence he gave the coins to Kevin. Indeed, in his cross-examination, he said
his recollection of the coins had nothing to do with a bank. There is no other
evidence supporting Nathan’s evidence in this
regard. In short, whatever
the position with respect to Nathan’s evidence of his receipt from his
grandmother of approximately
1000 $0.50 coins, the evidence does not satisfy me
that Kevin received the coins or that he deposited them into any account.
am not satisfied that any money that was given by Nathan to Kevin found itself
in any account in Nathan’s name. There is no
direct evidence of that
occurring. There is very scant evidence of the amount, if given, that would have
been provided to Kevin at
any particular time. No correlation between any such
possible amounts and deposits into the accounts is established in the
documentary
record in evidence because for the period prior to 2011 (during
which Nathan says he gave this money to Kevin) there are no
Was there a joint account in the name of Kevin and
Nathan in addition to the Access Account?
noted above, Kevin gave evidence that, in addition to the Access Account, he
opened another account in around 2020 which was a
joint account in both his and
Nathan’s name.
is no documentary support for Kevin’s evidence in this regard. Further,
the documentary record establishes the following:
(a) The Access Account was, other than for a brief time, in Nathan’s
(b) On 14 January 2021, Kevin emailed AMB, saying in part, that “we were
after a form to turn Nathan’s account into a
joint account ...”
There is no evidence that Nathan authorised Kevin to seek a change in the Access
(c) In AMB account statements between 30 September 2021 and 31 December 2022,
the Access Account was described as “Access Account
K and N Pike”
but described the owner of that account as Nathan;
(d) In the statement for the period ending 31 March 2023 and the statements
thereafter, the Access Account was once again in Nathan’s
name alone, in
the same way it was prior to 30 September 2021. At all times, the Access Account
was recorded by AMB as owned by Nathan.
is no evidence of the existence of a separate joint account other than
Kevin’s evidence in cross-examination. In my view,
the documentary record
establishes there was no separate joint account, and I make that
Did Nathan or Kevin sign Nathan’s name in the
Authority Document?
significant factual issue concerns the signing of the Authority Document. There
is no dispute that Kevin inserted his signature
above the words “Signature
of Authorised Agent”. The dispute between the parties was the identity of
the person who wrote
“N Pike” above the words “Members
Signature”.
respect to Nathan:
(a) In his affidavit evidence, Nathan said he signed the Authority Document;
(b) In cross-examination, he described the circumstances in which he signed the
Authority Document. As noted earlier, he said he
was with a friend, painting a
fence and his father wanted him to sign a document. He had to stop painting and
move away from the
fence to sign the document, which he did at a picnic table.
He said he felt very special to be asked to sign a bank document and
that is why
he remembers it. He did not include that explanation in his affidavit though he
said he did mention it to his lawyer;
(c) He accepted that he cannot recall the document he signed but remembered that
the purpose of the document was to give power to
his father over his accounts.
He accepted that he could not say with “certainty” that it was his
signature on the Authority
respect to Kevin:
(a) The first occasion in which Kevin gave evidence that he wrote “N
Pike” on the Authority Document was in cross-examination;
(b) Notwithstanding he made four affidavits he did not say in any of those
affidavits that he wrote those words. The author of those
words was, plainly, an
important issue in the proceedings. At a minimum, his lawyers can be taken to
have understood its relevance
given Nathan’s express reliance on the
Authority Document in his Cross-Claim;
(c) He said that the bank allowed him to sign Nathan’s name;
(d) He said Nathan did not know anything about the account. I have rejected
Kevin’s evidence that Nathan did not know anything
(e) It was put to Kevin that he was lying about the document to corroborate his
evidence that he had not spoken to Nathan about his
noted earlier, Counsel for Kevin submitted that Nathan had only a limited scope
to assert that Kevin was lying about signing Nathan’s
name on the
Authority Document. He submitted that the proposition that Kevin was lying was
put to Kevin on the narrow basis, at best,
referred to in paragraph [
] above. In making
this submission, he relied on what was said by the Full Court of the Federal
Court of Australia in
[6] In adversarial litigation there is a fundamental principle that a party
should not be permitted to submit that a witness has
lied on oath without it
first being suggested to the witness that his evidence is false, and if the
reason for the suggestion is
not self-evident, the basis on which the suggestion
is advanced so as to give the witness an opportunity to deal with the
suggestion.
the Full Court recognised in
was that in certain circumstances
there may be specific reasons why a party may wish to submit that a witness is
lying. For example,
a party may wish to submit a witness in a case is lying to
avoid some embarrassment to a friend or relative. In such circumstances,
the reason for the lie is identified, the witness may not have the opportunity
to address the suggestion squarely. However,
when a witness is the party
advancing a case, a suggestion that he is lying to corroborate certain testimony
he has given in support
of his case is, in substance, a suggestion that he is
lying to support his case.
in my view, it was squarely put to Kevin, by King’s Counsel for Nathan,
that he was lying that he signed Nathan’s
name to corroborate his evidence
that he had not spoken to Nathan about the account at ADCU, a matter in itself
advanced as relevant
to his case. Kevin could have had no doubt that what was
being put to him was that he was lying to advance his case. That suggestion,
my view, was self-evident. The suggestion that Kevin was lying necessarily also
encompassed Kevin’s assertion that ADCU
allowed Kevin to sign
Nathan’s name. Accordingly, I reject Kevin’s submission referred to
in paragraph [
the following reasons, I find that Nathan signed his name on the Authority
(a) Although Nathan could not say with certainty that it was his signature on
the Authority Document, his evidence was that he did
sign it. That is, although
he allowed for the possibility that it was not his signature, that was not his
position. Given the time
that elapsed between the date of the Authority
Document, and the time at which Nathan gave his evidence, it is unsurprising
he was not prepared to state the position, on oath, with certitude;
(b) Nathan did not resile from his evidence that he recalled signing a bank
document in the circumstances set out at paragraph [
] above. There is no
other bank document in evidence, nor was the existence of any other bank
document suggested by either party,
on which Nathan signed his name that gave
authority to Kevin to operate accounts at ADCU or AMB;
(c) As at the date of the Authority Document, the passbook for the Access
Account already had a note “Kevin to operate”
written on it. That
is, ADCU already knew that Kevin was giving instructions in relation to the
Access Account. Whilst there is no
direct evidence on the point, I infer that
the Authority Document was required by the Bank to regularise, from the
Bank’s point
of view, Kevin’s operation of an account in
Nathan’s name. The Authority Document was addressed to ADCU. The Bank
from the 1989 Application, that Nathan was a minor. Notwithstanding that,
I infer that ADCU wanted a document signed by Nathan, the
relevant member in
whose name the account was in, to confirm the authority of Kevin to operate the
account (at least with respect
to withdrawals). It seems to me that it would
have defeated the purpose of the Authority Document for ADCU to allow Kevin to
Nathan’s name as the giver of the authority. To do so would give ADCU
no further comfort that Nathan had given Kevin authority
than the position that
obtained prior to the execution of the Authority Document;
(d) The first time Kevin gave evidence that he signed Nathan’s name was in
cross-examination on the third day of the hearing.
Part of his explanation for
doing so was that Nathan knew nothing of the account. I have found that Nathan
did know his father had
opened an account for him at ADCU, and I have also found
that Kevin spoke to Nathan about his accounts from time to time over the
In his defence to Nathan’s Cross-Claim, Kevin did not deny that Nathan
signed the Authority Document, but rather did
not admit he signed it. Although
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) r 14.26(2), a
non-admission operates in the same way as a denial, it is to be expected that if
a party knows an allegation of
fact is not true, that party will deny it. This
is particularly expected if the allegation of fact is that one party signed a
and the opposing party asserts that they were in fact the one that
signed the document;
(e) My findings in relation to Kevin’s evidence referred to at paragraph
] above. It is not
necessary to find that Kevin was lying in his evidence about the Authority
Document. I find his evidence was unreliable
and I accept Nathan’s
making this finding, I have taken into account the importance of this issue to
the dispute between the Parties. I am comfortably
satisfied, in the sense of
real persuasion, that Nathan, and not Kevin, wrote the words “N
Pike” on the Authority Document.
Legal basis of the
Parties’ claims
Nathan’s Claim
his Second Cross-Claim, Nathan:
(a) Alleges that immediately before the money in the Term Deposit was paid into
Court, the account was in Nathan’s name, and
he claims he is the legal
owner of the Fund and that he is presumed to be the beneficial owner of the
(b) Alternatively alleges that the 1989 Application was made for him by Kevin on
his behalf and that, by the Authority Document,
he authorised Kevin to sign
withdrawal forms/notices on his behalf. In his final submissions, he submitted
that the Authority Document
gave Kevin general authority to operate his
accounts, and not merely an authority limited to withdrawal forms/notices. He
conduct of Kevin was as agent for him;
(c) Alternatively alleges that the funds deposited into the Term Deposit (and in
earlier term deposit accounts) were transferred
from the Access Account and, by
reason of that fact, Nathan was the legal and beneficial owner of the Term
Deposit when the Fund
was paid into Court;
(d) Alleges in the further alternative, that Kevin held accounts under
Nathan’s membership number on an express trust by reason
of a declaration
of trust in the membership application and the subsequent opening of accounts
under that number.
his closing submissions:
(a) Nathan submitted that Kevin applied for his membership and opened the Access
Account as his agent by reason either of his power
as parent or guardian, or
pursuant to express authority given by Nathan. Nathan claims that, by reason of
those matters, he is the
legal owner of accounts in respect of his membership
(b) Nathan submitted that if Kevin was not, at the time he opened the Access
Account, authorised to act as Nathan’s agent,
Nathan ratified his conduct.
He relied, principally on the Authority Document (the first ratification
argument). Further, Nathan
relied on other conduct as amounting to ratification,
namely the provision of money to Kevin and the discussions concerning his
deposit” (second ratification argument). Kevin claims that
Nathan’s submissions in this regard are not pleaded in Nathan’s
Cross-Claim and he objects to Nathan relying on those matters. In my view, the
first ratification argument is open to Nathan on the
pleading at [18]-[21] of
the Second Cross-Claim. However, the second argument is not open on
Nathan’s pleading – there
is no pleading of any ratification arising
from some ongoing conduct of Nathan as submitted in closing submissions. Nothing
did in the conduct of the hearing amounts to an agreement by him that
Nathan’s case could be advanced beyond his pleaded claim;
(c) Alternatively, Nathan pressed his trust claims.
Kevin’s Claim
his First Cross-Claim, Kevin alleges he entered into an agreement on or about 1
April 2019 with AMB to open an “Investment
Plus Account” and AMB
agreed to hold $675,000 in the account on certain terms. He alleges that after
that time the term deposit
was renewed, including with the provision of further
deposits by him. He says ultimately the sum held (in the Term Deposit) was paid
into Court. In short, Kevin claims he is the contracting party with AMB in
relation to the term deposits, including the Term Deposit.
As a result, Kevin
says he was the legal and beneficial owner of the Fund.
did not plead any alternative claim that, if Nathan was the legal owner of the
chose in action representing the Term Deposit
(and the Access Account), Kevin
remained the beneficial owner by reason of the deposit of money into those
accounts by him. Such
a claim was expressly disavowed on the first day of the
hearing. As a result, Kevin’s claim is singular – that he is
legal owner of the chose in action because he is the contracting party and his
beneficial interest follows that legal interest.
Accordingly, Kevin’s
claim fails unless I find he is the legal owner.
argues that despite the Term Deposit (and all other relevant accounts) being in
Nathan’s name, the accounts were mere
“nominee” accounts. His
use of that term in submissions is not intended to suggest that Nathan held the
accounts on trust
for Kevin. Rather, his use of that term was to argue that the
name of the account did not represent the true contracting party with
– that is, the name did not represent the customer in the banker-customer
relationship.
Consideration
Banker-Customer Relationship
dispute between the Parties concerns the proper administration of the funds paid
into Court by AMB. To determine the proper administration
of the Fund, it is
necessary to determine the Parties’ interests in the Term Deposit prior to
the funds being paid into Court.
The relevant property that was represented by
the Term Deposit was the contractual right that existed against AMB to be repaid
balance in the Term Deposit. A bank account is an inchoate chose in action
consisting “in the contractual right against the
bank, i.e., in a debt,
but a debt fluctuating in amount as moneys might be deposited and
withdrawn.”
Plaintiff appears to submit that the correct characterisation of an equitable
interest in a chose in action represented by a bank
account, is that the
equitable interest is treated by equity as being secured by a charge over the
fund or, more accurately, the
chose in action, against the bank to the extent of
the trust money.
In this case, I
think the position is different, at least with respect to the Term Deposit. The
Term Deposit was a discrete term
deposit. That is, it was not a fluctuating debt
in relation to which money might be deposited and withdrawn but rather a
for the deposit of a certain amount and the repayment of that amount
together with a definite interest amount. In those circumstances,
it seems to me
that a trust can exist over the chose in action represented by the contractual
right arising under the term deposit.
It is not necessary to determine that
question because, in either case, if a party does have a sufficient beneficial
interest to
create an equitable charge or recognition of a trust, he will be
entitled to be paid the fund. As noted earlier, Kevin does not claim
equitable interest independent of his claimed legal interest
central question in these proceedings is the identity of the contracting party
with AMB in relation to the Term Deposit. Allied
to that question is whether, if
the contracting party was Kevin, he held the chose in action on trust for
Nathan. There is no dispute
that it was Kevin who gave AMB the instructions
relating to the opening of the Term Deposit and the initial deposit of $675,000
from the Access Account.
Lordianto v Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police
the Court of Appeal observed at [48] that “[t]he law is settled that the
contract between a customer and a bank is established
at the time that a bank
account is opened, and does not comprise a series of loans from the customer to
the bank each time a deposit
is made.” With respect to term deposits,
however, each term deposit entered by a customer with a bank is, ordinarily, a
contract having specific terms governing matters such as the relevant
interest rate, the term and the consequences on
Further, each term
deposit contract is discharged when the principal and interest is either paid to
the depositor or replaced with
a new term deposit
Identity of contracting Parties
is well-settled that Australian law applies an objective approach to the
construction of contracts. The law does not seek to ascertain
the parties’
subjective understanding of a contractual obligation, but what the contractual
words convey to a reasonable person
in the position of the parties in the
circumstances in which the contract is entered into. Evidence of the
parties’ subjective
intention is usually inadmissible on the question of
construction.
(FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty
the High Court stated the
applicable principle as follows (citations omitted):
[40] This Court, in
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas
, has recently
reaffirmed the principle of objectivity by which the rights and liabilities of
the parties to a contract are determined.
It is not the subjective beliefs or
understandings of the parties about their rights and liabilities that govern
their contractual
relations. What matters is what each party by words and
conduct would have led a reasonable person in the position of the other party
believe. References to the common intention of the parties to a contract are to
be understood as referring to what a reasonable
person would understand by the
language in which the parties have expressed their agreement. The meaning of the
terms of a contractual
document is to be determined by what a reasonable person
would have understood them to mean. That, normally, requires consideration
only of the text, but also of the surrounding circumstances known to the
parties, and the purpose and object of the transaction.
the High Court summarised the core principles of the construction of commercial
contracts as follows in
Electricity Generation Corporation v Woodside
[35] The meaning of the terms of a commercial contract is to be determined by
what a reasonable businessperson would have understood
those terms to mean ...
[that] require[s] consideration of the language used by the parties, the
surrounding circumstances known
to them and the commercial purpose or objects to
be secured by the contract [which] is facilitated by an understanding ‘of
the genesis of the transaction, the background, the context and the market in
which the parties are operating’...unless a contrary
intention is
indicated, a court is entitled to approach the task of giving a commercial
contract a businesslike interpretation on
the assumption that the parties
intended to produce a commercial result. A commercial contract is to be
construed so as to avoid
it ‘making commercial nonsense or working
commercial inconvenience’.
the parties to a contract are identified according to the objective theory of
contract. As the Court of Appeal said in
Mills v Walsh
this “involves ascertaining the intention of the parties from their
communications and the circumstances in their mutual knowledge,
including their
evident commercial aims and expectations; their subjective beliefs and
intentions are irrelevant, save insofar as
they are manifest and
respect to the use of post-contractual conduct of the parties, the Court of
observed that such post-contractual conduct may more
readily be resorted to in identifying parties to a contract than for the purpose
of construing contractual
submitted that the name of an account is prima facie evidence that the named
customer is a party to the banker-customer contract,
and therefore the legal
owner of the chose in action. Nathan submitted that there is a rebuttable
presumption to this effect and
that the presumption, here, shifts both the
evidential and legal burden upon Kevin to rebut the presumption. In this regard,
Winau Aust Pty Ltd v LCC Property Development Pty Ltd
In particular, he relied on the following part of Kunc J’s
[114] Turning to the legal nature of a bank account, the Court accepts the
Registrar Generals submissions set out in paragraphs [96]
to [99] above. It is
something of a legal misnomer to speak of owning a bank account because a bank
account is not a type of property.
A bank account is, in its basic form, a
series of entries in the books of account of a bank recording credits and debits
the account of a customer in accordance with the terms of the
banker-customer contract. While the name of the account may include
the name of
the customer, that is not conclusive, but will be prima facie, evidence that the
named customer is a party to the banker-customer
contract. Similarly, the
description of an account as being X in trust for Y is not conclusive, but will
be prima facie, evidence
of the existence of a trust or that X is the trustee.
However, such evidence can be rebutted. Just because an account is opened in
someone’s name does not necessarily mean that in law it is their bank
account or that they are legally entitled to be paid
the funds in that account
where there is a credit balance.
[115] In this case the banker-customer contract which gave rise to the
Westpac Bank Account was not between 183 Eastwood and Westpac
because Mr Chan
had neither actual nor ostensible authority to enter into such a contract by
opening an account in 183 Eastwoods
name. Although not strictly relevant to this
part of the analysis, it can be noted that even as between Westpac and 183
Westpac would not have been able to rely on the publicly available
information that Mr Chan was a director of 183 Eastwood for the
identified in paragraph [113] above.
[116] I accept the Registrar Generals submission that this case is on all
fours with two English Court of Appeal cases where moneys
were paid into a bank
account set up by a fraudster in the name of a company:
Midland Bank Ltd
(1925) 41 TLR 402
Stoney Stanton
Supplies (Coventry) Ltd v Midland Bank Ltd
[1966] 2 Lloyd Rep 373. The
conclusion of Danckwerts LJ in the latter case (at 385) applies equally to the
case at bar: the moneys
which were paid into the Bank were not the
company’s moneys and there was never any relationship of customer and
regard to those moneys between the plaintiff company and the defendant
do not accept Nathan’s submissions in this regard. I do not read Kunc
J’s judgment in
as suggesting that any legal or evidentiary
presumption, in the true sense, arises by virtue of the name of a bank account.
in my view, Kunc J was saying that, absent any other evidence, the name
of an account will indicate the legal owner of the chose
in action. If, however,
there is other evidence, all the relevant evidence is to be weighed without the
application of a presumption
that imposes any onus on a party.
Brun-Smits v Bank of Queensland Limited
Flick J noted that irrespective of the name in which an account is opened, any
question as to the persons entitled to the monies
deposited in the account and
entitled to draw upon those monies is to be determined as a matter of
this case, where two Parties claim legal ownership of the relevant chose in
action, and AMB has been granted relief by way of interpleader,
carries an onus to establish to the satisfaction of the Court that the due
administration of the Fund requires it to be
paid to him.
considering the position with respect to the Term Deposit, it is relevant to
consider the legal and beneficial interests in the
Access Account given that the
funds deposited into the Term Deposit were sourced from the Access Account and
one of the ways in which
Nathan puts his claim relied on that
Parental Power and the Access Account
August 1989, Nathan was 13 years old. He was, at law, a minor. Kevin was his
father. Although Nathan’s parents were divorced
by that time, the only
material before the Court relating to the terms of the divorce related to
property and maintenance issues.
Nathan continued to live with his mother after
the divorce. There is no evidence of any Court order which limited Kevin’s
as a parent of Nathan. Neither Izabela nor Kevin in their evidence
suggested any such limitation.
common law, a parent has the power to administer their child’s
In my view, that
includes the power to open a bank account for and on behalf of the child and in
the child’s name to facilitate
that administration. Unless the objective
circumstances indicate otherwise, and subject to any statutory modification of
law, in so acting, the parent creates a banker-customer relationship
between the child and the bank. The parent’s power is
limited because it
may be exercised only for the benefit of the child.
this case, in 1989, Kevin, as Nathan’s father exercised this power in two
important ways:
(a) First, he applied, for and on behalf of Nathan, for Nathan to become a
member of ADCU;
(b) Secondly, he instructed ADCU to open an account in Nathan’s name,
being the Access Account.
Uttamchandani v Central Bank of India
“Uttamchandani
the Court of Appeal of England and Wales said:
The customer is, prima facie, the person in whose name the account is
held. Take by way of example the case of a father with an account
bank, who arranges for an account to be opened in the name of his
son. Suppose he pays in the opening credit from his own account
regular monthly transfers thereafter. The customer is the son, and not the
father. The son is entitled to assume that so
long as his account
is in credit his cheques will be met. That is an implied term of the
relationship between the son and the bank.
Suppose now that the father's
account is overdrawn. It would be quite wrong that the son should find his
cheques dishonoured, and
his credit balance extinguished, because of some
alleged right of set-off on the part of the bank.
passage was cited with apparent approval in
Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency v
Dresdner Bank AG
Saudi Arabian Monetary
I consider,
however, in both decisions the passage referred to above was
. Nevertheless in
Uttamchandani
, it was considered
to the statement of Kunc J in
, I do not understand the passage in
Uttamchandani
to be suggesting that a legal presumption arises from the
name of an account. Nevertheless, absent an objective basis grounded in
totality of the evidence which indicates that an account opened by a father in a
child’s name is not the account of the
child, the Court proceeds on the
basis that, at common law, a banker-customer relationship is created between the
child and the bank,
though at common law it is voidable by the child.
this case, I consider the following objective facts are relevant in determining
the identity of the customer with respect to the
Access Account:
(a) As noted earlier, the 1989 Application had recorded in the box headed
“Surname”, the name “Pike” and
beside it an initial
“N”. In the box headed “Christian Names”, the words
“Kevin Pike in trust for Nathan
Pike” were recorded. In the box
headed “Occupation”, the word “child” was recorded. The
address recorded
in the application was Kevin’s address in Potts Point,
New South Wales. The 1989 Application was an application for membership
(together with an application to purchase a share in ADCU). However, it is clear
that membership alone had no particular
value other than the ability, that came
with membership, to access and operate facilities provided by ADCU (and
subsequently AMB),
including an operating account (such as the Access Account)
and term deposits offered by ADCU. Those facilities were not available
non-members. Pursuant to the 1989 Application, ADCU issued Nathan’s
membership number and that was a different number to
Kevin’s member
(b) Subsequent to the 1989 Application and before the Authority Document was
executed, the Access Account was opened. The account
was opened in
Nathan’s name and was associated with Nathan’s membership number,
not Kevin’s number. The passbook
contained the words “Kevin to
(c) The Authority Document was signed on 26 October 1990. I have found that both
Nathan and Kevin signed the document. Relevantly,
Kevin signed the document as
“agent”, which, in the context of the document, identifies the
person to whom authority
is given. The authority, however, is limited. It is an
authority to “sign on my [Nathan’s] behalf withdrawal forms/notices
on my account number [xxx671]. Specimen signatures appears hereunder”.
Nathan has submitted that the authority granted by the
Authority Document itself
included an authority to enter term deposits. I reject that submission. The
document identifies its scope.
Further the fact that specimen signatures are
referred to supports the proposition that the authority given by the Authority
strictly, was directed to withdrawals. It is true, that as matter of
practice, ADCU and then AMB appeared to treat the authority
as extending beyond
the expressed limits. It is to be remembered that the Authority Document is
addressed to ADCU – that is,
it is a document that gives notice to ADCU to
act on the instructions of Kevin on the terms of the Authority Document.
of how ADCU (and then AMB) treated the Authority Document, the
authority Nathan gave pursuant to the Authority Document itself was
as expressed
on the Authority Document. Clearly, no authority is required for deposits in an
operating account. However, in my view,
before a conclusion could be reached
that the Authority Document itself included an authority relating to the opening
of term deposit
contracts, clearer wording to that effect is required. The
relevance of the fact that ADCU, AMB, Kevin, and Nathan treated the Authority
Document as providing authority extending beyond the expressed limits will be
dealt with later in the judgment;
(d) Kevin gave instructions to ADCU (and then AMB) for the opening of terms
deposits from time to time and for the application of
the matured funds with
those term deposits being in Nathan’s name;
(e) On the evidence before the Court, the engagement between Kevin and ADCU (and
then AMB) did not materially change until 2022 at
which point the dispute
between Kevin, Nathan, and AMB as to the ownership of the relevant account(s)
noted in paragraph [
] above, the banker-customer relationship arises at
the time the relevant account is opened. Accordingly, to determine the identity
of the customer in relation to the Access Account, it is necessary to consider
the facts at that point in time and determine, objectively,
based on those
facts, the identity of the customer. Kevin’s subjective intention or
thoughts are not relevant unless communicated
to ADCU. There is no evidence of
the content of any communication at that time in relation to the Access Account
other than what
can be gleaned from the contemporaneous document. In my view,
each document points to Nathan being the relevant customer. That is
(a) The 1989 Application is clearly not an application for membership in ADCU
for Kevin in his personal capacity. Kevin was already
a member of ADCU. The two
reasonable objective assessments of the application are that Kevin:
(i) Applied for membership for Nathan; or
(ii) Applied for membership as trustee for Nathan (those express words appear on
the application);
(b) The counter-party to the banker-customer relationship, ADCU, issued a new
member number pursuant to the 1989 Application and
did not include Nathan as
being subsumed in Kevin’s existing membership;
(c) The Access Account, when opened, was opened in Nathan’s name, and was
associated by ADCU with Nathan’ s membership;
(d) The initial passbook for the account recorded Nathan as the owner and
contained the words “Kevin to
Those words
would have been entirely unnecessary if the customer was Kevin;
(e) Other than the fact that Kevin signed the 1989 Application, gave
instructions to ADCU in relation to the opening of the Access
Account, and
deposited the initial amount to open the account, there is no contemporaneous
fact (or document) suggesting he was the
relevant customer. The fact that the
address on the 1989 Application (and associated to the membership) is
Kevin’s address
and the fact that he had custody of the passbook, is
equivocal. At the time of the 1989 Application and opening of the Access
Nathan was a minor and Kevin, his father, was the person dealing with
the ADCU (as recorded by the notation “Kevin to operate”)
would not be unexpected that Kevin’s address would be associated with the
membership and that Kevin would have custody
of the passbook regardless of
whether Nathan was the customer. I do not consider those matters, objectively,
pointing one way or
my view, Nathan was, at all times, the customer who was the legal owner of the
inchoate chose in action in relation to the Access
Account. His membership in
ADCU, and his Access Account, were established for him by Kevin, his father.
However, Nathan was the legal
owner of the chose in action. Although the words
“Kevin Pike in trust for Nathan Pike” appear on the 1989
Application,
and point to the existence of a trust, in my view, the objective
matters referred to above favour a conclusion that Nathan was the
legal owner of
the inchoate chose in action, rather than Kevin being the legal owner but
holding that legal ownership on trust for
Nathan. Further, there was no
reference to any trust in any of the account names and if Kevin was the legal
owner of the account,
the Authority Document would not have been required.
fact that Nathan was the legal owner of the chose in action relating to the
Access Account is significant in the context of the
way each party advanced his
case. As noted earlier, Kevin’s case is based on the allegation that he
was the legal owner of
the Term Deposit (and to the extent relevant, the Access
Account) but his claim for a beneficial interest arises only by reason of
alleged legal ownership. Accordingly, on the issues joined by the parties, the
finding that Nathan was, at all times, the legal
owner of the chose in action
relating to the Access Account carries with it, necessarily, that Nathan was
also the beneficial owner
of that chose in action. As a result, Nathan was the
legal and beneficial owner of the debt owed by ADCU, and subsequently AMB, in
the amount standing at any particular time in the Access Account.
records in evidence concerning term deposits in Nathan’s name do not
pre-date 2011. However, without detailing each transaction,
the following
relevant matters emerge from the documentary record:
(a) On 20 June 2012, the Access Account was credited $340,000 derived from the
maturity of a term deposit and, on 22 June 2012, the
Access Account was debited
$370,000 in acquisition of a new term deposit;
(b) On 22 February 2013, $370,000 was credited to the Access Account derived
from a term deposit and, on 27 February, $405,000 was
debited in acquisition of
a term deposit;
(c) On 23 October 2013, $405,000 was credited to the Access Account derived from
a term deposit and, on the same day, $442,000 was
debited in acquisition of a
term deposit;
(d) This pattern continued each year between 2013 and 2018. On 28 March 2018,
$620,000 was credited to the Access Account derived
from a term deposit and on
28 March 2018, $650,000 was debited in acquisition of a term deposit. The amount
of $650,000 was rolled
over into a new term deposit after being credited and
debited on the same day (28 September 2018) on the Access Account;
(e) Importantly, on 28 March 2019, $650,000 was credited to the Access Account
from the term deposit referred to in paragraph [
] above, and on the
same date $675,000 was debited in acquisition of the Term Deposit (given account
number 0095) which then was rolled
over until its funds were ultimately paid
into Court.
all times (other than a period of about one year to which I refer in paragraph
] above) the
Access Account was in Nathan’s name. No material change occurred in that
account with respect to the identity of
the customer. At all times he was
recorded as “owner” of the Access Account.
my view, the consequence of the above matters is that the funds used to acquire
the Term Deposit were funds that were legally and
beneficially owned by Nathan.
the Court of Appeal, in
principles concerning resulting trusts. Kirk JA (with whom Mitchelmore AJ
agreed) said (some citations omitted):
[37] ...the presumption is that the person who (relevantly) pays the purchase
funds for a property intended that the property be
held on trust for them to the
proportionate extent of their contribution:
[12]-[16], [44], [51], [104]-[111]. Where it is applicable the presumption
operates in effect as an onus of proof, and only has
work to do insofar as the
evidence of actual (objectively ascertained) intention to create a trust or not
is truly equivocal: ibid
at [13], [64]-[67], and [102]-[110]. Gordon and
Edelman JJ described the
presumption as “weak” in
[98]). In the same case Gageler J said:
[67] ... the presumption ... [is] of practical significance only in rare
cases where the totality of the evidence is incapable of
supporting the drawing
of an inference, one way or the other, on the balance of probabilities about
what contributors and purchasers
actually intended when they participated in the
purchase transaction.
[38] A presumptive resulting trust can thus be understood as an express
trust established by way of a particular evidentiary route
in particular
circumstances. The focus is on the manifest intentions of those parties who are
relevant to determination of whether
or not a trust was intended to be
created. That will involve consideration of the intention of the
person providing the funds:
Nelson v Nelson
(1995) 184 CLR 538
at 547 and 586;
[1995] HCA 25
as explained below, the relevant intention is to be determined objectively at
the time that the asserted trust was created.
In this regard, Gordon and Edelman
v Commissioner of Taxation
that ‘[a]part from
admissions against interest ... [s]ubsequent events and conduct are otherwise
not admissible.’
that Nathan was the legal and beneficial owner of the chose in action relating
to the Access Account, he was, at law, the provider
of the funds for the purpose
of the acquisition of the Term Deposit. Accordingly, it is his intention at that
time that is relevant.
There is no evidence, nor was it suggested or argued by
Kevin that Nathan gifted Kevin those funds and there is no basis upon which
Court could draw such an inference. There is no allegation by Kevin that Nathan
agreed that Kevin could use the funds in the
Access Account to acquire a term
deposit in his own beneficial interest. To the extent that Kevin and Nathan
spoke about accounts
at ADCU (and AMB), those accounts were described between
them as Nathan’s accounts (see for example, the email referred to
paragraph [
above). There is no objective evidence supporting an inference that Nathan
intended that his funds be used for the purchase of
a term deposit such that he
would not retain the beneficial interest in those funds. To the contrary, the
Authority Document by which
Kevin was given authority to make withdrawals on the
Access Account owned by Nathan is an objective matter from which the Court can
infer, absent contrary evidence, that Kevin’s authority was to be used in
the interests of Nathan. It is not suggested by Kevin
that the Authority
Document entitled him, as agent, to apply Nathan’s money for his own
Accordingly,
even if it were the case that Kevin was the contracting party for the Term
Deposit, he obtained the funds to acquire
that term deposit from Nathan’s
Access Account in the circumstances referred to above. In those circumstances,
even if Kevin
was the legal owner of the chose in action relating to the Term
Deposit, I readily draw an inference that he held that chose in action
for Nathan. I do not consider that there is any cogent evidence that Kevin
arranged the Term Deposit in his own interest
rather than Nathan’s.
and in any event, the presumption of a resulting trust in such circumstances, as
explained in
provides a further evidentiary route by which
Nathan’s intention (Nathan being the provider of the funds) can be
determined.
The presumption (or onus as described in
) is capable
of being rebutted by Kevin.
However, considering the matters set out in [
], in my view, there
is insufficient evidence to rebut the presumption. There is no evidence
supporting the proposition that Nathan
intended the money in the Access Account
to be used to acquire term deposits which he would not beneficially
the result, regardless of the legal owner of the chose in action concerning the
Term Deposit, Nathan is the beneficial owner of
the chose in action and as such
is entitled to be paid the money paid into Court by AMB.
I am wrong about parental power to open an account in the name of a minor child
as set out above, then I consider that Nathan nevertheless
succeeds in his claim
on either of the following alternate bases advanced by him relating to
Agency and the Access Account
set out in paragraphs [
] above, Kevin signed the 1989 Application on behalf
of Nathan. Nathan became a member of ADCU (and subsequently AMB) by reason of
the 1989 Application. Kevin then, pursuant to that membership, opened on behalf
of Nathan, the Access Account.
Kevin had parental authority to do so, or was otherwise authorised by Nathan (or
became authorised by ratification), he was
not acting as Nathan’s agent,
although he acted ostensibly on Nathan’s behalf. The objective matters
referred to in paragraphs
] above establish that he did not purport to act
personally.
Tonna v Mendonca
the Court of Appeal described the two essential elements of any agency
agreement, in the following way (citations omitted):
...first, the
(or assent) of both principal and
, the authority given to the agent by the principal
to act on the principal’s behalf.... (Arguably, there is a third element
being a principal’s control over the agent’s actions; however, in
Australian law, the alleged control element is “neither
crucial to agency
nor is it independent of the authority element” ...
Law of Agency
states that “consent (or assent) requires some
acceptance by the agent of a mandate, whether or not formal or contractual,
the principal”. The principal “must intend that the agent will act
for him or her and the agent must intend to accept
the authority and act on
it”. An intention to create an agency relationship “may be
manifested simply by placing another
in a situation in which, according to the
ordinary rules of law, or according to the ordinary usages of mankind, that
other is understood
to represent and act for the person who has so placed
National Australia Bank Ltd v
the Court of Appeal
(Sackville AJA, McFarlan JA and White J agreeing) identified the following broad
principles concerning agency
and ratification:
[124] The operation of the doctrine of ratification was explained by Isaacs J
Davison v Vickery’s Motors Ltd (In Liq)
as follows:
(1) The general rule is that no person can become a party to a bilateral
contract unless he enters into it personally or by an authorized agent.
(2) An exception is recognized where a person ratifies an agreement made
another as for him but without his antecedent authority.
(3) On ratification, and not before, the agreement is as a general rule
deemed by a fiction to have been made by his antecedent authority to the person
actually making it.
Bennett v Strauss
Court of Appeal said the following with respect to the ratification of an
unauthorised act (citations omitted):
[47] In the first place, ratification causes a relationship of principal and
agent to come into existence retrospectively. Thus,
where a person (A) has acted
without the authority of another person (P) in making a contract on their behalf
with a counterparty
(C), that other person (P) may, by subsequent conduct, cause
the first person (A) to be regarded as having been his or her agent
contract was made, even though a relationship of principal and agent did not
exist at that past time.
[48] Where such a counterparty (C) seeks to enforce such a contract against the
supposed principal (P), it is essential that the
acts of the actor (A) in truth
amounted to the immediate making of a contract. Only if the counterparty (C)
establishes that the
acts of the actor (A) were of that quality is there any
question of the supposed principal (P) being fixed with contractual liability
through ratification.
[49] The counterparty (C) must next establish that the person who acted (A) did
not “assume” or “profess”
or “purport” to
act in his or her own right and for his or her own benefit, but rather
“assumed” or “professed”
or “purported” to
act for the supposed principal (P). That supposed principal will usually be an
ascertained person but
it may not be necessary for the person’s precise
identity to be known at the time of the contract.
[50] There can be no ratification by an undisclosed principal, that is, where
the actor (A) appears to be contracting for themself
and the counterparty (C)
has no notice that the actor is acting in a representative capacity. This was
authoritatively established
[51]: Only if all these conditions are satisfied in relation to the course of
conduct between the actor (A) and the counterparty
(C) does any question arise
as to whether subsequent conduct of the supposed principal (P) amounted to
ratification causing, first,
the actor (A) to be seen retrospectively as the
agent of the supposed principal (P) (who, in turn, comes to be seen
retrospectively
as the principal for whom the actor acted) and, secondly, the
rights and liabilities under the contract made between the actor (A)
counterparty (C) to be seen retrospectively as rights and liabilities as between
the counterparty (C) and the now recognised
principal (P).
conduct of a principal amounts to ratification is a question of fact. The
conduct, however, must be unequivocal. Acceptance
of the benefit of the
unauthorised act of the agent with knowledge that the benefit flows from that
act will ordinarily suffice.
Suing on a transaction brought about by an agent acting beyond authority will
also ordinarily mean ratification of the unauthorised
transaction.
It is possible that
a principal’s failure to act, or his or her mere silence, may constitute
ratification of the unauthorised
acts of the putative agent. The authorities
recognise that in some circumstances, ratification can be inferred from silence
or acquiescence.
submitted that he appointed Kevin as his agent when he applied for membership
for him at ADCU and opened the Access Account.
Alternatively, he submitted that
if Kevin was not at law authorised at those times as his agent, he subsequently
ratified that conduct.
relied on the following for his submission that Kevin was his agent in relation
to the 1989 Application and opening of the
Access Account:
(a) Kevin’s position as his father;
(b) Nathan’s evidence that his father spoke to him and proposed opening an
account at ACDU for him and his agreement to that
(c) Nathan’s evidence that he collected money in his piggy bank and gave
it to Kevin to bank in an account for Nathan.
relied on the first two matters for his submission that he gave express
authority and relied on the third matter (on its own
or together with the second
matter) to submit that the Court should be satisfied that authority can be
implied or inferred. I consider
that Nathan’s claim that Kevin was his
agent, on the basis of the first two matters, referred to above at paragraphs
] , is within his
pleaded claim at paragraphs [18]-[20] of Nathan’s Cross-Claim.
gave evidence that sometime after Kevin moved to Sydney, they had a conversation
in which Kevin suggested that he would be
better off having his money deposited
at ADCU because it paid a higher interest rate and it would be easier for Kevin
to look after
it for Nathan. Nathan’s evidence is that he agreed. Whilst
Nathan does not put a date on that conversation, I infer that it
was reasonably
proximate to the date on which the Kevin signed Nathan’s membership
application and opened the Access Account.
At that time, Nathan was 13 years
old. Kevin denies that he had a conversation with Nathan to this effect.
the time, there was an account in Nathan’s name at the CBA. There is no
dispute between the parties that the amount in the
CBA account was transferred
to the Access Account. I have earlier rejected Kevin’s evidence in
relation to the CBA account
insofar as he claims he did not mention it to Nathan
Further, I have rejected Kevin’s evidence generally that he did not
discuss bank accounts in Nathan’s name with
] above). Nathan was
cross-examined on the conversation referred to in [
] above to the effect
that he did not have a clear recollection of such a conversation, but it was not
put to him that it did not
occur. I considered that Nathan was being truthful
when he stated that although he cannot recall the precise words used, the effect
of the conversation was as he stated. His evidence, in my view, has a ring of
truth to it. That is, a father suggesting to his son
where he should have a bank
account and that the father would be able to look after it for him. I accept
Nathan’s evidence
in this regard. For the reasons set out in paragraphs
] above, I prefer and
accept the evidence of Nathan in relation to this conversation.
the time of the conversation concerning the moving of Nathan’s account
from CBA to ADCU, there was no suggestion that Nathan
himself would cause that
transfer. Accordingly, his agreement to his father’s suggestion, must,
objectively, be understood
as Nathan giving his father express authority to take
the steps required to achieve that transfer. In light of the conversation
to in paragraph [
] above, and his position as Nathan’s father,
Kevin clearly accepted that authorisation.
Accordingly,
I find that Kevin was acting as Nathan’s express agent when he obtained
membership at ADCU pursuant to the 1989
Application and when he instructed ADCU
to open the Access Account in Nathan’s name.
Minors (Property and Contract) Act
(NSW) governs the binding
nature of a civil act carried out by a minor. Relevantly it provides the
(a) A civil act for the purposes of the Act, includes ‘any act relating to
contractual or proprietary rights or obligation
or to any chose in
(b) Where a minor participates in a civil act, the civil act is not binding on
the minor except as provided by the
(c) Where a minor participates in a civil act and his or her participation is
for his or her benefit at the time of his or her participation,
the civil act is
presumptively binding on the
(d) That the Act does not make presumptively binding on a minor a civil act in
which the minor participates, or appears to participate,
while lacking, by
reason of youth, the understanding necessary for his or her participation in the
(e) A person under twenty-one years may appoint an agent, and may, by that
agent, participate in any civil act. Any civil act participated
by a minor by an
agent has no greater validity or effect as against the minor than it would have
if done by the minor without an
was 13 years at the time of the appointment of Kevin as his agent in the manner
described above. He had the power to appoint
Kevin as his agent by reason of s
Minors (Property and Contract) Act
. Kevin’s signing of
the 1989 Application to obtain membership in ADCU was a civil act, within the
meaning of s 6, as it related
to contractual rights arising from membership, and
his act in opening the Access Account plainly related to a chose in action. So
too was Nathan’s appointment of Kevin as his agent for the same reasons.
Each act of Kevin in this regard was for the benefit
of Nathan in that it was
conducted to facilitate the transfer of funds from the CBA account to ADCU and
also conducted to facilitate
a bank account for Nathan perceived to be better
for Nathan (as this was the import of the conversation between Nathan and
Similarly, Nathan’s act of appointing Kevin as his agent was for
his own benefit for the same reasons. Accordingly, by reason
of the combination
of ss 46 and 19, Kevin’s acts as agent in signing the 1989 Application and
in opening the Access Account
are presumptively binding on Nathan. There is no
basis, in the evidence, to find that Nathan, at 13 years of age, lacked the
understanding to participate in the act of agreeing to have Kevin open
an account for him at ADCU.
a result, Nathan was and is the legal owner of the Access Account. I repeat, on
this analysis, the reasoning above in [
] such that, again, regardless of who is the legal
owner of the chose in action represented by the Term Deposit, Nathan is the
owner and entitled to be paid out the money held by the
Ratification
contrary, to my findings, Kevin was not authorised as Nathan’s agent to
open the Access Account at the time he opened it,
Nathan says that he
subsequently ratified Kevin’s conduct. In paragraph [
] above, I set out
my finding that Nathan’s claim that the Authority Document was
ratification of Kevin’s conduct is
within the bounds of his pleaded
the time of the Authority Document, Nathan was 14 years of age. As reflected
earlier, Nathan’s evidence is that whilst he
could not recall the precise
document he signed, he recalled signing a document to give his father authority
to operate his bank
account. I have accepted his evidence. Regardless of the
scope of the authority itself, the conduct of Nathan in giving his father
authority over “his bank account” is clear and unequivocal conduct
amounting to approval of the opening of the account,
and an adoption of the
account. The conduct of Nathan can only be explained as a ratification of
Kevin’s conduct in applying
for membership for Nathan at ADCU and opening
the Access Account.
have earlier found that Kevin did not open the Access Account in his own
interests. That is, he was opening it on behalf of Nathan
(see paragraphs
[113-114], [135]-[138] above). Kevin’s conduct in this regard was
“done for and in the name of the supposed
act of signing the Authority Document is a civil act for the purposes of the
Minors (Property and Contract) Act 1970
because it relates to contractual
rights concerning the Access Account and, at a minimum, relates to the chose in
action constituting
the right of the account holder against ADCU. Moreover, if
Nathan’s act is understood as his ratification of Kevin’s
opening the Access Account, similarly, that act is a civil act for the same
Nathan could not recall the precise document he signed, he did know, at the
time, the purpose of the document – namely,
to allow his father to operate
what he understood was his bank account. As he said, he trusted his father and
was, plainly, happy
to sign such a document. I have no proper basis to find that
at age 14, Nathan, by reason of his youth, did not have the necessary
understanding for his participation in the civil act of signing a document to
give his father authority to conduct certain acts on
what he understood was his
bank account or to adopt the existence of that account.
act in signing the Authority Document was for his benefit at the time as it gave
authorisation to his father to deal
with his bank account (whatever the limits
of the authority). He trusted his father and wanted his father to manage his
Objectively, Nathan’s act was to his benefit because it
facilitated the operation of his bank account by someone he trusted,
namely, his
Accordingly,
by reason of the above, pursuant to s 19 of the
Minors (Property and
Contract) Act
, Nathan’s civil acts described above are presumptively
binding on him. As a result, if, contrary to my reasoning above, Kevin
authorised when opening the Access Account, Nathan ratified that conduct by the
Authority Document with the consequence that
Kevin is treated in law as having
been retrospectively authorised. Accordingly, Nathan is the legal owner of the
chose in action
constituted by the Access Account.
repeat, on this analysis, my reasoning in paragraphs [
] such that, again,
regardless of who is the legal owner of the chose in action represented by the
Term Deposit, Nathan is the beneficial
owner and entitled to be paid out the
money held by the Court.
to the above reasons, by Nathan bringing this claim, and claiming in his
Cross-Claim that he was the “owner”
of the Access Account, he has
also by that conduct, as an adult, ratified Kevin’s acts in obtaining
membership for him and
opening the Access Account for
Post-contractual conduct
noted earlier, reliance upon post-contractual conduct is more readily available
in the determination of the identify of contracting
parties. I have made my
findings without the need to resort to post-contractual conduct.
Nevertheless,
there are two acts carried out by Kevin after the opening of the Access Account
(and several term deposits) that support
the finding that he was not a party to
the contract relating to the Access Account.
Kevin’s failure to include any account in Nathan’s name in his
Centrelink application referred to in paragraph
] above. As
reflected above, Kevin’s explanation for his failure shifted. I was not
impressed with his evidence in this regard,
and I consider he prevaricated. I
had the distinct impression that his initial response that he did not include
the accounts because
he was “managing them” and the “money was
not for [me] at that stage” is closer to the truth – that
not regard the accounts as “his” because they were in the name of
Nathan and he was only managing them. If
he was the true owner of the accounts
(and in truth the contracting party), I do not accept that he thought that he
did not need
to include those accounts in the Centrelink application. In my
view, he did not include those accounts because he did not consider
them as his
accounts (even if he considered the money deposits, in lay terms, as his because
they emanated from him).
the fact that subsequently to opening the Access Account, he did not include the
interest earned on any account in Nathan’s
name on his own tax returns. I
infer this was the case because in his evidence, he said that, with respect to
the payment of tax,
he never informed the Australian Taxation Office that the
accounts in Nathan’s name belonged to him. He said that was so because
was managing the account and that “it didn’t belong to me”. He
caused a tax file number to be issued for Nathan
and gave that number to ADCU
and AMB. Kevin’s conduct in this regard is entirely consistent with Kevin
not being the contracting
party with respect to the Access Account and the term
deposits in Nathan’s name.
The Term Deposit
Kevin and Nathan claim legal ownership of the chose in action represented by the
Term Deposit. I now address that issue.
have found that Nathan was, at all times, the legal owner of the chose in action
represented by the Access Account. I have found
that Nathan signed the Authority
of the express limits of the Authority Document itself, it is beyond question
that prior to the opening of the Term Deposit,
ADCU and AMB permitted Kevin to
draw on the Access Account and open term deposits in Nathan’s name with
the drawn funds. I
infer it did so pursuant to the Authority Document because,
as noted earlier, in 2022, it informed Kevin that he had been removed
authority on the Term Deposit but not the Access Account – there is no
other document provided to ADCU/AMB by which he
was given any authority.
is important to recall that the Authority Document was a document signed by
Nathan and addressed to ADCU. That is, it was a document
informing ADCU that
Nathan had authorised Kevin to take the steps set out in the document and for
ADCU to act upon that notification.
as between Nathan and Kevin, the scope of the agency is not limited by reference
to the Authority Document alone. I have
accepted Nathan’s evidence that he
agreed with Kevin’s proposal that he would be better off having his money
at the ADCU because it paid a higher interest rate
would be easier for Kevin
to look after it for Nathan
(see paragraphs [
conversation between Nathan and Kevin occurred in a context where:
(a) They were father and son; and
(b) At the time when Kevin had already opened an account for Nathan at CBA and
was managing that account.
the terms of the conversation I have accepted, Nathan was plainly agreeing to
have Kevin “look after” Nathan’s
money once an account was
opened at ADCU.
my view, the following matters support a conclusion that Kevin was
Nathan’s agent, not only in relation to the opening of
the Access Account
(as I have found above), but more broadly with respect to accounts opened for
him by Kevin with ADCU (and later
AMB), including the opening of the Term
(a) The terms of the conversation;
(b) The context of the conversation as identified in paragraph [
(c) The subsequent Authority Document which, despite its terms, Nathan
understood it to give Kevin “power over his account”.
it is true that the Term Deposit was opened approximately 30 years after the
1989 Application, the conversation and the Authority
Document, there is no
evidence of any change of position as between Kevin and Nathan prior to the
opening of the Term Deposit.
agency referred to above is sufficient to underpin a finding that Nathan was the
legal owner of the chose in action represented
by the Term Deposit. I repeat my
findings in relation to the
Minors (Property and Contracts) Act
in paragraph [
accept that the following objective facts may support the proposition that Kevin
was the contracting party in his own right in relation
to the Term
(a) He was the person who instructed the bank to open that account;
(b) The account statement in relation to the Term Deposit was addressed to
Nathan but at Kevin’s address;
(c) Nathan’s membership address was Kevin’s address;
(d) Kevin had historically, alone, dealt with ADCU and AMB and had possession
originally of the relevant passbooks and subsequently
internet banking access.
in my view, notwithstanding those matters, the following objective matters and
surrounding circumstances point to Nathan
being the legal owner of the chose in
action relating to the Term Deposit:
(a) Prior to the Term Deposit being opened, Nathan was the legal owner of the
Access Account;
(b) At all times prior to the opening of the Term Deposit, Nathan was the named
owner of the Access Account;
(c) ADCU required the Authority Document, and it was signed by Nathan;
(d) ADCU and AMB, at all times prior to the opening of the Term Deposit,
permitted Kevin to draw funds from the Access Account and
utilise those funds in
the opening of term deposits – however, those term deposits were in
Nathan’s name;
(e) The Access Account and all prior term deposits in Nathan’s name were
associated, on ADCU and AMB statements, with Nathan’s
membership, not
Kevin’s membership.
(f) The Term Deposit itself was in Nathan’s name.
I do not regard
Uttamchandani
as identifying a legal or
evidentiary presumption that the named person on an account is the owner of the
account, I do accept that
the naming of an account is prima facie evidence that
the “named customer is a party to the banker-customer
my view, the matters referred to in paragraph [
] above, separately
and in addition to, the matters referred to in paragraph [
] above, establish
that Nathan was the legal owner of the chose in action represented by the Term
conduct of Kevin referred to in paragraph [
] above supports this finding.
the absence of any equitable claim being brought by Kevin that is divorced from
the legal title, I find that Nathan was both the
legal and beneficial owner of
the chose in action represented by the Term Deposit.
Nathan also puts his claim, in the alternative, on the basis that he is the
beneficial owner of the chose in action represented
by the Term Deposit on the
basis of an express trust arising from the 1989 Application. Given my
conclusions set out above, Nathan’s
claim in this regard does not arise.
However, if contrary to my findings, Kevin was in fact the legal owner of the
chose in action
represented by the Term Deposit, Nathan’s express trust
claim would arise. I now consider that claim on that assumption.
have also earlier determined that although 1989 Application contained the words
“Kevin Pike in trust for Nathan Pike”,
the objective matters to
which I have referred in paragraphs [112-
] above, favoured a finding that Nathan was the legal
owner of the relevant chose in action, rather than beneficial owner pursuant
a declaration of trust. My analysis below assumes that view was not
Irwin v Pamplin (No
at [302], Henry J
summarised the principles for the creation of a trust as follows (citations
1. in order to constitute a trust, there are three critical requirements,
certainty of intention, certainty of subject matter, and certainty
of object or beneficiary;
2. an intention to create a trust may be express and in writing, but
also be inferred from the terms of conversations, conduct or the surrounding
circumstances;
3. in order to infer intention, the Court looks to the
nature of the
transaction and the whole of the circumstances attending the
relationship between the parties and known to them; and
4. a court may more readily find an informal oral declaration of trust
passed an equitable interest to a beneficiary when it is “dealing with
simple people, unaware of the subtleties of equity”.
the majority noted that (citations omitted):
[35] The intention to create a trust is ascertained objectively; it is not
necessary that the settlor subjectively appreciates that
the arrangements will
have the equitable effect of creating a trust so long as they hold the requisite
intention...These matters
are to be established on the balance of probabilities
in the usual manner. A previous reluctance to draw an inference that a trust
intended no longer applies ...
I have noted earlier:
(a) Kevin did not sign the 1989 Application for his own benefit. That is, he was
seeking a membership in the interests of Nathan;
(b) The 1989 Application expressly recorded, against the section relating to
“Christian name”, “Kevin in trust
for Nathan”. Kevin was
not sure he wrote those words, but he signed the application with those words
and must be taken to have
adopted them. At no stage did he suggest he was
unaware of those words when he signed the document;
(c) The fundamental purpose of the membership application was to obtain access
to the facilities offered by ACDU, and in particular,
operational accounts and
term deposits;
(d) ADCU gave the membership pursuant to this application a separate number to
Kevin’s own membership. This is an objective
matter indicating that the
membership was different to Kevin’s personal membership;
(e) Accounts were then opened and tied to that membership number, initially the
Access Account and subsequently term deposits, including
the Term Deposit.
contrary to my findings, Kevin was the legal owner of the chose in action
represented by the Term Deposit and the Access Account,
I must consider whether
the elements of a trust set out in paragraph [
] above are made out and do so now:
(a) The application signed by Kevin expressed the application as one being by
Kevin in trust for Nathan. Although that statement
is not determinative, it is
prima facie evidence of an intention by Kevin to hold property on trust for
Nathan, and I have found
that Kevin did not sign the application for his own
benefit but rather on behalf of Nathan;
(b) The subject matter of the putative trust, assessed objectively, was the
chose(s) in action that would arise under the membership
the subject of the
application, it, or they, being the whole purpose of the membership;
(c) The object of the putative trust was plainly Nathan.
my opinion, on the assumption that my earlier analysis that Nathan was the legal
owner of the choses in action represented by the
Access Account and Term Deposit
is not correct, then in my opinion, the elements of an express trust are made
my view, there was not a separate trust in relation to each account opened in
Nathan’s name. As noted above, each term deposit
was a separate contract.
Nevertheless, viewed objectively on the above assumptions, a trust was created
over all accounts opened
under the membership created by the 1989 Application.
The trust was perfected by the opening of the Access Account in 1989 –
that is, property by way of the chose in action represented by that account
formed property of the trust.
Thereafter,
each chose in action under the membership created by the 1989 Application was
trust property. A similar conclusion was
reached by the High Court in
v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
Webb J concluded, on the facts of that case, that a single trust was created
which comprised a “succession of choses in action”
rather than
“a succession of
In the present
case, I consider this to be the position because:
(a) The Access Account and each subsequent account was opened under the same
membership number;
(b) The Access account and all term deposits were in Nathan’s name and
ordinarily, money flowed between the term deposits and
the Access Account;
(c) The purpose of the membership was to obtain access to an operating account
and, if desired, term deposit accounts;
(d) There is no evidence to support any change in the intention of Kevin after
completion of the 1989 Application in relation to
accounts opened under that
membership and prior to the opening of the Term Deposit;
(e) The express declaration of trust was recorded in the 1989 Application (that
is, in the membership application);
(f) Kevin had a military bank account which was opened under a separate
membership number that existed before Nathan’s membership
Accordingly,
if contrary to my findings, Kevin is the legal owner of the choses in action
represented by the Access Account and the
Term Deposit, then I would uphold
Nathan’s alternative trust claim. On that basis, Nathan would be entitled
to be paid the
money held by the Court.
noted earlier, Kevin submitted he was the legal owner of the chose in action
represented by the Term Deposit (and the Access Account).
I have found
otherwise. For completeness, I will specifically deal with the matters raised by
Kevin. Kevin relied on the following
(a) He was, until 2022, the only person who dealt with, and gave instructions
to, ADCU and AMB with respect to:
(i) The application for membership;
(ii) The opening of the Access Account; and
(iii) The opening of all term deposits (including what would happen when they
(b) He deposited all the monetary contributions to the Access Account (which in
turn primarily funded the term deposits) together
with money separately
contributed to term deposits;
(c) The address on the membership application and the account statements was his
address (except when Nathan changed that in 2022);
(d) The indicia of ownership, namely the passbooks and then subsequently
internet banking was (until 2022) in the hands of Kevin
and not Nathan;
(e) The Bank did not have Nathan’s proof of identification until well
after the opening of the Term Deposit.
short, Kevin submitted, as a matter of contract, that
contracting party with ADCU (and then AMB) such that he was the customer in the
banker-customer relationship. As a result,
he claims he was the legal holder of
the relevant chose(s) in action and that the beneficial ownership follows his
legal ownership.
as a matter of subjective intention, Kevin’s evidence was that he intended
to have the money in the accounts in his
sons’ names form part of his
estate on death and for the money to be split evenly amongst his three sons. His
will, signed
in March 2013, is consistent with that subjective intention because
it contained the following bequeath: “I give the rest of
my estate both
real and personal to those of my sons ... who survive me ... including any
monies in accounts and equities held or
administered by me in mine, or my
sons’ names”. Because the money in those accounts, came from him, it
seems, at a subjective
level, Kevin considered, at least at the time he prepared
his will, that the money in the accounts (as opposed necessarily to the
themselves) was “his”.
difficulty with Kevin’s submissions is that, putting aside his subjective
intention which cannot control the legal outcome,
each of the matters relied
upon and referred to at paragraph [
] are equally consistent, as an objective matter, with
Kevin having engaged with ADCU and AMB as Nathan’s parent, his agent
(whether authorised at the time or not authorised but later ratified) or his
trustee. The fact that it was Kevin that dealt with
ADCU and AMB, and that he
had the passbooks/internet account, and his address was the address for the
accounts does not persuasively
indicate, of themselves, that he was contracting
on his own account. The fact that Kevin contributed all, or at least almost all,
the money into the Access Account is relevant as an objective matter, however,
it must be borne in mind that Kevin brings no equitable
claim arising from the
fact that he so contributed. The relevance of the significant contributions by
Kevin, as an objective matter,
is less significant in relation to the Access
Account because the identity of the contracting party is to be determined as at
date of contract and at that time, the account was opened with a modest
initial contribution. The fact that AMB only latterly sought
identification documents concerning Nathan to comply with certain legislative
requirements does not seem to me to be material
in identifying the parties to
the contract at the time the contract was formed.
matters relied upon by Kevin are relevant to an assessment of the objective
circumstances going to the identity of the customer
(and contracting party) in
relation to the relevant accounts. I have taken all those matters into account
in forming the views and
conclusions expressed on the legal and beneficial
ownership of the choses in action represented by the Access Account and the Term
Nathan’s claim for payment by Kevin of AMB’s
granting relief by way of interpleader, the Court:
(a) Ordered that AMB’s costs be paid out of the funds to be paid into
Court before those funds were paid into Court;
(b) Found that it was appropriate that Nathan pay Kevin’s costs of
the interpleader application. Kevin was put to unnecessary
addressing the application – to which he
consented – due to Nathan’s opposition. As Nathan’s
was unsuccessful, he was ordered to pay Kevin’s costs;
(c) Reserved to be dealt with at final hearing whether either party should be
ordered to reimburse the Fund.
short, Nathan submitted that AMB’s costs, being a burden on the Fund, were
caused by Kevin’s unsuccessful substantive
claim to the Fund. The
juridical basis for a claim for reimbursement of the Fund was not articulated in
Nathan’s Cross-Claim,
however, the decision in
Brown v Forrest
supports the existence of power to order such reimbursement (indeed it is
described as a usual order).
present case is distinguishable from
. The action taken by the
stakeholder in
does not appear to have been opposed by either of
the competing claimants. In this case, it was Nathan who opposed AMB’s
interpleader
application. As a result, AMB was required to fully prepare a
hearing on its interpleader application including the preparation of
affidavit evidence and submissions. Because of Nathan’s opposition, he and
Kevin both filed evidence and made submissions
to the Court. Nathan, in part,
alleged that AMB was not neutral in its application and “colluded”
with Kevin. Nathan
did not make good those allegations.
Ultimately,
the Court concluded that Kevin was put to unnecessary expense by reason of
Nathan’s unsuccessful opposition to AMB’s
interpleader application.
I infer that AMB was also put to, at least, some unnecessary expense because of
that opposition. Kevin
had consented to the interpleader relief that was sought
and had Nathan done so, it may well have been that AMB’s costs would
been minimal.
those circumstances, I do not consider it appropriate to accede to
Nathan’s submission that Kevin reimburse the Fund and
I will not make such
the hearing, Nathan indicated that he wished to be heard on the appropriate
costs orders to be made at judgment.
the foregoing reasons, Nathan is entitled to be paid the money held by the Court
pursuant to the interpleader relief granted to
Court makes the following orders:
(1) The sum of $728,324.49 paid into the Court pursuant to orders made by
Andronos SC DCJ on 20 August 2024 and all interest accrued
thereon be paid to
the Second Cross-Claimant (Nathan);
(2) The First Cross-Claim is dismissed.
(3) The Parties are to inform my Associate within 7 days if they require an oral
hearing on the question of costs. If the Parties
indicate that they do not
require an oral hearing, and are content for the Court to deal with the question
of costs on the papers
and in Chambers, then:
(a) Nathan is to serve his submissions on costs, together with any affidavits in
support, within 7 days of notice being given by
both Parties to my Associate
that an oral hearing is not required. Without leave, the submissions are to be
no more than 5 pages;
(b) Kevin is to serve his submissions on costs, together with any affidavits in
support within 7 days of receipt of Nathan’s
submissions. Without leave,
such submissions are to be no more than 5 pages.
07 November 2025 - Cover sheet - corrected hearing dates.
10 November 2025 - 10 November 2025 - Amendment to cover sheet -
'Representation' field.
(1959) 101 CLR 298
[2009] FCAFC 159
Russell v Scott
at 450-451 (Dixon and Evatt JJ);
[1936] HCA 34.
See also, Lordianto v
Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police
(2018) 100 NSWLR 630
[2018] NSWCA
Caledonia Travel
(2013) 59 NSWLR 361
[2003] NSWSC 1008
(2018) 100 NSWLR 630
[2018] NSWCA 199.
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1949] HCA 63
(1949) 80 CLR 344
(2004) 219 CLR 165;
(2014) 251 CLR 640
[2014] HCA 7.
[2022] NSWCA
[2020] NSWSC
Brun-Smits at [13]. See
also, Re Hett, Maylor & Co Ltd (1894) 10 TLR 412; Saudi Arabian Money Agency
v Dresden Bank AG
[2004] EWCA Civ 1074
; Stoney Stanton Supplies (Coventry) Ltd v
Midland Bank Ltd [1966] 2 Lloyd Rep
Perry v Perry
; Fountain v Alexander
[1982] HCA 16
(1982) 150 CLR 615
at 626 (Gibbs CJ),
634 (Mason J);
[1982] HCA 16
; Hewer v Bryant
[1970] 1 QB 357
(1989) New Law
Journal 222.
[2004] EWCA Civ
In this regard, Kevin
relies on Haythorpe v Rae
[1972] VicRp 73
[2025] NSWCA
(2022) 275 CLR 37
[2022] HCA 34.
The Venture
[1908] UKLawRpPro 9
[1908] P 218
; Bateman Television Ltd v Bateman
[1971] NZLR
In the absence of
agreement (and no such relevant agreement is alleged by Kevin), the relevant
intention for the purposes of rebutting
the presumption of a resulting trust is
that of the provider of the relevant funds: Pearson v Pearson
[1961] VicRp 108
[1961] VR 693
697; J D Heydon and M J Leeming (eds), Jacobs’ Law of Trusts in Australia
(8th ed, 2016, LexisNexis Butterworths) ch 12,
[12]-[13] fn 123; Li v Ye at
[2019] NSWSC
[2016] NSWCA
(2016) 341 ALR 141
[2016] NSWCA 24.
Blue Metal Ltd v Hughes
(1961) 79 WN (NSW) 498
at 515; Brockway v Pando
Pont (ed), Law of Agency (3rd ed, 2014, LexisNexis Butterworths at para 5.29 and
cases cited
McLaughlin v
City Bank of Sydney
(1912) 14 CLR 684
[1912] HCA 16
; Lederberger v
Mediterranean Olives Financial Pty Ltd
[2012] VSCA 262
(2012) 38 VR 509
Minors (Property and
Contract) Act 1970, s
Minors (Property
and Contract) Act 1970, s
Minors (Property and
Contract) Act 1970, s 19.
Minors (Property and Contract) Act 1970, s
Minors (Property and
Contract) Act 1970, s
Shao v Crown
Global Capital Pty Ltd (in prov liq) [2025] HCA 43 at
[2024] NSWSC
[1949] HCA 63
(1949) 80 CLR
[2017] NSWSC
Brown at [34].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (628 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter