URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/190.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Doolan v R [2025] NSWCCA 190 (14 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 190
Hearing Date(s):
8 September 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Ward P at [1]; Rigg J at [414]; Coleman J at [416]
1. Extend time to apply for leave to appeal to the date of
filing of the application for leave to appeal.
leave to appeal.
3. Dismiss the appeal
Catchwords:
CRIME – Appeal – Appeal against conviction – Unreasonable
verdict – Murder – Whether Crown excluded
the possibility that a
person other than accused inflicted at least one blow to the head of the
deceased – Deference given
to advantage of jury in assessing credibility
and reliability of witnesses
Legislation Cited:
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Cases Cited:
Hocking v Bell
[1945] HCA 16
(1945) 71 CLR 430
[1945] HCA 16
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63
Pell v The Queen
(2020) 268 CLR 123
The King v ZT
[2025] HCA 9
(2025) 99 ALJR 676
The Queen v
(2016) 258 CLR 308
[2016] HCA 3
[2023] NSWCCA 279
Principal judgment
Brendan Thomas Doolan (Applicant)
Rex (Respondent)
Representation:
Ms M Avenell SC (Applicant)
B Hatfield SC with Ms C Brain
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Katsoolis + Co, Solicitors + Attorneys
(Applicant)
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2021/00020665
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Supreme Court of New South Wales
[2023] NSWSC 821
Date of Decision:
13 March 2023
File Number(s):
2021/00020665
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
On 13 March 2023, the applicant, Brendan Doolan, was found guilty, following
a trial by jury in the Supreme Court at Forbes before
Lonergan J, of the murder
of Bradley Dixon (the deceased). The applicant had been tried on an indictment
charging him with the murder,
and in the alternative the unlawful killing, of
the deceased, who died at about 4:00am on 23 January 2021.
On 14 July 2023, the applicant was sentenced to imprisonment for 18 years
commencing on 23 January 2021, with a non-parole period
of 12 years expiring on
22 January 2033. The applicant did not seek leave to appeal against his
The Crown case was that the applicant violently attacked the deceased, who
was staying at the applicant’s mother’s house
in Johnson Street,
Forbes, some time around 3:45am on 23 January 2021. The applicant and his
friend, Corey Bouwens, who had been
out drinking with friends, stopped at the
applicant’s mother’s house while walking to the applicant’s
applicant’s mother was not at home.
The Crown case was that the applicant turned the power off to lure the
deceased outside the house and then proceeded to punch, kick,
knee and jump or
stomp on the deceased both at the back of the house and in the driveway next to
the deceased’s car, before
leaving the scene. The deceased died at the
scene from blunt force trauma to the head.
At around 3:45am, Mr Bouwens contacted another friend, Rickard (Boog)
Radburn, who arrived at the scene shortly after and called 000
Mr Bouwens’ phone. They both remained at the scene until paramedics
and police arrived. The uncontested expert evidence
was that death could have
resulted from a single blow or accumulation of blows and that a fatal blow could
have been inflicted seconds
or minutes before death. Blood spatter analysis and
DNA testing was conducted on surfaces at the scene, thongs of the applicant
on the landing of his house and the clothing worn by Mr Bouwens that
At trial, the Crown case was that the applicant was the sole person involved
in the attack. The Crown case was reliant on acceptance
by the jury of the
evidence of Mr Bouwens that the applicant assaulted the deceased at the scene.
Mr Radburn also gave evidence that
he saw the applicant assault the deceased. At
trial, Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn admitted giving to police false accounts of the
of 23 January 2021 in their statements at the scene and in police
statements on 23 January 2021 but maintained that the key aspects
version of events were true. The defence case was that the Crown could not
exclude the reasonable possibility that Mr Bouwens
was involved in the attack.
The applicant relied on tendency evidence to establish that Mr Bouwens had a
tendency violently and persistently
to assault males around the same age as the
deceased while he was intoxicated.
The sole ground of appeal was that the verdict was unreasonable and not
supported by the evidence. The applicant argued that the jury
could not have
reasonably accepted the evidence of Mr Radburn, and crucially, Mr Bouwens and
that the Crown had not excluded beyond
reasonable doubt the possibility that Mr
Bouwens had caused at least one injury to the deceased during the assault.
The applicant required leave to appeal his conviction because the ground of
appeal involved a question of fact alone and he also required
an extension of
time to apply for leave to appeal.
The Court held
(Ward P, Rigg and Coleman JJ agreeing), granting the
extension of time and leave to appeal but dismissing the appeal:
(1) As to the blood spatter analysis, the expert evidence of
Detective Flippence was to the effect that he would have expected more
Mr Bouwens’ clothes had he been involved in the attack at the back of the
house. Blood could have been dispersed onto
his clothes if he had simply been
close to the deceased out the back of the house or if he approached the
applicant out the front
of the house: [406] (Ward P), [415] (Rigg J), [419]
(Coleman J).
(2) Little weight can be attached to the tendency evidence
in circumstances where the incident relied on to establish the alleged
was an isolated incident and little was known of the motivation for that
altercation. The fact that on one earlier occasion
Mr Bouwens had been
involved in a violent assault of a man when drunk did not make it more likely
that he was involved in the assault
of the deceased: [407] (Ward P), [415] (Rigg
J), [419] (Coleman J).
(3) Deference must be given to the advantage of the jury in
assessing the credibility and reliability of the various witnesses who
evidence at the trial, particularly Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn. The evidence does
not give rise to a reasonable doubt as to the
presence of the applicant at the
Johnson Street house when the deceased was murdered, nor that it was the
applicant who assaulted
the deceased. It was reasonably open to the jury to
conclude that the Crown had excluded any reasonable possibility that Mr Bouwens
contributed a blow to the deceased. The jury’s verdict was open and was
not unreasonable: [402], [407], [408]-[412] (Ward P),
[414]-[415] (Rigg J),
[416]-[420] (Coleman J).
Pell v The Queen
(2020) 268 CLR 123
[2020] HCA 12
Hocking v Bell
(1945) 71 CLR 430
[1945] HCA 16
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR
[2016] HCA 35
2023] NSWCCA 279
The King v ZT
(2025) 99 ALJR 676
: On 13 March 2023, the applicant, Brendan Doolan, was found guilty,
following a trial by jury in the Supreme Court at Forbes before
Lonergan J, of
the murder of Bradley Dixon (the deceased). The applicant had been tried on an
indictment charging him with the murder
and in the alternative the unlawful
killing of the deceased, who died at about 4:00am on 23 January 2021.
14 July 2023, the applicant was sentenced to imprisonment for 18 years
commencing on 23 January 2021, with a non-parole period
of 12 years expiring on
22 January 2033. The applicant does not seek leave to appeal against his
applicant applies for an extension of time for leave to appeal against his
conviction, the sole ground of appeal being that the
verdict is unreasonable and
cannot be supported having regard to the evidence. The applicant requires leave
to appeal his conviction
because the ground involves a question of fact alone
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
the reasons set out below, I would grant an extension of time for the
application for leave to appeal against conviction and would
grant leave to
appeal but would dismiss the appeal.
Summary of Crown
Crown case, in summary, was that the applicant violently attacked the deceased
some time around 3:45am on 23 January 2021. The
applicant had been drinking with
his close friend, Corey Bouwens, and others during the evening of 22 January
2021. Both the applicant
and Mr Bouwens had drunk a significant amount of
alcohol (and at least Mr Bouwens had consumed some cocaine during the night). At
they were then drinking closed, the applicant, Mr Bouwens
and another friend,
Daniel Swanston, went to Mr Swanston’s home in Farrand Street, Forbes
for a short time where some further
alcohol was consumed and then the applicant
and Mr Bouwens left together.
Bouwens had been staying for a few weeks at the applicant’s house at
Farnell Street, Forbes, after injuring his ankle and
foot in a farming accident
at Walgett in December 2020. On the night in question, Mr Bouwens was wearing a
black “moonboot”
on his left foot and a thong on his right foot; the
applicant was wearing thongs.
applicant’s mother (Trina Doolan) lived in a house at Johnson Street,
Forbes, which was on the way home to the applicant’s
Mr Swanston’s house.
19 or 20 January 2021, the deceased (a friend of Ms Doolan’s through his
sister) had come to stay with Ms Doolan at the Johnson
Street house.
Ms Doolan’s evidence was to the effect that the applicant believed
the deceased to be a paedophile, did not want
him to stay with his mother, and
said he would not visit while the deceased was there.
their walk to the applicant’s house, the applicant stopped at the Johnson
Street house. The applicant’s mother was
not at home, having left the
previous afternoon to go camping. The Crown case was that the applicant turned
the power off to lure
the deceased outside the house (as to this, there was
evidence from one witness to the effect that Mr Bouwens had said
turned the power off, suggesting involvement on his part
– see below). The Crown case was that the applicant then proceeded
punch, kick, knee and jump or stomp on the deceased both at the back of the
house and in the driveway next to the deceased’s
car before leaving the
scene. (Mr Bouwens’ evidence, and that of another friend, Mr Radburn, was
to the effect that the applicant
returned at one point and again assaulted the
deceased before leaving prior to the arrival of emergency services.)
Bouwens was present at the scene and gave evidence that he witnessed the
assault. Mr Bouwens denied any involvement in the assault.
Mr Bouwens attempted
to call another friend, Rickard (Ricky or Boog) Radburn, for help and then spoke
to Mr Radburn’s partner,
Tara Jones. Ms Jones’ evidence (to which I
refer in due course) was that Mr Bouwens said “I need Boog. Brendan has
apeshit and is bashing a fellow” and that he (Mr Bouwens) could not
Radburn drove to the Johnson Street house and called 000 for help using Mr
Bouwens’ phone. Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn remained
at the scene until
police and paramedics arrived. The deceased had suffered serious injuries and
died in the front driveway. The
deceased’s blood was found in the house
and outside on the back steps and back patio. A box of repacked groceries was on
of the deceased’s car in the driveway (which I note would be
consistent with the deceased having attempted to leave the Johnson
Street house
in response to demands said by Mr Bouwens to have been made by the applicant
that the deceased leave).
cause of death was blunt force trauma to the head. The forensic pathologist who
conducted the autopsy on the deceased, Dr Lorraine
du Toit-Prinsloo, gave
evidence describing the external injuries to the deceased’s head and
internal injuries to his brain.
Dr du Toit-Prinsloo was not able to comment on
the number of blows, nor the mechanism of the blows, nor the degree of force
caused the injuries. The applicant emphasises that her evidence was that
death could have resulted from a single blow or accumulation
of blows; that a
fatal blow could have been inflicted seconds or minutes before death; and that
timing is “quite random”.
jury was directed on the issue of causation that the Crown was required to prove
that it was the applicant who was responsible
for each of the deceased’s
injuries; and that the jury had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that it
was the accused
alone who inflicted the injuries on the deceased (SU 52). The
Crown points out that, having regard to the directions given in the
(particularly those extracted below), the jury must have accepted the key
aspects of Mr Bouwens’ evidence in order to
convict the
Summary of applicant’s argument on
applicant accepts that this Court must proceed upon the assumption that the jury
assessed Mr Bouwens’ evidence to be credible
and reliable (
(2020) 268 CLR 123
[2020] HCA 12
) at [39]). However, the
applicant contends that an independent assessment of the whole of the evidence
compels the conclusion that
it was not open to the jury, acting reasonably and
rationally, to have been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the
applicant’s
applicant emphasises the following features of the prosecution case.
that the prosecution case depended upon the evidence of Mr Bouwens implicating
the applicant in the deceased’s death.
The applicant notes that, in
summing-up, the trial judge gave the jury what was described as an
“Essential Crown Witness”
direction, namely:
The Crown seeks to prove the guilt of the accused with a case based largely on
the evidence of Corey Bouwens. Accordingly, unless
you are satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that Corey Bouwens is both an honest and accurate witness in
the account he has given,
you cannot find the accused guilty. Before you can
convict the accused, you should examine the evidence of Corey Bouwens very
to satisfy yourselves that you can safely act upon that evidence to
the high standard required in a criminal trial. [SU 34-35]
that the prosecution case (as noted above) was that the applicant alone
assaulted the deceased with no contribution from Mr
Bouwens (there being no
contention of a joint criminal enterprise). The applicant points out that the
trial judge directed the jury
on this several times in the summing-up (and
repeated this in response to a jury note), in particular saying that:
...the Crown case is that the accused alone did a series of acts, mainly
punching, kicking, kneeing and stomping on the deceased’s
head and that
those acts caused his death. And the Crown case is that those acts were
voluntary...
In respect of that element, that the act or acts caused the death of the
deceased...on the unchallenged evidence of Dr du Toit-Prinsloo
who carried out
the post-mortem, it is not possible to say which act or acts of blunt force
trauma to the head of the deceased caused
his death. It could have been any one
of those blunt force blows or any combination of them.
That means, to find the accused guilty, you must decide beyond reasonable doubt
on the third element that any and all blows delivered
to Mr Dixon were delivered
by the accused alone. [SU 25-26]
Now this direction is addressed to the question of causation of the death of
Mr Dixon. You must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that it was an act
or acts of the accused, Brendan Doolan, that caused the death of the deceased.
The Crown case is that it was the
accused alone who engaged in punching,
kicking, kneeing and stomping to or on the head of the deceased which caused the
the deceased. It called evidence from Corey Bouwens and Rickard
Radburn, who said that it was the accused alone who assaulted the
The Crown called evidence from a pathologist, Dr du Toit-Prinsloo, who concluded
that the deceased died as a result of one or an
unknown number of blunt force
head injuries. The precise mechanism by which the fatal blunt force injuries
were inflicted could not
be determined by Dr du Toit-Prinsloo. Dr du
Toit-Prinsloo also said that the time between the fatal blow and death occurring
death could occur after seconds, or it could occur after minutes. In
other words, Dr du Toit-Prinsloo could not say which blow or
combination of
blows caused the death of the deceased.
In order for you to find the accused guilty of murder, you need to be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that it was the accused alone
who inflicted the blunt
force head injury or combination of blunt force head injuries that caused the
death of the deceased. The
accused says you would not be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that he caused the death of the deceased because there is a
significant
question mark over what occurred that morning, and you would not
accept that the acts attributed to him, in particular by Corey Bouwens
Rickard Radburn, were in fact done by him.
The Crown will have proved this element of the offence if you are satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the act or acts of punching,
kicking, kneeing, and
stomping on the deceased’s head, causing fatal blunt force head injury
occurred, and that this act or
these acts were performed by the accused alone.
The Crown will not have proved this element of the offence if you have a
doubt as to whether it was the accused alone who inflicted the fatal
blunt force injury or injuries that caused the death of the
in the causation evidence, the applicant contends that it was necessary for the
prosecution to exclude the reasonable possibility
that Mr Bouwens made any
contribution at all to the assault upon the deceased, even by just one blow to
applicant relies on four matters as giving rise to the reasonable possibility
that Mr Bouwens was involved to some extent in the
assault on the deceased:
first, inconsistencies and omissions in the account given (by Mr Radburn) during
the 000 call; second, Mr
Bouwens’ numerous lies; third, the blood pattern
analysis evidence; and fourth, the tendency evidence in relation to
Mr Bouwens.
Each will be addressed in due course. The applicant also points
to some evidence suggesting the involvement of another person (most
Mr Bouwens) in the attack.
applicant submits that, even if the jury was satisfied that the applicant had
some role in the assault upon the deceased, it was
not open to the jury to find
beyond reasonable doubt that he acted alone; that is, to exclude the reasonable
possibility that Mr
Bouwens contributed “even just one blow” to the
deceased’s head. Thus, the applicant maintains he is entitled to
Evidence at trial
Court has had the benefit of detailed analysis by both parties as to the
evidence at trial, not all of which will here be recounted
in detail (such as,
for example, the evidence as to relevant locations in Forbes – see Exs A
and B). We were invited to listen
to the recording of the 000 call (which we did
in Court) and, though it was conceded to be less useful (AT 42.39), CCTV footage
the two hotels where the applicant, Mr Bouwens and others had been drinking
and from an address in Battye Street in the vicinity
of the Johnson Street House
– Exs C and X. Obviously, given the significance attributed to it, it will
be necessary to consider
in some detail the evidence of Mr Bouwens (and his
varying accounts of the relevant events prior to the
the outset, it is convenient to set out the timeline of events.
11:00pm on 22 January 2021, the applicant and Mr Bouwens were at the Post Office
Hotel in Forbes. They remained at the Post Office
Hotel with a group of people
until 12:40am on 23 January 2021.
12:45am on 23 January 2021, the applicant, Mr Bouwens and others entered the
Commercial Hotel in Forbes.
Commercial Hotel.
around 3:30am and 4:00am, various neighbours or local residents heard shouting
or a loud altercation or other activity (see
below). One witness (Hayley
Buchanan) said she saw a man standing in the gutter out the front of a house
close to the Johnson Street
house and another in the middle of the front yard
and described hearing a sound like the thud of someone kicking a dog “in
the guts” and a male voice saying “Get up. Fucking get up, cunt. Get
up”. Another witness (Peter Nelson) saw a
woman in about that location at
before 4:00am on 23 January 2021, Mr Bouwens called Ms Jones on his mobile phone
(after a number of unsuccessful attempts
to contact Mr Radburn). Mr Radburn
confirmed that Mr Bouwens had called him but he did not answer the phone.
is some doubt as to the timing of Mr Bouwens call to Ms Jones. Exhibit F, being
screenshots of Ms Jones’ FaceBook Messenger
log (22/02/23; T 219),
bears a time entry of 3:54am. The call lasted for three minutes. However, the
000 call (which was made by
Mr Radburn using Mr Bouwens’ phone) was
recorded by the operator as being at 3:55:19am (Ex D). The Agreed Facts (Ex K)
the 000 call at 3:55:04am. There is nothing to indicate that the two
calls (to Ms Jones and to the emergency 000 number) were or
could have been made
simultaneously. Therefore, on the basis of the Agreed Facts, the call from Mr
Bouwens to Ms Jones must have
concluded by about 3:55:04am, which leads to
only two reasonable inferences: first, that the time entry of 3:54am on Ex F
the time that the three minute call ended (rather than commenced) and,
second, that there was an inaccuracy on the timing on Ms Jones’
Even if the correct time for the 000 call was 3:55:19am there is still an
implausible overlap if the call to Ms Jones started
here, the call to Ms Jones ending before 3:55:04am is consistent with the
evidence that the call to Ms Jones ended as the
lights of a car (which must have
been that of Mr Radburn) approached – since, logically, Mr Radburn
only left for the Johnson
Street house after the call to Ms Jones had commenced
but was at Johnson Street in time to make the 000 call.
the call to Ms Jones, she sent text messages to Mr Bouwens saying “Ricky
will legit bash brendan if he starts” and
“Where are yous”.
Those messages are consistent with Mr Bouwens having conveyed to her that the
applicant was involved
in the assault. (Ms Jones’ evidence as to the
conversation was admitted for the fact of the communication not its truth.
the trial judge gave a general direction on limiting the use of
evidence of accounts of events given by Mr Bouwens to other people,
Ms Jones; at SU 41.)
already noted, the 000 call was made at 3:55:04am (as per the Agreed Facts)
though recorded by the operator as being at 3:55:19am.
The relevant parts of
that call are extracted in due course. It was an agreed fact that the call
lasted for 15 minutes and 16 seconds,
until 4:10:20 on 23 January 2021. The call
ended after the arrival of the police and paramedics.
taken from a house on Battye Street recorded at 4:00am on 23 January 2021 (i.e.,
while the 000 call was in progress) a person
walking at the corner of Johnson
and Battye Streets, from the direction of the Johnson Street house (22/02/23; T
61; Ex X from timestamp
46.43). The Battye Street address was in the vicinity of
the Johnson Street house, Battye Street intersecting with Johnson Street
proximate to Prince Street and then running parallel to Johnson Street (see Ex
A). The CCTV footage shows a car, with headlights
on, driving along Johnson
Street towards the town. Shortly after the car passed the person, that person
ran off, possibly along Prince
Street. There may have been another person
walking away from town on the other side on Johnson Street. The CCTV footage was
not distinct.
(This is of some relevance in relation to the accounts given by Ms
Buchanan and Mr Nelson.)
F records another call from Mr Bouwens’ phone to Ms Jones at 4:17am on 23
January 2021, by which time the police and
paramedics were at the
Mr Bouwens’ first police statement (MFI 17)
Bouwens gave his first statement to the police at about 8:00am on
23 January 2021 (27/02/23; T 538). He conceded in his evidence
that it contained a number of false statements (which are indicated below).
Mr Bouwens was wearing the same clothing that
he had worn the night before.
He gave permission for the police to seize his clothing and the thong he was
wearing at that time (27/02/23;
T 526; 01/03/23; T 695-696).
as to where he had been staying in Forbes, Mr Bouwens said:
I have been staying with my friend, Ricky Radburn in Forbes, New South Wales. I
know where the house is but I cannot recall the address
because I am not from
Forbes. Ricky lives there with his girlfriend and two kids. I have just been
using a spare bedroom when I stay
at the house. [MFI 17, first statement at [3];
27/02/23; T 547]
the trial, Mr Bouwens’ evidence was that he said this because the police
asked. Mr Bouwens said that this was not a lie;
that he stayed some of the time
at Mr Radburn’s house and most of the time at the applicant’s house.
Mr Bouwens had no
idea why he did not include in his statement that he had
been staying with the applicant. He agreed that was a lie but said he was
sure why he told that lie (27/02/23; T 547). Mr Bouwens did not remember whether
he discussed with Mr Radburn that he was going
to include that particular detail
in his statement, but said it was possible (27/02/23; T 547-548). (Mr Radburn
gave a similarly
false statement to the police on this.)
Mr Bouwens said that at about 10:00pm on 22 January 2021 he left Mr
Radburn’s house and went to the Post Office Hotel
(MFI 17, first statement
at [5]). That was incorrect. At the trial, Mr Bouwens agreed that that was a lie
(27/02/23; T 548). Mr
Bouwens said he did not know why he included this lie
(27/02/23; T 548).
Mr Bouwens said:
The Commercial Hotel then shut in the early hours of the morning and I contacted
Ricky to pick me up from the pub. I felt moderately
intoxicated at that point. I
called Ricky heaps of times on Snapchat and I called Tara on Facebook Messenger.
Eventually, Ricky answered
the phone and Ricky came to pick me up. I was
standing near the pool in Forbes which is near the Forbes Inn. Ricky picked me
because I called Tara and just as
she arrived [sic; answered], Ricky pulled up in the car. Ricky was driving
Tara’s car which
is a small Kia. [MFI 17, first statement at [6];
27/02/23; T 551; 28/02/23; T 616]
Bouwens’ evidence at trial was that he vaguely remembered saying this;
that it was a lie; and that he had no idea why he
said it. Mr Bouwens did not
know why in this statement he said that Mr Radburn had picked him up down near
the Forbes Inn and pool;
and agreed that it was untrue that he called
Ms Jones from that location (27/02/23; T 551; 28/02/23 T 617).
Mr Bouwens said:
As we were driving, Ricky pulled over to the left-hand side of the road after
seeing two males in the driveway of a house. I do not
know what street we were
on, but I could point it out to police. One male was standing, and as soon as
Ricky pulled the car up, he
run away in a westerly direction. I couldn’t
see any of the clothing that the male was wearing, or what the male looked like,
it was dark and the street lighting was minimal. I did not look at the male long
enough to know how tall he was, or any other features
first statement at [7]; 27/02/23; T 559; 28/02/23; T 616]
trial, Mr Bouwens’ evidence was that he did not really remember saying
this (27/02/23; T 559). Mr Bouwens said that, apart
from the location, the whole
of the above extract from his statement was untrue (28/02/23; T 617).
Mr Bouwens said:
I exited the car and walked over to the driveway, and saw a male on the ground.
He was right behind a car in the driveway, which
was maroon in colour. The
male’s head was nearby the rear tyre on the right-hand side, and his legs
were diagonal, facing adjacent
to the roadway. The male on the ground was of a
bigger build and he was an older male, about 40 years old or older. The male was
covered in blood. The male did not say anything to me. The male was gasping for
breath. I heard him choking and trying to gasp for
air. I did not see the male
on the ground wearing a hat.
I found a phone that was on the grass, about one metre from the male’s
body. I picked the phone up. I think it had a pink or
red-coloured flip case.
The phone was smashed on the screen, and it wasn’t working. Ricky was
calling triple-0 off my mobile
phone to ask for help.
I took the mobile phone to the car and put it on the dash of the car. I
couldn’t stay with the male; I was in complete shock
and felt sick to my
stomach. I had never seen so much blood in my life. I do not recall touching the
man on the ground at all. I
am not very brave when it comes to blood [MFI 17,
first statement at [8]-[10]; 28/02/23; T 616].
trial, Mr Bouwens’ evidence was that it was untrue that he exited the car
and then saw the male (28/02/23; T 617).
Mr Bouwens’
second statement to police (MFI 17)
Bouwens gave his second statement some time after 1:00pm on 23 January 2021
(after a conversation with Mr Radburn and/or Mr Radburn’s
see below). While at the police station, Mr Bouwens gave his clothes from the
night before to Detective Townsend (27/02/23;
his second statement, Mr Bouwens referred to his first statement and said that
he wished to add additional information to that
statement and that he did not
discuss [sic; disclose] this information to the police at the time because he
was in shock and scared
by what he had seen (MFI 17, second statement at
[3]-[4]). That statement also contained false information.
Bouwens said that when the Commercial Hotel closed he and a number of others
walked across the road to the roundabout on the main
street and “everyone
went their separate ways” (27/02/23; T551) and that:
Brendan thought we were going to someone’s house, but the others had
walked off. Brendan got the shits and walked off towards
the street where the
incident took place that I made the statement about earlier. I cannot recall the
name of the street, but it
is the Street that the town pool faces on. Brendan
didn’t say anything to me, he just stormed off. Brendan walked ahead of
and the last time I saw him was in the park near the pool. It’s a grassed
area because I remember the grass. I kept walking
and called Ricky Radburn and
asked him to come and get me. Whilst I was waiting on Ricky to collect me I
continued walking in the
direction of Ricky’s house.
I was walking for about 10 to 15 minutes at a very slow pace because I have a
‘moon boot’ on. I’m not able to walk
fast because of the
Tendon damage to my foot. I continued walking until I was near Trina
Potter’s [Ms Doolan’s] residence.
Trina Potter is Brendan’s
biological mother. I know that she is away camping at the moment, she left on
Friday. I was walking
and got to about 20 metres away from the house next door
to Trina’s. I was talking on the phone to Tara at the time asking
and give me a lift. It was at that point that Ricky arrived while I was still on
the phone with Tara. I know the time to
be 3:50am because that was when I had
driveway. Brendan
saw me walking behind him. He saw me and looked directly at me
as I walked up to his mother’s house. Brendan looked me directly
face for a couple of seconds before he turned and ran away. He yelled something
out when he looked at me, but I don’t
know what he said. I saw a male on
the ground nearby where Brendan was standing. He was the male that I described
earlier in my statements
as being the male covered in blood. I do not know the
male’s name, but I know that he was staying at Trina Potter’s
I recognised this to be the same male. There was no other persons
around besides Brendan, myself, the man on the ground and Ricky
arrived. I recognised Brendan to be wearing the same clothing that he had on
earlier in the night at both the Post Office
Hotel and Commercial Hotel. [MFI
17, second statement at [15]-[16]; 27/02/23; T 542; T 553-554; 28/02/23; T
trial, Mr Bouwens’ evidence was that he “sort of” remembered
saying this (27/02/23; T 552) and agreed that he
lied about what had taken place
when he arrived at the Johnson Street house. Mr Bouwens said he did not know why
he lied about this
(28/02/23; T 599). Nor did he know: why he said the applicant
got the shits and walked off towards the street where the incident
took place or
why he said the applicant just stormed off and walked ahead of him; if, when he
made the second statement, he wanted
to put the applicant as far away from him
as possible; why he referred to having a conversation with Mr Radburn while
Johnson Street or why he surrounded the important detail of the time
of his call to Ms Jones with lies (27/02/23; T 553-554).
Bouwens further said that he did not know why he said that he did not know the
male’s name; that he did know who it was;
and did not know what crossed
his mind before he told this lie or what he was trying to achieve by saying it.
Mr Bouwens said he
was not concerned that his knowledge of the male’s name
would have any impact on what the police might do or ask (27/02/23;
Bouwens denied he was trying to distance himself as much as possible from the
deceased. Mr Bouwens said he thought it was important
to tell the truth about
what he knew of the deceased, and that is why he made the second statement,
although he accepted that in
that statement he also did not tell the truth. He
said he did not know why, apart from being freaked out again (see 27/02/23; T
Bouwens’ evidence at trial was that he did not know, was not sure or had
no idea why he did not detail the assault on the
deceased in the second
statement and did not know why he lied about what actually took place when he
arrived at the house (27/02/23;
T 563-565; 28/02/23; T 575; T 599).
his second statement, Mr Bouwens also said that:
... I did not tell Ricky that it was Brendan that I saw next to the male’s
body on the ground. I kept it to myself and didn’t
tell anyone. [MFI 17,
second statement at [18]; 27/02/23; T 556)]
trial, Mr Bouwens’ evidence was that he did not remember saying that, but
agreed that that was what was recorded in his statement
Bouwens referred to a conversation that afternoon with Mr Radburn after a sleep
after making the first statement in which he said:
Ricky was talking about the matter that happened earlier.
I said to Ricky, “Did you see who did it?”
Ricky said “no”.
I said “It was Brendan”.
Ricky said, “If you didn’t tell the police you’d better tell
them now rather than later”. [MFI 17, second
statement at [22]; 27/02/23;
Bouwens’ evidence at trial was that he did not remember the conversations
he and Mr Radburn had, if any and that he was not
sure if the conversation in
the second statement was true. He did not remember. Mr Bouwens said he did
not remember having any conversations
with Mr Radburn about the identity of
the applicant at some earlier point. Mr Bouwens said he knew, when he made
the second statement,
he had been on the phone to Ms Jones, and spoke about the
applicant being there. Mr Bouwens did not know why he put the conversation
in his second statement (27/02/23; T 556-557).
interview with police on 8 April 2021
8 April 2021, Mr Bouwens participated in an electronic recorded interview with
the police (ERISP). At the trial, Mr Bouwens’
evidence was that he was
telling the truth in the recorded interview.
the course of the ERISP, Mr Bouwens said the following as to what happened after
he and the applicant left Mr Swanston’s
A25: ... then me and Brendan walked and then walked to his
mother’s house, and we were going to get his swag to go camping
day, and then he’s turned the power off. I went to turn it back on, but he
told me, No. um, from there Brad walked
out ... Um, Brendan grabbed him. I was
trying to stop him. He wouldn’t stop, so then he started hittin’
him. Um, yeah,
then he fell on the ground, then he kicked him. Um, yeah, by the
time he fell on the ground, I was trying to push Brendan off him.
punched me. Um, yeah, I think Brad was trying to get his shit out of his
mum’s house, Brendan’s mum’s house.
So, it finally got to the
time that Brendan finally let him go to go inside. That’s when I rang
Ricky, told him to come and
get him to stop him ‘cause I couldn’t
stop him. [Mr Bouwens said he remembered saying this (27/02/23; T 565)]
And then I went out the front and I was calling Ricky. Brendan, I dunno what
happened out the back when I left so last thing I recall
was Brendan and Brad
walking in front of the car. They got to the driver’s door. I thought Brad
was gunna get in, but Brendan
still kept bashin’ him. He fell to the
ground. He kneed him in the head couple of times and then, what happened then
fell, he fell, like, fell like that to his, on his right hand side
I’m pretty sure and then Brendan continued to bash him,
kick him, jump on
his head. Um, then Brendan ran away. So, I tried keepin’ him away and then
he ran back again and then, what
happened there? I think that’s when the
police turned up or somethin’. And that’s when Brendan ran, before
turned up. (MFI 17, ERISP) This part of the answer was not read to
Mr Bouwens at the trial)
11:16, in the course of the ERISP, the following was said:
Q310: ...OK, so you can’t remember ever speaking about
anything on the way to Daniel’s place, to Trina’s place,
the house before Brendan decided to get his swag?
Q311: What did he say?
A: He just said, Oh, we should get the swag so we can leave in
the mornin’ because we were supposed to leave in the mornin’
Q312: Yeah.
A: --- to go. But ---
Q313: What did you say when he said?
A: I said, Oh yeah. I said, Isn’t there someone there? He
goes, Yeah. I said, Well, you be quiet then because, yeah ---
Q315: And then you said you’ve walked around the back
and Brendan turned the power off?
Q316: Why do you think he did that?
A: I had no idea. I had shat myself. I was, like, What the
hell, you turned the power off for.
Q317: Yeah.
A: He was just telling me to be quiet. So I went to turn it
back on and he yelled at me with anger. [see 27/02/23; T 565]
whether his answer to Q316 (“I had shat myself”) meant that he was
scared, Mr Bouwens went on to say:
A321: Yeah, oh, well, I didn’t know what he was gonna up,
get up to ‘cause I was, like, why’s he turned the power
because there was a light on inside. I didn’t know if he was awake or not.
But he turned the power off. Then I heard
footsteps inside. So that’s, I
think, that’s when I went and turned the power back on. And then he told
me not to and
pushed me. [Mr Bouwens said he vaguely remembered saying this; see
27/02/23; T 577]
to why that scared him so much, Mr Bouwens said (see 28/02/23; T 577):
A324: Because I knew he didn’t like the fellow inside and
he’s turned the power off and my instincts just thought of
something bad
straightaway.
Q325: Righto. And what did you say when he switched that ---
A: I just asked him why’s he turned it off. He just told
me to be quiet.
Q326: OK. How did he say it?
A: He said, uh, Shh, be quiet.
Q327: OK. Um, what point did you turn the power back on?
A: That was before he told me to be quiet ---
A: --- he told me not to.
Q329: Righto. And you say he turned it off again?
Q330: Can you describe too ---
A: Oh, no, no, ‘cause I didn’t end up turning it
back on. I tried to turn it back on.
A: I flicked one switch and that wasn’t even, that
didn’t do nothing. The other one, I went to touch. I touched it
he’s like, Don’t touch it and that’s when he pushed me. [Mr
Bouwens said he did not remember saying this
but that it vaguely accorded with
his memory of events; see 28/02/23; T 577]
Bouwens’ evidence at the trial was that he himself touched the power box,
trying to turn the lights back on. Mr Bouwens was
asked about the two portions
of his recorded interview relating to this (see above). Mr Bouwens said he did
not remember the conversation.
Mr Bouwens seemed to agree that the applicant
yelled at him in anger to leave the power off. Mr Bouwens then said the
applicant didn’t
yell, just had an angry voice”. He said if
“yelled at me in anger” was in his statement, it was correct
T 565; 28/02/23; T 577). (This sequence of events was not in either
of the police statements.)
Bouwens was then asked about his previous evidence at the committal proceeding
on 5 April 2022 (where he said that he could not
really remember what he or the
applicant did after the applicant flicked the switch in the power box (27/02/23;
T 566)). Mr Bouwens
asserted he did remember what took place. Mr Bouwens
said he just knew the applicant turned it off. Mr Bouwens said the applicant
not yell, he just had a stern voice. Mr Bouwens said he remembered not
remembering in his previous evidence (27/02/23; T 566).
in Mr Bouwens’ evidence at trial, Mr Bouwens said he did not recall if he
actually turned the power back on or not. Mr
Bouwens was again asked about the
two portions of his recorded interview in relation to this and said that he
vaguely remembered
saying the first portion but did not remember saying the
second. Mr Bouwens said the second vaguely accorded with his memory of what
happened. He maintained he touched the power box, or switches in it, but that it
was only to switch the power back on. Mr Bouwens
said he did not remember if at
any time the power switched back on. He said the applicant did not bang on the
door or yell, but in
response to the light switching off, not even a minute
later, the deceased came outside. Mr Bouwens said he did not remember if the
light in the house was on or off when the deceased came outside nor if there was
a light from the house shining on him and the applicant
then (28/02/23; T
Photographs
in Ex R showed that the power switches were located just next to the back door.
They were on a board and not in an enclosed
box. (DNA was recovered on the board
from at least two people, one of whom was the applicant (Ex Z, result 24). The
applicant, however,
points out that it was his mother’s house.)
Photographs in Ex R and the diagram Ex P showed three bins, between the
car and the garage, with the side of one approximately aligning
with the front of the car.
his ERISP, Mr Bouwens said that when he was out the front of the Johnson Street
house on the phone to Mr Radburn/Ms Jones he could
not hear anything. Mr
Bouwens’ evidence at trial was that this (not being able to hear anything)
was about what was happening
inside the house. The passage in the ERISP
Q414: OK. And what did you tell Tara?
A: I just told her she needs to come here and told her to send
Ricky because I can’t stop Brendan.
Q415: OK. So when you say, I can’t stop Brendan, what was
Brendan doing when you were talking to Tara?
A: Um, that was when they were out the back still. So I
don’t know what they were doing out the back.
Bouwens’ evidence at trial was that he did not remember saying this
although he would say that that was what happened. Mr
Bouwens said he was on the
phone while they (the applicant and the deceased) were out the back as well as
when they came out the
front (27/02/23; T 555). Mr Bouwens’ evidence was
that he was not on the phone to Ms Jones when he approached the deceased
applicant, so that would have been between the two calls to her (27/02/23; T
562). He did not know how much time was between
the first and second calls to Ms
Jones. Mr Bouwens maintained that there was a second call to Ms Jones (27/02/23;
T 562-563) (although
Ex F does not support this).
the ERISP, Mr Bouwens was taken to the fact that in in the second statement he
said nothing about the punching, kicking, stomping
and turning off the power, to
which Mr Bouwens responded:
A522: And so that’s why I wanted to tell you months ago
A: --- because I remembered it all. So, I didn’t
remember all that at all until a couple of weeks after, it all come back
I was dreamin’ about it. I still dream about it.
Q524: OK. How long after you think you thought that you this,
you recollected it all?
A: Oh, when I called you.
Q525: So, all right, you called me on the 2nd of February.
Q526: OK. That is a fortnight, a bit later? Yeah.
That’s, that’s, um, on the 23rd, so, sorry, that’s pretty,
Bouwens’ evidence at trial was that he “sort of” remembered
saying this (28/02/23; T 621).
Bouwens said in the ERISP that he did not remember at all when he made the
second statement that the applicant had attacked the
deceased and had no
recollection of an assault taking place at that time; that “There was
like, all blank. All I remember him
was standing there and then running
off” (Q/A 528-531). Asked about when he remembered the assault and how it
happened that
the memory came back (Q 788-789), Mr Bouwens said:
Q789: That memory came back?
A: Come in through my dreams. That I still dream about that
fuckin’ nearly every night. Makes me sick.
Q792: Did it come back in, the entire came back?
A793: Nuh. I’d wake up.
Mr Bouwens’ evidence at trial, he was asked whether the detail he gave to
police came back to him in dreams. He said it
did not come back through dreams;
he was just dreaming about it. Mr Bouwens said his recollection was not really
based on dreams.
When asked what “not really” meant, he said it did
not come back to him all through just dreams; he was just dreaming
lot. He said little bits came back in dreams. Mr Bouwens denied he was trying
to convey to the police that his later
recollection was based on things that had
come back in dreams. He said this was because it did not all come back to him
He said it came back straight away and was in his head. Mr Bouwens
said this included when he made his second statement and lied.
maintained his remarks about dreams were truthful (28/02/23; T 621-623). In
re-examination, Mr Bouwens said he gave
evidence of what he could remember
(28/02/23; T 647).
Mr Bouwens’ evidence at trial
is not necessary here to summarise the whole of Mr Bouwens’ evidence at
trial (though it has been carefully reviewed in preparation
for these reasons).
Relevantly, in light of the matters that the applicant here relies on, both as
to Mr Bouwens’ lies and
as to the plausibility of his account of events,
that evidence was as follows.
Knowledge of applicant and
Bouwens gave evidence that he had known the applicant since he was very young
and met him through a family friend while living
on the South Coast. They were
good friends and he was a groomsman at the applicant’s wedding (27/02/23;
478-482). Mr Bouwens
knew the deceased for roughly the same time as he knew the
applicant and said that he knew the deceased because his father had dated
deceased’s sister at some time (27/02/23; T 483). He said that he
and the deceased were friends but that he only knew
him as “Brad”
never “Bradley” (27/02/23; T 528). Mr Bouwens had known
Mr Radburn for a year or two through
the applicant (27/02/23; T 483).
cross-examination, Mr Bouwens’ evidence was that he knew the deceased
“very well” and could recognise him and
that he knew that the
deceased’s sister and the applicant’s mother were friends, but said
he did not know if the applicant’s
mother spoke to the deceased (27/02/23;
Bouwens said that he did not remember the deceased having a relationship with
any other member of his family. When reminded, Mr
Bouwens agreed that the
deceased also had a relationship with Mr Bouwens’ aunt, Natalie, but
only that they had dated. Mr Bouwens
did not know why he had never mentioned
that relationship prior to then, saying that it was when he was two years old
not know about the relationship until well after 23 January 2021
(though he did not remember who told him nor when). Mr Bouwens was
not aware of
allegations of domestic violence in that relationship (27/02/23; T 537-538). In
his previous evidence at the 2022 committal
hearing, Mr Bouwens said he was
certain that the deceased did not have any relationship with anyone he knew. At
the trial, Mr Bouwens’
evidence was that he did not remember saying this;
and that his previous evidence was not a lie because he did not then remember
the relationship. Mr Bouwens said he had not, prior to his previous evidence at
the committal hearing, thought a lot about what he
knew about the deceased nor
had discussions with people about any relationship with the deceased (28/02/23;
T 573-574).
Bouwens knew that a “Bradley” was staying at Trina Doolan (the
applicant’s mother)’s house for a while
but not that this was the
deceased. Mr Bouwens said that about a week or two before
“Bradley” turned up, the applicant
said something about how he did
not like him because he was a “convicted paedophile” or something.
Mr Bouwens said he
was not too sure where they were for this conversation
(27/02/23; T 528-529).
evidence of the applicant’s mother was that before Christmas 2020, she,
the applicant and Mr Bouwens had a conversation
on her front lawn about the
deceased coming to Forbes; that the applicant had heard “Brad” was a
paedophile and that
he did not like the idea of him being there and would not
come around to visit her if he were there. She said Mr Bouwens said
had been seeing a younger girl, who lied about her age,
saying that she was closer to being 17 than 15 and then it went to 12, and
turned out she was 12 years old (21/02/23; T 77).
cross-examination, Mr Bouwens said he did not remember any earlier conversation
with Ms Doolan and the applicant about “Brad”
in which the applicant
said that the deceased had been involved with a girl who was 12 years old
but accepted that it was possible
the conversation occurred (27/02/23; T 536).
Mr Bouwens denied being aware at the time of the incident that there was a
the name of Bradley Dixon who had been involved with a 12 year old
girl at the time of the incident but could not say when he did
become aware of
this (27/02/23; T 536-537).
evidence of Ms Doolan was that when Mr Bouwens serviced her car on 21 January
2021 she told Mr Bouwens that the deceased was staying
at her house and she had
already asked, or was going to ask, him to find somewhere else to stay
(21/02/23; T 78). At the trial, Mr
Bouwens’ evidence was that, during the
course of servicing the car, Ms Doolan said “Brad” was in the room,
he did not then know anything about this person called “Brad”
(27/02/23; T 529).
Events of 22/23 January 2021 before the
Bouwens said that on 22 January 2021 his foot was feeling sore, and the pain was
“probably 8 out of 10” regardless
of whether he was wearing the boot
or not. In cross-examination, when asked about the extent to which the moonboot
slowed him down,
Mr Bouwens said he did not think he was able to keep up with
others as they walked but could not remember if he lagged behind anyone
significantly when going from the Post Office Hotel to the Commercial Hotel
(27/02/23; T 543-544).
to his previous evidence at the committal hearing that he “wouldn’t
have a clue” how his foot was feeling
at the time of witnessing the
assault, Mr Bouwens’ evidence was that he did not remember saying
that. When shown the transcript,
Mr Bouwens said that previous evidence was
true; that his earlier evidence was about what the pain would have been but he
sure what it actually was (27/02/23; T 545).
here, the applicant submits that Mr Bouwens did not appear, in the CCTV on 22-23
January 2021, to be particularly restricted
or slowed down by the moonboot, nor
in pain; and the applicant notes Mr Swanston’s evidence that Mr Bouwens
kept up with the
group when walking. Reference is also made to Ms
Schaefer’s evidence as to the group on that night (see below). The Crown,
however, submits that the CCTV footage appears to show Mr Bouwens limping
slightly as the group left the Post Office Hotel (Ex X
at timestamp
16:30-17:18). (A slight limp is visible but Mr Bouwens appears able to keep up
with the group.)
Bouwens’ evidence was that he and the applicant had planned to go camping
with two other friends that day (22 January 2021)
but did not go because the
applicant did not finish working until around 6:00pm (27/02/23;
Bouwens said that he had six or seven beers at the applicant’s house after
work and thought the applicant had the same (27/02/23;
T 486). At the Post
Office Hotel, Mr Bouwens had about 10 beers but was not sure what strength they
were. Asked if he saw what the
applicant was drinking he said “the
same”. Mr Bouwens said that everyone was happy at the Post Office Hotel
T 487-488). When they went to the Commercial Hotel he continued
drinking beer; and possibly had six or seven more (27/02/23; T 489).
Mr Bouwens said he also had cocaine at some point through the night (though
in his ERISP he had denied this – Q/A 171); he
thought at the Post Office
Hotel (27/02/23; T 489). In the course of his evidence, Mr Bouwens
estimated that he had consumed around
22-24 beers by the time he left the
Commercial Hotel. At that time, Mr Bouwens felt “pretty intoxicated”
(27/02/23; T
488-489) (cf his earlier account in his first statement that he was
“moderately intoxicated”; see MFI 17 first statement
27/02/23; T 551) and his ankle was pretty sore (27/02/23; T 490).
Bouwens said he walked with the applicant and Mr Swanston to
Mr Swanston’s house. He did not remember how long the walk took.
There, Mr Bouwens had a Canadian Club from the fridge but was not sure if he
finished it (27/02/23; T 490). Mr Bouwens said that
they were not at
Mr Swanston’s house for long, perhaps only five minutes. Mr Bouwens
said that the applicant also had a Canadian
Club at Mr Swanston’s house.
Mr Bouwens and the applicant then left to go back to the applicant’s
house to go to bed
(27/02/23; T 491).
Bouwens and the applicant walked, he thought side by side, along Farrand Street
and then Johnson Street, heading away from town.
Mr Bouwens said he felt
“pretty intoxicated” and affected by the alcohol and cocaine.
Mr Bouwens did not remember any
conversation with the applicant (27/02/23;
Bouwens and the applicant stopped at the Johnson Street house. He said he was
not too sure how long it took to walk there. Asked
why he stopped there, Mr
Bouwens said “Brendan walked out the back of his mother’s
house” and that he “thought
it was just to get his swag”,
though the applicant had not said that (27/02/23; 492-493; 28/02/23; T 574). Mr
Bouwens said
that the lighting was poor; that there was a driveway on the right
that went into the garage, with the house on the left and a little
front porch,
as well as a gate between the house and the shed; and that the deceased’s
car was in the driveway (27/02/23; T
493). (This is consistent with the crime
scene photographs in Ex R, pp 12 and 15.)
Assaults at the back of
Bouwens gave evidence that the applicant walked down beside the car, through the
gate and out the back of the house. He thought
the gate was shut and the
applicant opened it. Mr Bouwens said the applicant did not say why he was going
out the back (27/02/23;
T 494). As noted above, Mr Bouwens’ evidence was
that he thought there was an intention to get the swag but did not remember
applicant nor himself saying anything about the swag. Mr Bouwens thought
this because they were going camping the next day (28/02/23;
T 574-575). Mr
Bouwens said he was pretty sure they were leaving first thing in the morning,
although they could have gone back to
the house in the light in the morning and
with the car. Mr Bouwens said it was a double swag; quite a large swag. Mr
Bouwens said
he had no reason why he did not mention the swag in the second
statement (taken the day they intended to go camping). Mr Bouwens
maintained he
was thinking about the swag at the time. Mr Bouwens said he could not remember
but was pretty sure he knew at all times
the applicant went around the back of the house, Mr Bouwens followed the
applicant about a metre or two behind (28/02/23; T 495).
Bouwens said that when they walked out the back, the applicant walked past the
power box on the back of the house (27/02/23; T
495). Mr Bouwens initially said
that the applicant “flicked the switches” on the power box on the
back of the house but
then said that he did not actually see the applicant flick
the switches but saw him walk past the power box and then the lights went
(27/02/23; T 494-495). Mr Bouwens said that the applicant did not say anything
and Mr Bouwens did not remember saying anything
himself (27/02/23; T 496).
Bouwens thought this was when the deceased opened and walked out the back door
and stood on the first step, holding the door open;
and that the deceased said
“Oh, it’s only you Brendan” (27/02/23; T 496). Mr Bouwens
could not recall if the applicant
responded. Mr Bouwens did not remember saying
anything to either the applicant or the deceased when the deceased came outside.
Bouwens said the deceased did not say anything to him nor look at him,
although he was only a metre or two away (28/02/23; T 579).
Bouwens said that the applicant was standing at the bottom of the steps and that
he (Mr Bouwens) was about two metres away. Mr
Bouwens said the deceased had
clothes on his top and bottom halves, although he could not remember what
(27/02/23; T 496). Mr Bouwens
said it was not until the deceased walked out the
back door that he realised that it was a person whom he knew who was staying
(27/02/23; T 530).
Bouwens said that the applicant then started punching the deceased on his face
using his right hand and a closed fist; that the
applicant hit him “a fair
few times...about five or more” which caused the deceased to bleed from
his mouth and nose
(27/02/23; T 497). Mr Bouwens said he could not really
describe the force of the punches. Mr Bouwens said that, while punching the
deceased, the applicant said something about “getting his stuff and
leaving” (27/02/23; T 498).
Bouwens said that he was beside the applicant while the applicant was punching
the deceased; that he told him to stop and then
started to push him off the
deceased, with open palms at about chest height, about four or five times but it
did not have much effect
on the applicant (27/02/23; T 498). Mr Bouwens
said that at some point the applicant also pushed Mr Bouwens a few times and
nearly caused him to fall over (27/02/23; T 499). Mr Bouwens’
evidence was that the applicant would stop hitting the deceased,
turn around and
push Mr Bouwens away, and he did this with two closed fists. Mr Bouwens said he
was not sure if there was blood on
the applicant’s hands, although the
deceased’s face was bleeding. He said the applicant had punched the
face probably more than ten times by the time he pushed him
(28/02/23; T 592-593).
Bouwens said that, during the punches, the deceased fell backwards “sort
of thing” onto his bottom onto a step; and
that the applicant, who was
still at the bottom of the steps started to kick the deceased, as if he was
kicking a wall or a door,
trying to get in, with the bottom of the
applicant’s foot coming into contact with the deceased’s face. Mr
Bouwens said
that the applicant was mainly kicking the deceased in the face and
that it caused more blood to come from the deceased. Mr Bouwens
applicant was yelling “Get out” and “leave”. Mr Bouwens
was not sure how many times the applicant
kicked the deceased but he said it
could have been possibly more than five times. Mr Bouwens said he was pretty
sure the applicant
used both feet. Mr Bouwens was also pretty sure that the
applicant had thongs on that night but was not sure if he was wearing them
kicking the deceased (27/02/23; T 499-501).
Bouwens said that after his pushes to the applicant (to try to get him off the
deceased) the deceased got himself up. Mr Bouwens
thought the deceased used the
handrail. Mr Bouwens said that the applicant stood right in front of the
deceased as he got up (27/02/23;
T 499-501).
Bouwens said that the deceased went inside the house and the applicant followed
him. Mr Bouwens said that the applicant had blood
on him, he thought mainly on
his face and a strip down his shirt (27/02/23; T 501-502).
the course of his evidence, Mr Bouwens marked positions on a photograph of the
back door and patio, through the assault out the
back of the house (Ex 6),
showing the deceased on the step, the applicant in front of the step, and Mr
Bouwens to the applicant’s
side (28/02/23; T 597).
Bouwens’ evidence was that he did not go inside the house at all
(28/02/23; T 590).
Call to Ms Jones while the deceased and the
applicant were inside house
Bouwens’ evidence was that when the deceased and the applicant went inside
the house, he went out the front to where the
driveway meets the road and called
Mr Radburn. Mr Bouwens said that he did this “to try and help me assist to
stop Brendan”.
Mr Bouwens said that he tried to call Mr Radburn around
four times but Mr Radburn would not pick up; and then Mr Bouwens called Ms
Jones. Mr Bouwens said that he told Ms Jones “to get Ricky down cause I
can’t stop Brendan”, though he could not
remember the words that he
used. Mr Bouwens said that initially during the call to Ms Jones the applicant
and the deceased were inside
and he could not hear anything. Mr Bouwens thought
he was on the phone to Ms Jones for maybe two to three minutes (27/02/23; T
Front yard assaults
Bouwens gave evidence that, while he was still on the phone to Ms Jones, the
deceased and the applicant came out of the house again
and he could see them in
the driveway. Mr Bouwens could not recall what was being said. Mr Bouwens said
that he saw the deceased
at the front of the car, with the applicant very close
behind him, and he thought that the applicant was pushing the deceased to
back. Mr Bouwens was not too sure if anything was said (27/02/23; T 504). Mr
Bouwens could not see if the deceased was carrying
anything but thought he had
keys and a phone (27/02/23; T 505).
Bouwens said that the applicant and the deceased went around to the
driver’s door (27/02/23; T 504). He thought he was still
on the phone to
Ms Jones at the time (27/02/23; T 555). Mr Bouwens said he thought the
applicant was “just telling [the deceased]
to leave”. He said he did
not remember the deceased saying anything. Mr Bouwens thought this was when the
applicant starting
hitting and punching the deceased again. Mr Bouwens thought
the deceased was trying to get into his car, with his right hand trying
the door handle. Mr Bouwens did not see whether the deceased got the door open.
Mr Bouwens said that the applicant was on
his right side, punching the deceased
to the face. Mr Bouwens was not too sure how many punches there were (27/02/23;
Bouwens said that the applicant was still yelling at the deceased to leave and
thought that was when the applicant “knocked
him out” because the
deceased fell to the ground, “sort of on his bum”, leaning into the
car with his left shoulder.
Mr Bouwens thought that the applicant had knocked
the deceased out. Mr Bouwens said that the applicant then “started to
the deceased to his head, probably about five times, using “a
fair bit of force” (27/02/23; T 506). Mr Bouwens said he
could hear (not
see) banging against the car and that it was the deceased’s head banging
against the car. Mr Bouwens could
not recall if the applicant was saying
anything but said the deceased was not saying anything and was not moving. Mr
Bouwens said
that during the “kneeing” he was standing very close to
the back of the car (27/02/23; T 507).
Bouwens did not know whether the deceased fell or the applicant pushed him but
said that the deceased ended up on his back “laying
feet to the front of
the car and head at the end” near the back wheel (27/02/23; T 508).
Mr Bouwens thought he was still on
the phone to Ms Jones (27/02/23; T 511).
Mr Bouwens said that the applicant starting jumping on the deceased, that the
put his right hand on the car and left hand on the top of the fence,
“levering himself up” with his arms and jumping
deceased’s head, chest and shoulders (27/02/23; T 508). Mr Bouwens said
that the bottom of the applicant’s feet
(he thought the whole feet) came
into contact mainly with the side of the applicant’s head or face but also
his chest and shoulders
as well. (At this point in the evidence, Mr Bouwens
asked for a break and the trial judge said they could have a break or
and see if [Mr Bouwens] can collect himself”. Mr Bouwens
decided to continue; 27/02/23; T 509).
Bouwens said he could not remember if the applicant was saying anything; he said
that the deceased was just lying there, not making
any noise. Mr Bouwens
was not too sure if he was still on the phone to Ms Jones while the applicant
was jumping on the deceased and
could not remember when they hung up (27/02/23;
T 509; T 511-512).
how far away he was when the applicant jumped on the deceased, Mr Bouwens
said “I was trying to push him off” and
that he would walk up to the
applicant and try to push him “same as what I did out the back”.
Mr Bouwens said he did
this “a lot of times”, with both his
hands to the applicant’s chest (27/02/23; T 510). Mr Bouwens said his own
feet would have been really close to the deceased’s head when he pushed
the applicant, with both hands to his chest (27/02/23;
T 515). Mr Bouwens said
his pushing did not have much effect on the applicant but that the applicant
“fell back a little bit”
and then pushed Mr Bouwens in the chest
with his two fists (27/02/23; T 510), which caused Mr Bouwens to go
“flying back”
and fell back two or three metres but did not end up
on the ground (27/02/23; T 511). Mr Bouwens said that he would then have
asked again about the respective positions of himself, the applicant and the
deceased, Mr Bouwens said that after the applicant
did three jumps “off
the fence and the car” the applicant stood over the deceased with his feet
on either side of him,
lifted him by clenching the front of his shirt and
dragged him to the back of the car (27/02/23; T 514). Mr Bouwens said that the
deceased was just lifeless when being dragged; not moving or saying anything.
Mr Bouwens said, after the applicant moved the deceased,
this was the
closest that Mr Bouwens got to the deceased, at his head (27/02/23; T
Bouwens said that he was not sure if, after he (Mr Bouwens) fell backwards, the
applicant then jumped on the deceased or whether
that was when the applicant ran
up Johnson Street towards Bogan Gate Road (27/02/23; T 512).
Bouwens said that he would not have a clue how long it was between the applicant
turning the power off and the applicant running
away (27/02/23;
T 512-513).
After the applicant ran away
Bouwens’ evidence was that, when the applicant ran up the road, up Johnson
Street towards Bogan Gate Way, he (Mr Bouwens)
“just stood around freaking
out, waiting for Ricky to turn up” at the end of the driveway (27/02/23; T
513; T 562). Mr
Bouwens thought he called Ms Jones a second time again and asked
where Mr Radburn was (27/02/23; T 513). (This is not supported by
Bouwens said that at this time the deceased’s face was covered in blood
and the deceased was not moving or making
any noises. Mr Bouwens did not go to
check on the deceased (27/02/23; T 518).
cross-examination, taken to Ex F which showed no call to Ms Jones after 3:55am
(until the second call to Ms Jones at 4.17am), Mr
Bouwens said the second call
may have been to Mr Radburn’s phone, which Mr Radburn did not have with
him (when Mr Radburn went
to Johnson Street) (28/02/23; T 600-601).
Bouwens said that when Mr Radburn arrived he was still standing on the driveway,
closest to the road; estimating that this would
have been about five metres from
the deceased. Mr Bouwens said Mr Radburn stopped his car near the power pole, a
couple of metres
down the road towards town (27/02/23; T 518). Mr Bouwens could
not remember the first thing Mr Radburn did when he got out of the
whether they spoke (27/02/23; T 519).
to his ERISP, in which Mr Bouwens had suggested that the applicant ran off when
Mr Radburn turned up (Q/A 441), Mr Bouwens did
not think this was correct. He
said that the applicant ran back (to the Johnson Street house) once Mr Radburn
turned up (28/02/23;
Applicant’s return
Bouwens said that he called 000 on his phone but could not speak and gave the
phone to Mr Radburn. Mr Bouwens said that he was
scared (27/02/23; T 519). Mr
Bouwens thought the 000 call was made straight away when Mr Radburn arrived
(28/02/23; T 602). Mr Bouwens
said that he was standing three metres or
something away from Mr Radburn the whole time that Mr Radburn was on the 000
call. He was
not sure where Mr Radburn was holding the phone (27/02/23; T
whether anything happened while Mr Radburn was on the phone to 000, Mr Bouwens
said “That’s when Brendan come running
back” (27/02/23; T
520). Mr Bouwens was not too sure how long Mr Radburn had been on the phone by
then, estimating that it
was maybe a couple of minutes (27/02/23; T 521).
Mr Bouwens said that he and Mr Radburn were still together at the end of the
(27/02/23; T 521; 28/02/23; T 603-4).
Bouwens said the applicant came back from the “Bogan Gate side” of
the street and from the directions of the houses
(rather than the pubs); that
the deceased was still in the same spot behind the car; and that the applicant
jumped back on the deceased.
Mr Bouwens said “He just ran back, and then
I’m pretty sure he just used both feet and jumped” and that his feet
came into contact with the deceased’s head (27/02/23; T 520). Mr Bouwens
was not sure how many times the applicant jumped
on the deceased. Mr Bouwens
thought the deceased gurgled but did not say anything or move (27/02/23;
Bouwens said that Mr Radburn went to walk over to the applicant and said
“something like get off him”. Mr Bouwens was
not sure how close
Mr Radburn got to the deceased but said it was not too close. Mr Bouwens
did not think that Mr Radburn and the
applicant touched each other (27/02/23;
T 521). Mr Bouwens said that the applicant went up to Mr Radburn and said
be next or something like that” in an angry voice
(27/02/23; T 522). Mr Bouwens did not think Mr Radburn did anything after
the applicant said that, and said that he thought Mr Radburn was still on the
phone. Asked if Mr Radburn was still on the phone (the
000 call) at that
point, Mr Bouwens said “At that point, I think he was” (27/02/23; T
522; see also 28/02/23; T 603).
cross-examination, asked whether the 000 call was made “straight
away” when Mr Radburn arrived, Mr Bouwens said he
thought so (28/02/23; T
602). Mr Bouwens said he could not remember the events between Mr Radburn
arriving and the phone call being
made. Mr Bouwens was “pretty sure”
the applicant did not return before the 000 call (28/02/23; T 602). Mr Bouwens
that the applicant returned while Mr Radburn was on the phone and
that the applicant jumped on the deceased’s head again. Mr
Bouwens was not
sure how far the applicant was away from Mr Radburn when the applicant said
“you’ll be next” but
said “not far away” (being a
metre or two) (28/02/23; T 603-604). Mr Bouwens said the applicant’s voice
but not too loud (28/02/23; T 604).
000 call (Ex D) was played to Mr Bouwens and he was provided with the transcript
of the call (28/02/23; T 606-607). Asked to identify
when it was that the
applicant came back and Mr Radburn told him to stop; and when the applicant
jumped on the deceased, Mr Bouwens
said “I’d say when it went
quiet” (28/02/23; T 607). Mr Bouwens denied that he was lying about the
applicant coming
back while Mr Radburn was on the phone (28/02/23; T 608).
Bouwens was not too sure where Mr Radburn had the phone (during the 000 call),
for example whether it was up to his ear or something
else (28/02/23; T
to his ERISP in which Mr Bouwens said:
That’s - I think Ricky threw me the phone when he was still on the phone
to triple-zero. And then Brendan took off and said
he was ‘next’.
Mr Bouwens’ evidence at trial was that he did not remember the phone
being tossed to him or of him holding the phone (28/02/23;
Bouwens did not remember sitting in Mr Radburn’s car at any point before
the police arrived and did not remember going for
a drive with Mr Radburn,
including through the 000 call (cf Mr Radburn’s statement to the police).
Mr Bouwens said he was not
in the car at any point when it drove in reverse
with its lights off (27/02/23; T 558).
Bouwens’ evidence was that he did not remember having (or did not have) a
discussion with Mr Radburn about the detail of
the applicant stomping on the
deceased while Mr Radburn was on the 000 call (28/02/23; T 619-620).
Bouwens said that the applicant ran off, away from town. Mr Bouwens did not
remember the applicant say anything else to the deceased
through the whole
incident apart from telling him to leave (27/02/23; T 522-523).
Bouwens said that all he knew that the applicant was wearing were his footy
shorts and thongs ;and that he did not see the applicant
again that morning
(27/02/23; T 522). Mr Bouwens said that through the whole incident he did not
take off his moonboot (27/02/23;
T 524; T 543-544). Mr Bouwens said he was not
injured at all (27/02/23; T 528).
Police arrive
Bouwens said that once the applicant left again he and Mr Radburn just stayed
together on the front lawn and driveway waiting for
the police to arrive. Mr
Bouwens said that he was two metres or so from the applicant. Mr Bouwens
did not think that he or Mr Radburn
went near or checked on the deceased. Mr
Bouwens said that the deceased coughed but he did not see him move (27/02/23; T
Bouwens thought Mr Radburn stayed on the 000 call until the police arrived, then
Mr Radburn gave Mr Bouwens’ phone back to
him (27/02/23; T 522-523).
Mr Bouwens said he gave the police the deceased’s phone, which he picked
up from the driveway “sort
of near” the corner of the house behind
the car (27/02/23; T 523; T 557). In cross-examination, Mr Bouwens was unable to
why he picked the deceased’s phone up at the scene. Mr Bouwens
said he took it to Mr Radburn’s car without realising
he had it and then
gave it to police (28/02/23; T 601).
Bouwens thought he spoke to two police officers. He did not remember what they
spoke about, although he gave them his name and
mobile number (27/02/23; T
524-525; T 557). Mr Bouwens said that stayed with the ambulance until the police
said he could go. He
was not sure how long the police were there before he left
(27/02/23; T 524).
Hugh Moore and Natalie Rolfe were the first police officers to arrive. They said
that as they approached the Johnson Street
house, Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn
were walking near the Johnson Street house towards town. Constable Moore (XN at
T 649) saw Bouwens
and Radburn walking in a south easterly direction along
Johnson Street. Mr Radburn’s car was parked in the gutter behind them,
front of the Johnson Street house (28/02/32; T 649-650; 670-671).
account is that Mr Bouwens said to Constable Moore “We walked over here,
then we seen him over there and then we was just
like” and made a gesture
as if to say “I don’t know” and said “That’s when
we called” and
that Mr Bouwens told Constable Rolfe that the person was
“all in black” (28/02/23; T 656-657)
Bouwens’ evidence at trial was that he did not remember these
conversations. He said that, assuming he said these things
to Constable Moore,
they would have been lies. Mr Bouwens agreed that he did not just come across a
man lying over there; and so
it must have been a lie (told almost straightaway
when the police showed up). He agreed it was a lie when he said the person was
dressed all in black. Mr Bouwens did not know why he told these lies, apart from
he was scared and freaking out (27/02/23; T 559).
they left the Johnson Street address, Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn went to Mr
Radburn’s house. Mr Bouwens said that Mr Radburn
drove them both back to
Mr Radburn’s house. He did not know what time it was when they got there.
Mr Bouwens said that he thought
Ms Jones might have been up but he did not speak
to her and did not speak with Mr Radburn. Mr Bouwens thought he just went
to bed. Mr Bouwens slept in his underwear and put his clothes on the
floor (27/02/23; T 525; T 546).
Police statements
the morning of 23 January 2021 Mr Bouwens was woken by Detective Townsend. Mr
Bouwens got dressed into the same clothes he had
worn the previous night. Mr
Bouwens said that not long after that he and Mr Radburn went to the police
station. He thought that Mr
Radburn drove them there. Mr Bouwens did not
remember how long they were at the police station (27/02/23; T 525-527).
Bouwens gave his first police statement at about 8:00am (see above). At the
trial, Mr Bouwens said that it was not the truth and
that he did not tell the
truth because he was scared of the applicant (27/02/23; T 530). Mr
Bouwens’ evidence was that he did
not remember, before going to the police
station the first time, discussing the content of any statement with Mr Radburn
T 546; 28/02/23; T 617); and did not remember any point on 23 January
2021 discussing what he might tell the police. Mr Bouwens said
the only thing he
recalled of a possible conversation with Mr Radburn, before the first statement,
was about telling the truth (27/02/23;
the first statement, Mr Bouwens went back to Mr Radburn’s house.
Mr Bouwens did not remember what he did or whether he
spoke to anyone but
thought they went back to bed for a bit (27/02/23; T 527; T 541-542).
Mr Bouwens said that when he woke up he
went to the kitchen; he thought
that Mr Radburn and Ms Jones were there and that there was a conversation in the
kitchen in which
Mr Radburn said “If you haven’t told everything,
you better go down and tell them” (27/02/23; T 527; T 541-542;
28/02/23; T
618). Mr Bouwens thought that Mr Radburn’s father turned up but he was
unsure if he was there for the conversation
in which Mr Radburn had said the
this, Mr Bouwens, Mr Radburn and Mr Radburn’s father went back to the
police station and Mr Bouwens gave his second statement
some time after 1:00pm
(see above) (27/02/23; T 528; T 538).
noted earlier, Mr Bouwens accepted that his first statement contained various
lies, including that he had been staying with Mr
Radburn rather than the
applicant (though he said he did stay with Mr Radburn some of the time); that he
had left Mr Radburn’s
house to go to the Post Office Hotel rather than the
applicant’s house the previous night; and that he had called Mr Radburn
pick him up after leaving the Commercial Hotel.
Bouwens said that by the time of his second statement he had had time to think
truth and had full intentions
to tell the truth but accepted that he did not tell the truth in the second
statement “to the
full extent”. Mr Bouwens said that he did not know
why; that he was “just freaked out” straight after it happened
was scared and traumatised (27/02/23; T 541; T 554; 28/02/23; T 619). Mr Bouwens
said he very vaguely recalled making the second
statement (27/02/23; T
Bouwens accepted that he lied in the second statement about not knowing the
deceased’s name but denied this was done to distance
himself (27/02/23; T
542-543). He said he did not know why he had said in his second statement that
the applicant had “got
the shits and walked off” from the Commercial
Hotel with Mr Bouwens following some way behind (27/02/23; T 553). Mr
accepted that he did not mention going around the back of the house or
an assault occurring at the back of the house in either of
his first or second
police statements (28/02/23; T 599). Mr Bouwens also accepted that he did not
say in either statement that he
touched the power box at some point to try to
turn the lights back on (27/02/23; T 563). In cross-examination, when asked when
first gave a true account of what had happened, Mr Bouwens said “parts
of my second statement were true and then when I got
arrested at Lake Illawarra
Police Station” (the occasion when the ERISP was recorded) (28/02/23; T
Bouwens was also cross-examined about statements he made on 8 April 2021 in the
ERISP to the effect that his memory had come back
through dreams (see above). Mr
Bouwens said that it was not the case that his memory came back through dreams
but that he dreamt
the ERISP, Mr Bouwens said that he had told no one about the applicant stomping
the deceased (Q/A 552; 28/02/23; T 623):
Q: ...We’ve... obtained statements from several people
who have told us that you’ve gone to them within a day, not
after making your second statement...you’ve gone into detail regarding the
stomp, Brendan stomping in [sic] Bradley
A: I’ve not told no one.
Bouwens’ evidence at trial was that he told the police he told no one as
at the time he did not remember talking to anyone
(28/02/23; T 624). When the
conversations with various persons were put to him in cross-examination,
Mr Bouwens largely did not recall
the content of those conversations but
accepted that there were conversations with Mr Neilsen, Ms Cantwell and others
(see below)
(28/02/23; T 624-640). Mr Bouwens denied it was possible he told
people a version of events because he himself had some involvement
in the death
of the deceased. He denied that he assaulted the deceased in any way or was
involved in his death “in any way
at all” (28/02/23; T
Mr Radburn’s evidence
noted above, Mr Radburn gave his first account of his involvement in the events
on 23 January 2021 in the 000 call that he made
at around 3:55am. He gave a
similar account to police who attended at the scene and in his first police
statement on 23 January 2021.
There was no dispute at the trial that the account
he gave as to how he came to be at the scene and various of the events that
at the scene was untrue.
Radburn made a second police statement in the afternoon of 23 January 2021.
the trial, Mr Radburn said he gave an untruthful account to the 000 operator
because he was in shock and because he knew who did
it at the time. He said he
knew it was the applicant because Mr Bouwens had told Ms Jones on the
First statement
to the first police statement (MFI 10), Mr Radburn said Mr Bouwens had been
living with him in Forbes; and that on 22 January 2021
Mr Bouwens went to
the pub and he (Mr Radburn) stayed home (22/02/23; T 188). At the trial, Mr
Radburn denied that he was intending
by the last of those statements to convey
that Mr Bouwens left Mr Radburn’s house for the pub (22/02/23;
Radburn said that when he woke up from Mr Bouwens calling him early on 23
January 2021 he spoke to Mr Bouwens over the phone on
Snapchat; that Mr Bouwens
asked if he (Mr Radburn) could pick him up from near the pool; he drove down to
get him from the pool and
he saw Mr Bouwens standing on the side of the road on
Johnson Street about 100m from the pool (22/02/23; T 190-192). Mr Radburn
that, after he collected Mr Bouwens from that location (22/02/23; T 193;
MFI 10 at [7]):
I did a U-turn and headed back on Johnson Street. As I was driving, in my
headlights I saw a man standing at a house in a driveway
on the left-hand side
of Johnson Street. I pulled up because I saw the male had stomped his foot by
picking it up and slamming it
down. This action drew my attention because I saw
another male was laying on the ground nearby where he had stomped his foot. I
up because I knew it was an altercation that was occurring from seeing
previous incidents and fights occurred during my life. I do
not know where the
male landed his foot...
Radburn maintained at trial that he saw a stomping on the head, although not at
that time, but said that the rest of the above
extract of his first statement
was not true (22/02/23; T 193).
Radburn did not identify the applicant but purported to give a description of
the standing male (22/02/23; T 194-195). (In his
evidence at trial, Mr Radburn
said he did not identify the applicant because he was scared and the applicant
was a mate: 22/02/23;
T 213.) Mr Radburn said (22/02/23; T 197; MFI 10 at
Upon seeing my vehicle pull up, the male has run along Johnson Street in a
westerly direction. I did not see where he went.
Radburn then gave reasons why he could not chase the male; and said (22/02/23; T
197; MFI 10 at [9]):
As soon as the male ran off, Corey and I exited the car and walked over to the
male that was on the ground.
to the 000 call, Mr Radburn said (22/02/23; T 198-199; MFI 10 at
I contacted triple-0 and remained standing at the rear of my own vehicle, which
was about 50 metres away from where the male was
on the ground.
The male triple-zero operator wanted me to go over and help him, and I
couldn’t physically do it because I was in instant shock.
Radburn said that Mr Bouwens “stayed over near the male on the
ground” (22/02/23; T 200).
Second statement
his second statement, Mr Radburn said (22/02/23; T 205; MFI 11 at
After I gave all my details [to police at the scene], Corey and I went back to
my place in my car. I had a conversation with Corey,
and I told him what I was
going to tell the cops. What I wrote in my first statement is what I told Corey.
The reason I didn’t
give this information during my first statement was
because I was really shocked and worried.
Radburn in his second statement gave an account for the first time of the
applicant returning and assaulting the deceased while
he was on the 000 call,
including (22/02/23; T 207; MFI 11 at [7]):
I went over to Brendan and called out his name. I was trying to calm him down
... When he slapped my arm away, we were face-to-face.
He was so close to me
that if I had swung at him I would have hit him.
Evidence at trial
Radburn gave evidence that, as at January 2021, he had known the applicant for
Mr Bouwens for about one year.
Mr Radburn saw the applicant several times a week and was closer to him than Mr
Bouwens (21/02/23;
T 142-143).
Radburn said that on the night of 22 January he went to bed at around 10:00pm or
10:30pm and was with Ms Jones, his partner. He
was woken in the night by his
phone vibrating and saw that Mr Bouwens was trying to call him but he just
ignored it and turned his
phone off, thinking “they were just ringing,
like being drunk” (21/02/23; T 145). He said Ms Jones’ phone then
rang immediately afterwards. Mr Radburn said that he did not know what was said
on the phone call, but Ms Jones said something to
him which made him get changed
into football shorts and jump in his car and leave within a couple of minutes of
receiving the phone
call (21/02/23; T 146-147). In re- examination, Mr Radburn
said Ms Jones told him that the applicant was bashing a fellow and he
apeshit; and that Mr Bouwens could not stop the applicant and needed Mr
Radburn’s help to stop him (22/02/23; T 215).
(The trial judge
directed the jury this could not be used as the truth of the assertions made
(22/02/23; T 215) but it does provide
some corroboration for Ms Jones’
account that Mr Bouwens said words to that effect to her.)
Radburn said that he drove to Trina Doolan’s house in Ms Jones’
bluey-silver Kia Rio; that it did not take him very
long to drive there; and
that he had headlights on. Mr Radburn did not take his phone with him (21/02/23;
Radburn said he pulled up directly in front of the driveway to Trina
Doolan’s house, off the side a little bit, facing town.
He said Mr Bouwens
was “standing there” on the left side of the driveway, on the grass
bit, “pretty much next to
the road” (21/02/23; T 149). He saw a man
lying on the driveway on his back near a parked car. He could hear the man
to breathe and making a “gurgling” noise. Mr Radburn
could not recall if Mr Bouwens said anything to him. He said Mr
Bouwens was
“shaken like a leaf, like, scared sort of thing” (21/02/23; T
Radburn said that probably a few minutes after he got there he asked
Mr Bouwens what happened; if anyone called for an ambulance
(or police);
and for his phone to call an ambulance. He said Mr Bouwens did not answer his
question about what happened (or Mr Radburn
did not recall the answer) but Mr
Bouwens said that no call had been made and gave him his phone (21/02/23; T
150-151). Mr Radburn
said they were about five metres from the person on the
ground (21/02/23; T 164-165). Mr Radburn said this was all that happened
he made the 000 call.
Radburn said he called 000 and asked for an ambulance and that, when he made the
000 call, he was standing near the road pretty
much next to his car,
“shitting” himself, and Mr Bouwens was next to him. Mr Radburn said
he could not hear anything
from the person on the ground. Mr Radburn gave
evidence that he was on the phone to 000 until the police arrived (21/02/23;
whether he did anything between calling 000 and the police arriving,
Mr Radburn said that “We went for a drive to look
for Brendan”
in his car, which he drove with Mr Bouwens in the passenger seat and with
headphones on. Mr Radburn said that
the drive went for five minutes; that they
drove up Battye Street and he yelled out “Brendan”. During this
time, Mr Radburn
said that he held the phone in his hand, just beside him, on
speaker. He thought they went up Battye Street. Mr Radburn said that
called out something but he did not hear what it was; that there was no response
and they went back to Trina Doolan’s
house. Mr Radburn said they were gone
for a minute and he parked facing in the driveway on a bit of an angle with the
parking lights
on (21/02/23; T 152-154).
Radburn said that he and Mr Bouwens got out of the car. Mr Radburn said he stood
in the driveway. He said the applicant came back
and violently grabbed the
person on the ground by the shoulder and dragged him a metre or so backwards
towards the road, told him
to get up reasonably loudly, and then jumped on him
(or stomped him with his foot to the head) twice again (21/02/23; T 155-156).
Radburn said that he was still on the 000 call when the applicant returned
(21/02/23; T 165-167).
Radburn said he was about five metres away from the person on the ground but
went over to the applicant and pushed him across the
chest to stop him. Mr
Radburn said that this moved the applicant about a metre from the person. Mr
Radburn said the applicant pushed
or slapped Mr Radburn’s arm away and
“aggressively” and “pretty loud[ly]” told him he
“was next”.
Mr Radburn said that the applicant ran away up
Johnson Street. Mr Radburn did not know where Mr Bouwens was when this happened.
Radburn said that it was maybe ten minutes between the applicant running away
and the police arriving (21/02/23; T 157-158).
Mr Radburn’s evidence, the 000 call was played (21/02/23; T 158).
Mr Radburn had listened to the call a day or so before
he gave evidence in
the trial (21/02/23; T 160-167). (He had earlier given evidence in the Dubbo
Local Court unaware that there was
a recording of the call. Mr Radburn had a
transcript of that evidence. The applicant notes that Mr Radburn’s
evidence at trial
was largely consistent with what he had said in the Dubbo
Local Court (21/02/23; T 167)).
the trial, Mr Radburn agreed that he said three times in the 000 call (the last
time also to the attending police) that he was
just picking his mate up from the
pub and that he was effectively telling the 000 operator that he and
Mr Bouwens just came upon
this person. Mr Radburn did not know why he said
these lies but denied he was trying to distance himself and Mr Bouwens as much
possible from the deceased (22/02/23; T 212).
Radburn could not identify when, in the course of the 000 call: he went for a
drive; when the applicant came back; when he called
out to the applicant (trying
to calm him down); when the applicant dragged the deceased and stomped on him;
or when the applicant
said “you’re next” but maintained that
this account was not a lie (21/02/23; T 168-169; 22/02/23; T 210).
Radburn agreed that he found the applicant coming back “shocking”
but said it did not occur to him at all to tell the
operator what was going on
with the applicant. Mr Radburn said he was in “shock” when he told
the operator he was 50
metres away (and that he was not good with distances). He
did not remember whether this was before or after he went over to the applicant
(as he recounted in his second statement). Mr Radburn said he had the phone in
his other hand when he pushed the applicant away.
Mr Radburn said that he was
scared to tell the operator what he saw (21/02/23; T 168-170).
cross-examination, Mr Radburn admitted that he lied in various respects in his
first police statement: that Mr Bouwens had been
living with him for about a
month; that he spoke to Mr Bouwens in the morning of 23 January 2021 before he
went to pick him up; that
he picked Mr Bouwens up from near a pool; and that he
saw an altercation on Johnson Street on the way back by chance (22/02/23; T
188-193). He was unable to explain why he lied about specific things that were
put to him but later said he lied in his first statement
because he was scared
of the situation because it was a murder. He denied that it was possible he
lied to protect Mr Bouwens (22/02/23;
Radburn said that, back at his house (in the early hours of 23 January 2021
before he gave his first police statement), he told
Ms Jones what he saw and
that she said not much back, nothing that he recalled (22/02/23; T 205). The
effect of Mr Radburn’s
evidence was that Mr Bouwens was not there for this
conversation. Mr Radburn said that when he got home, he spoke to Ms Jones
cried; and that Mr Bouwens showered and stayed in a spare room. He said
that the following morning they went with a detective to
give statements. They
were there for a few hours and then went back to Mr Radburn’s
Radburn said he was picked up again later that afternoon to go back to the
station. He said he did not tell the truth to police
in his first statement but
did in his second statement (21/02/23; T 162).
cross-examination, Mr Radburn agreed that he was absolutely certain that he did
not have a conversation with anybody prior to making
his second statement
(22/02/23; T 202). He was then asked whether he remembered saying in the second
statement that, after he made
the first statement, he spoke to his father and
told him what actually happened, and that his father told him and Mr Bouwens
they had to go and tell the truth. Mr Radburn said he did remember telling
his father and agreed he had a conversation with him.
He agreed that what he
said (four to five questions earlier) about him not having any conversations
with anybody was a lie, for which
he had no explanation. Mr Radburn maintained
that his father had separate conversations with him and Mr Bouwens (22/02/23; T
Radburn repeatedly said that he had not, at the time he made the first
statement, spoken to Mr Bouwens about what happened and
denied having any
conversation with him before they went to the police (22/02/23; T 206).
Cross-examined on a paragraph in his second
statement where Mr Radburn said that
he had a conversation with Mr Bouwens and “told him what I was going to
tell the cops”
after they went back to his house on the morning of
23 January 2021 (i.e., before they made their first statements), Mr Radburn
that there was a conversation and that he had lied in court by saying
there was none. Mr Radburn said he had no reason why he lied
and again denied that he was trying to protect Mr Bouwens. Mr Radburn said
he was trying to protect himself because
he did nothing wrong and was brought
into a situation which was “fucked” (22/02/23; T 206). Mr Radburn
agreed the way
to have dealt with that would have been to tell the truth in his
second statement, also made on 23 January 2021, and in court, which
done (22/02/23; T 206-207).
Radburn said he did not remember, after making the first statement, having any
conversation with Mr Bouwens, in which Mr Bouwens
asked if he saw who did it, Mr
Radburn said he did not, and Mr Bouwens said it was the applicant (22/02/23; T
re-examination, Mr Radburn said that he did not mention the applicant’s
name in his first statement because he was scared
and because he (the applicant)
was his mate (22/02/23; T 213).
Radburn denied that he had anything to do with the death of the deceased or
touched him in any way (22/02/23; T 207; T 212-213).
defence argued that Mr Radburn may have been motivated to lie to protect
himself, as he was upset at being pulled into the situation
and as he was trying
to distance Mr Bouwens from involvement in the deceased’s death (08/03/23;
T 1159-1162). The trial judge
directed the jury that, if the jury was satisfied
that Mr Radburn had a motive to lie, the jury would take that into account in
assessment of his truthfulness (SU 42).
at January 2021, Ms Jones had known the applicant for about two years and,
through him, Mr Bouwens for about a year (22/02/23;
T 217-218).
Jones said that, on the night of 22-23 January 2021, Mr Bouwens called Mr
Radburn’s phone a few times, but Mr Radburn did
not answer; and that
Mr Bouwens then called Ms Jones’ phone through Facebook and she
answered. Ms Jones’ evidence was
that Mr Bouwens said “I need Boog.
Brendan has gone apeshit and is bashing a fella” and he
“couldn’t stop
him”. Ms Jones said that Mr Bouwens said they
were near Trina Doolan’s house. She said he sounded distressed, stressed
and scared. Ms Jones said she said something to Mr Radburn and he left, while
she stayed on the phone to Mr Bouwens (22/02/23; T
Jones said Mr Bouwens “just kept saying he needed Boog, to hurry up, and
then he said that Brendan had – came back.
And I could hear him
yelling...”. Asked who she could hear yelling, Ms Jones said
“Brendan” and said he needed
Mr Radburn to hurry up and that
Brendan had – come back” (22/02/23; T 221-222).
She said she could hear the applicant yelling and two or three thumps
(22/02/23; T 222; 228).
Jones said she told Mr Bouwens to put her onto the applicant so she could try to
calm him down and that she heard Mr Bouwens say
“Tara’s on the
phone...do you want to talk to her?” and the applicant said no. Ms Jones
said she heard the applicant
say “Get up” two or three times and Mr
Bouwens said “I think he killed him”. She said that not long after
that Mr Bouwens said he could see Mr Radburn’s headlights and the call
ended (22/02/23; T 222).
Jones sent two text messages when the call ended (see above). Ms Jones said
that at no stage did Mr Bouwens say he was out the
back or out the front of the
house (22/02/23; T 243). In cross-examination, Ms Jones said, in relation to the
message “Ricky
will legit bash brendan if he starts”, that she
“assumed it was a simple punch up, and [Mr Bouwens] had been trying to
stop Brendan and said that he – when he was trying to stop Brendan,
Brendan would start on him...” (22/02/23; T 229).
Jones did not call 000. She said she assumed it was just a simple fight
(22/02/23; T 229).
Jones said she was awake until Mr Radburn and Mr Bouwens came home around
5:00am. She said they “seemed very distressed”;
they sat down in the
living room, were really quiet and were both in that room when she went to bed
(22/02/23; T 226-227). Ms Jones
said she did not recall if there was any
conversation (22/02/23; T 227-228). Her evidence was to the effect that the only
Radburn ever told her was that a “fellow was bashed to
death” and, when she asked where the applicant was, Mr Radburn
said he did
not know (22/02/23; T 231).
Jones said that Mr Bouwens’ version of events (in his second statement)
that he was in the park near the pool and had kept
walking and called
Mr Radburn to pick him up and while waiting he continued walking towards
Mr Radburn’s house was incorrect
(22/02/23; T 240).
Jones maintained in cross-examination what she said she heard during the phone
call with Mr Bouwens (22/02/23; T 238). In this
regard, the applicant points to
Mr Bouwens’ statement in the ERISP that when he was talking to Ms Jones
the applicant and the
deceased were out the back and he could not hear anything
(A 415-417; 22/02/23; T 241). However, I note that Mr Bouwens’ evidence
trial was that he was on the phone both when the others were out the back and
when they came out to the front (see [65] above).
Ms Jones gave evidence before
Mr Bouwens at trial so that what he said in evidence was not put to her.
However, it is possible to
reconcile those accounts if the applicant and the
deceased did come back out the front during the course of Mr Bouwens’
minute call to Ms Jones, since if that was the correct timeline it was
presumably possible for Ms Jones to have heard what she did
of the altercation
described by Mr Bouwens. What is clear is that Ms Jones could not have
heard anything that happened during the
000 call, as that was made on the same
phone as the earlier call to her.
the summing-up, as adverted to above, the trial judge directed the jury that Ms
Jones’ evidence of what Mr Bouwens said could
only be used as evidence
that he said it, not as evidence of the truth of what he said. The trial judge
also directed the jury that
voice identification evidence (here, Ms Jones’
identification of the applicant’s voice) may be unreliable and must be
approached with special caution before being accepted as reliable, repeating
some of the defence’s reasons why it was unreliable
Rickard Radburn Snr
police did not take a statement from Mr Radburn’s father. The applicant
notes that the Officer in Charge, Detective Senior
Constable Lucan Payne, had no
explanation for this (06/03/21; T 1049). Mr Radburn Snr was not called in the
Other witnesses
● The applicant’s mother (Trina Doolan)
Doolan said that the family had known Mr Bouwens since around 2015 when he dated
her daughter, and that he and the applicant had
remained friends “off and
on” since then. Mr Bouwens had moved to Forbes at the beginning of 2021
(21/02/23; T 69-70).
Doolan gave evidence that she had known the deceased since the early 2000s. In
late 2020, he rang her “out of the blue”
and asked if he could stay
with her, after they had not had contact for a few years (21/02/23; T 71).
Ms Doolan said that she told
the applicant and Mr Bouwens about this
sometime before Christmas 2020. She gave evidence that the applicant “had
Brad was a paedophile and didn’t like the idea of [him] being
there”. The applicant told her that “we [sic] wouldn’t
around while he was there”. Ms Doolan said that Mr Bouwens told her that
“Brad had been seeing a younger girl.
Apparently she’d lied to him
She said that the
applicant was present for that conversation (21/02/23; T 72);
and that the deceased arrived the next day in his car (21/02/23; T
car, a maroon Toyota Camry, was parked in the driveway at the Johnson Street
house at the time of his death.)
Doolan said that the deceased told her that he did not want anyone to know he
was staying there and that in the time he was there
he slept all day and would
wake in the afternoon. Ms Doolan gave evidence that Mr Bouwens came to the
house twice while the deceased
was there: first, on the day the deceased arrived
when Mr Bouwens came to her house to borrow some money to buy tyres; second, on
21 January 2021 when Mr Bouwens returned to assist her to service her car. Ms
Doolan said that on the second occasion, the deceased
did not get up until after
Mr Bouwens had left at around 2:00pm. Ms Doolan said that the deceased was home
on both occasions that
Mr Bouwens visited but did not give any evidence
that they saw one another (21/02/23; T 73-74).
the morning of 22 January 2021, Ms Doolan left Forbes to go camping on the South
Coast with her daughter and grandchildren. She
said she did not see the
deceased that morning but heard him snoring before she left. Ms Doolan
remained on the South Coast until
24 January 2021 (21/02/23; T 76).
cross-examination, Ms Doolan said she had a conversation with Mr Bouwens
to ask him to find
somewhere else to stay”. She said she had told both Mr Bouwens and the
applicant that she was going away
for the weekend. She had told the applicant
that the deceased was at her house earlier in the week (21/02/23;
Evidence of witnesses who were with Mr Bouwens and
the applicant earlier that night
was called from various witnesses who were with Mr Bouwens and the applicant
over the course of the night on 22 January 2021,
which was not contentious, to
the effect that the applicant and Mr Bouwens were in good spirits that night and
that there was nothing
unusual about their night out. In summary, that evidence
was as follows.
Molloy, a friend of the applicant and Mr Bouwens, did not go to the Post Office
Hotel but gave evidence that she, the applicant
and Mr Bouwens were drinking
beer at the applicant’s house earlier in the evening. She and another
friend, Meg Sladek, gave
them a lift to the Post Office Hotel at about 10:30pm
and said they did not appear to be intoxicated at that time.
Neilson, the applicant’s cousin, gave evidence that the applicant and Mr
Bouwens arrived at the Post Office Hotel at around
10:30pm and the applicant
told him he had had a couple of beers already; and that the applicant was in a
good mood. Mr Neilson said
that when the group left the Commercial Hotel some
people went back to someone’s house (Caitlin Northey’s house) but
the applicant and Mr Bouwens did not go with them because Ms Northey (referred
to in parts of the evidence as “Min”)
didn’t want many people
at her house, and “a few people there didn’t go much on Corey”
(22/02/23; T 251-253).
Swanston gave evidence that he usually always saw Mr Bouwens and the applicant
together (23/02/23; T 285). He said when they
left the Commercial Hotel at
around 3:00am he walked with Mr Bouwens and the applicant to his house which was
quite close to the
Commercial Hotel (23/02/23; T 286). It took 5-10 minutes to
reach his house. He said that as they walked Mr Bouwens “kept
up with the
group” and he did not notice him dropping back (23/02/23; T 291). He
could not recall if Mr Bouwens and the applicant
went into his house with him.
He said in cross-examination that he recalled having Canadian Club beverages in
his fridge at the
time (which was relevant because Mr Bouwens said that they did
go to his house and he drank a Canadian Club from the fridge) (23/02/23;
Schaefer, a good friend of Mr Bouwens, gave evidence that she received a video
on the “Snapchat” messaging application
from Mr Bouwens at about
3:00am on 23 January 2021 which showed the applicant and Mr Bouwens
“giggling, laughing, walking down
Johnson Street” near the Catholic
Church. She said that she could not see Mr Bouwens in the video but could hear
(23/02/23; T 333-334).
Evidence of neighbours and local
Hailey Buchanan
summarising Ms Buchanan’s evidence at trial, it is relevant to set out the
circumstances in which she came to give evidence.
1 July 2021, Detective Senior Constables Nolan and Sherlock spoke to Hayley
Buchanan about an unrelated investigation involving
a child (23/02/23; T
279-280). DSC Nolan knew that detectives investigating the deceased’s
death wished to speak to someone
matching Ms Buchanan’s description. DSC
Nolan alluded to the deceased’s death (23/02/23; T 281). Ms Buchanan said
“really rattled” her and Ms Nolan asked what she knew about the
murder (23/02/23; T 280). DSC Nolan’s evidence
was that Ms Buchanan said
words to the effect (23/02/23; T 281):
I was at the Forbes Inn on the night of the murder. When I was walking home down
Johnson, I saw two blokes kicking the shit out of
something on the ground. I
heard yelping noises and just thought it was a dog or something. I didn’t
know the blokes. The next
day, I heard there was a murder and realised it was at
the same house where I saw the two blokes.
here, at the trial, Ms Buchanan recalled speaking to DSC Nolan about the
murder when reporting child abuse (though she could
not recall her name)
(22/02/23; T 171). DSC Nolan’s account of her conversation with
Ms Buchanan was read to Ms Buchanan. Ms
Buchanan was very unsure about
what she told DSC Nolan but appears to have been adamant that she would not have
said there were two
blokes kicking as there were not (22/02/23; T 247-248).
Nolan did not recall Ms Buchanan mentioning either of the two males running away
(23/02/23; T 282). DSC Nolan asked Ms Buchanan
if she spoke to the police at the
time. Ms Buchanan said she spoke to one a few days later and told them what she
saw but no one
ever called her back. At the trial, Ms Buchanan guessed that the
detective she spoke to on the evening of 23 January 2021 disregarded
“cracked-out drug user” (21/02/23; T 103). (The trial judge directed
the jury on the potential for Ms Buchanan’s
drug use to have affected
her reliability: SU 43.)
appeared to DSC Nolan that Ms Buchanan had been smoking, and was under the
influence of, cannabis; but she also said that the account
Ms Buchanan gave
was lucid. DSC Nolan recorded what Ms Buchanan had said in an email 8 days after
the conversation (23/02/23; T 280;
the months after July 2021, Ms Buchanan was involved in driving offences,
resisting an officer and drug supply. She was arrested
several times (21/02/23;
T 94; T 128-131; T 135). As at 1 October 2021 she was still using cannabis but
said she was only using methamphetamine
occasionally (21/02/23; T 130). On 21
October 2021 she handed herself into police on a warrant; she said this was
after being given
a hotshot, being in hospital and missing a court date. It was
while in police custody that Ms Buchanan made her first police statement
Detective Payne (21/02/23; T 101-102; T 128; T 131). (As noted below, Ms
Buchanan denied that she decided to make a statement
because she was motivated
to avoid custody.)
Buchanan’s evidence at the trial was that at about 4:00am on a morning in
January 2021 she left the Forbes Inn (where she
was playing the poker machines)
and walked along Johnson Street (on the opposite side from Trina Doolan’s
house) on the way
to her home in Cedar Crescent (21/02/23; T 84). She said she
was concentrating on her phone as she walked (21/02/23; T 99-100; T
Buchanan said when she was walking up Johnson Street (effectively not quite
opposite the Johnson Street house) she heard an “empty,
sound, like the thud of someone kicking a dog “in the guts”. She
said she heard “Get up. Fucking
get up, cunt. Get up”
quite hostile, male voice. She said she was crossing the road from “St
Laurence’s” along Johnson Street when
she heard these noises. Ms
Buchanan said she did not see any kicking, only heard it (21/02/23; T 85).
Buchanan said she saw a man standing in the gutter near a tree out the front of
a house (fairly close to the Johnson Street house)
and another man standing a
bit further in the yard out the front of a house, which she described as a brick
duplex or flat in the
middle of the front yard. Ms Buchanan said the man in the
gutter had on long brown shorts, a bit past the knees, and a light coloured
shirt which was “whitey-cream” (21/02/23; T 86). She said the man in
the yard was slim, had brown bushy curly hair, a
pink or salmon coloured shirt,
camel/type skin coloured shorts and no shoes. Ms Buchanan said she saw the front
of a white car parked
in the yard of the house (21/02/23; T 88). (While the
description of the clothing does not match the clothing worn by the applicant
and Mr Bouwens, the location of the two men according to Ms Buchanan is
consistent with Mr Bouwens’ account of events.)
respect to the man in the yard Ms Buchanan said “I just seen someone
standing there, and then I yelled at them and said
‘Your dog’s not
going to listen to you when you’re beating the fuck out of it’,
because I thought they were
bashing a dog...” (21/02/23; T 87).
Buchanan said that “next minute – I yelled at him, and then
he’s running up the street”. She said he ran
up Johnson Street
(21/02/23; T 87). Asked where he was heading towards, Ms Buchanan said
“There’s an old old people’s
street that will go straight down, and then another one going down towards the
town off Johnson Street”.
She said he was running to the “corner
house” which she described as a “complex type thing”. (I
to note that this appears to be a description of the corner of Johnson
and Battye/Prince Streets.) Ms Buchanan said that the man
then ran into the
middle of the yard of the corner house and then ran across the road directly at
her. She said that she was still
walking at this point. Ms Buchanan said
that the man did not have any shoes on (21/02/23; T 89-90).
Buchanan said that the man turned and ran away again straight down the street;
not down Johnson Street this time but down past
“the martyr [sic: Mater]
aged care hospital”. Ms Buchanan described an area near Johnson Street
where “you can
go down past them flats, or you can go straight ahead down
past [the Mater], and he went straight down past [the Mater]” (seemingly
down Prince Street) (21/02/23; T 91).
Buchanan said that another man then drove up to the corner of the duplex in a
white SUV-type car from the direction where she first
saw the two men and got
out of the car and was yelling out “Dooley, Dooley” but that the man
“just kept running
like he’d seen a ghost” (21/02/23; T
Buchanan said that an old man with a dog walked out of the house she was in
front of, onto his driveway, just past Little Underwood
Street. She said the
running male and the male with the dog were less than ten metres apart, possibly
less than five (21/02/23;
T 91-92). (The man with a dog is consistent with Mr
Nelson’s account that he left his house to walk his dog around this time
and with his description of seeing a woman with red hair and a sunken look
– see below.)
Buchanan gave evidence that she spoke to a police officer at the crime scene
later during the afternoon of 23 January 2021 and
told a detective that she had
been walking past and heard someone getting kicked and the words “Get up,
cunt, fucking get up”.
Ms Buchanan said she gave that detective her phone
number and that he called her to check it was right. She said she was told she
would be contacted but she never was (21/02/23; T 107). Ms Buchanan said
she remembered it “like a photograph” (21/02/23;
cross-examination, Ms Buchanan accepted that it was likely that she was under
the influence of drugs at the time she witnessed
the events she described. She
said she was a user of marijuana and methylamphetamine but on 23 January 2021
thought she would have
only used marijuana and not methamphetamine because that
was a drug she used with her partner who was not around at that time (21/02/23;
T 94). Ms Buchanan accepted in cross-examination that she was not watching what
happened intently because she was also writing a
text message to her partner at
the time (21/02/23; T 99) (this is consistent with Mr Nelson’s
evidence that the woman he saw
was looking at her phone).
cross-examination it was put to Ms Buchanan that she did not say anything in her
first statement about the man running into a yard
and across the street and then
approaching her. She said that “the detective obviously wasn’t
listening, or was too
busy writing down... other things”. In her
statement, Ms Buchanan said that the closest she would have been to the man
whole time she saw him was the width of the roadway. In her evidence at
trial, Ms Buchanan said this was wrong, said that she told
Detective Payne
(who took her statement) about the man approaching her and that he must not have
included it (21/02/23; T 101-102).
Buchanan was also cross-examined as to the fact that her 21 October 2021
statement did not mention the person in the car saying
Ms Buchanan in the statement said that she could hear a male voice yelling
out something, she could not remember
what it was, but it was possibly a name.
In her evidence at trial, Ms Buchanan said that initially she told Detective
Lucas the name
had “ooley” in it when she made the statement but
that when she did a photo board process and “saw the last name”
realised it was “Dooley” (21/02/23; T 103-104).
Buchanan participated in a photo-board identification, on 21 January 2022. She
also said then “I couldn’t: remember
at the time, like a Tor
something. Um, yeah, I don’t know”
In cross-examination, Ms
Buchanan denied she knew by then that the applicant had been charged and said
she did not know his name
until she identified him in the photo-board (I note
that Ms Buchanan did not correctly identify the applicant in the photo-board
(see below)). Ms Buchanan said maybe it was “Dooley” that the person
in the white car was calling out. She maintained
in cross-examination that she
was not aware of the applicant’s name before the photo board process and
the police had never
mentioned a name (21/02/23; T 103-106).
video of a person walking at 3:44am was played to Ms Buchanan (Ex 2) and she
said this was possibly her (21/02/23; T 118-119).
Buchanan was also shown a video of herself completing the photo board
identification process she referred to on a computer in the
presence of police
(Ex 3). (The transcript of the photo board process was MFI 5.)
Ms Buchanan did not identify the applicant from
the photographs, but
selected a different male as the person who was kicking the dog (21/02/23; T
123-125; Exs 3-5). The applicant
notes that no witness referred to the applicant
as having the nickname “Dooley”. The applicant submits that the
and video evidence of the photo board notification show that
Ms Buchanan was not certain of the identification.
Buchanan was cross-examined about when she spoke to police (her evidence was
that this was in July or August 2021, which is corroborated
by DSC Nolan) and
when she provided her statement to police (21 October 2021). Ms Buchanan denied
that she was motivated to make
a statement by a desire to avoid custody
(21/02/23; T 135).
adverted to above, Ms Buchanan was cross-examined on what DSC Nolan said was her
account to her as to seeing “two blokes
kicking the shit out of something
on the ground”. Ms Buchanan said that she did not know whether she said
that, and did not
think she did say that but “probably would have said
that I seen ‘two blokes in the yard’”. She said she
see them doing anything but only heard the noises she described above. Ms
Buchanan was adamant that she “didn’t
say that there was two people
doing things” and said “there was one person – there was two
people in that yard.
There was one person in the gutter with their back to me,
and somebody else in the middle of the yard. Like, in the front yard”.
Asked if it was “at all possible” that she said to DSC Nolan that
there “were two blokes kicking [the] shit out
of something on the
ground?”, Ms Buchanan said “No, cause there wasn’t two blokes
kicking the shit out of something”
(22/02/23; T
Peter Nelson
Nelson lived at 39 Johnson Street, towards Black Street (24/02/23; T 445; T 449;
T 451). He gave evidence that he woke up at about
3:00am on Saturday 23 January
2021 to take his dog for a walk. He said he walked out of his house at about
3:45am. From his veranda,
he saw a girl walking past, heading out of town, who
had a patch of red hair dyed distinctly bright red hair. He thought she was
Caucasian and between 20 to 30 years; said she had a slim build; that her face
looked “sunken”; and she was “buried
in” her phone and
did not look up at him (24/02/23; T 445-446). (It is reasonable to infer that Mr
Nelson was the man with
the dog that Ms Buchanan saw.)
Mr Nelson stepped onto the footpath on Johnson Street, after the woman passed,
he heard someone calling out a name, “Dexter”,
or “Baxtor” or “something”. Asked if he saw or heard
where the calling out had come
from, Mr Nelson said “well, I was looking
at towards that direction, that’s when I seen the car there with the
on and then what made me take note was that the headlights went out
and then the car started reversing...”. Mr Nelson said
he could only see
the silhouette of the car but it was a small, 4-cylinder type of car. He then
continued his walk down Little Underwood
Lane and was walking for about two
hours (24/02/23; T 447-448).
woman was the only person Mr Nelson saw that night. He did not see a man running
off, including down Battye Street (24/02/23;
Angus lived at Johnson Street two blocks away from Trina Doolan’s house
(probably the distance of “the length of a
prime mover and a
semi-trailer” away) on the corner of Johnson and Battye Street (24/02/23;
416). He heard dogs barking and went outside, where
he heard screaming and
yelling. Mr Angus heard a “prominent”, very husky male voice say
multiple times “Come outside,
you fucking dog” (24/02/23; T
416-417). He heard moaning and a couple of other voices yelling out as well. Mr
Angus heard someone
say “You got what you deserved, you dog. You got what
you deserved”, which he thought was a different voice to the other
and thought was more likely to be a female’s voice though he was unsure.
He did not see anything but saw two cars driving
around (neither of which
matched the description of Mr Radburn’s car) – a black Mazda ute
drive around while it was happening
and something like a Volkswagen Terracan
leave a couple of minutes after the sounds stopped (24/02/23; T 417). As Mr
Angus went to
call the police, they arrived (24/02/23; T
Amy O’Donoghue
O’Donoghue lived at Johnson Street, directly across the road from the
Johnson Street house. At about 3:30am on 23 January
2021 she woke up and heard a
male voice being aggressive, really loud and swearing, saying “Get up, you
people or two voices but only one voice was saying “get up, you
She said she could also hear what sounded like “punching or
an impact” which is what made her believe there was someone
else there,
and she also thought someone else was there because of what the first person was
saying (24/02/23; T 423).
cross-examination Ms O’Donoghue was asked if she heard any other voices
and she responded that “the only thing I can
recall is a single male voice
that was really loud” and “what sounded like someone...wheezing or
like, there was someone
being hurt” (24/02/23; T 425).
O’Donoughe went to the bathroom, where the sounds were not as clear. The
sounds went on for maybe three to five minutes.
She did not hear any cars
(24/02/23; T 425-426).
Margaret Demamiel
Demamiel lived at Queen Street, behind and a few houses from the Johnson Street
house. She woke up at about 3:44am on 23 January
2021 and heard loud shouting.
It went on for about 15 minutes, then stopped for about 5-10 minutes, then went
on again for a few
(two) minutes. In the first period, Ms Demamiel heard two
male voices, maybe more, including one very aggressive voice repeating
“fuck” very loudly over and over and another voice replying. In the
second period, she heard what she thought were the
same voices but she could not
hear what was said. In a statement made that day, she said she knew there were
more than two voices
(24/02/23; T 428-430). In cross-examination she was asked
and said “I probably meant there could have been more than
two”. Ms Demamiel was not sure where the voices came from;
it was possible
from Queen or Battye Street (24/02/23; T 432).
Teale lived at Johnson Street. He said that at about 3:30am he heard voices
coming from the street that sounded agitated,
including what sounded like a
female’s voice. He went to the front of the house to see what was going
on and saw four people
walking on the footpath out the front of his house, being
two females and two males. In cross-examination, he said he did not hear
saying words like “Get up, you cunt” (24/02/23; T
Evidence of witnesses as to conversations with Mr
Bouwens after incident
witnesses gave evidence of conversations with Mr Bouwens after the incident
evidence being adduced before
Mr Bouwens gave evidence). The trial judge directed that the evidence provided
by Ms Cantwell (see
below) as to what Mr Bouwens said to her was evidence of
what he said but was not evidence of the truth of what he said and was relevant
only to his credit (22/02/23; T 272). Similar directions were specifically made
for each of Jamie Walsh (23/02/23; T 348), Michelle
Alcorn (23/02/23; T 371) and
Kim Bouwens (24/02/23; T 442), but not Nicholas Hector, Shane Neilson or Tanisha
Bouwens. However,
as noted above, the trial judge gave a general direction as
to the evidence of the applicants various accounts of the event to others
41. The evidence of those witnesses can be summarised as
Nicholas Hector
Hector knew the applicant and Mr Bouwens and had been out with them at the
Commercial Hotel on the morning of 23 January 2021.
At 7:52am on
23 January 2021, Mr Hector spoke to Mr Bouwens on the phone.
Mr Bouwens said something along the lines that he had
been at the police
station since 4:00am and “I found a dead guy’’ (23/02/23; T
Hector said Mr Bouwens seemed “rattled”. He said that after this
call he tried to call the applicant to see if he
wanted to “get on the
beers”. He agreed that in his police statement he had said “I
called [the applicant] to
see if he wanted to get together and back on the
beers, and also to make sure he was okay after what Corey had told me”.
the trial, Mr Hector was not able to explain the connection between what Mr
Bouwens told him and the applicant (23/02/23; T 344).
In cross-examination, he
said he did not recall exactly what Mr Bouwens said in their call because he was
still very intoxicated
at that point. He said it was along the lines of
“I found a dead guy” but he could not remember exactly (23/02/23; T
Jamie Walsh
Walsh was the owner of Tyreright in Forbes, where the applicant worked. He knew
Mr Bouwens for couple of months through the applicant
as the applicant’s
housemate (23/02/23; T 345-346).
Mr Walsh’s front yard after Mr Bouwens had made his second
statement (23/02/23; T 346).
Bouwens said he had just come back from the police station giving a second
statement about what happened; that Ms Doolan had let
the deceased (“this
bloke”) stay with her, and the applicant found out that he was a convicted
paedophile from the South
Coast”; that Ms Doolan was a friend of the
bloke’s sister; and that “we couldn’t stop him” or
tried to stop him” (23/02/23; T 346).
25 January 2021, Mr Walsh made a police statement, including about that
conversation (23/02/23; T 349). In that statement, Mr Walsh
said he was sure
that, at the start of the conversation, Mr Bouwens indicated that all three (the
applicant, Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn)
went up to the Johnson Street house
together (23/02/23; T 347; T 352). Mr Walsh said that Mr Bouwens said
“Brendan charged
up to his mother’s house and bashed on the
door”; and did not say anything about the power being switched off at the
house (23/02/23; T 350).
Walsh said Mr Bouwens told him that “they had stormed up there and Brendan
had knocked on the door to tell this guy to get
out of his mother’s house.
The guy started to leave...and Brendan started to assault this guy. Punching,
kicking kneeing and
then proceeding to jump on this guy’s head”
(23/02/23; T 346). He was asked “did he say what position this guy
when he jumped on his head?” and said “he must have been on the
ground cause he indicated that Brendan had used
a car bonnet and a...otto bin I
think it was, to lever himself up in the air” and that the guy was
“asking to leave and
for help” (23/02/23; T 347).
said Mr Bouwens told him he had “tried to step in to help stop Brendan
and...Brendan got aggressive with him and tried to
swing at him and
missed,” saying they couldn’t stop him”. Mr Bouwens also told
him that he tried to “convince”
the applicant by saying
“You’ve got kids to think about and a family” and the
applicant had replied “I don’t
care, he’s a paedophile”
(23/02/23; T 347).
Walsh said that Mr Bouwens told him that Mr Radburn was there and Mr Walsh
said he asked why Mr Radburn had not “knocked
him out” and stopped
him, because he knew he had the reputation of an “ex footy player”.
Mr Walsh said that Mr
Bouwens said that Mr Radburn was on the phone to the
ambulance; and that the applicant had pointed at Mr Radburn and said
next cunt” (23/02/23; T 347).
Walsh was cross-examined on aspects of what Mr Bouwens had told him, including
that Mr Bouwens had not told him anything about
switching off the power
(23/02/23; T 350). Asked whether Mr Bouwens had said anything about his first
police statement, Mr Walsh
responded (23/02/23; T 354):
I believe it was along the lines of him and Ricky had tried to cover up a little
bit, help Brendan. And then he had gone back to
the police station to – he
had a think or whatever it may be, he’d gone back to give this –
pretty well the statement
that he’d, you know, told me that – it was
along the lines of the same statement he had told me.
Walsh said that Mr Bouwens said that, after bashing on the door, the applicant
told this guy to get out of his mother’s place”, that
the “bloke told Brendan that he would leave now and started
to walk to his
car” and that “when this bloke got outside, Brendan started
attacking him” (23/02/23; T 350).
Mr Walsh believed this was
a few steps towards his car. Mr Walsh said that Mr Bouwens said “the bloke
attempted to get to his
car asking for help and advising ... that he was trying
to leave” (23/02/23; T 351).
Walsh said that Mr Bouwens said “I tried to get Brendan to stop as he has
three kids to think about Brendan ignored me and
took a swing at me which
missed” and the applicant said “I don’t care, he’s a
paedophile” and that
Mr Bouwens said “[t]he bloke was on the
ground calling out for help and asking to leave while Brendan had one hand on
bin and one hand on the bonnet of the car, continued jumping on the
bloke’s head with both feet” (23/02/23; T 351-352).
Walsh said he asked Mr Bouwens “Why the fuck didn’t Ricky knock
Brendan out, as he was meant to be this big footballer
and tough man?” and
Mr Bouwens said “He was on the phone to the ambulance. We couldn’t
stop him. Even when he
had finished jumping on his head, apparently dead, he
turned and pointed at Ricky and said ‘You’re next cunt’”
(23/02/23; T 352).
Walsh said that Mr Bouwens said nothing to him about the applicant “coming
back” (23/02/23; T 353).
Daniel Swanston
Swanston gave evidence that on the evening of 23 January 2021 he saw Mr Bouwens
at the Vandenberg Hotel in Forbes and he appeared
shaken. Mr Bouwens said
he witnessed a murder overnight and that it was “Brendan that had done
it” (23/02/23; T 292).
He said Mr Bouwens did not give any further
details about what happened (23/02/23; T 300).
Alcorn (Mr Bouwens’ cousin) gave evidence that she received a Snapchat
message from him one morning saying he had just
witnessed a murder and was at
the police station (23/02/23; T 355). She saw him later that night at the
Vandenberg Hotel and he
looked pale and did not say much (23/02/23; T
Michelle Alcorn
Alcorn (Mr Bouwens’ aunt and Jessica’s mother) knew the applicant as
she was a customer of Tyreright (23/02/23; T 364-367).
Ms Alcorn was staying in
Forbes on the weekend of 23-24 January 2021. She spoke with Mr Bouwens at
the Vandenburg Hotel on the
evening of 23 January 2021 and made a statement on
can’t believe I saw Brendan jumping off the back of a car onto
the man’s head”, “I picked the bloke’s
phone and it was
and it was covered in blood, so I wiped it on my shirt and put it in my
pocket” he did not realise he had
so much blood on him until he got to the
police station and that “When I bent over him, he had a mouthful of blood.
and it splattered all over me, then he died” (23/02/23; T
said Mr Bouwens was pale and seemed like he was in shock at the time. She said
he did not provide any more details and she did
not ask for any, because she
assumed that Mr Bouwens had seen “something horrific” and she
“was just going with
the flow” (23/02/23; T
Shane Neilson
Neilson (the applicant’s cousin) said he spoke to Mr Bouwens at Forbes KFC
just after 3:00pm on 24 January 2021 (23/02/23;
I asked him what happened and he told me that Brendan had lost it, and he
couldn’t stop him. And I asked, “How could
you not stop him?”
And he said, “Oh, he was just in a fit of rage.” And then he told me
that Ricky Radburn was
there, and I said “Surely two of youse could have
stopped him if that’s the case.” And he said “No, we
And I said to him, “Look at the size of Ricky.
Surely you could have stopped him.” I said, “You could have tackled
him if” – you know, I just didn’t believe that that’s
what – what happened there. And then I asked
him, “Did you go into
the house?”
...And Corey replied, “No, we didn’t. We turned the power off to
lure him out”.
whether Mr Bouwens told him anything about the man who had been killed, Mr
Neilson said that he had heard rumours and so he
asked Mr Bouwens “is
it true that he had slept with a young girl?” or a 15-year-old girl and
that Mr Bouwens had replied
“No. She was only 12”. Mr Neilsen said
he felt he was not getting the truth from Mr Bouwens and that he said he could
not eat or drink but was holding a bag of KFC (23/02/23; T 255). He was not
cross-examined.
note that Ms Doolan was cross-examined on a conversation she had with
Mr Neilsen sometime after 23 January 2021. She said she remembered
to him, and she thought that at one stage the conversation was about the power
being turned off. Her evidence was to the
effect that Mr Neilsen had a
conversation with Mr Bouwens at KFC in which Mr Bouwens said that he had turned
the power off and “that
he wanted to lure him out” (21/02/23;
Georgia Cantwell
Cantwell (Mr Hector’s then partner and a friend of the applicant through
whom she knew Mr Bouwens) was in the group that
went out on the night of 22-23
January 2021 (23/02/23; T 256-258).
Cantwell gave evidence that around a week after the murder Mr Bouwens and his
sister (Tanisha) came to her house to pick up a speaker
that Ms Bouwens had
left there (on 31 January 2021) (23/02/23; T 256). That evening and maybe early
the next morning, Ms Cantwell
made notes of what Mr Bouwens said to her. On 29
March 2021, Ms Cantwell made a police statement about what was said (23/02/23;
Cantwell’s evidence of that conversation, included the statement by
Mr Bouwens that “Brendan didn’t tell him
anything apart from he
overheard him yelling on [the] phone at Trina one day for him being in the
house” and that the applicant
“should just plead guilty”
(22/02/23; T 266) so that he (Mr Bouwens) would be “left out of
it” and could
claim money from the government for counselling (22/02/23; T
260). Ms Cantwell was taken to her note of the conversation in her phone
15), which said in
part “Corey
thinks Brendo doesn’t know if he
pleads guilty case over”. Ms Cantwell had said in her police
statement “When
Corey said this, he was saying that, if Brendan pleads
guilty to the matter, then the investigation is over and excluded him”.
Ms Cantwell could not recall if Mr Bouwens actually used those words but said he
used the words “then the investigation is
over” (22/02/23; T
Cantwell said that Mr Bouwens said they were “walking home” and he
“didn’t know” there had been a
fight inside cause he was
“out the front calling Ricky” and that Mr Bouwens did not answer
when Tanisha Bouwens said
“weren’t you out the back?”
(22/02/23; T 267). Ms Cantwell also said that Mr Bouwens said he himself
was on phone
to ambulance officers, who asked him to do CPR (22/02/23; T 268);
and that “The guy was a convicted paedo living in Trina’s
close to a school” (22/02/23; T 271).
whether Mr Bouwens said anything about the man who died. Ms Cantwell said
“that they – that he ‘knew’
him” (22/02/23; T
261); and that she made a note of this because it made her feel
“uncomfortable”. In cross-examination
Ms Cantwell said she felt
uncomfortable because of the way Mr Bouwens was speaking and his body
language (22/02/23; T 264). Ms Cantwell
agreed that she told police that
she thought Mr Bouwens was lying at the time of their conversation (22/02/23; T
Cantwell was cross-examined on various other aspects of her note on her phone,
including that Mr Bouwens had asked her if she saw
the applicant’s hands
the morning after the incident, that “He doesn’t think Brendo knew
he killed the guy”
and that Mr Bouwens had said that the applicant was in
a rage and “it wasn’t him” (22/02/23; T 269-270).
Bouwens’ evidence was that he remembered going to Ms Cantwell’s
house with Tanisha Bouwens but not any conversation
with Ms Cantwell about what
happened (28/02/23; T 632-633). Tanisha Bouwens’ evidence was that she
went to a house but effectively
denied that Mr Bouwens spoke about what happened
(24/02/23; T 404-405).
Tanisha Bouwens
Bouwens (Mr Bouwens’ sister) said she grew up with the applicant, so knew
him for probably about ten years (23/02/23;
T 377). Tanisha said that on the
morning of 23 January 2021 her mother received a call from Mr Bouwens which
made her “panicked”.
She said that a few days later herself, her
mother, another brother and her father travelled to Forbes and took Mr Bouwens
father’s place in Goulburn. She was asked whether Mr Bouwens told
her what was going on and said “Not really, no. Not
straight up” but
that at some point he said “How can a best mate do something like
this?”; that he had witnessed
a murder; and that his “best mate
bashed someone”. She could not remember any other details (23/02/23; T
Bouwens said that the first time she spoke to Mr Bouwens about what happened was
at the end of March 2021 (23/02/23; T 378;
24/02/23; T 400). In
cross-examination, she was taken to the details of conversations she said she
had with Mr Bouwens in her 8
April 2021 police statement including that Mr
Bouwens and the applicant had started walking home from the pub and the
applicant decided
to pick up his swag from his mother’s place, and that he
had told her (23/02/23; T 382-383):
When we got to Brendan’s mum’s house, I waited out the front while
Brendan went to the garage. It all happened so fast.
I could hear yelling and
ran to the back of the house. Brendan was at the power box turning off the
power. All the lights went off
at the house and the guy came out of the house. I
didn’t know what to do. Brendan was throwing punches, yelling and
The guy got away and went back inside the house to get his keys and stuff to get
away from Brendan. I walked back out the front thinking
that would be it, but
Brendan and the other guy came running out the front door. There was more
yelling, and Brendan was punching
the other guy. The guy fell on the ground near
his car, and Brendan started stomping on his head and kicking him. I could hear
guy struggling to breathe and went over to try and stop Brendan.
That’s when I recognised the other guy was Brad.
I tried to push Brendan away and yelled at him to stop. But Brendan came at me
and pushed me in the chest with his fists. I had to
step back because there was
no stopping him. I rang Ricky to get him to come down in case Brendan was going
to go me. Brendan eventually
stopped and ran off.
Ricky turned up and we rang triple-0. Brendan came back around that time and
started kicking Brad again. We kept yelling at him to
stop, but he
wouldn’t. When he did stop, he took off again.
Bouwens said in her statement that Mr Bouwens was upset and “really
teary” while telling her this (23/02/23; T
383). She said she vaguely
remembered the above passages from her statement but that she could not remember
anything beyond what
she put in her statement (23/02/23; T 282-283). She denied
having any earlier conversation with Mr Bouwens (23/02/23; T 383) and
that her family had discussed their statements and what they would say
(24/02/23; T 406). Mr Bouwens’ evidence was
that he had no memory of this
conversation. Mr Bouwens said he had obviously discussed the incident with
Tanisha Bouwens but could
not say when (28/02/23; T
Kimberly Bouwens
statement from Kimberly Bouwens (Mr Bouwens’ mother) was read onto the
record. She said in the statement that one morning
in January [2021] she
received a call from Mr Bouwens who said “We seen someone belting a guy.
When we yelled out, the guy
ran” and that he thought the guy was dead.
She said Mr Bouwens sounded upset and concerned. Later that day Mr Bouwens
her again and said the police were taking his phone, that he knew who did
it and that “it was Brendan”. Mr Bouwens told
her the deceased was
“the guy staying with Trina” and “Loretta’s
brother” (24/02/23; T 443).
Bouwens also said that when she later saw Mr Bouwens she asked him why he had
lied and he said “It was Brendan. He was
my mate. I thought I was doing
the right thing” (24/02/23; T 443). He also told her:
...I can’t even remember going there to get the swag. I thought we were
just walking past but then Brendan walked down the
side and around the back.
That’s when I remembered the swag. Brendan then turned the lights off and
waited for Brad to come
out. I don’t know if he called him or what.
Brendan was saying “you need to pack your shit and get out”. Brad
agreeing. Brendan started bashing Brad. I said to Brendan, “Stop it,
he’s had enough. Let him go”.
I tried to stop him, but he pushed me in the chest. Brad and Brendan walked
inside to get his stuff. I walked around the front and
rang Borg [a nickname of
Mr Radburn’s; 24/02/23; T 408] to come and help me, as I couldn’t
stop Brendan. Before Borg
had got there, Brendan and Brad walked outside, and it
looked like Brad had been bashed inside the house. Brendan started bashing
again. He was jumping [on] him.
Brendan...dragged Brad towards the fence so he could jump on him again. Brendan
got on the fence and jumped on Brad. Brendan then
left. Ricky had showed up and
we called the police. While we were on the phone to police, Brendan came back
and jumped on Brad again.
I tried to stop him, but he hit me again. He was
jumping on his face. We tried to stop him, but couldn’t. He then ran
Interaction with the applicant
than the accounts of Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn there was no evidence from anyone
that they saw the applicant between about 3:00am
and 11:00am on 23 January 2021
(when Georgia Cantwell went to check on the applicant and found him asleep in
his bed at his house).
Ms Cantwell said she did not observe any injuries to the
applicant’s face at that time (22/02/23; T 263). Another witness,
Brooks, said he spoke to Ms Cantwell on the morning of 23 January about her
going to “check on” the applicant.
He said at about 9:15am Ms
Cantwell called him and said “Brendo looks fine. He’s in bed, and
his hands look fine”
(23/02/23; T 331). In cross-examination, he agreed
that he wrote in his statement that Ms Cantwell had said “He didn’t
look worried and appeared fine. No. I don’t think he’s done
it” (23/02/23; T 332).
Tendency evidence relating to
Mr Bouwens’ cross-examination, the Crown read onto the record a Statement
of Agreed Facts (Ex K), which (among other
things) detailed an assault by Mr
Bouwens on another man (Mr Bassett) at about 11:00pm on 11 August 2018
(28/02/23; T 640-642). This
was relied on by the defence at the trial as
tendency evidence.
Agreed Facts described the incident as occurring when Mr Bouwens had consumed
seven beers, was walking home and saw Mr Bassett.
Mr Bouwens approached Mr
Bassett and accused Mr Bassett of saying something about his mother, which was
denied by Mr Bassett:
Corey Bouwens then came towards David Bassett and pushed him and then hit him in
the face five or six times in the area of the eyes,
nose and jaw.
David Bassett ran 10 metres up the road to get away from Corey Bouwens.
Corey Bouwens pulled a fold-out knife out and showed it to David Bassett and
said ‘Shut up, do you want me to stab you’.
Corey Bouwens chased David Bassett and hit him two or three more times, causing
David Bassett to fall to the ground.
Corey Bouwens kicked David Bassett in the stomach and chest area about four
times while he was on the ground.
A female yelled at Corey Bouwens to leave David Bassett alone, and Corey Bouwens
responded “no, I’m having too much fun.”
Agreed Facts recorded that Mr Bouwens’ brother also punched
Mr Bassett and that the victim was seriously injured. They also
that on 8 August 2019 in a Local Court hearing at Albion Park, Mr Bouwens gave
sworn evidence about the incident to the
effect that Mr Bassett was the
aggressor and he hit Mr Bassett several times in self-defence, which was untrue.
Mr Bouwens was not
asked about this incident in his evidence at the trial.
trial judge directed the jury that the defence relied upon this as evidence that
Mr Bouwens has a tendency or tendencies to (28/02/23;
(1) ... engage in violent assaults against male victims aged
between 40 and 50 years of age by punching and kicking them, both
victim is standing and while the victim is on the ground, or otherwise unable to
defend himself either properly or at all,
(2) ... engage in protracted violent assaults against male
victims described in (1) above, including:
(a) following or pursuing and further assaulting a victim who
has moved away or is trying to escape after an initial assault by
Mr Bouwens;
(b) refusing to heed requests to stop engaging in violent
(3) ... engage in violent assaults against male victims
described in (1) while he – Corey Bouwens – is intoxicated.
(4) ... engage in violent assaults against male victims
described in para 1 above in circumstances where [there] is no, or
alternatively,
minimal provocation, and
(5) ... enjoy or take pleasure in committing violent acts that
I have read and as described in the notice.
Honour directed the jury that they must find those facts proven because they
were agreed, and that they should then go on to consider
whether from those
agreed facts they could conclude that Mr Bouwens had the alleged tendencies
(28/02/23; T 643).
trial judge directed the jury that if they concluded that Mr Bouwens has such a
tendency or tendencies, they could use the fact
of that tendency in considering
whether the prosecution established that the applicant, as opposed to anyone
else, caused the deceased’s
death (28/02/23; T 642-643).
admission of tendency evidence was not opposed by the Crown (27/02/23; T 461).
The applicant’s counsel submitted that the
evidence was relevant to
whether it was the accused and the accused alone who committed the offence
(27/02/23; T 466).
Exhibit D - 000 call
000 call was made from Mr Bouwens’ phone (21/02/23; T 151-152).
Mr Radburn spoke to the operator, at one point speaking
“Corey” to get his mobile number (Ex D; MFI 6, p 2).
Radburn told the operator in effect that: he did not know the exact address
where he was; he “just seen this fella getting
bashed” and “I
just stopped; I just stopped it all”; he was “just picking my mate
up from the pub”
and was driving him up the road to drop him off home; he
looked over and saw a male in the driveway and “someone was just,
flogging him”; as he pulled up “he just took off and gone”; he
did not know where the “other fella
went” but he could not stop him;
and he thought that the man was dead. Mr Radburn said that he was stopping there
in case the fella comes back”. Mr Radburn said that the
deceased was not moving at all but he thought he was breathing; that
want to go up to him because he did not want to see “that shit”; and
that there was a lot of bleeding. Mr
Radburn said that the man was not
responding. Mr Radburn said that he was there with his mate that he picked up
from the pub. He
said that the man was on his side. Mr Radburn said that he
could not describe the attacker, saying that it was dark. Mr Radburn said
there was just one person there. He said that he was 50 metres from the injured
man, standing at his car with his mate; that
he had not been near and did not
wish to approach the man.
applicant emphasises that at no point in the call was anything said about the
second man (i.e., the attacker) returning, jumping
on the injured male again and
saying “you’ll be next” or Mr Radburn saying “get off
him”; nor could
any of this be heard in the background. Nor does the
transcript of the call indicate that Mr Radburn tossed the phone to Mr Bouwens
while still on the call or went for a drive (cf the statement Mr Radburn gave to
police) (MFI 11 at [7]) (see also
Mr Radburn’s evidence at
21/02/23; T 152; T 168-169). The applicant accepts that at times there were
some periods (which the
applicant says were short) between Mr Radburn and the
operator speaking, the applicant says that there were no extended quiet periods
during which any of this could have happened.
police and ambulance arrived about 11 minutes 30 seconds into the 000
Cause of death
adverted to earlier, evidence was called from Dr du Toit-Prinsloo who performed
a post-mortem on 27 January 2021 and who concluded
that the cause of death was
blunt force head injury. There was an extensive diffuse subarachnoid
haemorrhage and an intraventricular
haemorrhage. The deceased had a fractured
nose, fractures around the eye and cheekbones, a further diffuse subaponeurotic
haemorrhage,
being a haemorrhage on the inside of the skull and blunt force
injuries to the backs of his forearms. The latter were consistent
defensive injuries. She described further areas of bruising to the brain and
bruising to the eyes and face (01/03/23; T 725-727).
du Toit-Prinsloo could not say how many blows caused the head injuries nor what
exactly caused the blunt force injuries (01/03/23;
cross-examination, she confirmed that the injuries could be caused by punching,
kicking, a knee, a stomp or use of an
object. She said that any part of the
head injuries she observed could individually or in combination cause death
(01/03/23; T 736).
Police and crime scene evidence
was called from Constable Hugh Moore and Senior Constable Natalie Rolfe who
responded to the 000 call at about 4:00am on
23 January 2021. Constable Moore
gave evidence that the deceased’s body was at the rear of the
deceased’s Toyota Camry
in the driveway, laying across the driveway.
was a diagram showing the location. Constable Moore moved the
body at the scene because he did not think there was room to perform
it was located because of the position of the deceased’s car near the body
and the amount of blood in the area.
Near the body was a cap, a set of car keys
and a box of groceries. Constable Moore unsuccessfully performed CPR (28/02/23;
An attending paramedic (Matthew White) gave evidence that the deceased
was already dead when they arrived and had lost about 500ml
of blood from his
head. He was bleeding internally from his right ear (01/03/23; T 684-685).
Moore said that Mr Bouwens approached him and said “this is a phone I
found here too” and “sorry about
that, just had it in the car”
(28/02/23; T 656). He pointed to a spot on the grass where he said he found it.
Constable Moore
said that Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn appeared to be in shock
(28/02/23; T 666). Senior Constable Rolfe said that Mr Radburn told
scene he saw a “fella all in black running that way”, pointing to
Johnson Street North, and that Mr Bouwens
appeared “standoffish” in
his demeanour, but she did not have a long conversation with him (28/02/23;
Constable Maggie Townsend gave evidence that on 23 January 2021 at about 8:00am
she attended Mr Radburn’s address and
directed he and Mr Bouwens to
attend the Forbes Police Station. Once there, she observed blood on Mr
Bouwens’ shirt and shirts.
She asked whether they were the clothes he was
wearing the previous night which he confirmed (01/03/23; T 695-696).
Senior Constable
Townsend asked if he had touched the body of the deceased,
which he denied. Senior Constable Townsend described Mr Bouwens as
very direct or forthcoming when answering questions” while she
was taking the statement (01/03/23; T 699). In cross-examination,
SC Townsend
said that she thought Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn attended the station separately
on the morning of 23 January 2021 because
they had to press an intercom to be
let in, and she recalled them doing so separately. She did not see how they
arrived or left.
She did not seize Mr Bouwens’ moonboot (01/03/23; T
Constable Townsend said that at about 1:00pm on the same day she became aware
that Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn had returned to
Forbes Police Station and wanted
to speak to a detective (01/03/23; T 697). Ricky Radburn Sr was also present.
She said the three
of them “all looked extremely distressed”. Mr
Radburn said that he had lied in the first statement and that he “knew
the murderer was” and identified the applicant by name (01/03/23; T
699-700). Mr Radburn said he had lied earlier because
he did not want to get
the applicant into trouble (01/03/23; T 700). The applicant was arrested at
8:35pm that night (01/03/23;
Sarah Walker, the Crime Scene Examiner, gave evidence that she and a team of
investigators examined the inside and outside
of the Johnson Street house as
well as the applicant’s house across 23-24 January 2021 (01/03/23; T
the crime scene, Sgt Walker observed blood stain on the “off side”
of the deceased’s vehicle, concentrated on
the rear door and three
“wheelie style bins” along the fence in the front of the garage
(01/03/23; T 749). She said
there was a large amount of apparent blood stain on
the rear patio verandah area at the premises and blood stains inside the
(01/03/23; T 749), including on the kitchen floor, fridge, bathroom,
hall alcove wall and second bathroom (01/03/23; T 754). In
the second bedroom
there was apparent blood stain on the front of a chest of drawers (01/03/23; T
754-755). Sgt Walker observed
that the deceased had blood stains to his
face, arms and down the legs from his groin to the top of his feet (01/03/23; T
She said the tracksuit pants he was wearing were relatively clean,
indicating that blood was shed before they were worn (01/03/23;
T 751-752).
Walker took swabs from the switchboard or power box on the back wall of the
house. She described it as having a “main control
light power”
switch which she tested and found to be capable of turning off and on the power
in the house (01/03/23; T 762).
She took fingerprints from the exterior of the
deceased’s car (02/03/23; T 793), and described other areas where
fingerprints
were taken.
crime scene photographs at Ex R show the areas of bloodstaining described by Sgt
Walker as well as the objects located around
the deceased’s car including
keys, a cap and a box of groceries. The Crown points out that these objects are
consistent with
him attempting to leave at the time he was murdered. The
photographs also show significant blood spatter underneath the railing
back stairs (Ex R, p 71). Sgt Walker said there was apparent bloodstaining up
the handrail and on the handrail as well (02/03/23;
T 799). There was also
apparent blood stain on the top of the rear step (Ex R, p 73) (02/03/23; T 800).
Sgt Walker said (bare) footprints
were identified in the house but there was not
enough detail in them to match them to anybody (02/03/23; T 802). The blood on
Bouwens’ clothing was also shown in the crime scene photographs (Ex R,
pp 160-164).
the applicant’s house (examined on the morning of Sunday 24 January), Sgt
Walker located two damp towels in a washing hamper
within the bathroom. One had
a visible stain which returned a presumptive positive result for the presence of
blood. She observed
that the lid of the washing machine was up and the lights
were illuminated. The machine was full of damp clothes and a towel. The
of clothing in the machine included a grey cap, a khaki t-shirt, two pairs of
NRL Bulldogs shorts and a towel, as well as a
black uniform, another cap, shark
shorts and underwear. She did not identify blood elsewhere in the house
(01/03/23; T 758). Sgt
Walker seized two pairs of thongs from the
applicant’s house (02/03/23; T 805). She seized some, but not all of the
from the washing machine (02/03/23; T 807). She performed tests on
areas of red/brown staining on the blue Bulldogs shorts and they
were negative
(02/03/23; T 808). There were no further tests performed on the clothes, though
it would have been possible (02/03/23;
T 864-866).
Crown notes that key aspects of Sgt Walker’s evidence and the results of
fingerprint and DNA testing by Detective Leading
Senior Constable Ward and
Virgina Friedman of the Forensic and Analytical Science Service were summarised
in Ex Z; and that this
evidence was not contentious, save for disputes as to how
certain DNA may have come to be in different locations.
testing of blood from various locations at the crime scene was consistent with
it being the deceased’s blood; a palm print
on the front nearside panel of
the Toyota Camry was identified as belonging to Mr Bouwens (result 11); trace
DNA on the external
handle of the rear screen door was found to contain a
mixture of DNA from at least two individuals. The applicant and the deceased
could not be excluded as contributors to the mixture. Assuming there were two
contributors to the mixture, it was considered greater
than 100 billion times
more likely to obtain the mixed profile if it originated from the applicant and
the deceased as opposed to
two unknown, unrelated individuals (result 19).
were bloodstains on each of a pair of black thongs seized from the front of the
applicant’s house. DNA testing of swabs
from various locations on the
thongs was consistent with the blood being the deceased’s (results 20-22).
The applicant could
not be excluded as the major contributor to a mixture of DNA
from a swab taken of the power box at the Johnson Street house. Assuming
were two contributors to the mixture, it was considered greater than 100 billion
times more likely that the profile would be
obtained from the applicant and
another unknown individual than two unknown, unrelated individuals (result
from swabs taken of Mr Bouwens’ clothing and his moonboot was consistent
with being the deceased’s (results 29, 30
and 32). The applicant could
not be excluded as a contributor to two swabs from bloodstains on
Mr Bouwens’ shirt (result 29).
The deceased’s blood was found
in a swab of blood taken from the handle of a wheelie bin in the driveway
(result 13).
Leading Senior Constable Ward gave evidence that there was insufficient detail
to reach an identification of the source
of a right palm print on the rear of
the vehicle but that “the information that is present lends support to it
being the right
palm of Brendan Doolan” (03/03/23; T
Forensic evidence
police seized Mr Bouwens’ clothes on 23 January 2021. The police did not
seize the moonboot until 8 April 2021 (it was examined
and sampled on 17 May
2022) (02/03/23; T 850; T 875; 06/03/23). The applicant submits that there was
no reason for the delay in
examination of the moonboot (although notes that the
Officer in Charge, DSC Payne, in his evidence, gave a reason for not seizing
moonboot earlier, namely that that there was a period of telephone interception
on Mr Bouwens from 18 February to 8 April 2021;
06/03/23; T 1054-1055; T
1060-1063).
police also seized Mr Bouwens’ “Rocko’s” brand thong at
some stage. The applicant says that it was assumed
at trial that it was the
thong Mr Bouwens was wearing on the night of 22-23 January 2021. Mr
Bouwens’ cap was never found or
seized (06/03/23; T 1055).
applicant notes that the police did not search or undertake any examination of
Mr Radburn’s house or Ms Jones’ car
and says that there was no
reason for this (06/03/23; T 1061-1062).
Blood pattern
Terrence Flippence was called by the prosecution and Jae Gerhard was called by
the defence to give concurrent expert evidence
Mr Bouwens’ clothes and footwear. The items in question were his blue
shirt, tan shorts,
right thong and moonboot. Blood pattern analysis was also
carried out on the applicant’s thongs seized at his Farnell Street
way of explanation as to their findings, the expert witnesses agreed that:
“spatter” is the travel of blood droplets
through an area as a
result of force or energy greater than gravity (06/03/23; T 952-953); the higher
the energy that goes into causing
the blood to project through the air, the
smaller the stains will be (06/03/23; T 965-967); “projected” stains
the blood is projected through the air, from force, and lands on an
object, and, when the blood lands, it leaves a tail in the direction
so pointing away from the direction in which it came (06/03/23; T 973-974);
“expirated” blood is that which
occurs as a result of breathing out,
causing small droplets to project through the air and land on a surface
(06/03/23; T 957); and
“transfer” or “contact” staining
is when blood is physically transferred onto a surface via a wipe or some
of contact (06/03/23; T 956).
findings in relation to the respective items may be summarised as
Mr Bouwens’ blue shirt
were taken of apparent reddish stains on Mr Bouwens’ blue shirt. Forensic
testing showed: the deceased’s DNA
on the lower front and front left upper
shoulder; DNA of both the deceased and the applicant on the right front pocket;
the deceased’s and possibly the applicant’s DNA on the
right sleeve below the cuff (Ex R pp 159-162) (Ex Z result 29).
experts described three distinct areas of blood staining the front of
Mr Bouwens’ shirt which were marked in photograph
19 in Ex V.
Detective Flippence considered the bottom of the shirt to have an area of
numerous small projected blood stains of about
1mm diameter or potentially
smaller in some instances. He considered the stains could have been spatter or
expirated. Ms Gerhard
did not consider it a typical expirated pattern but did
not discount it as a possibility. The witnesses agreed that the energy used
cause those stains to project through air was quite or fairly high, and that the
blood would have travelled a maximum of about
2-2.5 metres (06/03/23;
T 999; T 1002-1005; T 1008-1009).
stains identified were as follows.
first stain (marked “1”) was at the bottom of the shirt in the
middle. Detective Flippence considered that this “appears
projected blood stain” (i.e., a stain that is the result of a projection
through the air landing on an object). Ms
Gerhard would not necessarily have
classified stain 1 as a projected stain, just a blood stain “that this
portion of the shirt
has had some contact with wet blood” (06/03/23; T
second stain (marked “2”) was on the front pocket of the shirt (of
a “contact stain swat [sic]
or a wipe” and that it could have been consistent with the wearer of the
shirt being punched
or pushed by someone with a blood-stained hand or other
object. The most Detective Flippence could conclude was that there was a
transfer of wet blood without being able to say precisely how it was caused. He
could not give an opinion on force or direction.
Ms Gerhard agreed that this was
a contact stain and said that the stain had very little movement in it,
suggesting direct contact
with little movement between the items. Ms Gerhard
would not go so far as to comment on what object caused it (06/03/23; T
T 1031-1032).
third stain (marked “3”) was towards the top left shoulder of the
shirt. Detective Flippence said that this was a
agreed. Neither could say whether there was movement in it (06/03/23; T
1000-1002).
experts agreed there were also areas of projected stains around the same areas
as marker “1” (in the large oval on
Ex V). Detective Flippence said
these could be spatter or expiration. Ms Gerhard said the pattern was not a
typical expirated pattern
where there would be variation in the sizes of the
blood stains but she could not discount that possibility (06/03/23; T 1003) (see
Ex V, photographs 19-24).
the back of the shirt were two areas of staining (Ex V, photographs 25-27), one
on either sleeve. Detective Flippence described
one as a very small transfer
stain (marked “4”) and the other as a larger stain made of three or
four areas of transfer
but “very small” (marked “5”)
(06/03/23; T 1004-1005).
Flippence agreed with the proposition that some of the smaller bloodstains were
consistent with “the projection of
blood with a higher degree of energy
than what would be expected from something such as dripping”. Asked
whether he was able
to say with any certainty the degree of force that would
have been required to propel such small bloodstains, Detective Flippence
that “the mechanism used to disperse those stains would have been fairly
high because of the – the small size of
the stain. Also, I might add the
small size of the stain means it doesn’t travel that far, so a maximum of
(06/03/23; T 1008).
witnesses agreed that something other than visual examination (which is what the
police did) may have identified even smaller
stains and potentially provided
further information on whether the projected stains may have been expirated
(06/03/23; T 1005-1009;
T 1028). They agreed that, in an ideal investigation of
the shirt, it would have been appropriate to do more than a visual examination
and that other methods were available (06/03/23; T 1009; T
Mr Bouwens’ tan shorts
were taken of apparent reddish stains on the shorts (02/03/23; T 822-823).
Forensic testing of the swatches taken from the
front left leg, front right leg
and the left side crotch showed the deceased’s DNA (Ex Z, result 30).
experts identified small areas of projected staining, of around 1 millimetre or
smaller (06/03/23; T 1009-1010; T 1019), on the
front right leg of the shorts
(some, at markers 3 and 4, were spattered staining, generally around one
millimetre but a couple were
2 millimetres); as well as contact stains in the
crotch area and on the left-hand side of the shorts (Ex V, photograph 28). At
5 and 6 on the left and right crotch were larger contact stains, with
small spatter around them (06/03/23; T 1010; T 1019). The witnesses
that, given the location of these stains, it was possible they were spatter but
ended up looking like transfer stains
through contact with a surface (06/03/23;
T 1028). The front left leg had three projected or spatter stains, about a
millimetre each
(06/03/23; T 1010; T 1019). Both experts accepted the contact
stains could also have been the result of spatter that ended up looking
transfer stain by reason of contact with some other surface (06/03/23; T 1028)
(see Ex V, photographs 45-47).
the witnesses agreed that further examination than just visual was available.
The witnesses agreed that this could have been
used potentially to identify
further blood staining on the shorts (06/03/23; T 1022; T1027-28;
T 1032-1033).
Rocko’s right thong
were a number of small red stains on the thong: a stain (marker 1) that was a
projected stain on the edge but near the top of
the thong; two stains (marker 2)
that were two projected stains near the edge of the toe area; and at marker 3,
on the side of the
thong, two areas of blood staining which were difficult to
classify (06/03/23; T 1010-1011; T 1020; T 1024-1025) (see Ex V, photographs
Flippence considered that the thong may have been worn during the blood-shedding
events at the Johnson Street house. Ms
Gerhard said it was the projected
staining on the surface of the thongs which indicated they had been in close
proximity to a blood-shedding
event (06/03/23; T 1020-1021).
the thong was only subjected to a visual examination, although other methods of
examination were available to identify blood
on it. The applicant says that
ordinary police practice dictated a far more rigorous examination of the thong.
The applicant contends
that, having regard to the partly black porous surface of
the thong, there was real scope for blood to have been hidden on the visual
inspection (06/03/23; T 1023-1026; T 1032).
moonboot, which (as noted above) was not seized until 8 April 2021, had a number
of small stains on it. A stain on the front
left-hand side foot padding was
positive for human blood. It seems that some stains were too small to do
confirmatory blood testing.
A number of swabs were taken, including of stains
which were negative for human blood (02/03/23; T 851; T 867-869; 06/03/23; T
1011-1012).
Forensic testing of the swabs showed the deceased’s DNA (Ex
Z, result 32). The moonboot weighed more than 1.3kg (Ex R, p
166) (see Ex
V, photographs 34-35).
Flippence was unable to see blood staining on the moonboot (in the photographs
he examined). He accepted that there was
blood on the boot, having regard to the
evidence of others, but said the moonboot was not collected for two months after
the incident
so there was an issue as to accountability and a lack of continuity
that led him to refrain from giving that blood any weight (06/03/23;
1026-1027). (Pausing here, it is not clear that there is any evidence as to
whether or how long after the events on 23
January 2021 Mr Bouwens in fact wore
the moonboot; AT 35-36.) Detective Flippence considered the moonboot could have
been affected
by environmental factors, so it was difficult to make an
assessment of blood on it at the time of the incident (06/03/23; T 1021;
1026-1027). Ms Gerhard did not discount the evidentiary value of the moonboot
but said it needed to be approached with caution.
Ms Gerhard said that it was
not uncommon for there to be a passage of time before items were tested but that
there had not been
sufficient examination of the moonboot (06/03/23; T 1027).
Detective Flippence did not demur from that proposition (06/03/23; T
1032-1033).
Conclusion of experts as to blood analysis
Flippence’s evidence, assuming Mr Bouwens wore the blue shirt, tan shorts
and Rocko’s thong in the early hours
of 23 January 2021, was that Mr
Bouwens (06/03/23; T 1021):
... must have been reasonably close to the disbursal of blood at some point in
the – the event where blood has disbursed in
the scene. My problem with it
is the blood around the back door just outside that area isn’t conducive
with the blood he has
on his – on his clothing. I’d expect more
blood on his clothing if he was close to that area at the time that blood was
Flippence said that “the two don’t match up”, referring to the
“abundance of bloodstaining in the
scene” (referring to the back
patio) and the “small spatter” (06/03/23; T 1021). (The Crown
submits that it follows
that Detective Flippence’s evidence was not
consistent with Mr Bouwens being the perpetrator of the attacks that caused that
bloodstaining at the scene.) Detective Flippence acknowledged that attackers
sometimes do not get much blood on them (06/03/23; T
1021). His evidence was to
the effect that blood distribution is highly variable and the environment
dynamic, so accurate predictions
attacker could not be made (06/03/23; T 1031). That said, Detective Flippence's
was that he would have expected more blood if Mr Bouwens were close to
the abundant disbursal of blood on the back patio (06/03/23;
Gerhard said she did not necessarily agree with this because she was not
confident that all of the bloodstaining present on the
clothing had been
identified, and said that the situation was a dynamic one involving a prolonged
altercation. Ms Gerhard said that
she had observed offenders with very little
blood staining present on their clothing on some occasions, some with an
enormous amount
and every range in between (06/03/23; T 1022). Detective
Flippence said that any further testing would detect only smaller staining
larger areas of staining. Ms Gerhard said in relation to this that “the
basic principle applies that the greater the force
or the greater energy that is
applied to blood, the smaller the blood drops will get” (06/03/23; T
Forensic testing in relation to applicant’s
DNA/blood analysis
from the applicant and the deceased was recovered from a trace DNA sample taken
from the external handle of the rear screen door
at the Johnson Street house (Ex
Z, result 19). DNA from the applicant and at least one other person was
recovered from the main
power switch on the power board (Ex Z, result 24). (The
applicant emphasises that it was his mother’s house and the deceased
staying there.)
crime scene police attended the applicant’s Farnell Street house in the
morning on 24 January 2021, there was a pile of
seven thongs on the front
landing. The police seized two sets of black thongs with blue trim and straps as
they appeared to be the
thongs the applicant was wearing in CCTV the night
before (01/03/23; T 752; T 756-757; 02/03/23; T 804-805). Of the seized thongs,
the police examined in particular a left and a right thong positioned next to
each other, “sort of on top”, on the front
landing, on which there
were some small reddish marks (02/03/23; T 804-805; T 845-848; T 861-862; T
869-870; Ex R, pp 188-192; Ex
V, photograph 36-43).
testing of the left thong showed: the deceased’s DNA on a swab of
bloodstain on the strap; the deceased and at least
one other person’s DNA
on a trace DNA tape-lift of a toe strap; and the deceased’s DNA on swabs
of bloodstain on the
outer sole and underside of the strap (Ex Z, result 21).
Detective Flippence said it was hard to classify the stain types because
large size of the weave; and Ms Gerhard agreed (06/03/23; T 1012-1013). The
applicant’s DNA was not specifically identified
on the samples taken from
the thongs.
testing of the right thong showed: the DNA of the deceased and at least one
other person on a swab of an apparent bloodstain
on the strap; the
deceased’s DNA on a swab of an apparent bloodstain on the underside of the
strap; the DNA of the deceased
and at least one other person on a trace DNA swab
of the upper heel section; and the DNA of the deceased and at least one other
on a trace DNA tape-lift of the toe strap (Ex Z, result 20). As to the
staining on the inner of the left strap of the right thong,
Detective Flippence
said it was difficult to identify because of its “non-distinct
features” but said that it could have
been caused by a blood-stained
object rubbing the thong, such as if somebody had blood on their foot and put
the thongs on (06/03/23;
T 1014). Detective Flippence gave similar evidence as
to the possible cause of the staining on the right strap of the same thong
(06/03/23; T 1015).
Flippence and Ms Gerhard doubted that these thongs were worn during the assault,
as there did not seem to be any spatter
on the top of the straps or on the top
of the thongs (06/03/23; T 1020). They agreed that the most that could be said
for the blood
on the underside of the thong straps was that there had been some
transfer of blood but it was impossible to say how it got there
(06/03/23; T
Consciousness of Guilt
prosecution relied on the evidence (of Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn) that the
applicant ran away from the Johnson Street house and
was not there (unlike Mr
Bouwens) when the police and ambulance officers arrived as evidence of
consciousness of guilt. The trial
judge directed the jury on this in the
summing up (SU 33-34). No complaint is made as to the summing up on this
this context, the applicant refers to the evidence of Ms Cantwell to the effect
that between 8:00am-10:00am on 23 January 2021
she visited the applicant’s
house on Farnell Street and found the applicant sleeping; that she woke him up
and told him there
stuff happening” and” You need
to call Corey”; and that the applicant said “okay” then went
sleep (22/02/23; T 259; T 263). Ms Cantwell’s evidence was that
the applicant looked sleepy but nothing was unusual about
his demeanour
(22/02/23; T 272).
prosecution also relied as evidence of consciousness of guilt on the fact that,
when the police attended the applicant’s
house at 9:30am on 24 January
2021 (having arrested the applicant there at about 8:40pm on 23 January 2021 and
having established
a crime scene at the property at that time) (01/03/23; T 752;
02/03/23; T 854; 06/03/23; T 1035-1036), the washing machine appeared
been on and was full of a damp towel and damp clothes, including a grey cap,
khaki t-shirt with branding and two pairs of
Bulldogs shorts (01/03/23; T
757-758). These were seized as again they appeared to be the clothes the
applicant was wearing in the
CCTV footage of the night before (02/03/23; T
806-809). Both forensic evidence experts agreed that it would have been
possible to
check the applicant’s clothing for blood after it had been
washed. No such forensic examination of these clothes was performed
(06/03/23; T
1029-1030). Other clothes in the washing machine were a second cap, black
uniform tyre repair shirts, dark shorts and
underwear (02/03/23; T
Defence case
defence case at trial was that there was an available inference that
Mr Bouwens was involved in the deceased’s death, arising
presence at the Johnson Street house; his admitted lies in his two police
statements; his inability to explain his lies
apart from being scared; and the
spatters of the deceased’s blood on his clothing and footwear.
trial judge directed the jury that the experience of the courts is that evidence
given by a witness who may have been involved
in the alleged crime may be
unreliable; and that, for that reason, the jury must approach
Mr Bouwens’ evidence with considerable
caution (SU 36-37).
defence case was that Mr Bouwens may have been motivated to lie because he was
scared, to avoid police scrutiny of him and to
minimise his own involvement and
responsibility for an assault upon the deceased or his death. The trial judge
directed the jury
that if the jury considered such a motive or motives to lie
were established, the jury would take that into account in assessing
Bouwens’ truthfulness. The trial judge also directed that the applicant
did not have to prove a motive to lie, there may
be unknown reasons why a person
might lie, and even if the jury rejected the proposition that Mr Bouwens
had a motive to lie, that
did not necessarily mean he was truthful (SU 37-38).
Again, there is no complaint as to the directions given by the trial
Appeal Ground – unreasonable verdict
already noted, there is a sole ground of appeal, that being that the verdict is
unreasonable and not supported by the evidence.
In oral submissions, this was
based on the contention that the prosecution failed to exclude the reasonable
possibility that Mr Bouwens
had contributed at least one blow to the
deceased’s head (the Crown case not being that there existed a joint
criminal enterprise
between Mr Bouwens and the applicant).
explained above, the applicant relies on four matters as giving rise to the
reasonable possibility that Mr Bouwens was involved
in the fracas: the 000 call;
Mr Bouwens’ lies; blood pattern analysis; and the tendency
Applicant’s submissions
applicant emphasises the 000 call as the starting point for the assessment of
the evidence given by Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn,
contending that their evidence
this regard, the applicant says (and this is indeed the case having listened
ourselves to the audio recording of the call) that
nothing can be heard in the
recording of the 000 call of any further assault of the deceased or interaction
with Mr Radburn after
the latter’s arrival and that nothing was said by
him to the operator about this.
applicant argues that, contrary to what one might expect had the applicant in
fact returned and acted as Mr Radburn described,
Mr Radburn was calm during the
000 call. Further, the applicant says that Mr Radburn’s evidence of going
for a drive and calling
out to the applicant (not supported by Mr Bouwens) is
also something that was not reported nor heard during the recording. The
says that this would have involved some unlikely holding of the phone.
(Pausing here, some support for the account that there was
a calling out of
someone’s name, albeit that there is doubt as to what name, is to be found
in the accounts of both Mr Nelson
and Ms Buchanan – as summarised earlier
but this does not account for the lack of any sound of this during the 000 call
applicant argues that the “story” of the applicant returning during
the 000 call (which first appeared in Mr Radburn’s
second statement on 23
January 2021) is the product of collusion between Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn; and
that the most likely explanation
for this is so that Mr Radburn could
corroborate Mr Bouwens’ account by saying that he too saw the applicant
assaulting the
deceased. The applicant notes that on Mr Walsh’s evidence,
later on 23 January 2021 Mr Bouwens told Mr Walsh about the applicant
the deceased and telling Mr Radburn he was next but not that the applicant came
applicant submits that Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn must have colluded to advance a
fabricated story from as early as the 000 call,
referring to the lies told by Mr
Radburn in that call as to how they come to be at the scene and that (on their
accounts) Mr Bouwens
was physically close to Mr Radburn during that call but he
did not interject to correct Mr Radburn. It is noted that, when the police
arrived, Mr Bouwens continued the false version that the two just happened upon
the incident.
applicant says that the explanations given by Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn for
lying (shock and fear of the applicant) are unsatisfactory.
The applicant
submits that the more plausible explanation (or at least one that cannot be
excluded) is that of protecting Mr Bouwens
by distancing him from the scene
(and, in particular, distancing him from the deceased and the applicant). The
applicant argues
that Mr Radburn’s assertions in the 000 call that they
were 50 metres away from the injured man, had not approached him and
wish to do so, are consistent with this.
applicant argues that the collusion between the two continued into their first
police statements, submitting that Mr Radburn acknowledged
as much in his second
statement by saying
I had a conversation with Corey and I told him
what I was going to tell the cops” (22/02/23; T 205). The applicant says
Mr Bouwens’ evidence that the most he remembered of any conversation
with Mr Radburn was about telling the truth must be false
relying on the fact
that they both not only lied in their first statements but advanced the same
lies (to the effect that: Mr Bouwens
had been staying with Mr Radburn;
Mr Bouwens went out to the pub from Mr Radburn’s house; Mr Bouwens
called to be picked up
and they spoke over the phone; Mr Radburn picked
Mr Bouwens up from the vicinity of the pool, which is near town; Mr Radburn
over because Mr Radburn
saw the incident between two males;
neither said they knew whose house it was; a man ran off in a westerly direction
as Mr Radburn
pulled up; and Mr Bouwens got out of the car and approached the
male). It is noted that both Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn purported
to describe
the male who ran off, but neither identified the applicant; nor did they
identify the deceased.
applicant submits that the lies in the first statements by each of
Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn (and their lies as to having done
so) go beyond
merely raising doubts about their credibility generally. The applicant argues
that protection of at least Mr Bouwens,
by distancing him, is an available if
not obvious answer to the question as to why they were lying.
is further submitted that there must have been some conversation between Mr
Bouwens and Mr Radburn (or through Mr Radburn Snr)
prior to the second statement
since it was in their second statements that both first implicated the
Mr Bouwens’ lies
generally, the applicant points to Mr Bouwens’ lies about other
applicant argues that Mr Bouwens’ disclaimer of much knowledge about or
interest in the deceased is significant because
the prosecution relied upon the
applicant having a motive to assault the deceased (his supposedly being a
paedophile). The applicant
argues that the more Mr Bouwens knew about the
deceased at the time of the assault, the more that motive can be transferred to
applicant also points to inconsistencies in the accounts made by Mr Bouwens
to a number of people as to what took place. By way
of example, the applicant
notes that Mr Bouwens told (or intimated to) Mr Walsh that: Mr Radburn was with
them at the house; the
applicant bashed on the door; the assault occurred at the
front of the house; the applicant’s attempt to hit Mr Bouwens missed;
the applicant used an Otto bin and car bonnet to stomp; that Mr Bouwens told Ms
Alcorn that the applicant jumped off the back
of the car onto the
deceased’s head; that Mr Bouwens told Mr Neilsen about Mr Radburn being
there and “we” turned
the power off to lure him out; and that Mr
Bouwens told Tanisha Bouwens that: he waited at the front while the applicant
the garage; he heard yelling and ran to the back; and he recognised it
was the deceased when he was being assaulted at the car.
The applicant says
that this is consistent with Mr Bouwens wishing to put a version forward to
family and friends implicating the
applicant and exculpating himself but being
unable to keep the version together.
applicant maintains that the notion that Mr Bouwens followed the applicant out
the back of Trina Doolan’s house to get the
swag (his account in the
ERISP) is an unlikely explanation given that it was a large swag, it was several
hundred metres from the
applicant’s home, they were drunk, it was around
4:00am, and it could easily have been be collected in the car on the way to
to the recorded interview (where Mr Bouwens claimed that his full recollection
of the assault came back in dreams), the applicant
Mr Bouwens’ attempt in evidence to clarify that he meant he was
dreaming about what happened is unconvincing. It
is submitted that, if Mr
Bouwens’ recollection did come back in dreams or was affected by them,
then it is unreliable; alternatively,
that this was a “fictitious and
fatuous way” to attempt to justify the false version previously given to
the police.
Either way, the applicant says that it contributes to the
“dubious” state of Mr Bouwens’ evidence.
applicant submits that there are questionable aspects of Mr Bouwens’
version of the circumstances of the assault: his various
assertions about what
happened with the power; the deceased having clothes on his bottom half at the
back of the house (the expert
evidence of Detective Flippence and
Ms Gerhard being that the deceased sustained some of his injuries while he
was not wearing any
form of protection, in this case, his tracksuit pants;
06/03/23; T 998); that the deceased acknowledged the applicant at the back
but not him, although they knew one another too; and that the assault out the
back happened in a very small space, with himself
in close. The applicant notes
that Detective Flippence considered that more blood would be expected on Mr
Bouwens if he were close
to the assault at the back of the house (see the
submissions as to the blood analysis evidence below). The applicant argues that
Mr Bouwens’ blue shirt did not have multiple contact stains which might
have been expected had he been repeatedly pushed with
bloody hands. Further,
the applicant says that it is unlikely the applicant could have executed the
levered stomps described by
Mr Bouwens in the shrubby/treed space between the
car and low fence. The applicant also points to Mr Bouwens’ evidence that
he made two calls to Ms Jones, which is not supported by Ex F.
applicant submits that there is also tension between the evidence of
Mr Bouwens and Ms Jones and that Ms Jones’ evidence
does not assist
in acceptance of Mr Bouwens’ version. The applicant submits that there is
an inconsistency between Mr Bouwens’
evidence at trial (that he called Ms
Jones from the front while the applicant and the deceased were inside the house
and he was still
on the phone to her when they came out the front and the
applicant continued to assault the deceased at the car) and his statement
recorded interview that the applicant and the deceased were at the back or in
the house and he could not see nor hear anything
when on the phone to Ms Jones.
It is noted that Mr Bouwens did not give evidence of Ms Jones asking to be put
on the phone to the
applicant but the applicant declining, as asserted by Ms
Jones; and that Ms Jones gave evidence that Mr Bouwens said to her that
applicant had “come back” but Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn said
this was when Mr Radburn was on the 000 call.
applicant argues that none of Mr Bouwens, Mr Radburn and Ms Jones can be trusted
as to what Ms Jones was told afterwards of the
assault upon the deceased.
the applicant submits that Mr Bouwens’ lies are sufficient to cast doubt
on his denial that he was involved in any way
in the assault upon the deceased;
and that the obvious motivation for his lies is to conceal his own
involvement.
Blood analysis
applicant argues that the presence of the deceased’s blood on
Mr Bouwens’ clothes and footwear contributes, at a minimum,
reasonable possibility that Mr Bouwens was involved in the assault. The
applicant says that this is especially so for the
spatter (including high energy
spatter) low on the front of Mr Bouwens’ clothes (on the bottom of the
blue shirt, the tan shorts
and the Rocko’s thong). The applicant points
to the expert evidence to the effect that Mr Bouwens must have been reasonably
close to the dispersal of blood to have caused the blood staining on his
clothes. The applicant says that there is only Mr Bouwens’
providing an alternative explanation for this (i.e., that it must have occurred
when he was really close to the deceased,
pushing the applicant away). The
applicant also maintains that the forensic examination of these clothes was
unsatisfactory.
Tendency evidence
applicant relies on the tendency evidence as a further reason to doubt
Mr Bouwens’ denials of involvement in the incident.
The applicant
says that it was another episode of Mr Bouwens, when drunk and with minimal
justification, engaging in a protracted,
vicious assault upon another man,
including to his head and when he was on the ground. The applicant says that,
although this was
not seemingly relied upon at the trial as tendency evidence,
Mr Bouwens then lied about this incident on oath (when that matter was
Local Court).
Other matters
applicant says that Ms Buchanan’s version is beset with difficulties but
that, even if Ms Buchanan saw or heard something
going on at the Johnson Street
house, her evidence does not amount to evidence that the applicant assaulted the
deceased, let alone
by himself; and that her evidence does not exclude the
involvement of Mr Bouwens.
applicant emphasises DSC Nolan’s account of Ms Buchanan’s statement
that she saw “two blokes” kicking
the shit out of something on the
ground (a version that Ms Buchanan, however, adamantly denied was said).
Further, the applicant
notes that Mr Angus heard separate voices saying
“Come outside, you fucking dog” and” You got what you
you dog. You got what you deserved” and that Ms Demamiel may
have heard more than two voices. The applicant relies on these
evidence as suggesting the involvement of more than one person assaulting the
to the evidence relied upon by the prosecution as evincing a consciousness of
guilt on the applicant's part, the applicant submits
that this is unpersuasive.
The applicant says that, while the applicant might not have stayed near his
mother's house, he went home
up the road to bed and was at home when
Ms Cantwell visited in the morning and the police came to arrest him in the
night (which
they did at 8:40pm on 23 January 2021). The applicant says that
this was hardly a sophisticated effort at flight. The applicant accepts
washed the clothes he was in the night before, but submits that this could
easily have been a routine wash since work clothes
were in the wash too (and
notes that the police could have, but did not, further examine these clothes).
Further, the applicant notes
that the thongs with the deceased's blood on them
were just left on front patio. Insofar as Detective Flippence and Ms Gerhard
the thongs were worn during the assault, the applicant submits that this
would seemingly mean that he would have to have engaged
in the protracted
assault, as described by Mr Bouwens, barefoot.
submissions
Crown says that there was no dispute at the trial that Mr Bouwens had told lies
on multiple occasions as to the events on the
morning of 23 January 2021,
particularly in his first and second police statements; and the Crown accepts
that the only other possible
eyewitness to the applicant being at the scene (Mr
Radburn) had also lied to police about the incident.
the Crown contends that the jury was entitled to accept the key aspects Mr
Bouwens’ evidence at the trial notwithstanding
that he had undoubtedly
told lies at different points in time. The Crown emphasises the significant
advantage the jury had in being
able to see and hear Mr Bouwens’ evidence
at the trial and form its own assessment of his credibility (a matter that is
fundamentally
within the province of the jury) and points out that the jury was
entitled to accept some parts of his evidence even if the jury
rejected other
Crown submits that Mr Bouwens’ evidence was not implausible and that it
was corroborated by other evidence in the trial
including Mr Bouwens’
behaviour after the murder (in remaining at the scene until police and
paramedics arrived and wearing
the same clothes when he went to the police
station the following day).
Crown says that, implicit in the applicant’s written submissions is that
the jury ought to have rejected Mr Bouwens’
evidence as to what he saw the
applicant do, as well as the evidence of Mr Radburn (that he saw the applicant
come back to the scene
and assault the deceased), Ms Jones (as to what Mr
Bouwens told her and what she could hear on the phone) and Ms Buchanan
saw only one man in the yard and not two).
Crown points to the following six matters in support of its submission that the
jury’s verdict was well open to it.
that the evidence overwhelmingly supported the proposition that the applicant
was present at the Johnson Street house when
the deceased was murdered.
Crown relies in this regard on: the undisputed evidence that the applicant and
Mr Bouwens left the Commercial Hotel together,
that they were staying together
and that they planned to go camping together the next day; the discovery of the
blood on a pair of thongs found at the applicant’s house
(in circumstances where there was no suggestion that these thongs
Bouwens’); and the detection of DNA consistent with being the
applicant’s being found on the switchboard or power
box and on the rear
door handle of Johnson Street house (as well as there being some evidence that
his palm print was on the rear
of the car) (see Ex Z).
Crown argues that, while it was submitted for the applicant that the DNA
findings as to the power box and rear door handle are
consistent with the house
being the applicant’s mother’s home, the results were equally
consistent with the applicant
being present at the scene on the night of the
murder. The Crown emphasises that the detection of DNA at those two particular
is consistent with specific aspects of Mr Bouwens’ account
(namely, that he believed the applicant switched the power off and
applicant and the deceased went inside after the applicant assaulted the
deceased on the back porch).
Crown says that the applicant’s presence at the scene was also supported
by the following: Ms Buchanan’s evidence
that she saw two people, one in
the yard and one near a gutter, and the CCTV footage from Battye Street which
showed a figure running
past the camera at 4:00am; the exchange of messages
between Mr Bouwens and Ms Jones (Ex F) immediately after the phone call at
(which the Crown argues provides strong corroboration to the accounts of
Mr Bouwens and Ms Jones that Mr Bouwens told Ms Jones something
occurring at the scene involving the applicant); and Ms Jones’ evidence
that she could hear the applicant when Mr Bouwens
called her.
that there was evidence that the applicant fled the scene before emergency
services arrived. The Crown points to the following:
evidence from Ms Buchanan
that she saw one of the two men at the scene run away; evidence from Mr Bouwens
that the applicant ran
away (at least once); and the CCTV footage from the
Battye Street address showing someone running in that direction (the Crown
that the irresistible inference was that this person was the
applicant). The Crown argues that, if the jury accepted that the applicant
with Mr Bouwens at the Johnson Street house, then the conclusion that he left
before emergency services arrived inevitably followed.
The Crown points to the
submissions made to the jury at trial as to consciousness of guilt, to the
effect that the applicant left
because he knew what he had done to the deceased
and to conceal his involvement, and that that the applicant washing his clothes
was consistent with concealing evidence of his involvement; and that the jury
was given a direction on consciousness of guilt reasoning
with respect to those
two matters (07/0323; T 1129). The Crown notes that it was drawn to the
jury’s attention that the jury
needed to rule out any other explanation
for the conduct other than awareness of guilt (citing SU 33-34).
that Mr Bouwens not only remained at the scene until emergency services arrived
but also called Mr Radburn and Ms Jones for
says that it was open to the jury to reason that his conduct was inconsistent
with what might
be expected of someone who was physically involved in the murder
(and for the jury to contrast his behaviour with that of the applicant),
pointing to the submissions made to the jury in closing as to this (07/03/23; T
1114). The Crown submits that the fact that Mr Bouwens
neither left the
scene nor discarded or changed his clothing before going to the police station
was a reasonably compelling indication
against his involvement in an attack on
the deceased, regardless of any lies that he told. The Crown says that the jury
take into account Mr Bouwens’ leg injury and that he was
wearing the moonboot in assessing whether he would have been physically
of carrying out the assault, having had the benefit of watching the CCTV and
seeing how he was moving.
that Ms Buchanan’s evidence was consistent with and supported
Mr Bouwens’ account that only one person was involved
in the assault
(i.e., her evidence that there was one man in the front yard, whom she believed
from what she could hear to be kicking
a dog, and another man standing
separately near the gutter).
Crown accepts that Ms Buchanan’s credibility and reliability were
challenged at trial and that she may have been under the
influence of marijuana
at the time that she walked home on the morning of 23 January 2021. However,
the Crown says that Ms Buchanan’s
credibility on what she saw and heard
was not significantly diminished through cross-examination. The Crown submits
that Ms Buchanan’s
account that she was in the vicinity of the Johnson
Street house was corroborated by CCTV footage (Ex 2) showing her walking in the
area and by Mr Nelson, who described seeing a woman with red hair walking and
looking at her phone. It is noted that Ms Buchanan
maintained her account
of what she saw and heard and the Crown says that she made appropriate
concessions in her evidence as to her
drug use and criminal history.
Crown submits that Ms Buchanan’s account was unembellished in that she did
not purport to see the victim but was frank about
mistakenly believing that she
was witnessing someone kicking a dog and she accepted her attention was divided
because she was on
her phone. The Crown says that Ms Buchanan had no reason to
lie or to give an account favourable to Mr Bouwens but not the applicant;
that the Officer in Charge gave evidence that Ms Buchanan asked for nothing in
return for making a statement (06/03/23; T 1037);
and that, while there was
evidence that Ms Buchanan formally made her statement on a day when she was on
remand in October 2021,
and was subsequently granted bail, Ms Buchanan had
already given an account to DSC Nolan some months earlier (and on Ms
evidence also to an officer who was present at the scene on 23
January 2021). The Crown says that those matters rebut any suggestion
account came about through a desire to be released from custody.
Crown argues that it was open to the jury to give little weight to
Ms Buchanan’s incorrect identification in the photo board
The Crown says that it is clear from the footage and from the transcript (Ex 3
and MFI 5) that Ms Buchanan expressed some
uncertainty about her selection
during the process, and notes that it was conducted a year after the events she
witnessed. The Crown
says that the critical part of Ms Buchanan’s
evidence was that she saw only one of the two men doing the
rather than her identification of the applicant.
Crown submits that it was also open to the jury to accept that Ms Buchanan
was being truthful when she denied telling DSC Nolan
that she saw “two
blokes kicking the shit out of something on the ground”, but rather
“two blokes” at the
house, one of whom was “kicking the shit
out of something on the ground”. The Crown points out that DSC
recollection of what was said was based on an email she wrote
eight days after the conversation.
to other aspects of Ms Buchanan’s account of events, the Crown points out
that: Ms Buchanan’s account of hearing the
man saying “get up”
was supported not only by Ms Jones (who said she heard the applicant say this
while she was on the
phone to Mr Bouwens) but also by two neighbours
(Ms O’Donoghue and Mr Teale); and Ms Buchanan’s account that
a name being called out was consistent with Mr Nelson’s evidence
that he also heard someone calling out a name (albeit that
he thought it was a
different name).
Crown submits that Ms Buchanan’s evidence that she saw a surname in the
photo board process which triggered the memory as
to the name
“Dooley” is consistent with the recording (Ex 3 and MFI 5) where Ms
Buchanan can be seen to observe something
on the computer screen shortly before
saying “Dooley” and “Mmm...Dooley. ‘Cause I think
name they were calling out when running up the road”.
The Crown says that, while it was not raised by the Crown at the trial,
out from the photo board process tendered by the defence (Ex 4) displayed the
name “Brendan Doolan” at the top
of the page, suggesting that name
may also have been visible to the witness. In any case, the Crown says that Ms
Buchanan had earlier
told police she heard a name being called out; and that the
only change was her evidence that it may have
been something like
the Crown says that Ms Buchanan’s evidence that the person she saw was not
wearing shoes was consistent with the expert
evidence that the blood stains on
the applicant’s thongs may have been caused by him putting the shoes back
on (06/03/23; T
1014-1015).
the Crown points to Detective Flippence’s evidence to the effect that the
amount of blood on Mr Bouwens’ clothing
was not consistent with what he
would have expected from the perpetrator having regard to the crime scene
photographs. The Crown
says that the photographs of the clothing show the areas
of blood staining to be fairly minimal (referring to Ex R at pp 160-164;
photographs 19-28). The Crown argues that there were explanations for
the presence of some blood on Mr Bouwens’ shirt that
fell short of
involvement in the murder, referring in this context to Mr Bouwens’
account to Ms Alcorn that he picked up the
deceased’s phone and put it in
his pocket, which the Crown says is consistent with there being a blood stain on
the front pocket
(noting that there is no dispute that Mr Bouwens had handled
the phone at some stage); and to Mr Bouwens’ account that he had
attempted to intervene.
the Crown emphasises that it was a matter for the jury to form a view as to
whether Mr Bouwens’ evidence on the core
aspects of his account was
credible notwithstanding he had admitted to lying and was “potentially an
unsophisticated and unsatisfactory
witness in some respects”. The Crown
notes that the jury was directed that it was a matter for the jury to
“look carefully
at what the witnesses said” and determine the effect
of any discrepancies in their account (SU 6), and to assess demeanour
consider how the evidence of a witness fit with the rest of the evidence by
looking at it in context. The Crown points out
that the need for the jury
closely to consider whether Mr Bouwens could be believed was made very clear to
the jury at a number of
points (referring to the Crown prosecutor’s
closing address and to the directions given by the trial judge (to which I have
earlier referred)).
Crown says that the theme that Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn had repeatedly lied and
could not be believed was one that pervaded the
applicant’s
counsel’s closing address; and submits that it must have been clear to the
jury that Mr Bouwens’ credibility
was the key issue in the trial.
to the lies by Mr Bouwens in his first and second police statements, the Crown
submits that it was open to the jury to find those
lies were explicable by some
reason other than Mr Bouwens inflicting any blows to the deceased.
Crown argues that an obvious explanation for the lies in Mr Bouwens’ and
Mr Radburns’ first statements (as to happening
upon the altercation and
seeing a figure run away) is that both Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn did not want to
implicate the applicant,
who was their close friend. The Crown says that this
is consistent with the account of Mr Bouwens, referring to the evidence of
Walsh, who said that the applicant told him he and Mr Radburn “had
tried to cover up a little bit, help Brendan” and
the statement of Mrs
Bouwens that her son told her that he lied because “It was Brendan. He was
my mate. I thought it was doing
the right thing”. It is noted that
Mr Radburn said in his evidence at trial that he lied because he was scared
and the applicant
was his mate. The Crown submits that the jury may have
considered that explanation to be more plausible than the suggestion that
lies were aimed at protecting Mr Bouwens, given that Mr Bouwens had remained at
the scene and called for help.
to the continued lies by Mr Bouwens in the second statement, the Crown notes
that the trial judge in summing up reiterated the
submission by the
applicant’s counsel in closing that these could no longer be explained by
a desire to protect the applicant.
The Crown says that, while Mr Bouwens
implicated the applicant in the second statement but continued to tell lies
it remained open to the jury to reconcile those lies
with fear in circumstances where Mr Bouwens had been present during the murder,
or due to shock or immaturity, or some combination of these matters and a desire
to avoid admitting the full extent of his earlier
lies. The Crown says that it
did not inevitably follow from the lies he told that Mr Bouwens was concealing
his own involvement.
as the applicant places reliance on the lies told in the 000 call, the Crown
points out that those lies were told by Mr Radburn
and not Mr Bouwens. The
Crown says that the evidence does not support the applicant’s submission
that Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn
must have colluded to advance a fabricated story
from as early as the 000 call, noting the very limited time between the call to
Ms Jones at 3:54am and the 000 call at 3:55pm. The Crown also points to the
evidence that the men appeared to be in shock when police
arrived. The Crown
argues that the lies told by Mr Radburn in the 000 call are readily
explicable by a desire to avoid implicating
the applicant in the murder.
to the reliance placed by the applicant on alleged lies told by Mr Bouwens and
Mr Radburn about the applicant returning to the
scene while Mr Radburn was on
the 000 call and the applicant assaulting the deceased again, and
Mr Radburn’s evidence that
the two drove around calling out the
applicant’s name (the latter not being able to be attributed to Mr Bouwens
who did not
give this evidence), the Crown accepts that nothing in the 000 call
corroborates that either of these things occurred. However, the
Crown points out
that there are periods during the 000 call where Mr Radburn is not speaking to
the operator. In any event, the
Crown says that the notion that the applicant
left and returned is somewhat consistent with Ms Buchanan’s account that
saw the applicant run off and then come back (though accepting that she did
not give evidence of seeing him do anything nor seeing
Mr Radburn arrive in the
interim), and the notion that a name was called out was corroborated by both Ms
Buchanan and Mr Nelson.
Crown says that the significance of this aspect of the evidence of both
Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn in light of the contents of
the 000 call was
fundamentally a matter for the jury; and the Crown submits that, even if some of
this account were to rejected,
it remained open to the jury to accept the core
aspects of Mr Bouwens account.
as the applicant challenges Mr Bouwens’ credibility and reliability on the
basis of perceived inconsistencies in the
accounts he gave to others following
the assault and his evidence in Court, the Crown submits that there were
important consistencies
in what Mr Bouwens said (including that the applicant
was the perpetrator; that the assault was violent; and that the applicant jumped
on the deceased, the Crown here referring to the accounts Mr Bouwens gave to Ms
Alcorn, Mr Walsh and his mother). The Crown argues
that in his evidence in the
trial, Mr Bouwens was consistent on the core aspects of what he observed, going
to the elements of the
Crown also submits that Mr Bouwens’ evidence was consistent with the crime
scene photographs: his account that the applicant
first assaulted the deceased
at the areas he identified in Ex 6 at the back steps being consistent with the
blood stains in those
areas in the crime scene photographs; his account that the
applicant and the deceased then went inside being consistent with the
found throughout the house and the DNA on the back door handle; and his account
that there was then a further assault in the
vicinity of the fence and the car
in the driveway being consistent with the blood stains around the car on the
driver’s side,
particularly at the back of the car (see Ex V, photograph
12; Ex R, pp 45-59; and Ex S).
Crown notes that at trial the applicant’s counsel relied on Mr
Bouwens’ account that the applicant used a bin to pull
himself up and jump
as being inconsistent with the photographs and that Mr Bouwens said that this
may have been the fence. In this
regard, the Crown points out that the
deceased’s blood was identified on the handle of the bin (Ex Z, result
13); that the
crime scene photographs show the bins, the fence and the side of
the car all to be close together; and that there was evidence suggesting
applicant’s palm print was located on the rear of the car. In those
circumstances, the Crown says that the reference to
use of a bin was not a
significant inconsistency or deficiency in Mr Bouwens’ account. Further,
the Crown submits that it was
a matter for the jury to determine the
significance of any inconsistencies between his accounts and details of his
evidence at the
trial with other evidence.
Crown submits that it was also open to the jury to ascribe weight to any
perceived attempt by Mr Bouwens to minimise his knowledge
of the deceased. The
Crown says that Mr Bouwens’ evidence that he did not appreciate that the
“Bradley” staying
at Ms Doolan’s house and the
“Brad” he knew were one and the same until he saw him was not
inherently implausible,
and that Mr Bouwens’ evidence that he did not
mention that the deceased had a relationship with his aunt initially because
was two years old and had forgotten, was also not incapable of belief.
to the challenge to Mr Bouwens’ reliability on the basis of his evidence
that he dreamt about the incident and remembered
some details through dreams,
the Crown says that, at trial, the defence case was that the reference to things
coming back to him
in dreams were lies that he told to explain new details in
his account by the time of the police interview, rather than something
whether he had a genuine recollection of what he was describing. The Crown says
that Mr Bouwens’ evidence at the
trial made clear that all he was saying
was that he had dreamt about the incident, not that new memories had come to him
The Crown points out that a number of the details the applicant gave
in his evidence were consistent with Mr Walsh’s evidence
as to what Mr
Bouwens told him on 23 January 2021; and the Crown submits that this weighed
against any suggestion that Mr Bouwens
had recalled key details much later
through dreaming. In this regard, the Crown points to Mr Walsh’s account
that Mr Bouwens
told him about the applicant “punching, kicking,
kneeing” and “jumping on” the deceased’s head after
telling him to leave his mother’s house (which the Crown notes was
consistent with Mr Bouwens’ evidence at the trial).
to the reliance placed by the applicant on the tendency evidence, the Crown says
that, while there were similarities between the
assault on the deceased and the
assault relied on as tendency evidence, there were also significant differences,
as the Crown submitted
in closing; and the tendency was based on evidence
involving one other incident, over two years before 23 January 2021. The
says that it was a matter for the jury to assess the tendency evidence
relating to Mr Bouwens and determine what weight to give it
in the context of
the other evidence in the case.
Crown submits that full allowance should be given to the advantages the jury had
in seeing and hearing the evidence during the
trial; in particular, that of Mr
Bouwens but also that of Mr Radburn, Ms Jones and Ms Buchanan.
Crown argues that the jury was at a significant advantage in assessing Mr
Bouwens’ credibility (that being the primary issue
raised on appeal). As
already noted, the Crown argues that it was open to the jury: to accept
Mr Bouwens’ evidence on critical
aspects of the Crown case and to
reject his evidence on other aspects; to accept that Mr Bouwens was telling the
truth in his evidence
in Court notwithstanding he had (admittedly) lied on
previous occasions; and for the jury to find that the lies he had previously
told were explicable. The Crown says that this is not a case where Mr
Bouwens’ evidence was inherently implausible or inconsistent
evidence. Rather, the Crown says that it was supported in key respects by
independent evidence and entirely consistent
with his conduct on the night. The
Crown thus submits that it was open to the jury to accept that Mr Bouwens was
not involved in
the assault notwithstanding that he had previously assaulted
someone else over two years earlier, and to find the case proven beyond
reasonable doubt on the evidence as a
Determination
principles relevant to resolving a ground of appeal challenging the
reasonableness of a verdict were stated by the High Court
M v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 487
[1994] HCA 63.
The key question is whether the
jury’s verdict was open on the whole of the evidence. One “must not
disregard or discount
either the consideration that the jury is the body
entrusted with the primary responsibility of determining guilt or innocence, or
the consideration that the jury has had the benefit of having seen and heard the
witnesses” but, rather, “pay full regard
considerations”. Given that the jury is “the constitutional
tribunal for deciding issues of fact” (
Hocking v Bell
[1945] HCA 16
(1945) 71 CLR
[1945] HCA 16
The Queen v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR
[2016] HCA 35
), setting aside a verdict is a serious step which is
not to be taken without giving particular regard to those advantages. Having
regard to the advantages of the jury requires the Court to identify the
“existence, nature and scope” of the advantages,
ordinarily be done on the basis of the transcript (
The King v ZT
(2025) 99 ALJR 676
the High Court said at [9]-[11] (citations omitted):
First, although another passage of
M v The Queen
refers to the advantage
the jury has in “seeing and hearing the witnesses”, the passage
above confirms that the jury’s
advantages are not confined to witness
testimony but may extend to all of the evidence adduced at trial. The advantages
are the advantages the jury had, including by the application of the
jurors’ collective wisdom and experience of ordinary affairs,
from seeing
and hearing the evidence as it unfolds when evaluating factual matters,
especially witness credibility. The existence,
nature and scope of those
advantages will vary from case to case depending on the form in which the
evidence was adduced and the
nature of the issues that arose at the trial. For
example, in
Dansie v The Queen
the advantage possessed by the trial judge
as arbiter of fact was assessed as “slight” because the prosecution
circumstantial, consisting mostly of transcripts of unchallenged
testimony, and the appellant did not give evidence.
Second, in applying
M v The Queen
the appellate court is required to give
“full allowance” to the advantages of the jury in seeing and hearing
the evidence
when assessing whether those advantages are capable of resolving
any doubt the appellate court holds about the appellant’s
guilt. Whether
the evidence is adduced in the form of witness testimony or recorded
conversations or recorded interviews, the advantages
may extend to an assessment
of matters such as: the tone and manner in which the witness or participants
spoke or conducted themselves;
their maturity; their emotional state and
intelligence; and how they interact with others, including family members,
associates,
strangers or officials (eg, police officers). The jury can consider
those matters possessing a breadth of understanding of how different
speak and behave in such circumstances that a judge may not have.
M v The Queen
requires that the appellate court undertake an
“independent assessment” of the sufficiency and quality of the
of the evidence”. However, that assessment is undertaken in a
context in which an appeal is as much of an adversarial process
as the criminal
trial from which the appeal is brought and in which it is for the parties to
identify the evidence that the appellate
court must review and assess and the
features of that evidence that support their respective cases on appeal. The
appellate court
does not determine the grounds of appeal by simply reconsidering
the parties’ respective cases at the trial.
assessing a contention that a verdict was unreasonable the Court’s
functions “[do] not involve the substitution of
trial by an appeal court
for a trial by a jury” and the Court “should not seek to duplicate
the function of the jury
in its assessment of the credibility of the witnesses
where that assessment is dependent upon the evaluation of the witnesses in
witness-box” (
at [37]-[38]). Assessments of credibility, and
the weight to be given to evidence by reference to the manner in which it was
are matters that are typically within the province of the jury,
notwithstanding that an appellate court can nonetheless set aside
where it has concerns about the reliability of evidence that is otherwise
assumed to have been assessed by the jury to
have been credible. In
[2023] NSWCCA 279
Adamson JA observed at [98]:
The extent to which this Court is entitled to disbelieve a witness (such as the
complainant in the present case) whose evidence a
jury must have accepted, at
least in so far as it established the elements of the offence or offences of
which [the accused] has
been convicted, is constrained. This Court said in
(a pseudonym) v R
[2020] NSWCCA 8
(Macfarlan JA, Brereton JA and
Beech-Jones CJ at CL agreeing):
“...it should be emphasised that, in general, matters of credibility are
for the jury to determine and only in an unusual case
will it be able to be said
that the complainant’s credibility has been so damaged that it was not
open to the jury to accept
his or her evidence”.
with the 000 call, which the applicant argues is the appropriate starting point
on this appeal, there is no doubt that Mr
Radburn lied in his account to the
emergency operator as to how he came to be on the scene and in matters such as
feigning ignorance
of the house at which the incident had occurred. On Mr
Bouwens’ evidence, he was close to Mr Radburn during that call and
it can readily be inferred that he tacitly adopted those lies when he
did not correct them at the time. He also repeated those lies
Radburn) in his first statement. And neither Mr Radburn nor Mr Bouwens said
anything in their first statements as to the
applicant returning to the scene
(nor did Mr Radburn at that time give any account of driving to look for the
applicant and calling
out his name).
I do not accept that an inference can or should be drawn from the common lies in
the 000 call that there was collusion between
Mr Radburn and Mr Bouwens prior to
the 000 call as to what should be said to the emergency operator. The timing of
events as ascertained
from the three minute call to Ms Jones (which, as
explained earlier, must have concluded by about 3:54am) and the 000 call itself
provides little or no opportunity for Mr Bouwens (who, on Mr Radburn’s
account was “shaken” as a leaf when he arrived
and the scene) and Mr
Radburn to concoct a fabricated story as the applicant’s submissions
postulate. It will be recalled that
Ms Jones’ evidence was that the call
from Mr Bouwens ended as the headlights of the car (Mr Radburn’s arrival)
were approaching.
Less still can it be surmised that the two were lying in order
to protect Mr Bouwens (rather than the applicant).
ready, and in my opinion, much more plausible explanation (rather than there
being any collusion at that time) is that Mr Radburn,
who on both his and Ms
Jones’ accounts had been told that it was the applicant who was involved
in the altercation at the Johnson
Street house and Mr Bouwens was seeking help
in that regard, was trying to protect the applicant (his friend); as also was Mr
who on Mr Radburn’s account was visibly shaken and in shock at
what had happened. That explanation is consistent with neither
Mr Radburn nor Mr
Bouwens referring (prior to the second statements) to the applicant returning to
to the account given in the respective second statements that the applicant
returned during the 000 call and further assaulted
the deceased and of the
interaction between Mr Radburn and the applicant (when Mr Radburn said the
applicant told him “You’re
next”), it is certainly the case
that nothing can be heard in the background of the 000 call of those events as
described by
Mr Radburn and Mr Bouwens. However, not only were there pauses
or silences during the 000 call when nothing was said but, more significantly,
during some of those pauses no static can be heard on the line (which one would
infer was when the call had been placed on mute,
whether by the operator to
confer with emergency services or the like or by Mr Radburn himself). The
applicant accepted the Court’s
observation that this was the case but
submitted that the time period of those pauses was too short to permit the
events that Mr
Radburn and Mr Bouwens described to have occurred (AT 13-14).
Nevertheless, some of the pauses where no static can be heard were
longer than
other periods in which there was simply no conversation between Mr Radburn and
the operator. It is not implausible that
events such as the applicant saying
“You’re next” occurred in one of those pauses; nor is it
implausible that the
sound of stomping on the deceased’s head either
coincided with such a pause or was not able to be heard on the recording
because by this stage of events the deceased cannot have been moving or
making much sound). Therefore, the account given by Mr Radburn
and Mr Bouwens as
to the applicant returning and the events that followed cannot be dismissed as
impossible to have occurred; nor
is it inherently implausible.
fact that Ms Jones gave evidence that she heard sounds of an assault (and of the
applicant telling the deceased to get up) is
not inconsistent with
Mr Bouwens’ account that the applicant and deceased came to the front
of the house during his call to
Ms Jones. Certainly, Ms Jones could not have
heard anything during the 000 call as the call to her had ended by then.
on the accounts given by Mr Radburn and Mr Bouwens, she cannot have
heard the threat that “you’re next” (since
that was made
during the 000 call on their version of events). But her evidence as to the
applicant telling the deceased to get up
is consistent with the evidence of
other witnesses (such as Ms Buchanan, Ms Jones and Ms O’Donoghue) and
supports Mr Bouwens’
account as to aspects of what occurred in the front
yard when the applicant and deceased came out the front.
to the fact that Mr Radburn did not tell the 000 operator anything about the
applicant returning to the scene, or the threat made
to him, even though he
agreed that this was shocking, it was for the jury to assess how plausible it
was for Mr Radburn not to have
volunteered that information at the time –
as it was for the jury to assess whether he sounded calm and collected (as the
suggests) on the 000 call. The purpose of this Court listening to the
recording of the 000 call was to assess the jury’s advantage
regard (not to make our own assessment of Mr Radburn’s credibility based
on that call) and to place in context the
relevant timeline of events. In
assessing that evidence, the jury could no doubt take into account that, unlike
Mr Bouwens, Mr Radburn
had not been out drinking until the early hours of the
morning and one might expect him to sound more calm when speaking to the
than Mr Bouwens might have sounded had he made the 000 call.
to any discussion between Mr Radburn and Mr Bouwens prior to their respective
police statements about what had occurred (which
both witnesses initially
denied), Mr Radburn himself acknowledged in his second statement that he had a
conversation with Mr Bouwens
in which he told him what he was going to say to
the police (before the first statement). But this does not carry with it the
that the two collaborated or colluded in a fabricated account at that
time – rather, it is consistent with this being the version
Mr Radburn told the 000 operator, which Mr Bouwens overheard, and
Mr Bouwens later adopting that untruthful version of events
at the time of
his first statement.
more problematic aspect of Mr Radburn’s account is the evidence he gave at
trial (not in either of his statements and which
evidence given
by Mr Bouwens) that he and Mr Bouwens went for a drive together to look for the
applicant (including the calling out
of the applicant’s name during that
drive). There is some support for this account insofar as both Mr Nelson and Ms
gave evidence that they heard a name being called out (albeit, not the
name “Dooley” except, in the case of Ms Buchanan,
after she had
participated in the photo-board identification process); and hence it might be
plausible that Mr Radburn or Mr Bouwens
was calling out to the applicant as Mr
Radburn arrived at the house (consistent with Mr Radburn’s statement to
the 000 operator
that as he drove up “old mate” took off (Ex D; MFI
6, p 4)). But this is mere speculation – as is the suggestion
Radburn was lying about the applicant coming back in order to protect Mr
Bouwens. For various reasons, the account of both
men going on a drive while the
000 call was in progress is implausible. However, this evidence can be regarded
as unreliable evidence
on Mr Radburn’s part without casting reasonable
doubt on Mr Bouwens’ account of the events at the Johnson Street house.
Accepting that it was a matter that could affect his overall credibility, this
was for the jury to assess.
to the proposition that Mr Radburn and Mr Bouwens had colluded to fabricate a
story of the applicant returning during the 000 call,
I do not accept that the
evidence supports such an inference. Certainly, the ultimate state of the
evidence supports the conclusion
that there was (despite their earlier denials)
some discussion at least between Mr Radburn and his father, on the one hand, and
Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn’s father, after the making of their
respective first statements as to what had happened (which led
to them returning
to the police station to give their second statements). However, the fact that
neither had referred to the applicant
returning in their earlier statement but
did so in the second statement is consistent with them seeking to protect the
at the first point and then abandoning that attempt; it does not
bespeak an attempt to falsify evidence in order to implicate the
applicant and
protect Mr Bouwens. Moreover, the change in their accounts between the first and
second statements (as to the applicant
returning to the house) does not make it
more likely that Mr Bouwens was involved in the attack.
Ultimately,
the jury had the advantage of assessing each of Mr Radburn and Mr Bouwens give
evidence and of assessing their credibility
and reliability in the context of
the evidence as a whole. There is nothing to suggest a motivation for Mr Radburn
to implicate the
applicant for the benefit of Mr Bouwens. He was a friend
of each and, indeed, had been a friend of the applicant for marginally longer
than a friend of Mr Bouwens.
to the matters relied upon by the applicant in his submissions as to
Mr Bouwens’ lies more generally, I make the following
observations.
First, I do not attach the significance that the applicant does to Mr
Bouwens’ evidence as to his disclaimer
of knowledge or interest in the
deceased. For example, it is not implausible that Mr Bouwens did not recall a
relationship between
the deceased and his aunt that occurred when Mr Bouwens was
a young child. Nor do I accept that knowledge or belief that the deceased
paedophile can be used to impute to Mr Bouwens a motive to assault the deceased.
Unlike the position of the applicant, there
was no evidence that Mr Bouwens
had expressed a dislike of the deceased staying with the applicant’s
to the inconsistencies in Mr Bouwens’ various accounts of the events to
other people (such as whether the applicant had used
an Otto bin and car bonnet
to jump on the deceased or had jumped off the back of the car), it is not
unusual for there to be variations
in accounts given of such events – and
it must be remembered that this assumes the accuracy of the recollection of the
to whom the account was given. Perhaps most troubling is the account
given by Mr Neilson that Mr Radburn was there and “we”
the power to lure the deceased out. However, on no view of the evidence can it
be suggested that Mr Radburn was there
at the time the power was switched off,
which suggests that a mis-recollection by Mr Neilson as to who was said to have
power off becomes not implausible. Insofar as the applicant points to
the evidence (from Ms Cantwell at [257] above) that Mr Bouwens
effect keen for the applicant to plead guilty in order for the investigation to
come to an end, this must be seen in the context
that Mr Bouwens also
apparently thought that if this happened he could apply for some form of
compensation. In other words, it is
consistent with a mercenary motive as
opposed to some form of consciousness of guilt on his part.
to Mr Bouwens’ belief that the applicant had gone to the house to get his
swag, this may have been implausible in the circumstances
but Mr Bouwens did not
suggest that this was what the applicant had said was the reason they were going
there – it could simply
have been a mistaken assumption on
Mr Bouwens’ part.
to the blood spatter analysis, it is significant in my opinion that the evidence
of Detective Flippence was to the effect that
he would have expected more blood
on Mr Bouwens’ clothes had he been involved in the attack out the back of
the house. There
appears to be no dispute that blood could have been dispersed
onto his clothes if he had simply been close to the deceased out the
back of the
house or if he approached the applicant out the front of the house.
to the tendency evidence, little weight can be attached to this in circumstances
where it was an isolated incident and little is
known of the motivation for the
altercation (other than the fact that something had been said about Mr
Bouwens’ mother which
apparently triggered it). The fact that on one
earlier occasion Mr Bouwens had been involved in a violent assault of a man when
does not make it more likely that he was involved in the assault of the
deceased. In any event, it was a matter for the jury to consider
whether the
asserted tendency had been proved and, if so, the impact of that tendency on
whether the Crown had proved its case beyond
reasonable doubt.
considered all of the evidence, I am not left with a reasonable doubt as to the
guilt of the accused. I consider that it was
reasonably open to the jury to
conclude that the Crown had excluded any reasonable possibility that
Mr Bouwens contributed a blow
to the deceased. In that regard, I accept
that the jury could place weight on the fact that Mr Bouwens, despite his many
not leave the scene but waited for police and paramedics to arrive
(having earlier called Ms Jones for help from Mr Radburn). Conversely,
open to the jury to place weight on the fact that the applicant had left the
scene before police arrived and had washed his
clothing (albeit including work
clothes) that morning.
evidence does not give rise to a reasonable doubt as to the presence of the
applicant at the Johnson Street house when the deceased
was murdered (having
regard to the fact that he had left the Commercial Hotel with Mr Bouwens,
his DNA was on the switchboard and
rear door handle of the house, and the
forensic analysis established the presence of the deceased’s DNA on the
applicant’s
thongs (which were found at his house and consistent with the
thongs observed in CCTV footage that he was wearing that night)). While
Buchanan was conceded by the Crown to be a dysfunctional witness, her account of
seeing two men (one in the yard and one in the
gutter) was consistent with Mr
Bouwens’ account of events and her account of what she heard (like a dog
being kicked and the
demand that the victim get up) was corroborated by a number
of witnesses (see above). Her presence in the area at the time was corroborated
both by the CCTV footage (Ex 2) and Mr Nelson’s account.
Ultimately,
deference must be given to the advantage of the jury in assessing the
credibility and reliability of the various witnesses
who gave evidence at the
trial, particularly of Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn.
my opinion the jury’s verdict was open and was not unreasonable. I have
concluded that the Crown excluded the possibility
that Mr Bouwens was involved
in the assault and murder of the deceased.
appeal should be dismissed.
the above reasons, the following orders should be made:
(1) Extend time to apply for leave to appeal to the date of filing of the
application for leave to appeal.
(2) Grant leave to appeal.
(3) Dismiss the appeal.
: I have had the considerable advantage of reading the draft judgment of
Ward P and agree with the orders her Honour proposes. Her
comprehensive summary of the evidence, issues at trial, legal principles and
arguments on appeal makes it unnecessary
for me to explain in detail why I agree
that the appeal should be dismissed.
my own assessment of the whole of the evidence, I am not persuaded that it was
not open to the jury to convict the applicant. I
regard the traumatic nature of
the circumstances Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn found themselves in (on the Crown
case), their loyalty
to the applicant, and the problems caused by giving an
initially false account, capable of explaining the asserted discrepancies
inadequacies in their evidence. I am not persuaded that the issues raised give
rise to a reasonable doubt. Were I to entertain
such a doubt, I would regard
the jury’s advantage in assessing these witnesses as significant,
requiring resolution of this
ground against the applicant. I also agree with
Ward P’s analysis of the other aspects of the evidence relied upon by the
I have had the advantage of reading the reasons of Ward P in
draft. I am grateful for her Honour’s careful and thorough exposition
the evidence at trial and the respective arguments of the parties.
own review of the evidence has led me to conclude, like her Honour, that I am
satisfied that the verdict was open to the jury and
is not unreasonable. I
consider that the evidence establishes the guilt of the applicant beyond
reasonable doubt.
was for the jury to consider the credibility and reliability of the witnesses,
particularly Mr Bouwens and Mr Radburn having seen
and heard those witnesses and
considering their evidence in the context of the evidence as a whole. The
applicant has not established
any basis for this Court to go behind the
advantage the jury had in this regard. I agree with the reasons of Ward P as to
was reasonably open to the jury to conclude that the Crown had excluded
any reasonable possibility that Mr Bouwens contributed a
blow to the
the reasons given by Ward P, none of the arguments advanced by the applicant are
established so as to raise in my mind a reasonable
doubt as to the guilt of the
agree with the orders proposed by Ward P.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (718 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter