URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2000/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mirosevich v Haddad & Haddad [2000] NSWFTT 4 (27 May 2000)
Fair Trading Tribunal
New South Wales
[2000] NSWFTT 4
Respondent:
Haddad & Haddad
File Number:
BU 1999/1310
Catch Words:
Building dispute – purported repudiation of the building contract
– purported breach of contract
Primary Legislation:
Matter for Decision:
Application under s89A of
Cases Cited:
- Vitol SA v Norelf Ltd
(1994) 4 All ER 109
- Carr v JA Berriman Pty Ltd
[1953] HCA 31
(1953) 89 CLR 327
- Laurinda Pty Ltd v Capalaba Park Shopping Centre Pty Ltd
[1989] HCA 23
(1989) 166 CLR
- Fercometal Sarl v Mediterranean Shipping Co SA
[1989] AC 788
- Ross T Smyth and Co Ltd v TD Bailey and Son and Co
(1940) 3 All ER 60
- Lunar Park (NSW) Ltd v Trainways Advertising Pty Ltd
[1938] HCA 66
(1938) 61 CLR
- Bowes v Chaleyer
[1923] HCA 15
(1923) 32 CLR 159
Mr JP Gallagher, Senior Member
Ms EJ Grinston, Member
Hearing dates:
29 February, 1&2 March 2000
Submissions closed:
13&22 March 2000
Date of Decision:
27 May 2000
REPRESENTATION
Ms E Olsson of Counsel
Respondent:
Mr T Davie of Counsel
The Tribunal determines that the Applicant repudiated the Contract dated June
1998 between the parties, and the Respondents accepted
that repudiation and
terminated the Contract
REASONS FOR DECISION:
1) On 2 June 1998, Mr Mirosevich (“Applicant”) entered
into a building agreement with Mr and Ms Haddad (“Respondents”)
the construction of a home on their property at Castle Hill.
It is not in dispute that work commenced on 25 May 1998 with the
demolition of an existing house on the property. As work proceeded
next few months, relations between the parties became strained, deteriorating to
a point where the Respondents’ former
solicitors, Kalmath Lawyers, wrote
on 19 November 1998 to the Applicant alleging he was in breach of the building
agreement due to
various acts or omissions listed in that letter. The
Applicant’s former solicitors, Tillyard & Callanan, replied to that
letter on 2 December 1998 denying any breach by the Applicant. On the same
date, the Applicant signed a Notice of Suspension of
Works and a Notice of
Extension of Time prepared by his solicitors and these were subsequently served
on the Respondents.
Further correspondence ensued between the parties’
solicitors culminating in a letter dated 10 March 1999 from the
Respondents’
former solicitors to the Applicant’s former solicitors
advising that the Respondents regarded the Applicant as having repudiated
building agreement and that the Applicant was no longer authorised to enter the
Respondents’ property or to perform any
further work on the
Subsequently, a letter dated 18 March 1999 was sent to the
Applicant’s former solicitors by the Respondents’ present
solicitors,
Mullaly and Mylott, informing them that the Applicant had repudiated
the building agreement and that the Respondents had accepted
that repudiation as
terminating the agreement and had therefore engaged alternative builders to
complete the building works.
2) On 14 May 1999, the Applicant filed an application with this
Tribunal seeking an order for $118,400.00 from the Respondents for
damages for
breach of contract. The application included an alternative claim on the basis
of unjust enrichment for reasonable remuneration
for the work performed by the
Applicant. On 22 September 1999, the Respondents filed an answer to the
application and made a cross-claim
for the cost of rectification of building
work performed by the Applicant, the difference between the contract price and
cost to complete the work, and other damages. The amounts were not
quantified and were to be advised at a later date.
3) On 9 February 2000, the Applicant filed amended details of
claim. The quantum of damages sought was not changed. During the course
hearing, the Respondents filed particulars of their cross-claim, which came to a
total of $69,627.00.
4) Counsel for both parties agreed that the most sensible way to
proceed in this matter was to first determine the contractual issues
and to hold
over any consideration of the question of damages and quantum. The evidence
produced and the submissions made proceeded
on that basis and these reasons are
restricted to a consideration of the contractual issues, that is, the
circumstances in which
the building agreement (“Contract”) was
relevantly breached and terminated.
5) It was the contention of each party that it was entitled to
terminate the Contract on the basis of the other’s repudiatory
breach. The
key issues for present determination, therefore, are as follows:
a) Which party repudiated the contract by breach.
b) Which party accepted that repudiation and terminated the
Preliminary
6) It is convenient to set out here in detail some of the clauses
of the Contract.
Clause 9 was headed “Progress Payments” and was as
“WITH A LENDING
The Owners shall direct the Lending Authority to pay to the
Contractor Progress Claims outlined in the Progress Payments Schedule
Agreement within five (5) working days after being notified in writing by the
Contractor that the stages of work have been
satisfactorily completed. It is
acknowledged the Owner shall always remain responsible for the payment of such
Progress Claims.
The Contractor acknowledges that if an inspection is made which
finds the Progress Claim premature, then the Contractor will pay for
(if any) of such inspection.
WHERE NO LENDING AUTHORITY
The Owner shall pay the Contract Price by Progress Payments outlined
in the Progress Payments Schedule 5 of this Agreement within
five (5) working
days after being notified in writing by the Contractor that the stages of work
have been satisfactorily completed.
The Owner shall deposit the Contract Price into a joint account in
the name of the Owner, with the Owner receiving interest on the
account, but
with the Contractor as joint signatory.”
“Progress Claim” was defined in clause 2 to mean
“a written claim prepared by the Contractor and given to the Owner
the value of work done and material supplied to that
Schedule 5 of the contract was headed “Clause 9 Progress
Payments” and, apart from recording a deposit of $5,000.00, recorded
following stages of work:
“1. Demolition - $20,000.00
2. Footings - $45,000.00
3. Frame - $90,000.00
4. Roof tiles - $80,000.00
5. Kitchen - $60,000.00
6. Handover - $12,000.00”
Clause 17 was headed “Termination of Contract by
Owner” and was as follows:
“The Owner may, subject to this following, end
this Agreement if the Contractor:
(a) becomes bankrupt or executes a deed of Assignment of
arrangement or makes any Composition for the benefit of creditors;
(b) goes into liquidation, either voluntary or compulsory, or has a
Receiver of Official Manager appointed; or,
(c) fails to proceed with the Building Works with all due diligence;
(d) fails to proceed with the Building Works in a competent and
workmanlike manner; or,
(e) without reasonable cause suspends the Building Work before
Practical Completion; or,
(f) refuses or neglects to comply with any obligations under this
Agreement; or,
(g) fails to remove or remedy any defective work (as directed by the
warranty insurer) within the time allowed;
THEN the Owner must give the Contractor a notice in
A. Specifying the default;
B. Requiring it to be rectified within ten (10) days or else the
Owner may terminate this Agreement after that ten (10) day period
by serving a
Notice of Determination upon the Contractor.”
Clause 18 was headed “Termination of Contract by
Contractor” and was as follows:
“The Contractor may end this Agreement, subject to
the following, if the Owner:
(a) fails to pay a Progress Claim or Variation within ten (10)
working days of the date on which it becomes due and payable; or,
(b) becomes bankrupt or executes a Deed of Assignment or Arrangement
or makes a Composition for the benefit or creditors; or,
(c) goes into liquidation (voluntary or compulsory) or has a
receiver and/or Official Manager appointed; or,
(d) fails to give adequate instructions or directions;
(e) commits a breach of the warranties referred to in Clause 4;
(f) fails to execute a variation; or,
(g) enters into occupation (actual or constructive) without the
Contractors consent or attempts to take control of the Building
THEN the Contractor may stop the Building Works AND serve a Notice
of Suspension of Works upon the Owner:
A. Specifying the default;
B. Requiring it to be rectified; and
C. Stating that this Agreement may be terminated if the default is
not rectified within ten (10) Working days.
At the end of ten (10) Working days, if the Owners default has not
been rectified, the Contractor may serve a Notice of Determination,
Agreement and requiring the Owner to pay the following amounts within five (5)
Working days:
(i) Cost of Building Works to date not already paid and Builders
Margin; and
(ii) Costs of quitting the Land.”
7) It is not in dispute that the Applicant received the deposit of
$5,000.00 and rendered invoices for the amounts shown above for
stages 1, 2 and
3 for which he received payment. The dates when those payments were made were
the subject of some evidence and submissions
by the Applicant concerning
extensions of time under the Contract. The relevance of those matters will be
discussed later.
8) On 12 November 1998, the Applicant rendered an invoice for the
sum of $80,000.00 in respect of stage 4 of the work “roof
Exhibit A2, annexure “M” ). The question of whether the roof tiling
was satisfactorily completed for the
purposes of clause 9 of the Contract was an
issue in dispute between the parties. Evidence on this question was given by
the Applicant
and by his expert witness, Mr. Cornish. Photographic evidence of
the roof tiling work was submitted by the Respondents (Exhibit
relevance of this evidence is discussed later.
Whatever the position concerning completion as at 12 November
1998, it was not in dispute that the sub-contractor, Monier Roofing,
subsequently attended the site in February 1999 and fixed the ridge cappings in
place. Its account totalled $10,642.00, which was
paid by the
It is also not in dispute that, after receipt of the invoice for
$80,000.00, the Respondents signed a document entitled “Borrowers
for Progress Payments” ( Exhibit A2, annexure “N” ), which was
then passed to the Respondents’ lending
authority, Westpac Banking
Corporation. Further, it is common ground that the Respondents subsequently
wrote to the bank on 18 November
requesting the bank to stop payment of the
$80,000.00 ( Exhibit A3, annexure “I” ). That letter went on to
matter is at present with the hands of my Lawyer, who is preparing a letter of
termination of contract.
Until then, no further payment would be made or sign for. (the
contract is closed for now.)”
The invoice for $80,000.00 was never in fact paid.
9) As already noted, on 2 December 1998 the Applicant signed a
Notice of Suspension of Works, which was subsequently served on the
Respondents
( Exhibit A2, annexure “ Q “ ). This notice was said to be given
pursuant to clause 18 of the Contract and
stated that the Respondents had failed
to pay the “Progress Claim” of 12 November 1998 for $80,000.00 and a
Claim” dated 8 September for $14,400.89. The notice
advised that if the default was not rectified by payment of the total
$94.400.89 within 10 working days after service of the notice, the Applicant
“may terminate the Contract”.
The notice also advised that the Applicant had “stopped the
Building Works”. The Applicant’s written evidence was
stopped the work on 17 November 1998 following a telephone conversation with Mr.
Haddad when he was told that he would be
receiving a letter from their
solicitors, and also because he was still awaiting payment of the $80,000.00
(Exhibit A2, paragraphs
39 and 40). The conversation as deposed to by the
Applicant was denied in the sworn statement of Mr. Haddad (Exhibit R8, paragraph
10) The parties were in dispute about what work, if any, was in
fact done by the Applicant between the dates of 12 November 1998 and
11 February
1999 (the date when Monier Roofing was paid its account). In response to
questions from the Tribunal, the Applicant
said that the “roof guard would
have been taken off ”after 12 November 1999 and that in February the roof
ridge capping
was cemented on. He conceded that he did not do any work himself
after 2 December (the date of the Notice of Suspension of Works)
but said that
he went back to the site on occasions to check that the property was secure and
not being vandalised. In response
to further questions from Ms. Olsson, the
Applicant stated that apart from the ridge capping by Monier Roofing there had
some lead flashing placed by a plumber between the dates of 12
November 1998 and 11 February 1999. He also advised that he attended
to inspect both sub-contractors’ work.
11) In addition to the above, the Applicant gave evidence that
from 12 November 1998 he had been attempting to arrange a meeting between
Respondents and the suppliers of the kitchen. He deposed that a meeting had
been arranged at the property on 16 November 1998
but the Respondents had failed
to attend. He attested that a subsequent meeting was arranged for 17 November
1998 but again the
Respondents failed to attend. He described this as an
additional factor leading to his decision to stop work on the property (Exhibit
A2, paragraphs 36-40).
Mr. Haddad denied in his sworn statement that there was any
discussion about the kitchen on 12 November 1998 and stated that no appointment
had been made with the kitchen subcontractors on 16 and 17 November 1998
(Exhibit R8, paragraphs 36-39).
During cross-examination, the Applicant repeated his claim that he
had been waiting for the site meeting with the kitchen people on
dates. He conceded, however, that he was not suggesting that there was
absolutely nothing else he could do on those dates
Mr. Haddad during cross-examination by Ms. Olsson repeated his
denial that the meetings with the kitchen people had ever been arranged.
The import of these issues will be discussed
Submissions
12) Written submissions were made by Ms. Olsson and Mr. Davie and
each of them also made a written response to the other’s submissions.
The essential thrust of Ms. Olsson’s submissions are
contained in paragraphs 8-10 of the findings she submitted the Tribunal
First, she argued that the Applicant was entitled to submit the
progress claim for stage 4 because Monier Roofing “had installed
tiles within the meaning of the progress payment schedule of the
Secondly, she submitted that the Respondents had repudiated the
Contract by the following conduct:
“(i) failing
to give the Applicant adequate or any instructions with respect to tiles and
kitchen selections in November 1998;
(ii) he indicated to a third party (bank) that the Contract was
“closed for now” and that his lawyer was preparing “a
of termination”;
(iii) by refusing to direct the lending authority to process
progress claim 4 (roof tiles);
(iv) by refusing permission for the Applicant to attend the site
(10th March 1999);
(v) by engaging another builder and giving him exclusive possession
of the site (10th March 1999).”
Thirdly, she maintained that the Applicant “expressly
accepted the repudiation by commencing legal proceedings and in the details
claim form filed with the Tribunal, pleading an acceptance”.
13) Mr. Davie’s submissions can also be summarised as
First, he made various submissions directed to the argument that
the submission of the invoice for $80,000.00 was not a valid progress
accordance with Clause 9 on the Contract and there was therefore no breach by
the Respondents.
His second argument was that, even if there had been a breach, it
was not repudiatory in that “the failure to pay one instalment,
circumstances where the work the subject of the relevant stage was not
completed, would not ordinarily be regarded as repudiatory”.
that there was no evidence to suggest that the Respondents would not have paid
the claim “if it had been presented
in the proper manner after completion
of the roof tiles”. In further support of this argument, he submitted
that if the Applicant’s
“failure to continue to carry out work on
the site constitutes a repudiation, then the respondents would be excused
obligations under the Contract”.
The third bracket of his submissions was that, even if there had
been a repudiatory breach by the Respondents, the Applicant had never
accepted the repudiation and elected to treat the Contract as at an end. In
support of this, he referred to the Notice
of Suspension of Works dated 2
December 1998 and a Notice of Extension of Time of the same date, both of which
had been signed by
the Applicant and served on the Respondents. He argued that
these notices “constituted unequivocal affirmations of the
Finally, he pointed to the further work carried out on the
property in February 1999 by the sub-contractor, Monier Roofing, and
argued that
this could only have been “pursuant to the
and findings
Assuming the Respondents’ conduct gave the Applicant the
right to terminate the Contract, did he do so?
14) Clearly the turning point in the relationship between the
parties in this matter was the submission of the $80,000.00 invoice
November 1998 and the circumstances surrounding its non-payment. While evidence
to stages 1, 2, and 3 was adduced
and Ms. Olsson argued that those late payments were repudiatory conduct by the
Respondents, she
conceded in her oral submissions that the Applicant did not act
on those and did not exercise any rights he made have had in respect
A good deal of evidence was canvassed during the proceedings
concerning the stage the roof tiling work had reached when the $80,000.00
invoice was submitted. A similar amount of evidence was forthcoming in respect
of the circumstances surrounding the submission of
the invoice to Westpac
Banking Corporation and the Respondents’ instructions to that bank to stop
payment of the invoice.
Both counsel made detailed submissions about these
matters and about the form of the claim and the interpretation of Clause 9 of
the Contract. While acknowledging the detail of that evidence and those
submissions, we do not think it is necessary to come to
any conclusion about
those matters.
15) The reason for this is that we agree with Mr. Davie’s
submission that, even if there had been a repudiatory breach by the
Respondents,
the Applicant did not accept that repudiation and his subsequent conduct did not
communicate any election or decision
to terminate the Contract.
16) The clear facts are that on 2 December 1998, the Applicant
signed a Notice of Suspension of Works and a Notice of Extension of
of which were served on the Respondents. On the same date, the
Applicant’s former solicitors, Tillyard and Callanan,
wrote to the
Respondents’ former solicitors, Kalmath Lawyers, denying their claim in a
letter of 19 November 1998 that the
Applicant was in breach of contract, and
setting out in detail his claim for extensions of time under the Contract (
Exhibit A2,
annexure “P” ). The letter summarised the extensions as
at 2 December 1998, the date of practical completion is 28 December 1998. That
date will be extended by one working day
for every working day that your clients
fail to pay our clients Progress Claim dated 12 November 1998”.
Finally, when responding to the Respondents’ solicitors
claims in respect of failure to carry out certain works in accordance
Contract, the letter advised that two of the items “represent uncompleted
work at this stage of construction”.
We agree with Mr. Davie’s submission that the notices
“constituted unequivocal affirmations of the Contract”. Furthermore,
the letter from the Applicant’s solicitors leaves us in no doubt that the
Applicant’s legal advisers were treating the
Contract as still in
17) Acceptance of a repudiatory breach can be by words or conduct
but such words or conduct must make it plain that the innocent party
is treating
the Contract as at an end – Vitol SA v Norelf Ltd
(1994) 4 All ER 109
114. The election to treat the Contract as at an end must be unambiguous
– Carr v JA Berriman Pty Ltd
[1953] HCA 31
(1953) 89 CLR 327
While we make no finding that the Respondents were in repudiatory
breach of the Contract, we do make a finding that, assuming such
repudiatory
breach, the Applicant did not accept that repudiation by his words or conduct
and made no unambiguous decision to treat
the Contract as at an
No subsequent words or conduct on the part of the Applicant ,
moreover, suggest that he treated the Contract as at an end. On 11
1999, for example, the Applicant’s former solicitors wrote again to the
Respondents’ former solicitors ( responding
to a letter from them dated 11
December 1998 ). Their letter concluded with the following
are instructed that your clients have made no attempt to rectify the defaults we
supplied in the Notice of Suspension of
Works. Our client intends to take
appropriate action in accordance with the Contract.” (Exhibit A2,
annexure “U”.)
Clearly, the Applicant’s legal advisers still treated the
Contract as on foot at that time. The final correspondence between
solicitors also confirms that the Applicant had not accepted any repudiatory
breach and made an election to treat the Contract
as at an end. In a letter
dated 4 March 1999, the Respondents’ former solicitors advised the
Applicant’s former solicitors
that their clients had “no option but
to regard your client as having repudiated the Building Contract between the
because of his failure to continue the building works (Exhibit
A2, annexure “X”). In a letter of response dated 5 March
Applicant’s former solicitors made the following comments:
“Our client’s actions have been in
accordance with the Contract and clearly do not amount to a
repudiation.
However, the last paragraph of your letter may well constitute a
repudiation by your clients so as to give our client another ground
to terminate
the Contract.“ (Exhibit A2, annexure “Y”.)
Once again, it is clear that the Applicant’s solicitors
regarded the Contract as still in existence. Indeed, no further steps
taken under
of the Contract by the Applicant or his legal
representatives until a Notice of Determination dated 24 December 1999 was
the Respondents. As discussed later, by this time the Contract had
been terminated by the Respondents.
Did the Applicant breach the Contract after 12
November 1998?
18) Mr. Davie submitted that around the time of the submission of
the invoice for $80,000.00, the Applicant stopped work. He went
“No justification for doing so at the time has
been proffered: evidence is given that at the time the contractor was waiting
for a site meeting in relation to the kitchen but the applicant does not say
that this prevented him from proceeding with the work”.
As already noted, the Applicant’s evidence relating to the
kitchen work was disputed by Mr Haddad. We are of the view that
whether or not
the Applicant’s evidence in this regard is accepted, it is not material to
the question of whether the Applicant
had ceased work as at 2 December 1998, the
date of the Notice of Suspension of Works. There is nothing in the
Applicant’s
two sworn statements (Exhibits A2 and A3) that suggests that
he did any work on the property after 2 December 1998. As discussed
earlier, in
answer to questions from the Tribunal, the Applicant conceded that he did no
work after 2 December 1998 except to check
out the property to ensure it had not
been damaged by vandals etc. He also confirmed in later evidence, however, that
prior to paying
the sub-contractor Monier Roofing on 11 February 1999 he had
inspected its work and some lead flashing work done by the
19) On a consideration of the evidence before us, we conclude that
the Applicant simply stopped performing his obligations under the
certainly from 11 February 1999 if not from 2 December 1998, and had no
intention to complete the work while the invoice
for $80,000 remained unpaid.
The issue of whether a breach is repudiatory must be looked at objectively. In
Laurinda Pty Ltd v Capalaba
Park Shopping Centre Pty Ltd
[1989] HCA 23
(1989) 166 CLR 623
658, Dean and Dawson JJ said:
“It suffices that,
viewed objectively, the conduct of the relevant party has been such as to convey
to a reasonable person,
in the situation of the other party, repudiation or
disavowal either of the contract as a whole or the fundamental obligation under
We find that the Applicant’s conduct, objectively
considered, was repudiatory.
Alternatively, his failure to carry out and complete the Contract
amounted to a breach of a condition or fundamental term of the
20) We found earlier that the Applicant unequivocally affirmed the
Contract when he signed the Notice of Suspension of Works and Notice
Extension of Time on 2 December 1998 and by the terms of the letter of the same
date from his former solicitors to the Respondents’
former solicitors.
Subsequent correspondence by the solicitors, also referred to earlier, confirmed
the Applicant’s attitude
to the Contract. The obvious question that
arises is how this affirmation of the Contract can be reconciled with a finding
the Applicant evinced a clear intention not to be bound by the Contract and
was in repudiatory breach. To put it another way, was
the Applicant entitled to
rely on the Notice of Suspension of Works and refuse to carry out and complete
the work unless and until
the invoice of $80,000.00 was paid?
The answer is that an unaccepted repudiation does not absolve an
innocent party from his or her obligation to perform work under a
Fercometal SARL v Mediterranean Shipping Co SA
[1989] AC 788.
Assuming for the
argument that the Respondents were in repudiatory breach by non-payment of the
invoice for $80,000.00, the Applicant,
not having accepted the repudiation by
terminating the Contract (on the grounds that the default specified in the
Notice of Suspension
of Works had not been rectified) continued to be bound by
his own fundamental obligations.
Furthermore, while he may have had no actual intention to
repudiate the Contract, his refusal to perform any further work, certainly
11 February 1999, constituted a serious and fundamental breach. In Ross T Smyth
and Co Ltd v TD Bailey Son and Co
(1940) 3 All ER 60
at 72, Lord Wright said
that is not “necessary to show that the party alleged to have repudiated
should have an actual intention
not to fulfil the contract. He may be
determined to do so only in a manner substantially inconsistent with his
obligations, and
not in any other way”. In other words, where a party
adopts an erroneous construction of a contract, a repudiation may occur
party acts on the construction by breaching one or more terms, or by evincing an
intention to perform only in accordance
with his or her construction – see
also Lunar Park (NSW) Ltd v Traimways Advertising Pty Ltd
[1938] HCA 66
(1938) 61 CLR
21) On a consideration of the evidence before us, we find that the
Applicant was in repudiatory breach of the Contract at least from
11 February
1999, due to his refusal to carry out and complete the work under the Contract.
We also find that this repudiatory breach
was accepted by the Respondents when
their solicitors at that time wrote on 4 March 1999 to the Applicant’s
former solicitors
advising that their clients had “no option but to regard
your client as having repudiated the Building Contract between the
parties” and advising that the Applicant was no longer authorised to enter
the property or to perform any further work on the
property. (Exhibit A2,
annexure “X”.)
If there was any remaining doubt, we find that this acceptance was
confirmed by the letter of 18 March 1999 from the Respondents’
solicitors to the Applicant’s former solicitors, advising that the
Applicant had “repudiated the agreement and
our clients have accepted that
repudiation as terminating the agreement” and advising that their clients
had engaged “alternative
contractors to complete the works” (Exhibit
R2, annexure “Z”).
22) The question could be asked whether the Respondents were able
to terminate the Contract on the basis of a repudiatory breach in
circumstances
where the Respondents’ own conduct (on the assumption we adopted in our
earlier reasoning) had earlier given
rise to a right on the part of the
Applicant to terminate the Contract.
The answer is that an election to continue to be bound by a
contract (by not accepting a repudiation) is final - that is, continuation
inconsistent with any right to terminate. In other words, where Party A has made
an election to continue with a contract, Party
B’s prior repudiation does
not preclude Party B from termination of the contract on the grounds of later
repudiatory breach
by Party A – Bowes v Chaleyer (1923 )
[1923] HCA 15
23) We determine that the Applicant repudiated the Contract by his
failure at least from 11 February 1999 to carry out and complete
the work under
the Contract. We also determine that the Respondents accepted the
Applicant’s repudiation and terminated the
The result is that the Respondents are entitled to pursue their
cross-claim for damages for breach of Contract. Mr. Davie’s
submissions
addressed the question of mitigation but the Tribunal makes no finding in
relation to this issue or in relation to the
Respondents’ claim for
damages generally because these will be matters for further evidence and
submissions when this matter
is relisted for rehearing.
24) Evidence was given and cross- examination took place during
the proceedings concerning additional work (so called variations
Contract) allegedly performed by the Applicant, and a number of submissions
were made by both Ms. Olsson and Mr. Davie concerning
whether additional payment
for this extra work could be claimed by the Applicant. We make no findings on
these issues, first because
the evidence relating to them is not complete and
secondly because we consider that they are not material to the question of
repudiatory
breach and what flowed from that. They will clearly be relevant to
later evidence and submissions on quantum and damages.
P Gallagher
E J Grinston
Senior Member Member
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THIS IS A TRUE AND ACCURATE RECORD OF THE REASONS FOR
DECISION OF THE FAIR TRADING TRIBUNAL.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (96.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter