URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/851.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Watts v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2025] NSWPICMP 851; (4 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF REVIEW
Watts v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2025] NSWPICMP
Margaret Watts
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA
REVIEW PANEL
Terence Stern OAM
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Shane Moloney
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
DATE OF DECISION:
4 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS –
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
injured in a motor vehicle accident; medical dispute as to whether the injuries
sustained in the accident were threshold
injuries; dispute also arose as to
whole person impairment (WPI); Medical Assessor (MA) determined the injury to
the left shoulder
and scarring was not related to the accident, and the injury
to the cervical spine was caused by the accident and was a threshold
claimant sought a review of the determination; Review Panel conducted its own
examination;
– Review Panel found the supraspinatus tear to
the left shoulder was caused by the accident and was a non-threshold injury;
certificate of MA was revoked; Review Panel found that injuries to the cervical
spine, left shoulder, and scarring caused by the
accident resulted in a combined
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
AMENDED CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
Review Panel revokes the decision of Medical Assessor Mohammed Assem dated
19 February 2025 and substitutes:
supraspinatus
tear to the left shoulder was caused by the accident and is a
non-threshold
Review Panel revokes the decision of Medical Assessor Mohammed Assem and
substitutes the determination to certify that the injuries
referred to the Panel
and caused by the accident gave rise to a whole person impairment of
AMENDED STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
claimant, Margaret Watts (Ms Watts) was involved in a motor vehicle accident on
19 May 2022 (the accident) in which she stated that she sustained injury to
her left shoulder, cervical spine, and skin.
Australia Limited t/as NRMA (the insurer) was the comprehensive third-party
medical dispute has arisen about whether Ms Watt’s injuries were threshold
injuries, and this dispute was referred to the
Personal Injury Commission
(Commission) for assessment.
Assessor Mohammed Assem assessed Ms Watts on 18 February 2025 for the
Commission. The Medical Assessor certified on 19 February
2025 that the injuries
to the left shoulder and skin (scarring) were not caused by the accident and a
determination as to whether
they were threshold injuries was not required for
the purposes of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(the Act). Medical
Assessor Assem further certified that the injury to the cervical spine was a
threshold injury for the purposes
of the Act.
Watts lodged an application with the Commission seeking a review of the Medical
Assessor’s decision.
9 April 2025, a delegate of the President of the Commission determined there was
reasonable cause to suspect a material error in
the assessment and has allowed
the Review. On 12 September 2024, the delegate convened this Review Panel (the
Panel) to conduct the
SCOPE OF THE AMENDED
to the “Referral for Assessment to Medical Assessor/s” document, the
scope of the dispute was as follows:
disputes to be
- threshold
injuries to be
- injury to the
left shoulder including full thickness tear of the rotator cuff and requiring
two surgical procedures;
- injury to the
cervical spine including aggravation of pre-existing degenerative changes,
scarring surgical scarring.
disputes to be
- permanent
impairment.
injuries to be
- injury to the
left shoulder including full thickness tear of the rotator cuff and requiring
two surgical procedures;
- injury to the
cervical spine including aggravation of pre-existing degenerative changes,
- skin–scarring
surgical scarring.
the original Medical Assessment, the Review Panel revoked the decision of
Medical Assessor Mohammed Assem, dated 19 February 2025
and substituted the
determination that:
supraspinatus
tear to the left shoulder was caused by the accident and is a
non-threshold
injury for the purposes of the Act.
a result of the revocation of Medical Assessor Assem’s determination,
without more, the Review Panel’s Assessment and
Determination was
incomplete.
Review Panel failed to assess the injuries which had been referred to Medical
Assessor Assem.
Review Panel accordingly amends this decision so as to deal with and determine
all of the disputes which were referred to it.
LEGISLATIVE
Watt’s claim is governed by the provisions of the of the Act. This
legislation provides a scheme for the compulsory third-party
insurance of all
motor vehicles registered in New South Wales and a scheme of statutory benefits
and compensation by way of lump sum damages (under
persons injured in motor accidents in New South Wales.
almost all injured persons are entitled to some statutory benefits in accordance
with Part 3 of the MAI Act, there are some
disentitling provisions and limits to
the amount and extent of benefits and compensation available. One of these
restrictions is
that, this motor vehicle accident having occurred before 1 April
2023, if the only injuries sustained by the injured person are
“threshold”
injuries, the injured person cannot receive statutory
benefits beyond 26 weeks after the accident and cannot recover damages.
Threshold injury
threshold injury is defined in s 1.6(1) of the Act as a “soft tissue
injury.” Section 1.6(2) of the Act defines a soft
tissue injury to
“[A]n injury to tissue that connects, supports or
surrounds other structures or organs of the body (such as muscles, tendons,
ligaments, menisci, cartilage, fascia, fibrous tissues, fat, blood vessels and
synovial membranes), but not an injury to nerves or
a complete or partial
rupture of tendons, ligaments, menisci or cartilage.”
a person injured in a motor accident sustains soft tissue injuries only then,
unless one of those soft tissue injuries falls within
the exclusion contained in
s 1.6(2),the injured person’s statutory benefits cease in accordance with
ss 3.11 and 3.28 of the Act.
1.6(4) provides that regulations may be made to deem a specified injury as a
soft tissue injury or not a soft tissue injury.
Part 1, cl 4 of the Motor
Accident Injuries Regulation 2017 (the MAI Regulation) says that “an
injury to the spinal nerve root
that manifests in neurological signs (other than
radiculopathy)” is a threshold injury.
5.8 of the Motor Accident Guidelines (the Guidelines) defines radiculopathy and
adopts the method of assessment provided for
in the whole person impairment
(WPI) chapter of Part 6 of the Guidelines. Clause 5.9 then
“Where the neurological symptoms associated with the
injured person’s injury of the neck or spine do not meet the assessment
criteria for radiculopathy, the injury will be assessed as a threshold
summary, if the person injured in the car accident sustains a spinal nerve
injury this is a threshold injury unless that particular
nerve injury manifests
in two of the five signs of radiculopathy.
Method of assessment
5 of the Guidelines contain the procedure for assessing whether an injury
resulting from the motor accident is a threshold injury
for the purposes of the
Act. In respect of the medical assessment of whether an injury is a threshold
injury or not, the Guidelines
relevantly provide:
assessment will determine whether the injury related to the claim is a soft
tissue injury or a threshold psychological
or psychiatric injury caused by the
motor accident.
5.4 Insurers should not require injured persons to undergo diagnostic
imaging for the purpose of the insurer determining whether
the injury related to
the claim is a threshold injury. Diagnostic imaging is not considered necessary
to assess threshold injury.
5.5 A diagnosis for the purpose of a threshold injury decision must be based
on a clinical assessment by a medical practitioner or
other suitably qualified
person independent from the insurer.
5.6 The assessment of whether an injury caused by the accident is a
threshold injury for the purposes of the Act should be based
on the evidence
available and include all relevant findings derived from:
(a) a comprehensive accurate history, including pre-accident history and
pre-existing conditions
(b) a review of all relevant records available at the assessment
(c) a comprehensive description of the injured person’s current
(d) a careful and thorough physical and/or psychological examination
(e) diagnostic tests available at the assessment. Imaging findings that are
used to support the assessment should correspond with
symptoms and findings on
examination.”
5.4 suggests that the method of assessment set out above appears to be directed
to the insurer and the medico-legal or other
experts retained by the
are no other provisions with respect to the assessment of threshold injuries by
claimants, their medio-legal experts or Medical
Assessors. The Panel is
proceeding on the basis that the provisions in Part 5 apply in this
Dispute resolution
there is a dispute about whether an injured person’s injuries are
threshold injuries or not, that matter is declared a medical
assessment matter
which may be referred to the Commission for determination.
7, Division 7.5 of the Act provides for medical assessments by the Commission
including provisions relevant to an original
medical assessment such as Medical
Assessor Assem’s, further medical assessments and the Review of medical
assessments by this
Applications
for review of a medical assessment under s 7.26 are made to the President of the
Commission on grounds that the assessment
“was incorrect in a material
respect” (s 7.26(1)). If the President, or his delegate is satisfied
“there is a reasonable
cause to suspect that the medical assessment was
incorrect in a material respect” then the President arranges to the
application
to be referred to a Review Panel consisting of a Member of the
Commission and two Medical Assessors (ss 7.26(2) and (2B)).
review is not necessarily confined to the issues raised in the application (or
the reply) but is “a new assessment of all
the matters with which the
medical assessment is concerned” (s 7.26(3A)).
128 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (the Rules)
permits the Panel to determine its own proceedings and the Panel
is not bound by
the rules of evidence and may inquire into relevant matters as it thinks
ASSESSMENT UNDER REVIEW
Assessor Mohammed Assem examined Ms Watts on 18 February 2025 and issued his
certificate on 19 February 2025.
[2], Medical Assessor Assem confirmed that he was asked to assess injuries to Ms
Watts’ left shoulder, cervical spine, and
skin (scarring).
Assessor Assem set out a summary of the submissions of the parties at
noted the documents considered in his assessment of Ms Watts at [5]-[6].
Assessor Assem set out the pre-accident history at [8], noting that Ms Watts is
63-year-old right-hand dominant person who lived with her husband. She has
three adult children. She described herself as an active
individual, engaging in
cycling, swimming, and sewing before the accident. She sustained a fall on 17
November 2014, an ambulance
attended. She had no loss of consciousness but
complained of headache and left shoulder pain. She was advised to rest, take
and follow up if symptoms persisted. She recalls that she recovered
well, returning to swimming and cycling without restriction.
Further, the
Medical Assessor noted in 2018, Ms Watts recalled experiencing shoulder issues
which she suspected may have been a frozen
shoulder. She underwent an
ultrasound, but she had limited recollection of the findings. She recalled
seeing a physiotherapist around
that time but is uncertain of the exact reason
for treatment. Despite this, she stated that she fully recovered. On 14 January
Ms Watts consulted Dr Poonacha for left cervical spine radiculopathy. A CT
scan of the cervical spine was ordered, and follow-up
care was advised. In her
statement, she recalled developing neck pain in 2021, which she attributed to
prolonged use of her sewing
machine. She consulted an exercise physiologist, and
her symptoms resolved. Ms Watts worked full-time as a sales assistant for 11
years before the accident.
[9], the Medical Assessor recorded a history of the accident, noting that on
19 May 2022, at approximately 8.30am, Ms Watts drove her 2010 Toyota Camry
Altise sedan on her way to work. As she approached a red
traffic light, she came
to a complete stop. While stationary, her vehicle was rear-ended by a Volkswagen
sedan. At the time of impact,
she had both hands on the steering wheel and her
foot on the brake, preparing to move as the light turned green. She said she was
unexpectedly struck from behind, causing a sudden jarring motion that affected
her neck, shoulders, and arms. The force of the impact
left her momentarily
disoriented and unable to move, and she remained in place with her eyes closed
for a brief period as she attempted
to regain composure. Photographic evidence
shows minor damage to the rear bumper of her vehicle, consisting of shallow
and scuff marks that were difficult to detect on magnification. She
reported that her boot sustained damage and could not be opened
properly. The
airbags did not deploy, and the vehicle remained drivable. She drove to work as
she was responsible for opening the
store, but soon realised her pain was
worsening. She experienced neck discomfort, left shoulder pain, and weakness in
her left arm.
As her symptoms intensified, she decided to leave work early to
seek medical attention.
Medical Assessor recorded the history of symptoms and treatment following the
accident. On 19 May 2022, Ms Watts consulted Dr
Poonacha, who recorded neck
stiffness with mildly restricted range of motion, normal upper limb movements,
and no neurological deficits.
There was no mention of shoulder complaints.
23 May 2022, Ms Watts completed an Application for Personal Injury Benefits form
(APIB), which noted “muscle spinal upper
and lower back injury”
[sic]. When the Medical Assessor enquired about the absence of shoulder
complaints in the APIB form,
she explained that she was uncertain of the
specific pain location at the time, as it affected her entire upper and lower
16 June 2022, during a follow-up consultation, she reported an improvement in
upper back pain with physiotherapy. However, she
was noted to have mild left
upper arm radiating pain, though no neurological deficits were observed. In the
certificate of capacity,
no shoulder pain was mentioned.
1 July 2022, she reported that the pain radiated from the neck to the left arm
and worsened in the left shoulder, with associated
numbness and pins and needles
in the left hand. Examination revealed painful arc movements, reduced left arm
strength, and weak grip
in the left fingers. She was advised to continue light
duties and physiotherapy and undergo an MRI of the cervical spine and left
19 July 2022, an MRI of the left shoulder revealed downward-sloping type 2
acromion with subacromial spurring and acromioclavicular
joint arthropathy,
causing supraspinatus impingement. There was a near full-thickness tear of the
supraspinatus.
12 September 2022, she consulted Dr Jai Kumar, orthopaedic surgeon, who
suspected a posterior subluxation of the left shoulder.
Shoulder flexion was
limited to 90 degrees actively, 150 degrees passively, with grade 3
supraspinatus strength. A cortisone injection
was recommended along with
physiotherapy. Surgical repair was considered if symptoms persisted.
6 October 2022, a neurosurgical consultation with Associate Professor Hansen
noted subjective pain and weakness, with four plus
out of five power in all left
upper limb movements. A transforaminal injection at C4- C5 and C5-C6 was
recommended, along with a
nerve conduction study. By 9 February 2023, a repeat
MRI of the left shoulder confirmed an incomplete full-thickness supraspinatus
tear (7mm) with moderate bursal fluid and degenerative acromioclavicular joint
changes. No tendon retraction was observed. On
15 February 2023, Dr Kumar
noted ongoing shoulder complaints despite physiotherapy and anti-inflammatory
medication. On 6 June 2023,
Ms Watts underwent a rotator cuff repair. On 16-17
October 2023, she experienced left shoulder stiffness secondary to adhesive
(frozen shoulder), requiring capsular release.
[11], Medical Assessor Assem noted that Ms Watts has not sustained any
additional injuries since the accident.
Medical Assessor set out Ms Watts’ current symptoms at [12], noting she
reported constant neck discomfort that fluctuates
in intensity from 5-8/10. The
pain was predominantly located on the left side, radiating down the vertebral
border of the left scapula.
She also experienced persistent left shoulder pain,
which worsens with certain movements. To manage her pain, she regularly takes
Panadol Osteo and Nurofen, though she sometimes avoids medication, believing the
pain will subside, only for it to return. She describes
tremors along the ulnar
border of her left hand and forearm. Additionally, there is slight sensory loss
along the ulnar border of
her left hand.
Assessor Assem set out his clinical examination at [13]-[14] of his certificate
which the Panel reproduces below:
“[13] Range of motion
measurements were conducted using a goniometer. Cervical spine (Cervicothoracic)
Posture: Her posture
appeared normal, with no visible deformities. Tenderness:
Tenderness was noted upon palpation, though there was no guarding or muscle
spasm. Range of Motion: Her cervical spine movements were limited to
approximately three-quarters of the normal range in all planes,
flexion, extension, rotation, and lateral flexion. There was no spinal asymmetry
or spinal dysmetria detected. Neurological
Examination: Reflexes in the upper
limbs were brisk and symmetrical. There was global weakness to her left arm.
Sensation remained
intact, and there was no significant difference in the
circumference of her upper arms or forearms neural tension tests were negative.
Upper Extremities Scarring: A scar is present on the left shoulder from previous
arthroscopic surgery. The scar is indented and tender
to palpation. Active Range
of Motion (Degrees):
Right Shoulder
Left Shoulder
External Rotation
Internal Rotation
[14] Based on the photographic evidence of vehicle damage, the motor vehicle
accident appears to have been relatively minor, with
minimal structural impact
to Margaret Watts’ vehicle. Given the low-impact nature of the collision,
I have difficulty in reconciling
the severity and widespread nature of her
reported complaints and limitations with the subject accident.”
[15], the Medical Assessor provided a summary of relevant documentation.
[17], Medical Assessor Assem set out his diagnosis, causation and reasons which
is reproduced below:
“[17] Ms Watts, 63 years old, had a
pre-existing left shoulder degenerative rotator cuff tear and was diagnosed with
left cervical
radiculopathy. On 19 May 2022, she was stationary at a red light
when her vehicle was rear-ended. Photographs show very minor damage
barely visible. She continued on her way to work but later developed symptoms
prompting her to seek medical attention from
Dr Poonacha. Over the following
months, her shoulder and cervical symptoms worsened, leading to ... radiological
investigations,
which confirmed a full-thickness supraspinatus tear and cervical
degenerative changes. Despite conservative treatment, including
physiotherapy
and cortisone injections, she eventually underwent rotator cuff repair surgery,
but continued to experience persistent
pain, stiffness, and signs adhesive
capsulitis requiring a capsular release.
LEFT SHOULDER
Ms Watts has a history of left shoulder pain dating back to 2008, when
radiological imaging identified a small degenerative tear in
the supraspinatus
tendon, along with partial thickness tearing. In 2014, she sustained a
mechanical fall, resulting in left shoulder
pain, which was managed
conservatively. She reportedly made a full recovery. In 2018, she was suspected
of having a frozen shoulder
and underwent an ultrasound examination. The
mechanism of injury from the motor vehicle accident was relatively minor. Ms was
a seatbelt over her right shoulder, and the rear-end collision resulted
in minimal visible damage to her vehicle. Although she later
reported left
shoulder complaints, these were not supported by contemporaneous medical
records. There was no mention of shoulder
pain in her initial general
practitioner (GP) records, Certificate of Capacity, or Application for Personal
Injury Benefits. Had
there been a significant injury to her left shoulder that
would have caused, aggravated or exacerbated a pre-existing rotator cuff
the symptoms would have been apparent immediately after the motor vehicle
accident. The first recorded reference to left shoulder
pain appeared in June
2022, when it was documented by her treating physiotherapist. Given her history
of prior shoulder complaints,
pre-existing pathology, the absence of a plausible
mechanism of injury, and delay in reporting symptoms, there is no causal
relationship
between the motor vehicle accident and her left shoulder symptoms.
CERVICAL SPINE
Ms Watts had pre-existing neck complaints on 14 January 2021, at which time
she was suspected of having left cervical radiculopathy
and a CT scan of the
cervical spine was requested for further investigation. The accident was
relatively minor, but it is plausible
that she may have sustained a mild
whiplash injury. Although her Application for Personal Injury Benefits did not
initially reference
neck pain, her treating doctor did record muscle pain in the
cervical spine on 19 May 2022. This provides reasonable grounds to accept
her cervical spine symptoms were causally related to the accident, likely
representing an aggravation of pre-existing degenerative
pathology. Although she
reported numbness in her left hand, there were no focal neurological deficits at
the time of my assessment.
That is, she did not meet two or more of the criteria
for upper limb radiculopathy. Her condition is classified as a threshold injury
to the cervical spine according to the Act.”
[18], the Medical Assessor noted that the injury to the cervical spine (soft
tissue injury) was caused by the accident.
[19], the Medical Assessor noted that the injuries to the left shoulder and skin
(scarring) were not caused by the accident.
[20], Medical Assessor Assem noted that Ms Watts did not meet two or more of the
criteria for upper limb radiculopathy as outlined
in the Motor Accident
Guidelines (the Guidelines, paragraph 6.138, p. 108). Despite the presence of
pre-existing degenerative changes,
there was no evidence of a fracture, complete
or partial rupture of tendons, ligaments, menisci, or cartilage, or an injury to
nerve root. Therefore, her condition is classified as a threshold injury to
the cervical spine according to the Act.
Medical Assessor concluded at [21]-[22] that the following injury was a
threshold injury:
cervical spine
– soft tissue injury;
and the following injuries
referred for assessment were determined to not be caused by the accident:
left shoulder,
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE REVIEW PANEL
Statement of Ms Watts dated 20 July 2024
Panel refers to the statement of Ms Watts of 20 July 2024 and reproduces
relevant sections:
[12] In about 2005 I had some neck pain and
stiffness. I do not recall the circumstances. I was investigated with a CT scan.
pain and stiffness resolved.
[13] I spontaneously developed shoulder stiffness in 2008 and I was told I
had a frozen shoulder. I do not have diabetes. I was investigated
with an X-ray
and ultrasound. I had a cortisone injection after which my symptoms
[15] On 17 November 2014, I had a fall and knocked my head. I have no memory
of hurting my shoulder.
[16] I had a neck strain in 2016. I had some neck pain and stiffness but
these symptoms resolved.
[17] I developed neck pain again in 2021, which I attributed to extensive
use of my sewing machine. I consulted an exercise physiologist
and my symptoms
subsequently resolved.
[18] I was injured in a motor vehicle accident on 19 May 2022.
[20] The light turned green. I remained stationary waiting for the vehicles
in front of me to move off. I had both of my hands on
the steering wheel and my
right foot on the brake pedal. Whilst I remained stationery, I was struck from
behind by another vehicle.
[21] My body was jolted by the impact. I immediately noticed pain in my left
shoulder, neck, middle and upper back and both arms.
[26] I saw my GP who referred me to have scans of my neck and shoulder and
physiotherapy. I continued working, despite my symptoms.
[28] I was referred to orthopaedic surgeon, Dr Jai Kumar, whom I first
consulted on
12 September 2022 regarding my shoulder. Dr Kumar advised
deferring any further steps in relation to the shoulder until I had consulted
spinal surgeon about my neck symptoms.
[29] I first consulted spinal surgeon, Associate Professor Mitchell Hansen,
6 October 2022. Associate Professor Hansen recommended transforaminal
injections of C4/5 and C5/6, along with some nerve conduction
[30] On 20 October 2022, I underwent a left C4/5 foraminal injection.
[31] On 27 October 2022, I underwent a left C5/6 foraminal injection.
[32] Both injections provided only temporary relief of my neck symptoms, for
[33] On 16 November 2022, I underwent a nerve conduction study.
[34] On 22 November 2022, I returned to Associate Professor Hansen.
Associate Professor Hansen advised me to return to Dr Kumar for
treatment of my shoulder.
[35] I returned to Dr Kumar on 18 January 2023. Dr Kumar recommended
[36] On 6 June 2023, I underwent surgery with Dr Kumar in the form of a
scope of my left shoulder.
[37] On 7 August 2023, I returned to Dr Kumar. Dr Kumar said he was
concerned I may have chronic regional pain syndrome and also
[38] On 4 September 2023, I had a further consultation with Dr Kumar. He
recommended a further surgery in the form of a capsular
[39] On 16 October 2023, the I underwent a capsular release performed by Dr
[40] I underwent physiotherapy and rehabilitation. I noticed a significant
improvement of my shoulder symptoms from the capsular
release after about six
[41] I returned to work in November 2023.
[43] I continue to have a stiff and sore neck, a stiff and sore shoulder
(albeit improved since surgery) and a stiff and sore upper
[44] I did not have any significant health concerns prior to the accident.
[51] I rely a lot more on my right arm, particularly when doing any lifting.
I am concerned I am going to damage my right arm from
[53] I used to take Endone and Lyrica everyday to manage my symptoms. I now
take a combination of Panadol and Ibuprofen up to three
times per day. I try to
persevere so far as possible however I am taking this medication most days to
[54] I do not recall having injured my shoulder prior to the motor vehicle
accident. I had a frozen shoulder in 2008, however this
resolved with
[55] I have experienced temporary neck pain and stiffness from time to time
in the past, prior to the motor vehicle accident.
[56] Immediately prior to the accident I was not having any neck or shoulder
Diagnostic investigation of Dr John Korber, radiologist, of 8 April
Panel reproduces relevant sections of the report of Dr John Korber of 8 April
2024 below:
Imaging reviewed
ULTRASOUND 11 July 2008 - I also note in the report of an ultrasound
performed in 2008 that back then the claimant had a small attritional
in the most anterior fibres of the supraspinatus tendon measuring 9 x 11 mm in
diameter consistent with a partial thickness
SHOULDER MRI 18 July 2022 - I reviewed the MRI of the shoulder and agree with
the report. There is a near full thickness tear of supraspinatus
which is also
shown to be tendonotic and that there was a down sloping acromion.
Most patients of the claimant’s age would have some rotator cuff
pathology. This is well documented in the literature. It is
pre-existing the accident, the claimant already had an attritional anterior tear
of supraspinatus in the same position
as the current tear.
Given the commonness of rotator cuff findings, it always hinges on the
clinical examination and history as to what is relevant rather
appearance itself. It is noted that Dr Poonacha one month after the accident
makes no mention of shoulder pain, in fact
stating that the upper limbs are NAD.
On the balance of probabilities, it is extremely unlikely that the claimant had
a traumatic
lesion that was so painful to require surgery but had no symptoms at
that time. This might be better asked of one of my clinical
colleagues. It is
possible, and I suspect that on clinical grounds, there may have been an
intervening event.
I did not receive the cervical MRI. I note there is cervical spondylosis. If
this were an issue again on clinical grounds I would
expect that Dr Poonacha
would not have mentioned that there was no radiculopathy.
Specific Questions
In answer to your specific questions and based on the fact that I have only
viewed a left shoulder MRI dated 18 July 2022:
NRMA kindly ask for you to correlate the attached medical image findings and
other examination results, tests and reports and provide
a definitive diagnosis.
There was a pre-existing tear in the same location 14 years prior to the
accident in question
We also ask that you provide an opinion on causation of your definitive
diagnosis and the degree of the injury if deemed to be caused
accident-related injury or a preexisting condition.
Based on the clinical record, pre-and post-accident, the claimant did not
tear the rotator cuff in the accident.”
Report of Dr Todd Gothelf of 19 August 2024
Examination
of the cervical spine:
“The cervical posture was normal. There
is positive reported tenderness to palpation of the left paraspinal muscles.
no visible or palpable deformity in the neck region. There was no
observed muscle spasm or guarding. Cervical movement was a fraction
normal range of motion of ¾ full cervical extension, ¾ full flexion,
¾ full right rotation, ¾ full left
rotation, ¾ full right lateral
flexion, and ¾ full left lateral flexion. There was no cervical
asymmetrical loss of motion.”
Examination
of the upper limbs:
“There was a full range of movement of
elbows and wrists of both the upper limbs in all dimensions without crepitus,
spasm or tenderness. Power, sensation, reflexes, circulation, sweat
cover, colour and temperature of both upper limbs were normal
and equal. There
was no wasting or swelling of the upper limbs, and the circumferential
measurements were as follows:
Mid-forearm
Active range of motion was measured with a goniometer.
Internal rotation
External rotation
The left shoulder had a smooth but limited passive motion with good rotator
cuff strength and no impingement signs.”
Watts is a 63-year-old female who was involved in a motor accident 19 May 2022.
As a result of the subject accident Ms Watts
has the following diagnoses:
“Cervical spine strain, soft tissue injury, exacerbation of
underlying degenerative cervical spine. A cervical spine MRI 18
revealed multilevel disc protrusions with left sided foraminal narrowing at C3/4
and C4/5 levels. Ms Watts was treated
with physiotherapy and saw a Spine Surgeon
and was treated with cortisone injections. Ms Watts reported persistent pain in
down the left arm. The physical examination revealed positive
tenderness, no guarding, no asymmetrical loss of motion, and no non-verifiable
radicular complaints. Left shoulder strain, partial thickness rotator cuff tear,
aggravation of preexisting left shoulder rotator
cuff tendinopathy. An MRI of
the left shoulder 18 July 2022 revealed a bursal surface partial thickness
supraspinatus, near full
thickness tear. Surgery was performed by Dr Kumar June
2023 for a left shoulder arthroscopy and rotator cuff repair. A second surgery
was performed October 2023 for a capsular release. Ms Watts reported persistent
shoulder pain with activities. The physical examination
revealed a loss of range
of motion.”
prognosis is guarded. Ms Watts reported persistent pain and dysfunction of the
shoulder which prevents her from performing duties
using the arm at or above
shoulder level. The condition is unlikely to change over
Opinion whether the accident aggravated pre-existing
condition/injuries
was evidence of a pre-existing left shoulder condition symptomatic in 2008 with
evidence of a previous partial rotator cuff
tear. I consider that the subject
motor accident resulted in a worsening rotator cuff tear and permanent
aggravation as the injury
resulted in the need for surgery.
was evidence of a pre-existing degenerative cervical spine which was
asymptomatic prior to the subject accident. I consider
that the accident
resulted in an exacerbation of the underlying condition and Ms Watts had a
symptomatic cervical spine.
Assessment of WPI if injuries have
have taken into account the claimant’s reported symptoms, the treating
doctor’s reports, the radiological evidence,
and my clinical findings on
today’s medical examination. The Guidelines (10 November 2023) state
“The Evaluation should
only consider the impairment as it is at the time
of the assessment” (paragraph 6.21).
determination as to permanent impairment for all accidents from 1 December 2017
is made in accordance with the Guidelines, (10
November 2023) which references
American Medical Association’s Guides to the Evaluation of
Permanent Impairment
, fourth edition (AMA 4
“Cervical spine
Table 73 p 110 AMA 4 is used. A DRE category I applies as there was cervical
spine tenderness but no guarding and no asymmetrical
loss of motion. Ms Watts
reported radicular symptoms of pain down the left arm. However, according to the
definition of nonverifiable
radicular complaints, her symptoms do not meet the
criteria as the symptoms must follow a specific nerve root. In this case there
were symptoms that were more general and not specific to a specific nerve root.
Thus a 0% WPI applies.
Left upper extremity (shoulder)
Figures 38, 41, 44 pp 43-45 AMA 4 are used for shoulder impairment. The
measured active range of motion resulted in a 13% UEI on
the affected shoulder
and 2% UEI on the unaffected shoulder. As per section 6.51 p 91 MA Guides, the
right “normal” shoulder
impairment can be subtracted from the
affected side as I would expect the pre-injury ranges to be similar. 13% - 2% =
11% UEI. Table
3 p 20 AMA 4 Guides is used to convert 11% to 7% WPI.
There was no evidence of a pre-existing left shoulder problem and therefore
no deductions were made. There was a history of a shoulder
pain and frozen
shoulder 2008 which full recovered without problems. The history did not specify
which shoulder.
Table 6.18 p 132 MA Guides is used. The scars from surgery were healed, Ms
Watts was conscious of the scars, there was good colour
match, Ms Watts is able
to locate the scars, there were no trophic changes, there was a minor contour
defect, the anatomic location
is not usually visible with clothing. I consider
that a 1% WPI is reasonable.
Cervical spine
Combining 7%, 1%, 0% yields 8% WPI.
The Final Whole Person Impairment is 8% WPI.”
Application for Personal Injury Benefits dated 23 May 2022
the Application for Personal Injury Benefits dated 23 May 2022, Ms Watts
recorded the accident: “While waiting for red light
to turn green, car ran
into the rear end of my vehicle.”
Watts reported injuries to her “Muscle, spinal, upper & lower
Biomechanical report of Michael Griffiths dated 27
a biomechanical report dated 27 June 2024, Michael Griffiths assessed the
accident dynamics and potential injury mechanisms. He
reviewed vehicle damage,
collision forces, and occupant movement to determine whether the accident
conditions were capable of producing
the claimed injuries. Mr Griffiths noted
that photographic evidence of the vehicles involved showed minimal structural
damage, indicating
that the impact forces were low. He analysed delta-V (change
in velocity) calculations, concluding that the force imparted to
Watts’ vehicle was insufficient to generate significant biomechanical
loading on the occupant. The report emphasized that
rear-end collisions at low
velocity typically result in minor soft tissue strain rather than structural
damage to musculoskeletal
components.
Mr Griffiths further noted that the
accident severity fell below thresholds commonly associated with traumatic
rotator cuff tears.
Report of Dr Jonathan Negus of 1 July
Panel refers to the report of Dr Jonathan Negus of 1 July 2024 and reproduces
the relevant sections below:
Current symptoms
Cervical spine - She gets continued aching and pain into the shoulder blades,
worse on the left side. She still has some stiffness
on neck rotation and pain
going into the left arm.
Left Shoulder - She struggles to lift her left arm above shoulder height and
gets some tingling in the ulnar nerve innervated fingers
of the left hand.
She has no issues with her lumbar spine.
Current treatment
She takes Panadol and ibuprofen regularly, has remedial massage regularly and
also sees a physiotherapist every two to three weeks.
Prior disease/condition/injury
She has had a number of complaints of neck and shoulder pain in the past:
the letter of
instruction states that there was a CT scan of her neck in 2005;
a neck strain in
a neck strain in
2021 which she felt was from the use of a sewing machine, but she saw an
exercise physiologist and it all resolved.
There was also some talk
of a frozen shoulder in 2008 which was resolved by a cortisone injection.
Capability/disability
shoulder, needing to use her right arm to wash and get behind
her back due to
stiffness in the shoulder. When it comes to domestic chores, she is mainly
limited by her neck as well as her left
arm, needing to use a stick vacuum
rather than her old vacuum and she also struggles getting clothes high on the
line but she can
lift her left arm up with her right arm to get into position.
Her lifting limit is 5kg.
Previous compensable injuries - There have been none.
Examination
Shoulder examination - She had a lateral deltoid scar which had a little bit
of adherence to the underlying structures, was a little
widened and also had
some colour change. It was obvious with normal clothing. There was no tenderness
around the shoulder with some
tenderness over the clavicle. Her active range of
motion in the shoulders as measured with a goniometer is as follows:
She did have some weakness of supraspinatus on the left with all other
rotator cuff muscles intact.
Internal rotation
External rotation
Cervical spine - She had no scarring and no central tenderness. She was
tender a little over the left paraspinal muscles with no guarding
or spasm. She
had mild stiffness in rotation. Her upper limb neurology was normal.
My prognosis is guarded. She had relatively minor appearing impact which has
exacerbated her pre-existing conditions, and she is still
taking a long time to
recover from the injuries.
Pre-existing injuries
She had pre-existing arthritic changes within the neck as well as
pre-existing degenerative changes to the soft tissues within her
left shoulder.
The motor vehicle accident aggravated both issues including the rotator cuff
tear to the left shoulder and the nerve
compression of the cervical spine.
Assessment of WPI
Shoulder ROM impairment
38, 41, 44;
13% UEI = 8%
deduct 1/10th
for pre-existing – 8 MINUS 0.8 – 7.2 –
Cervical spine
DRE category II
for minor impairment – nonuniform loss of range of motion;
deduct 1/10th
for pre-existing – 5 MINUS 0.5 – 4.5 – 5%;
TEMSKI = 1%,
shoulder scar
obvious with normal clothing, colour contrast and she is aware of it.
7 COMBINE 5 COMBINE 1
Report of Dr Jai Kumar, orthopaedic surgeon, dated 12 September
Panel refers to the report of Dr Kumar of 12 September 2022 and reproduces the
findings below:
“She has engaged Liz Fitzgerald from Belmont
Physiotherapy, who is doing her best to try and regain strength and range of
The shoulder seems to go quite well but as soon as any manual therapy
occurs around the neck, it causes Margaret quite a lot of pain
and discomfort.
Margaret has no previous history of left shoulder or neck pathology. Her past
medical history is noted.
On examination today, she is a healthy and well muscled female. She has
minimal tenderness around the midline of her neck though some
tenderness along
the lateral paraspinal musculature. She is tender along her bicipital groove and
over her subacromial bursa. Forward
elevation is active to 90 degrees and this
can be passively corrected with pain to 150 degrees. She retains grade 3 power
of supraspinatus.
External rotation is symmetrical to 30 degrees with grade 5
power of infraspinatus. Internal rotation is to the buttock with grade
of the subscapularis. The biceps mechanism is irritable with a positive Speed's
test. There is no evidence of capsulitis
or arthritis.
I have gone through her MRI of both her cervical spine and her shoulder
performed at Hunter Imaging Group. Her MRI of her cervical
spine shows foraminal
stenosis which I understand she is seeing Dr Hansen for on 05 October 2022. Her
MRI of her left shoulder shows
a full thickness tear of the supraspinatus
I think the priority for Margaret really has to centre around management of
her cervical spine. I would like to proceed to an image
guided cortisone
injection to her left shoulder and would like her to continue physiotherapy with
Liz while she catches up with Dr
Hansen to see whether there is any management
required of her neck. Once Mitch feels that he has optimised Margaret's neck, if
is still getting the shoulder symptoms then I will see her again to discuss
the potential options with her shoulder. I am hopeful
that the cortisone
injection and physiotherapy will settle down her left shoulder and we can avoid
surgery. If it is not the case
then she will be a good candidate for rotator
cuff repair.”
MRI of the cervical spine by Dr Mark Fiorentino dated 22 August
Panel refers to the cervical spine MRI by Dr Fiorentino of 22 August 2025 and
reproduces the findings below:
“FINDINGS: The craniocervical
junction is normal and there is normal cord signal. At C3-C4, there is a small
disc-osteophyte
complex and left facet joint degenerative disease with minimal
spinal canal narrowing. The re is severe narrowing of the left neural
foramen. At C4-C5, there is a small disc-osteophyte complex with minimal spinal
canal narrowing. Moderate narrowing of the neural
exit foramina bilaterally. At
C5-C6, there is a minimal disc-osteophyte complex with no narrowing of the
spinal canal or neural exit
foramina. At C6-C7, there is left uncovertebral
degenerative change with minimal spinal canal narrowing. Mild narrowing of the
neural exit foramen. Anterior and posterior paravertebral soft tissues are
unremarkable.
COMMENT: Degenerative cervical spine changes as described, worst at C3-C4 on
Report of Associate Professor Mitchell Hansen dated 6 October 2022
Panel refers to the report of Associate Professor Hansen of 6 October 2022 and
summarises its findings below:
“She describes a pain that
emanates down her left arm with some pian in the posterior aspect of her head
and scalp pain and
then from her posterior shoulder blade into the lateral arm
and don the lateral aspect of her hand to the proximal to the base of
She notices flares of her pain when she is trying any fine motor skills such as
opening jars. She has managed so far with
non-steroidals and Panadol Osteo to
limited effect. Physiotherapy has been engaged similarly to limited effect.
Examination – She feels some subjective pain and weakness and certainly
on examination seem to match up with what was effectively
4+ out of 5 power
through all movements of her left upper limb.
Investigations – A MRI from HIG does seem to demonstrate a degree of
left C5/6 foraminal stenoses as well as an element of this
Treatment/recommendations – To explore further the delineation of the
arm and neck symptoms, I’ve asked her to undergo
a transforaminal
injection at both the C4/5 and C5/6 levels as well as nerve conduction studies
at the same time.”
conduction study by Associate Professor Mitchell Hansen dated 16 November
“Findings – APB and ADM were unremarkable. Radial,
Median and Ulnar sensory were normal in amplitude and velocity. F waves
within normal limits. This was a normal study with no evidence of large fiber
peripheral neuropathy.”
of the left shoulder dated 9 February 2023:
“Findings -
Glenohumeral alignment is normal. No evidence of fracture or dislocation. Biceps
tendon intact. There is a small
biceps sheath effusion. There is an incomplete
full thickness tear supraspinatus measuring 7mm. There is extensive partial
tear involving the rest of the supraspinatus. No evidence of tendon
retraction. No evidence of atrophy. Infraspinatus intact. Subscapularis
tendinopathic but appears intact. There is a moderate amount of fluid in the
bursa. AC joint shows moderate degenerative changes.
Summary - Incomplete full thickness tear supraspinatus without evidence of
retraction. Background of quite marked bursal thickening.”
of the cervical spine dated 18 July 2022:
“There is loss of
the normal cervical lordosis but no destructive lesion, paravertebral mass or
slip. The disc spaces are relatively
well preserved. At C2-3, no disc or neural
compromise.
At C3-4, small central disc protrusion. No canal stenosis. Left uncovertebral
and facet joint arthropathy causing left foraminal stenosis
and mild foraminal
left C4 nerve root compromise.
At C4-5, minor broad-based disc bulge. Mild left foraminal narrowing due to
uncovertebral and facet joint degeneration. Minor left
C5 foraminal nerve root
compromise.
At C5-6, mild disc bulge. Once again, mild foraminal narrowing due to
uncovertebral and facet joint degeneration. No definite nerve
root compression.
At C6-7, left-sided disc osteophyte complex. Mild left thecal sac compromise.
No cord or nerve root compression. At C7-T1, no disc
or neural compromise. No
abnormal cord signal. CONCLUSION: Left foraminal neural compression as
described.”
SUBMISSIONS
Claimant’s submissions dated 19 August 2024
Panel summarises the submissions of Ms Watts dated 19 August 2024 by reference
to paragraph numbers below:
[1]-[5] Ms Watts sets out the history of the
accident and the alleged injuries she suffered to her left shoulder and neck, as
as psychological injuries.
[6]-[7] Ms Watts promptly sought treatment and was referred to Dr Kumar,
orthopaedic surgeon, and Associate Professor Hansen (neurosurgeon).
diagnosed a complete tear of the left supraspinatus tendon, which he attributed
to the accident.
[8] Ms Watts continued to work until she underwent surgery with Dr Kumar on
6 June 2023.
[9] Her recovery was complicated by adhesive capsulitis and chronic regional
pain syndrome (CRPS). She underwent further surgery
on 16 October 2023, which
improved, though did not fully resolve, her symptoms.
[10] Ms Watts has since returned to part-time work.
[11] Liability, so far as breach of duty of care is concerned, is not
disputed by the insurer.
Threshold injury
[12]-[13] The insurer disputes that Ms Watts has
sustained a non-threshold injury and relies on a report by Dr John Korber (8
2024), who opines her shoulder pathology pre-existed the accident.
[14]-[15] Ms Watts submits Dr Korber’s opinion should not be accepted.
She relies on her treating records and the opinion of
her expert, Dr Jonathan
Negus, orthopaedic surgeon.
[16]-[17] Ms Watts submits there was a pre-existing rotator cuff tear, but
it was small and incomplete, and that the radiology suggests
the tear progressed
to a complete or near-complete tear following the accident.
[18] Ms Watts refers to
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
which defines ‘threshold injury’
[19] Ms Watts submits on the balance of probabilities, the accident likely
caused the incomplete tear to worsen, thereby rendering
non-threshold.
[20] Ms Watts was stationary at the time of the low-speed impact. She had
her foot on the brake and hands on the wheel.
[21] Dr Kumar opined on 7 March 2023 that even a low-speed impact could have
caused the injury.
[22] Ms Watts submits she had no shoulder symptoms prior to the
[23]-[24] Ms Watts reported shoulder and upper arm pain to her GP and
physiotherapist shortly after the accident, supporting that
the rotator cuff
tear was caused or worsened by the accident. In the alternative, Ms Watts
submits the pre-existing tear was rendered
symptomatic by the accident.
[25] Further, she submits the surgery, particularly the incision through the
skin and bone resection, constitutes a non-threshold
injury, due to alteration
of bodily tissue.
[26]-[27] Ms Watts refers to the operation reports of 6 June 2023 and 17
October 2023. She notes she also suffered CRPS and adhesive
capsulitis, which
have since resolved.
Insurer’s reply submissions dated 27 August 2024
submissions made by the insurer are in regard to the matter being referred to
the stood over list and are not set out by the
Panel in this
certificate.
Insurer’s reply submissions dated 10 September
Panel summarises the submissions of the insurer dated 10 September 2024 by
reference to paragraph numbers below:
Pre-existing
[19] The insurer submits Ms Watts had a left shoulder injury from a fall in
[20] Ms Watts also had a history of left cervical spine radiculopathy in
[21] Imaging reflects historical complaints of back and arm pain,
paresthesia, shoulder tear, and multilevel disc protrusions.
Medical evidence
[22] Dr Poonacha, GP diagnosed back injury from the accident in a
certificate dated
19 May 2022.
[23] Ms Liz Fitzgerald physiotherapist, noted diagnoses of neck whiplash,
shoulder pain, and lower back pain on 20 June 2022.
[24] On 29 July 2022, Dr Poonacha diagnosed motor vehicle accident back
injury, left cervical radiculopathy, and left shoulder pain.
[25] Dr Jai Kumar, orthopaedic surgeon, noted a full-thickness supraspinatus
tear in his 12 September 2022 letter, as well as limited
shoulder mobility.
[26] Associate Professor Hansen, neurosurgeon, examined Ms Watts in October
2022 and recommended transforaminal injection of both
C4/5 and C5/6 levels and
nerve conduction studies.
[27] Nerve conduction studies from 16 November 2022 showed normal study.
[28] On 22 November 2022, Associate Professor Hansen confirmed improvements
post-injection and attributed the shoulder pain to joint
pathology consistent
with MRI findings.
[29] On 18 January 2023, Dr Kumar described a traumatic rotator cuff tear
and a poor prognosis without surgical repair.
[30] A 9 February 2023 MRI of Ms Watts showed an incomplete full-thickness
tear supraspinatus and bursal thickening.
[31] On 15 February 2023, Dr Kumar advised surgery due to ongoing pain and
functional limitation.
[32] On 7 March 2023, Dr Kumar confirmed the rotator cuff tear was caused by
the accident and that surgery was required due to exhausted
non-operative
[33] Ms Watts underwent rotator cuff, capsulitis, biceps tendinopathy,
subacromial bursitis with subacromial impingement on 6 June
[34] Post-surgery, Ms McGrath, exercise physiologist, noted limited
improvement as of 3 August 2023.
[35] On 7 August 2023, Dr Kumar observed signs of CRPS and frozen
[36] Mr Stockley, physiotherapist, provided an Allied Health Recovery
Request Number 1 for physiotherapy on 9 August 2023 and diagnosed
left shoulder
rotator cuff repair.
[37] On 4 September 2023, Dr Kumar recommended arthroscopic capsular release
due to severe adhesive capsulitis and CRPS.
[38] The procedure was performed on 17 October 2023.
[39] A case summary on 13 November 2023 noted gradual improvement
post-surgery.
[40] On 20 November 2023, Dr Kumar confirmed excellent pain relief and range
of motion recovery.
Physical injuries
[44] The insurer disputes that Ms Watts sustained non-threshold physical
[45] The insurer submits that the injuries fall within the definition of
threshold injury under:
section 1.6(2)
of the Act;
(b) clause 4 of the Regulations, and
(c) the Guidelines.
[46] The insurer submits there is no evidence of injury to nerves, or
complete or partial rupture of tendons, ligaments, menisci,
or cartilage.
[47] The Guidelines require diagnosis based on clinical assessment. The
insurer submits that no treating provider diagnosed a spinal
nerve root injury.
Radiculopathy assessment was essential but not satisfied.
[48] The insurer submits that Ms Watts’ medical records do not show
two or more clinical signs consistent with radiculopathy
as required under cl
[49] The insurer concludes that Ms Watts' physical injuries are threshold
injuries as defined in the Act.
Insurer’s submissions dated 24 October 2024
Panel summarises the submissions of the insurer dated 24 October 2024 by
reference to paragraph numbers below:
[10] Her Application for Personal Injury Benefits (dated 23 May 2022) listed
muscle and spinal injuries but no ambulance or hospital
treatment. She reported
no pre-existing issues at the time.
Pre-Existing Conditions
[11]-[13] Ms Watts had a fall in 2014 with left shoulder pain. She has a
history of left cervical spine radiculopathy in 2021. Imaging
shows back pain,
left arm pain and paraesthesia, a shoulder tear, and cervical spine disc
protrusions.
Medical evidence
[14]-[32] Please see [22]-[40] of the insurer’s submissions dated 10
September 2024
[33] On 27 June 2024, Mr Griffiths concluded in his biomechanical Report that
impact speed was under 5kmph and the injuries were not
consistent with such
low-impact force.
[34] On 8 April 2024, Dr Korber provided a medico-legal report which found
no clear traumatic shoulder injury post-accident and noted
the tear existed
prior. He stated it was highly unlikely such a painful tear requiring surgery
would go unnoticed.
[35] On 6 August 2024, Dr Gothelf assessed Ms Watts physical WPI at 8%,
below the 10% threshold.
Submissions
[38] The insurer submits as per Dr Korber’s opinion, that the rotator
cuff tear was
pre-existing and not caused by the accident.
[39] The insurer submits that based on all available medical evidence, Ms
Watts physical WPI does not exceed the 10% threshold.
Claimant’s submissions dated 26 November 2024
Panel summarises the submissions of Ms Watts dated 26 November 2024 in respect
of the biomechanical report of Mr Griffiths below:
[1]-[3] Ms Watts
refers to the late report of Mr Griffiths dated 27 June 2024, served by the
insurer and submits that Mr Griffith’s
opinion that the forces involved in
the accident could not have caused her any injury is flawed.
[4] Ms Watts sets out her allegations of injury (paragraphs 19 to 27) from
her Submissions of 19 August 2024 for context:
“19. On the balance of probabilities, the force of the accident caused
an incomplete tear to become a complete tear, or at
least a more substantial
incomplete tear, thereby satisfying the non-threshold criteria.
the accident occurred at a low speed, at the moment of impact the claimant had
her foot on the brake pedal and hands on
the steering wheel.
treating surgeon, Dr Kumar, accepts that a low-speed impact could cause the
plaintiff's injury (report 7 March 2023). Dr Kumar
opines the accident caused
progression of the rotator cuff tear (report
14 August 2024).
claimant states she had no shoulder symptoms prior to the accident.
after the accident the claimant reported upper arm and shoulder pain to her GP
and physiotherapist. This supports a finding
she has suffered a complete tear,
or worse partial tear, from the forces of the accident.
or alternatively, the pre-existent tear has been rendered symptomatic.
and alternatively, the surgery performed by Dr Kumar for the signs and symptoms
arising from the accident, renders the injury
non-threshold. At a minimum there
has been an incision through the skin, an organ. Further Dr Kumar performed an
acromioplasty involving
resection of bone. There has also been alteration to the
tissues of the shoulder.
claimant refers to the operation report of 6 June 2023 in full. The claimant
also refers to the operation report of 17 October
Finally the claimant notes she suffered from chronic regional pain syndrome and
adhesive capsulitis, since resolved.”
[6] Ms Watts submits
that Mr Griffiths' assumptions are erroneous and that in her statement, she
describes a ‘visible dint
in the rear bumper’ and that the
‘boot would not open and close normally.’
[7] Ms Watts submits that this casts doubt on the accuracy of
Griffiths’s conclusions about the forces involved. Ms Watts submits that
he failed to consider her account of the accident
as per paragraphs [20] and
[21] of her statement.
[8] Ms Watts refers to Mr Griffiths' report on page 267 that the energy was
insufficient to cause violent motion or abnormal pathology.
He suggests her
injuries are degenerative or from another incident.
[9] Ms Watts submits that Mr Griffiths failed to consider her full account
of the accident, including that she was jolted at impact.
[10] Ms Watts submits she has not been involved in any other accidents, and
the insurer has provided no evidence that she has been
involved in any other
[11] Ms Watts acknowledges her pre-existing conditions but submits they were
aggravated by the accident, as outlined in her 19 August
2024 submissions.
[12] Mr Griffiths reports on page 277 that the vehicle damage was limited to
a scuff mark.
[13] Ms Watts submits this is inconsistent with her description of
[14] Ms Watts refers to various studies summarised by Mr Griffiths (pages
301–307) and notes the studies themselves have not
been provided.
[15] Mr Griffiths reported that the low-level forces in the accident could
not have caused injury.
[16] Ms Watts submits that such studies are generalisations, failing to
account for those in the minority who are injured at low
speeds. She submits she
is one such person.
[17] Ms Watts submits these studies do not consider her individual
circumstances, including pre-existing vulnerabilities. She submits
Griffiths dismisses her injuries as purely pre-existing.
[18] Ms Watts refers to page 313 of the report which lists documents
reviewed by Mr Griffiths. She submits he did not consider expert
reports from Dr
Gothelf, Dr Negus, or Dr Kumar, all of whom conclude she was injured in the
accident. She further submits Mr Griffiths
strayed beyond his biomechanical
expertise in analysing her symptoms against medical records and drawing factual
conclusions.
[19] Ms Watts submits Mr Griffiths made a number of inaccurate assumptions
and that his opinion should be treated with great caution.
She further submits
that Mr Griffiths failed to consider the opinions of three orthopaedic surgeons,
the possibility that she falls
within the minority injured in low-speed
accidents, and the role of pre-existing conditions in predisposing her to
further injury.
Insurer’s reply submissions dated 1 April 2025
Panel summarises the reply submissions of the insurer dated 1 April 2025 by
reference to paragraph numbers:
[1] Ms Watts submits the grounds
for review are:
(a) confined to the left shoulder only;
(b) the Medical Assessor did not apply the correct causation test under the
Guidelines;
(c) the Medical Assessor failed to consider relevant matters;
(d) the Medical Assessor considered irrelevant matters, and
(e) the Medical Assessor's conclusions are inconsistent, amounting to either
error on the face of the record or failure to provide
adequate reasons.
[2] Ms Watts submits the Medical Assessor failed to address her claim that
the accident worsened her pre-existing shoulder condition.
[3]-[4] The insurer submits the Medical Assessor addressed this on page 11
of his certificate, stating the mechanism of injury from
the motor vehicle
accident was relatively minor; reports of left shoulder complaints were not
supported by contemporaneous medical
records; had there been a significant
injury to her left shoulder that would have caused, aggravated or exacerbated a
pre-existing
rotator cuff tear, the symptoms would have been apparent
immediately after the motor vehicle accident; and the first recorded reference
to shoulder pain was in June 2022. The Medical Assessor concluded there was no
causal relationship given the absence of contemporaneous
complaints,
pre-existing pathology, and a lack of plausible mechanism of injury. The insurer
submits the Medical Assessor clearly
considered and explained why he rejected
aggravation as a cause of Ms Watts's symptoms.
Failure to Consider Relevant Considerations
[5]-[6] Ms Watts submits the Medical Assessor failed to consider expert
opinions from Dr Negus and Dr Kumar. The insurer refers to
page 3 of the
Commission’s certificate, where the Medical Assessor states he considered
all documents provided.
[7]-[8] The insurer refers to
Wingfoot Australia Partners Pty Ltd v Kocak
, which confirms there is no onus on the Medical
Assessor to refer to another doctor’s opinion and why they do not agree
it. The insurer submits the Medical Assessor is not required to explain why
he did not adopt another doctor’s opinion.
[9]-[10] The insurer submits the Medical Assessor’s function is to
form an independent medical opinion using his own expertise,
not to arbitrate
between competing opinions. The insurer submits the Medical Assessor is not
obliged to list every document considered.
[11]-[13] Ms Watts submits the Medical Assessor relied solely on a lack of
contemporaneous shoulder symptoms. The insurer submits
the Medical Assessor
considered multiple factors: pre-existing injury, pathology, lack of plausible
mechanism, and delay in symptom
reporting. The insurer submits the Medical
Assessor properly addressed causation and provided a clear rationale for his
conclusion.
Taking irrelevant considerations into account and incongruity
[14] Ms Watts submits the Medical Assessor failed to identify an alternative
cause of her symptoms.
[15]-[16] The insurer submits the Medical Assessor is not required to
identify a competing cause, only to determine whether the claimed
causally related to the accident. Once the Medical Assessor ruled out causation
and gave his reasons, he was not required
to speculate on other causes.
[17]-[18] Ms Watts submits the Medical Assessor should not have relied on
Dr Korber or Mr Griffiths. The insurer submits disagreeing with those
opinions does not constitute material error, nor did the Medical
Assessor err in
referring to them.
[19] The insurer submits the Medical Assessor fulfilled his obligations and
provided a proper explanation of causation and his conclusions.
[20]-[24] The insurer submits Medical Assessor Assem did not make any
material error and that the assessment was conducted in accordance
with the Act
and the Guidelines. The insurer submits there is no basis to refer the medical
assessment to a Review Panel and the
application for review should be
Claimant’s submissions dated 4 April 2025
submissions made by Ms Watts are in regard to the matter remaining in the stood
over list and are not set out by the Panel in
certificate.
MEDICAL EXAMINATION BY THE REVIEW PANEL OF THRESHOLD
27 June 2025, Medical Assessor Shane Moloney examined Ms Watts on behalf of the
Panel. His findings are set out below.
Pre-accident
Watts lives with her husband and has three adult children. She states that prior
to the accident, she had been working as a permanent
part-time worker. This was
for 16 hours a week in a furniture store. This involved sales and occasional
movement of sofas and rugs
et cetera. Prior to the accident she states she was a
regular walker who also engaged in cycling and swimming and sewing.
was apparently an injury to the left shoulder with a supraspinatus tear in 2008
but she is unsure of the details. In 2014, Ms
Watts sustained a fall in the
street landing on the left shoulder. At that time, she consulted her GP with
headaches and left shoulder
2018 there was a recurrence of left shoulder pain when she was diagnosed as
having a frozen shoulder and underwent an ultrasound.
She states that
physiotherapy at that time led to a full recovery.
January 2021 there was a development of neck pain with radiation down the left
arm. A CT of the cervical spine was ordered at that
time and Ms Watts attributed
this pain due to excessive use of the sewing machine. She states that she
consulted an exercise physiologist
with resolution of symptoms and continued to
work part-time.
History of motor accident
19 May 2022, Ms Watts was driving on the way to work and stationary at a set of
lights when hit from the rear. She was wearing
a seatbelt but airbags were not
deployed. She considers this was a massive impact which left her feeling shocked
and shaky and she
sat in the car for a while to recollect her thoughts. She then
drove into a side road and exchanged details with the other driver.
proceeded to drive to the furniture shop to open up for the day but due to pain
then went to her GP. The police and ambulance
did not attend the scene.
the time of the accident, Ms Watts said that she had a headache, neck pain and
left shoulder pain.
History of symptoms and treatment following
the motor accident
Watts consulted her GP, Dr Poonacha on the day the accident when he recorded
neck stiffness with no abnormalities in the upper
limb movements and referred
her for physiotherapy. In a follow-up consultation on 16 June 2022, her GP
reported mild left upper arm
radiating pain with no neurological signs. Next
consultation was on 1 July 2022. At this time, her treating GP recorded left arm
pain radiating from the neck worst pain in the left shoulder with associated
numbness and pins and needles in the left hand. Her
GP referred to a
neurosurgeon, Associate Professor Hansen and an orthopaedic surgeon
Kumar. The neurosurgeon organised two cortisone injections of the cervical spine
which both gave relief of pain for two weeks.
He then decided that the pain was
coming from the shoulder and hence referred her to Dr Kumar.
12 September 2022, Dr Kumar suspected a posterior subluxation of the left
shoulder and recommended cortisone injections. An MRI
of the left shoulder dated
18 July 2022 reported a bursal surface partial-thickness tear of the
supraspinatus, near full-thickness
with no labral tear.
Kumar undertook a rotator cuff repair on 6 June 2023 but subsequent to this
procedure, Ms Watts developed a frozen shoulder. On
17 October 2023, Dr Kumar
undertook a capsular release which gave some improvement to range of movement
Current symptoms
present, Ms Watts has persistent left-sided neck pain and in the last two months
has developed pain and spasms radiating down the
left arm. She notices spasm in
the anterior chest wall, neck and shoulder and gets relieved by rotating her
head to the right.
gets tremor and pins and needles in the left little and ring fingers which
increases with excessive use such as cleaning. The
right arm is
asymptomatic.
gets occasional tightness in the intrascapular region. Due to shoulder
restrictions, she has difficulty doing over arm swimming
but can dog paddle and
walk freely. She continues to drive and works 16 hours per week at the same job.
She has noticed that she
gets ‘brain fog’ with difficulty
concentrating at work.
Watts continues to live with her husband who helps with the cleaning and
cooking. They now sleep in separate rooms due to her constantly
getting up and
down during the night.
Present treatment
medication is Panadol osteo and ibuprofen two of each four times a day. She
consulted her GP when necessary and has no follow-up
with any specialist
organised. She continues to have physiotherapy to the neck and shoulder every
fortnight and this is self-funded.
Watts considers that there was a significant impact with the accident despite
the minimal damage to her car.
main issue is a supraspinatus tear in the left shoulder. There was apparently a
small tear in 2008 and a more significant tear
on the MRI after the accident. Dr
Korber, a radiologist considered that it was unlikely that the left shoulder
sustained a tear due
to the motor vehicle accident.
is difficult to determine whether the accident caused an aggravation of a
pre-existing degenerative tear of the left supraspinatus
tendon. Medical
Assessor Assem considered that due to the minimal impact in the accident and the
fact that left shoulder pain was
not recorded until a month after the accident
that they were not related.
Panel refers to paragraph [21] of Ms Watts statement, in which she says that her
body was jolted by the impact and that she “immediately
noticed pain in
[her] left shoulder, neck, middle and upper back, and both arms.”
Panel has no reason to conclude that Ms Watts was lying in giving this
pre-accident GP clinical notes, which have been made available on Pathway and
have been considered by the Panel, do not demonstrate
any evidence of treatment
of or symptoms of a pre-existing shoulder condition which would explain the
subsequent full-thickness tear.
Assessor Assem noted at [26] above that Ms Watts recalled in 2008 she was
experiencing shoulder issues which she suspected
may have been a frozen
shoulder. She did undergo an ultrasound at that time.
Panel notes that the ultrasound investigation was reported as follows:
“Ultrasound Left Shoulder
The biceps tendon is normally positioned within the groove. No abnormality is
seen in relation to the subscapularis. A small attritional
tear is noted in the
most anterior fibres of the supraspinatus tendon measuring 9 x 11 mm in diameter
consistent with a partial thickness
tear. The bursa is of normal thickness.
Abduction was quite painful and restricted but external rotation had normal
range. The infraspinatus is normal in appearance.
Small partial thickness tear of the anterior fibres of the supraspinatus
tendon, otherwise normal study.”
is noted that the Medical Assessor at [27] recorded a history of the accident,
including that Ms Watts had both hands on the steering
wheel and her foot on the
brake when the impact occurred, which she told Medical Assessor Assem caused a
sudden jarring motion that
affected her neck, shoulders and arms.
Michael Griffiths described an insignificant accident which he did not consider
generated forces which, on the balance of probabilities,
could cause physical
trauma. Mr Griffiths however is a non-medical expert in the area of accident
dynamics and associated injury
mechanisms. He concluded at [53] that the delta-V
forces of the impact were insufficient to generate significant biomechanical
on Ms Watts. Necessarily, Mr Griffiths’ conclusions are related to
the impact of the accident, related to the hypothetical
ordinary person of
similar age and gender involved in such an accident, rather than conclusions in
respect of Ms Watts in particular.
FURTHER MEETING OF THE REVIEW PANEL WITH RESPECT TO THE THRESHOLD INJURY
Panel met for a second time on 10 July 2025 at 3.00pm and fully discussed the
issues, including the preliminary findings of Medical
Assessor Shane Moloney who
saw Ms Watts on behalf of the Panel on 27 June 2025.
Panel included in its further discussion a consideration of the views of Dr
Korber, radiologist, as well as all of the evidence
to which the Panel has
referred above.
Panel took into account the views expressed by Mr Michael Griffiths as to the
delta-v forces of the impact and that in his view,
they were insufficient to
generate significant biomechanical loading on Ms Watts.
Panel noted that Mr Griffiths did not take into account at all, or sufficiently,
Ms Watts said at [18] to [20] of her statement of 20 July 2024 that at
the time of the accident, she had both hands on the steering
wheel and her right
foot on the brake pedal and that her body was jolted by the impact and she
immediately felt pain in her left
shoulder, neck, middle and upper back, and
Panel considered that Mr Griffiths had failed to give any or any adequate
consideration to the expert opinions of Dr Negus, Dr
Kumar, and Dr Gothelf.
Panel took into account that as there was a full thickness tear of the
supraspinatus diagnosed after the accident, the Panel considered
accident could have and probably did cause the shoulder injury. Ms
Watts’ previous shoulder condition had settled,
and the Panel notes the
physiotherapist who saw Ms Watts on 20 June 2022 was treating the left shoulder
within one month of the accident.
On the balance of probabilities, the accident
has caused the supraspinatus tear which required repair.
view was shared by Medical Assessor Shane Moloney and indeed by the whole
THE PANEL’S CONCLUSIONS WITH RESPECT TO THE
THRESHOLD INJURY DISPUTE
Ms Watts’ descriptions of how the accident happened and what she was doing
at the time of impact, from her medical history,
and all other relevant matters
to which the Panel has referred, this accident could have caused the injury
sustained by Ms Watts
and probably did cause a full thickness tear of the
supraspinatus which was diagnosed after the accident.
to the accident, Ms Watt’s previous shoulder condition had settled and the
physiotherapist who saw her on 20 June 2022
was treating left shoulder
complaints within one month after the accident.
previous shoulder condition of Ms Watts had settled. On the balance of
probabilities, the accident caused the supraspinatus tear
which required
follows that the supraspinatus tear was a non-threshold injury.
Panel sets aside the decision of Medical Assessor Mohammed Assem of
February 2025 and substitutes:
supraspinatus
tear to the left shoulder was caused by the accident and is a
non-threshold
PERMANENT IMPAIRMENT DISPUTE
injuries which were referred to the Review Panel for assessment as to permanent
impairment were:
injury to the
left shoulder including full thickness tear of the rotator cuff and requiring
two surgical procedures;
injury to the
cervical spine including aggravation of pre-existing degenerative changes,
scarring surgical scarring.
LEGISLATIVE
5D and 5E of the
Civil Liability Act 2002
CLA) apply to the MAI Act: s 3B (2) of the CLA.
Leverrier’s claim and entitlements to compensation are governed by the
provisions of the MAI Act. An injured person can make
a claim for both economic
losses and non-economic loss damages.
s 4.11 of the MAI Act provides that no damages for non-economic loss may be
awarded in respect of injury unless the degree
of permanent impairment of the
injured person as a result of the injury caused by the motor accident is greater
Permanent impairment assessment
7.21 of the MAI Act provides that the degree of permanent impairment of an
injured person is to be assessed in accordance
with the Guidelines.
Guidelines were issued pursuant to Division 10.2 of the MAI Act and adopt AMA 4
Guides. The Guidelines are definitive in respect
of the matters they address but
where they are silent on an issue, the AMA 4 Guides should be followed: cl 6.2
of the Guidelines.
impairment is assessed in accordance with Chapter 6 of the Guidelines.
of injury is addressed in cls 6.5, 6.6 and 6.7 of the Guidelines.
6.6 of the Guidelines notes:
Causation is defined in the Glossary at page 316 of the AMA 4 Guides as
‘Causation means that a physical, chemical or biologic factor
contributed to the occurrence of a medical condition. To decide
that a factor
alleged to have caused or contributed to the occurrence or worsening of a
medical condition has, in fact, done so,
it is necessary to verify both of the
alleged factor
could have caused
or contributed to worsening of
the impairment, which is a medical determination.
alleged factor
or contribute to worsening of the
impairment, which is a non-medical determination.'
This, therefore,
involves a medical decision and a non-medical informed judgement.”
6.7 of the Guidelines
“There is no simple common
test of causation that is applicable to all cases, but the accepted approach
involves determining
whether the injury (and the associated impairment) was
caused or materially contributed to by the motor accident. The motor accident
does not have to be a sole cause as long as it is a contributing cause, which is
more than negligible. Considering the question 'Would
this injury (or
impairment) have occurred if not for the accident?' may be useful in some cases,
although this is not a definitive
test and may be inapplicable in circumstances
where there are multiple contributing causes.”
Pre-existing
impairment is addressed in cls 6.31, 6.32 and 6.33 of the Guidelines.
evaluation of the permanent impairment may be complicated by the presence of an
impairment in the same region that existed before
the relevant motor accident.
If there is objective evidence of a pre-existing symptomatic permanent
impairment in the same region
at the time of the accident, then its value must
be calculated and subtracted from the current WPI value. If there is no
evidence of the pre-existing symptomatic permanent impairment, then
its possible presence should be ignored: cl 6.31 of the Guidelines.
6.32 of the Guidelines
“The capacity of a medical
assessor to determine a change in physical impairment will depend upon the
reliability of clinical
information on the pre-existing condition. To quote the
AMA 4 Guides (page 10): 'For example, in apportioning a spine impairment,
the current spine impairment would be estimated, and then impairment from any
pre-existing spine problem would be estimated.
The estimate for the pre-existing
impairment would be subtracted from that for the present impairment to account
for the effects
of the former. Using this approach to apportionment would
require accurate information and data on both impairments.' Refer to clause
6.218 for the approach to a pre-existing psychiatric impairment.”
EVIDENCE BEOFRE THE REVIEW PANEL
Review Panel considered all of the evidence that was before it in respect of the
threshold injury dispute.
FURTHER EXAMINATION BY THE REVIEW
Assessor Drew Dixon examined Ms Watts for the Review Panel at 1.00pm on Friday
17 October 2025 at the Commission’s medical
Assessor Drew Dixon reported to the Review Panel on his examination of Ms
Accident details
64-year-old claimant was driving to work in her 2010 Toyota Camry Altise sedan
on Mount Wilson Road, Mount Hutton, NSW. As she
approached a red traffic light,
she came to a complete stop at 8.30am on 19 May 2022 and was rear ended by a
Volkswagen sedan. At
the time of impact, she had both hands on the steering
wheel and her foot on the brake. There was a sudden jarring motion that affected
her neck, shoulders and arms. There was no head injury nor loss of
consciousness. Her car boot sustained damage and could not be
was able to self-extricate from the vehicle and initially drove onto work as she
had to open the store where she worked.
had pain in her neck and left shoulder and had weakness in her left arm.
symptoms became more marked and she left work early.
Symptoms and
treatment following the accident
consulted her GP who found there was mild restricted range of motion with no
apparent neurological deficit in the upper limbs.
She was advised to continue
with light duties and simple analgesia and start physiotherapy.
1 July 2022 she reported pain radiating from her neck to the left arm with left
shoulder brachalgia and paraesthesia in the left
hand, namely to the little and
ring fingers and felt there was weakness of strength in her left arm. She
continued with light duties
and physiotherapy. She had an MRI of her cervical
spine and left shoulder on 19 July 2022 which showed subacromial spurring and AC
joint arthropathy and supraspinatus impingement with a near full thickness tear
of the supraspinatus.
consulted Dr Jai Kumar, orthopaedic surgeon, on 12 September 2022 who felt the
flexion was limited to 90 degrees and supraspinatus
strength was grade 3 and a
cortisone injection was recommended.
also had review by a neurosurgeon, Associate Professor Mitchell Hansen, on
October 2022 who found grade 4 plus out of 5 weakness in the left upper limb and
transforaminal injection at C4/5 and C5/6 was recommended
with nerve conduction
repeat MRI of the left shoulder on 9 February 2023 showed an incomplete full
thickness supraspinatus tear and degenerative AC joint
6 June 2023 she underwent rotator cuff repair and on 16 to 17 October 2023 she
experienced ongoing shoulder stiffness secondary
to adhesive capsulitis (frozen
shoulder) and this required capsular release.
Details of injuries
and conditions sustained since the motor vehicle accident
reports persisting pain and stiffness in her neck with left shoulder brachalgia
and required Panadol Osteo and Nurofen. She described
tenderness of the ulnar
border of her left hand and forearm with slight sensory loss in the ulnar digits
of her left hand.
has difficulty with ADLs such as household cleaning, gardening, lifting heavy
groceries and laundry, dressing and doing her toenails,
bathing and showering
and doing her hair and is reliant on her husband for the heavier household
had difficulty returning to her work as a sales professional at Plush Sofas Pty
Limited where she had been employed since 11 November
2022 and is currently
doing 32 hours per fortnight with a 5kg lifting limit.
reports difficulty returning to sports such as surfing, swimming, bike riding
and sewing, which she previously enjoyed and gardening,
Examination
examination at the Commission’s medical suites at 1 Oxford Street, Sydney
17 October 2025, she was 5’6” tall and weighed 76kg. She
presented in a straightforward manner without embellishment.
was stiffness of her cervical spine with flexion decreased one quarter and pain
on neck extension which was decreased by one
third and lateral flexion decreased
by one third bilaterally and lateral rotation decreased by one third to the left
associated with
shoulder pain. Rotation to the right was decreased by one
cervical foraminal compression test was positive and she had tenderness of the
left supraclavicular brachial plexus. The biceps
and supinator jerks were
present on the left but her triceps jerk was absent and her reflexes in her
right upper extremity were present.
There was altered sensation in the little
and ring fingers of her left hand and her intrinsic power was grade four out of
grip strength grade four out of five and thenar power grade five out of
five. Envelope test for intrinsic power was also positive
on the left.
was 1cm of wasting of her left upper arm, 10cm above the elbow, measuring 29cm
and on the right 30cm and no wasting of her left
forearm, 10cm below the elbow
measuring 22cm bilaterally. The Tinel’s sign over the median and ulnar
nerves at the wrist and
left elbow were negative, as was her Phalen’s
was stiffness on elevation of her left shoulder with active abduction 80 degrees
with impingement, forward flexion 90 degrees,
extension 40 degrees, adduction 40
degrees, external rotation 70 degrees and internal rotation 40 degrees. Shoulder
girdle power
on the left was grade four out of five. There was a 4cm scar
anterolaterally with loss of contour which remained tender and the arthroscopic
portal anteriorly had healed well.
had a better range of motion of her right shoulder with active abduction 170
degrees, forward flexion 180 degrees, extension 50
degrees, adduction 40
degrees, external rotation 80 degrees and internal rotation 80 degrees. There
were no tender areas in the right
shoulder today.
Radiological
investigations
MRI of the cervical spine on 22 August 2025 showed degenerative changes in the
cervical spine with C3/4 disc osteophyte complex
and facet joint degenerative
disease with severe narrowing of the left neural exit foramen and at C4/5 a disc
osteophyte complex
with minimal canal narrowing and moderate narrowing of the
neural exit foramina bilaterally and C5/6 minimal disc osteophyte complex
narrowing of the spinal canal and neural exit foramen. At C6/7 there was left
uncovertebral degenerative change with minimal
spinal canal narrowing and mild
narrowing of the left neural exit foramen.
John Korber, radiologist, did a medico-legal report dated 8 April 2024 and noted
insertional anterior tear at the supraspinatus
tendon before the accident in the
same position as the current tear.
conduction study by Associate Professor Hansen on 16 November 2022 showed no
large fibre peripheral neuropathy.
diagnoses are:
(a) whiplash injury to her neck with aggravation of cervical spondylosis with
grade 4 out of 5 left C8 radiculopathy;
(b) contusion to left shoulder with post traumatic stiffness which required
arthroscopic repair of the supraspinatus and subsequent
release of adhesions
with capsulitis, and
(c) scarring of the left shoulder which was 4cm long and had loss of contour and
was tender and she was able to readily localise
it and it is visible if wearing
a short sleeve blouse or sleeveless top and the claimant remains conscious of
there was a known whiplash injury at the time of the subject motor vehicle
accident, the claimant did develop left shoulder
brachalgia with trapezial
muscle pain and was subsequently shown to have rotator cuff tear of her left
shoulder which required operative
repair and subsequent release for adhesive
capsulitis.
injury to the cervical spine is a non-threshold injury as she has C8
radiculopathy in the left upper extremity.
injury to the left shoulder is associated with rotator cuff tear requiring
repair and is a non-threshold injury.
Whole person
for the cervical spine is DRE Category III, 15% WPI less DRE Category II for
pre-existing cervical spondylosis, from Table
73, Page 110
, AMA 4 Guides, giving
10% WPI. There was a C 8 radiculopathy with an absent left triceps reflex,
sensory loss in a C 8 distribution
and slight muscle wasting.
for the post-traumatic stiffness of her left shoulder is from Pie Charts 38, 41
and 44, Pages 43-45 of AMA 4 Guides, 15% UEI
which equates to 9% WPI.
gives a total of 18% WPI from the Combined Values Chart.
for her surgical scar at the left shoulder as described is from TEMSKI Table
6.18, Page 136 from the Guidelines, 1% WPI.
gives a total of 19% WPI from the Combined Values Chart.
claimant was consistent on presentation and on repeat movements of the shoulders
and cervical spine.
range of motion found for the left shoulder is consistent with that found by
Medical Assessor Assem in his MAC dated 19 February
2025. I am at variance with
his neurological findings, however, finding intrinsic weakness in the left hand
with sensory changes
consistent with C8 radiculopathy.
did not provide assessment for scarring as he felt it was non causal.
claimant had two cortisone injections to her cervical spine which only gave
temporary relief.
shoulder specialist, Dr Kumar, had recommended a cortisone injection for
sustained benefit and she had a rotator cuff repair on
6 June 2023 at Lingard
Private Hospital and then on 17 October 2023 had capsular release with some
improvement in the range of motion.
issue of the supraspinatus tear in the left shoulder was that there was
apparently a small tear in 2008 and a more significant
tear on MRI after the
subject accident but the claimant noted that she had both hands gripping the
steering wheel on impact and felt
pain in the neck with left shoulder
brachalgia.
previous X-ray in 2018 had shown a smaller attritional tear of anterior fibres
of the supraspinatus tendon and the MRI of the
left shoulder on 18 July 2022
showed a near full thickness supraspinatus tear with subacromial
FURTHER CONSULTATIOND OF THE REVIEW PANEL ON PERMANENT
Review Panel considered all of the evidence that had been before it in respect
of the threshold injury dispute.
Review Panel consulted as to the findings on permanent impairment, having
previously consulted on threshold injury, and, having
consulted, came to the
view that the conclusions of Medical Assessor Dixon were correct as to permanent
impairment.
Medical Assessors and the legal Member were in agreement that the neurological
findings for the cervical spine showed an intrinsic
weakness of the left hand
with sensory changes consistent with C8 radiculopathy. In each of the
discussions, the relevant Medical
Assessor and legal Member agreed with the
reasons and conclusions.
Panel further considered scarring which was clearly, in the view of the Panel,
Panel could not see how it could be reasonably argued that the scarring to the
left shoulder was not causally related to the accident.
Watts said in her statement of 20 July 2024 that it is clear that she underwent
a number of procedures on her left shoulder, including
on 6 June 2023, surgery
by Dr Kumar in the form of a scope of the left shoulder, and surgery on 17
October 2023 when she underwent
a capsular release.
Panel considered that, on the balance of probabilities, as a result of the
procedures to the left shoulder, Ms Watts developed
scarring which was causally
Panel notes that Medical Assessor Dixon has carefully described the scarring and
is satisfied that, on the balance of probabilities,
it justifies a 1% WPI
CONCLUSIONS ON WHOLE PERSON IMPAIRMENT
Watts’ WPI is made out from the following injuries:
left shoulder,
Review Panel determines that Ms Watts has sustained a combined WPI of 19% using
the Combination Table at the end of the AMA 4
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (750 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter