URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDRGC/2010/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Christopher Hilzinger [2010] NSWDRGC 2 (18 May 2010)
of New South Wales
R v Christopher HILZINGER
[2010] NSWDRGC 2
Regina (Crown)
Christopher HILZINGER (Offender)
FILE NUMBER(S) :
His Honour Senior Judge Roger Dive
CATCHWORDS:
Meaning of Eligible Person :- whether the test regarding eligibility
requires examination of the elements of the offence charged or
the conduct
disclosed in the agreed facts. Whether an offender charged with the offence of
enter and damage property in company has been charged with an offence
involving violent conduct
when the facts reveal the Crown could have chosen
alternate circumstances of aggravation (which involve violent conduct). Whether
damage to property has as an element “violent conduct”
LEGISLATION CITED:
Drug Court Act 1998
Crimes Act 1900
CASES CITED:
[1999] NSW DRGC 2
Chandler v The Director of Public
Prosecutors
[2000] NSWCA 125
Director of Public Prosecutors v Allan Ebsworth
[2001] NSWCCA 318
R v Butcher
[1986] VicRp 4
[1986] VR 43
[2005] NSWDRGC 1
[2005] NSWDRGC 2
[2010] NSWDRGC 1
DATES OF HEARING:
DATE OF JUDGMENT:
18 May 2010
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES:
A Broomfield, Director of Public Prosecutions (Crown)
Legal Aid Commission (Offender)
1 Mr Hilzinger is a 19 year old man who has
committed a number of offences, including a serious crime. Unusually for a man
to the Drug Court, he has never been in trouble before. On the 3 June
2009, Mr Hilzinger has gone with four other offenders to Lockies
Leppington in the middle of the night. Wearing balaclavas, the five have gained
access to the hotel, confronted and detained
Mr Graham, the cleaner, and then
caused very significant damage to the hotel by driving both a 4WD and a forklift
into the hotel
in an attempt to steal a safe and an ATM. A silent alarm was
activated, police attended, the offenders fled, and little was actually
Mr Hilzinger was in fact the only person apprehended, as he was found nearby a
short time later. Upon apprehension, he had
in his possession a balaclava,
gloves, and $1390. The money had come from breaking into the cigarette machine.
Mr Hilzinger faces
no other charges which involve violence towards the cleaner,
Mr Graham, even though Mr Graham was kidnapped for a short time (having
taken for a drive at the beginning of this event), manhandled at one point, and
then later detained in the staff room.
2 Mr Hilzinger has remained in
custody since his arrest on 3 June 2009. When before the Local Court he
indicated pleas of guilty,
and was committed to the District Court for sentence.
Those pleas were maintained when he appeared before Judge Murrell SC at the
Campbelltown District Court on 31 March 2010. After hearing submissions, he was
then referred to the Drug Court under
Drug Court Act 1998
the principal offence of
“aggravated break and enter and commit a
serious indictable offence, namely damage property, while in the company of four
co-offenders”
. There are three additional charges to be taken into
account on sentence; two matters of being carried in a stolen motor vehicle
the night in question, and the charge of stealing which relates to the
cigarettes and money taken from the cigarette machine.
3 The Crown has
questioned his eligibility for a Drug Court program. Such eligibility is defined
Drug Court Act 1998
Section 5(2)(b)
provides that a
person is not an eligible person if the person is “
an offence involving violent conduct or sexual assault.”
The terms “charged with” and “violent conduct” are
not defined.
4 The Crown suggests, on a number of grounds, that Mr
Hilzinger is not an eligible offender.
An “Elements” or a
“Conduct” test?
5 Since the
Drug Court Act
commenced, there have been a number of decisions on this question of
eligibility, and as to whether the Court should look to the
elements of the
offence charged, or consider the conduct of the offender.
6 The Crown
submits that the Drug Court should not confine itself to an
“elements” test, and can and should take into
account the conduct of
Mr Hilzinger, as revealed in the facts sheet. The Crown further argues that Mr
Hilzinger falls foul of the
elements test in any event.
7 Ms Broomfield
argues that the Drug Court has in the past considered both an “elements
test” and a “conduct test”,
and drew the court’s
attention to the matters of
[2005] NSWDRGC 1
[2004] NSWDRGC 1
, two decisions of the Drug Court on this issue. In my view,
neither decision provides guidance in this matter, and I adopt what I
[2010] NSWDRGC 1
regarding the particular
circumstances of
, I drew on my
decision in
where I sought to summarise the case law on
this question of eligibility. I will again draw on that summary:
“In the matter of
Chandler v The Director of Public Prosecutors
[2000] NSWCA 125
Justice Hodgson, Chief Judge in Equity, gave the leading
opinion. Justice Hodgson referred to the second reading speech for the
which was given in the Legislative Assembly on 27 October
1998, and that second reading speech included the following statement;
“The Drug Court programme will deal
only with offenders who commit certain categories of offences. These offences
will be mainly
non-violent theft offences. Those offenders who commit sexual
offences and offences involving violent conduct will not be eligible.
of offences that will be included are break, enter and steal, fraud and forgery
offences, offences involving stealing from
a person or unarmed robberies,
provided there is no violence, possession and use of prohibited drugs, or
dealing in quantities of
prohibited drugs below the indictable
At paragraph 37 his Honour said;
“...in my opinion, the use of the word
‘charged’ in
Section 5(2)
points very strongly to it being the
elements of the charge which are significant, not the particular conduct. That
view was expressed
in an earlier decision of Judge Murrell, Senior Judge of the
Drug Court in
[1999] NSW DRGC 2.
Justice Hodgson also referred to dictionary definitions of violence and
violence and said;
“40. Without
quoting them, I think it is fair to say that relevantly the dictionary
definition suggests that violence generally
refers to the application of rough,
strong, physical force.”
Justice Hodgson also agreed with Judge Murrell in
should be construed quite strictly, as it removes a benefit which would
otherwise accrue to an offender.
The next relevant authority is the
matter of the
Director of Public Prosecutors v Allan Ebsworth and
[2001] NSWCCA 318.
In that matter Justice Meagher gave the leading
opinion. The case of
concerned a man who was charged with
robbery whilst armed with an offensive weapon. Mr Justice Meagher agreed with
what Chief Judge
Hodgson had said in
in relation to an elements
test, and went on to say;
“19. I agree
with that construction of the section. In my view, this Court should follow what
was said in Chandler in this connection.
20. In the present case,
if one looks at the charge, it is implicit as I have said from the verb, to rob
and the accusation of an
offensive weapon, that violence was necessarily
involved. Those two elements together constitute violent
21. Support for this interpretation is found in
the decision of the Victorian Supreme Court in R v Butcher
[1986] VicRp 4
[1986] VR 43
that Court stated, “if threats are made personally to intimidate or
seeking to intimidate this is also in our opinion
violence.... both putting a
person in fear or seeking to put a person in fear of being ‘subjected to
force’ has always
been accepted under the common law as violence
sufficient to render a contemporaneous larceny a robbery.”
And continuing from paragraph 24;
“24. Accordingly, the charge of armed
robbery armed with an offensive weapon, in reference to the elements of the
charge, constitutes
behaviour involving violent conduct.
if that test is wrong, and if it were necessary to consider the particular
conduct of the offender, the first opponent’s
behaviour in this case
necessarily constitutes violent conduct.
26. For the reasons given
above, threatening to use violence in the form of brandishing a baseball bat is
sufficient to constitute
violent conduct.”
So essentially the situation is that the decision in
and again approves the decision of the Drug Court in
9 I noted in
that Mason ACJ agreed with Meagher JA in
If one confines oneself to the criminal pleading as distinct from the
facts the Crown expects to prove in this case, this was in my
offence involving violent conduct...That is because a necessary element of the
offence of the robbery charged will
be proof of the use of threat of
10 Mr Flood, who appeared for Mr Hilzinger, has
also drawn my attention to what Mr Justice Powell said in
Whilst Powell JA was not able to concur with his brother judges in the case, on
this point he said, at paragraph 16:
“...it follows that, if – as I believe to be correct – when
determining whether an accused is “an eligible
person”, the Drug
Court is required to consider whether violent conduct is one of the elements of
the offence with which the
accused is charged..”
11 There is, in my view, a clear line of
authority from
Rance, Chandler
an elements test, and in
I applied that line of authority, and
made a finding that he was an eligible offender. Mr Bruce’s case is both
interesting
and relevant, in that he had been charged with break, enter and
steal, committed in the aggravating circumstance of being in company.
sheet however disclosed that he had tackled the homeowner to the ground in his
escape from the home he had just broken
into. In Mr Bruce’s case, the
prosecution had not laid a charge of breaking and entering, with the
circumstance of aggravation
being the use of corporal violence, or with a
separate charge of assaulting the homeowner. So what was before the Drug Court
a charge which on its face had no elements of violent conduct within it, and
a facts sheet which disclosed an alternate charge, or
an additional charge, and
a fact which was relevant on sentence. I am told that the Crown is seeking to
test that decision.
12 In the absence of any new authority on the issue,
I remain of the view that the elements test is the correct test, and, on the
face of it, there is no element of violent conduct in the charge laid against Mr
Multiple Circumstances of Aggravation
strongest argument from the Crown is that the Crown is only obliged to aver one
circumstance of aggravation, irrespective of
how many such circumstances may be
Section 105A
Crimes Act 1900
defines “circumstances
of aggravation” as “circumstances involving any one or more”
of six circumstances,
and the Crown argues that the failure to select a
circumstance of aggravation which alleges violent conduct does not mean the
involving violence is not also an element, as the definition section
specifically refers to circumstances of aggravation being one
or more of those
14 The Crown argues that all six aggravating circumstances set
section 105A
Crimes Act 1900
apply to Mr
Hilzinger’s behaviour. The facts sheet reveals that:
Mr Hilzinger was armed with a stick.
He was in company (as averred).
He did use corporal violence by pulling the victim to his feet after
having yelled at him to get down on the floor and put his hands
on his head.
Further, that this aggravating circumstance is established on the basis of
common purpose.
He did inflict actual bodily harm to the victim by virtue of the
psychological harm to Mr Graham (as set out in the Victim Impact
Statement).
He deprived Mr Graham of his liberty by retaining him in the staff
room of the hotel.
He knew there was a person present in the hotel when the offence was
committed – indeed they waited for the cleaner to unlock
the hotel to gain
15 On this issue Mr Flood has argued that the word “charged”
should be given its normal, usual meaning, and that the identification
circumstance of aggravation the Crown relies upon is more than just the
identification of a particular. The legislation
is beneficial legislation, and
as Hodgson CJ in Equity said in
(quoted above).
Flood has also drawn attention to the fact that a charge of kidnapping was in
fact laid, but later withdrawn and dismissed,
as the Crown conceded
that it cannot prove that the offender was one of the males who
accompanied the victim in his car, or that he was a party to an agreement
the victim would be driven away from the scene.”
17 The Crown
argues that any one of the aggravating circumstances could have been averred in
the charge, and that all of those factors
are relevant and are to be taken into
account on sentence. The argument is that the choice of aggravating circumstance
be the determining factor as to whether Mr Hilzinger is eligible for
a Drug Court program, and that it was never Parliament’s
intention to
provide such a program for violent offenders.
18 I cannot agree with that
submission. The fact that there are other, alternate charges available which
would have specified those
alternate aggravating circumstances does not elevate
those alternate aggravating circumstances to being elements of the subject
Those facts are, of course, relevant on sentence. But they are not an
element of the offence charged, and would not have to be proved
at trial. They
will be relevant in any sentencing proceedings, including sentencing proceedings
before the Drug Court.
19 The test provided for the Drug Court is to
ascertain whether Mr Hilzinger has been charged with an offence involving
violent conduct.
The test is not whether he could have been charged with an
offence involving violent conduct. Both Ms Broomfield and Mr Flood have
submissions as to what Parliament could have done. However given this is
beneficial legislation, and should be interpreted accordingly,
it is perhaps
obvious that if Parliament had wanted to exclude persons in relation to whom the
facts of the case revealed violence
to persons or property, it would have been
very simple to draft section 5 accordingly.
20 I remain of the view, as
expressed in
, that the words “charged with...an offence
involving violent conduct” should be given their ordinary meaning, and
the clear line of authority is for an elements test. The prosecution has
chosen to lay a particular charge, no doubt after considering
the evidence
available, and a plea of guilty has been entered to that charge. That is the
only relevant offence with which he has
been charged.
substantial damage to property violent conduct?
21 Whilst the Crown,
in opposition to Mr Hilzinger’s eligibility, did not raise the issue of
damage to property, Mr Flood addressed
the issue in his written submissions. I
think it should be quickly addressed. There have been a number of decisions on
the meaning
of s 5, however none address the question of whether material damage
(in this case very substantial damage) constitutes being charged
with an offence
involving violent conduct. The damage to the hotel in this matter is very
considerable, with a damages bill of $63,474
and the loss of business whilst the
hotel was closed for repairs is estimated as $15,854.
22 The fact that
very substantial damage was done to the property does not render Mr Hilzinger
ineligible. Breaking into premises
was a crime anticipated by the legislators,
and is specifically mentioned in the 2
Reading Speech frequently
referred to in the cases on section 5. So crimes involving damage to property
were expected to be eligible
offences. Unfortunately it is the case that very
considerable damage is sometimes occasioned to premises during break-ins. Very
shop front windows or secure roller doors may be broken, or there may
be extensive vandalism. It can also be, as Mr Flood has pointed
out, that great
damage may be occasioned with no element of violence at all –with aerosol
paint for example. The fact that
very significant material damage was done, as
apart from (just) breaking a door or window to gain entry, does not elevate the
to one which is an ineligible offence.
23 Accordingly, in the
light of all of the above, I am of the view that Mr Hilzinger is an eligible
************
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (35.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter