URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/587.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Yu v Architectural Facade Constructions Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPIC 587; (3 November 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION OF MEMBER
Yu v Architectural Facade Constructions Pty Ltd [2025] NSWPIC
RESPONDENT:
Architectural Facade Constructions Pty Ltd
Josephine Bamber
DATE OF DECISION:
3 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workers Compensation Act 1987
applicant had sustained injury to his cervical spine in circumstances where
there was an eight-month delay in him experiencing
cervical symptoms;
the applicant has discharged his onus of proof on the balance
of probabilities that he did sustain an injury to his cervical spine
workplace incident; the lump sum claim is remitted to the President for referral
to a Medical Assessor to assess permanent
impairment of the cervical spine and
the agreed injury to the lumbar spine.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
The Personal Injury Commission (Commission) determines:
date of injury in the Application to Resolve a Dispute is amended to “on
or about 12 July 2022”.
applicant sustained injury to his cervical spine on or about 12 July 2022 in the
course of his employment with the respondent.
lump sum claim is remitted to the President for referral to a Medical Assessor
to assess permanent impairment of the lumbar spine
and cervical spine with a
date of injury on or about 12 July 2022. The documents to be referred to a
Medical Assessor are those attached
to the Application to Resolve a Dispute and
A brief statement is attached setting out the Commission’s reasons
for the determination.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Yu was working as a construction worker for the respondent, Architectural Facade
Constructions Pty Ltd, when on or about 12 July
2022 he was carrying a metal
board with a colleague who slipped and the board collided with the right side of
Mr Yu’s body
and pushed him backwards. He alleges he sustained injury to
his lumbar spine and cervical spine in this incident and he seeks lump
compensation pursuant to s 66 of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
respondent disputes Mr Yu injured his cervical spine. It accepts he injured his
lumbar spine but asserts the claim for permanent
impairment in relation to the
lumbar spine is not sufficient to attract lump sum compensation.
are differing references to the actual date of injury. Nothing turns on the
particular date however, the parties agree for the
Application to Resolve a
Dispute being amended to refer to the date of injury as “on or about 12
July 2022”.
PROCEDURE BEFORE THE PERSONAL INJURY
am satisfied that the parties to the dispute understand the nature of the
application and the legal implications of any assertion
made in the information
supplied. I have used my best endeavours in attempting to bring the parties to
the dispute to a settlement
acceptable to all of them. I am satisfied that the
parties have had sufficient opportunity to explore settlement and that they have
been unable to reach an agreed resolution of the dispute.
matter proceeded in arbitration hearing before me on 1 October 2025. Mr Bruce
McManamey, counsel, instructed by Mr Young, solicitor,
appeared for Mr Yu, who
was present together with a Mandarin interpreter. The respondent was represented
by Mr Paul Stockley, counsel,
instructed by Mr Peter McCarthy,
Documentary evidence
following documents were in evidence before the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission) and considered in making this determination:
(a) Application to Resolve a Dispute and attached documents, and
(b) Reply and attached documents.
Oral evidence
was no oral evidence. Both counsel made oral submissions which have been sound
recorded. A copy of the recording is available
FINDINGS AND REASONS
evidence relating to the alleged cervical spine injury is summarised
Mr Yu’s statement dated 20 June 2025
Yu sets out the details of how the incident on or about 12 July 2022 occurred.
At [9] and [10] of his statement he says he was
assisting a co-worker to carry a
large metal board, which weighed over 100kg. They were attempting to lift it to
put it into a bin
which was about a metre high. As they were heaving it up his
colleague suddenly lost his grip and let go of the board. Mr Yu says
and fell onto the right side of his body, pinning him against the bin. He says
he immediately felt severe pain along the
right side of his chest and in his
lower back. He reported the incident and stopped working due to the pain.
describes his medical treatment and his continuing lumbar pain which was
radiating to his right thigh and leg, with numbness and
[14] he states in the days and weeks immediately following the accident he did
not notice any neck pain. He believed his only injuries
were to his lower back
and the right side of his chest and abdomen.
[15] he said it was only several months later that he began to experience issues
with his neck. He adds around early 2023 he started
to develop pain and
stiffness in his neck, which gradually became more noticeable. He says he
reported the neck symptoms to his doctor
in about March 2023 and then
investigations were undertaken of his neck.
[17] Mr Yu states that prior to the work accident he had never experienced neck
have not summarised all of the statement as there are parts that are more in the
nature of submissions. The details of Mr Yu’s
medical treatment are
referred to when summarising the medical evidence.
consultations
Xuesong Jason Han, general practitioner from Auburn Healthcare Centre, saw Mr Yu
on 15 July 2022 and recorded in his clinical notes
that Mr Yu had a chest wall
injury for two days and he was still painful over the right ribcage area. The
doctor requested an X-ray
noting on the referral “right ribcage pain post
Mr Yu saw Dr Han again
on 17 and 18 July 2022, and the doctor requested a CT scan of his chest with the
referral stating, “right
side ribcage pain after hit a metal
On 19 July 2022 Dr
Han recorded that Mr Yu was complaining of “lower back pain from
compensating” and he prescribed stronger
pain killer medications.
29 July 2022 Mr Yu saw Dr Song at the same practice as Dr Han. Dr Song recorded
that his condition had stabilised, “no further
injury”. He still had
pain and was able to move normally.
Han reported to the insurer on 24 August 2022 providing a diagnosis of a right
chest injury, noting even though she suspected a
rib fracture none was detected
on CT scanning.
Lam consultation 14 September 2022
Yu consulted Dr Lam on 14 September 2022 and gave her a history of the work
accident on 12 July 2022 when he was carrying a large
thick metal sheet with a
co-worker who suddenly put the sheet down. The doctor records that Mr Yu was
caught unawares and that the
edge and lower corner of the metal sheet jerked
upwards and caught him on his right sided ribs. She notes he stumbled and has a
-fall over the sheet, he reported severe right sided chest pain and
abdominal wall pain and worsening low back pain. Dr Lam records
examination his right shoulder was tender anteriorly and the chest wall was
tender over the rib. She also recorded her findings
on examination of the lumbar
Physiotherapy records
Yu was treated at Complete Allied Health Care with physiotherapy treatment
commencing on 12 November 2022.
notes record ongoing abdominal wall, chest wall and lower back pain with muscle
spasm and intermittent pain and numbness down
the right lower limb. A report was
sent on that day to Dr Lam consistent with these notes. There is no mention of
neck pain. It appears
Mr Yu did not attend for further physiotherapy at this
Dr Lam consultation 29 March 2023
first record of Mr Yu complaining of his neck is in the clinical entry of Dr Lam
29 March 2023.
Dr Lam under
the heading “Agenda” records that Mr Yu reports “ongoing chest
wall, neck + low back pain with weakness”.
At that time he was attending
physiotherapy once a week but the doctor does not state what body parts were
being treated by the physiotherapist.
She requested an MRI scan of the cervical
spine as well as of the lumbar spine.
MRI scan 6 April
MRI cervical scan revealed mild disc desiccation at C3/4 and a small disc bulge
at C6/7. There was no neural compression and all
exiting nerves pass
Associate Professor Papantoniou
7 March 2023 Dr Lam issued a referral for Mr Yu to consult A/Prof Papantoniou in
relation to the work accident referring to his
A/Professor Papantoniou
reported to Dr Lam on 11 May 2023.
The history he reports does not make it clear that
Mr Yu complained of neck
pain months after the incident on 15 July 2022, although he does refer to the
MRI scan of the cervical and
lumbar spine dated 6 April 2023 which he states was
approximately nine months after the original work injury. He states that the
scan revealed a small disc bulge at C6/7 and that Mr Yu has suffered from
cervical and lumbar pathology as a result of his work
Shahzad is the applicant’s medico-legal occupational physician who has
provided a report dated 22 January
He has a consistent history
of the work accident with that related in Mr Yu’s statement. On
examination he found muscle guarding
over the cervical spine and tenderness or
muscle atrophy of the sternocleidomastoid, levator scapulae, trapezius or
paravertebral
muscles. Also there was tenderness over the spine or paraspinal
Dr Shahzad found the range of movement in all planes to be two
thirds of normal. Asymmetry of spinal motion was recorded. Dr Shahzad
cervical compression test was positive. The neurological examination of the
upper limbs revealed motor examination of C5 to
T1 had abnormal muscle strength
but otherwise was normal.
Shahzad when offering his opinion about the nature and extent of injuries does
not explain how the neck was injured. He states
that Mr Yu sustained injuries to
his lumbar spine, right chest and right abdominal wall. But then in the next
paragraph when describing
the ongoing symptoms he states, “he also has
some neck pain”.
diagnosis heading, Dr Shahzad just sets out the radiology finding “disc
desiccation at C3/4 and a disc bulge at C6/7
without radiculopathy”.
the permanent impairment report Dr Shahzad states,
“Mr Yu fits
the criteria for DRE Cervical Category II, with clinical history and examination
findings are compatible with a
cervical spine injury, with muscle guarding,
rigidity and asymmetrical range of motion being present on clinical examination.
has a 6% whole person impairment due to having difficulties with some
domestic duties as well as garden and yard maintenance.”
Shahzad provided a supplementary report dated 19 June
He was asked his opinion
whether the injury to the cervical spine arose out of or in the course of Mr
Yu’s employment. He
said the sudden force of a large metal board weighing
over 100kg falling onto the right side of his body was a sudden impact which
transmitted force through his entire spinal column including his cervical
region. He said it is medically plausible that the cervical
spine was also
affected beyond the other injuries such as the right chest wall, lumbar spine
and abdominal wall. Dr Shahzad referred
to the cervical symptoms being
documented later with the MRI in 2023 confirming disc desiccation at C3/4 and a
disc bulge at C6/7.
He further explained there was an absence of prior neck
complaints and these type of structural changes align with the type of
biomechanical
force involved in the injury. Dr Shahzad opined that delayed onset
of symptoms does not exclude a work-related causation especially
mechanism of injury supports such involvement.
Shahzad says he disagrees with Dr Wallace’s conclusion because he did not
address or consider Mr Yu’s cervical condition,
which has since been
clinically and radiologically confirmed.
Wallace provided a medico-legal report to the respondent dated 30 April
He has a slightly
different history of the workplace incident, that the co-worker dropped his end
of the aluminium plate with Mr
Yu taking the full weight “and it twisted
and he twisted to his left before dropping it to the ground. The plate struck
right lateral chest wall as it fell.”
Dr Wallace refers to Mr
Yu’s present complaints and states “he does not complain of any
cervical symptoms.” Dr Wallace
records that a Mandarin interpreter was
Wallace states that the MRI scan showed minor disc degeneration at C3/4. He does
not list a cervical injury in his diagnosis. Dr
Wallace did not examine Mr
Yu’s cervical spine.
Wallace in answer to question 8 states there is no objective evidence that Mr Yu
suffered injury at his cervical spine as a result
of the work injury on 13 July
2022. He notes the first mention of pain in his neck was eight months post
injury and he repeated that
Mr Yu did not complain of any cervical
Submissions
applicant’s counsel submitted that the applicant had no prior problems
with his neck before the workplace incident and he
was able to carry out his
duties. He referred to the mechanism of injury and submitted that it was of some
importance, that Mr Yu
was in the process of lifting a heavy weight. He argues
that it can be concluded that in the process of the lift it would put a strain
on the neck. In addition, the metal sheet hit the right side of
Yu’s body and he was propelled backwards.
applicant’s counsel submitted that it is not material that there was a
delay in Mr Yu experiencing neck symptoms. He drew
attention to the first
examination of Mr Yu by Dr Lam which included an examination of his right
shoulder. He says this is significant
because it shows the symptoms were not
just localised over the chest. Counsel submits that the MRI scan of the cervical
not disclose degenerative pathology throughout his cervical spine, but
it discloses discrete pathology at C3/4. It was submitted
that at that stage Mr
Yu was about to turn 37, so he was not an old man.
applicant’s counsel referred to A/Professor Papantoniou’s report,
stating the history of the incident was consistent
with the other histories but
he accepted that the doctor does not record that there was delay in Mr Yu
reporting neck pain. Counsel
submits that A/Professor Papantoniou’s
opinion is that the work incident has caused the pathology evidence on the MRI
which he had referred to immediately before giving this opinion.
was further submitted that Dr Shahzad examined Mr Yu’s cervical spine and
found signs of problems with the neck. He diagnoses
specific pathology in the
cervical spine as shown on the MRI scan. It is submitted that it is clear that
the doctor is of the view
that these symptoms are not the result of an
aggravation, but that the injury caused the pathology. Counsel submits that this
supported by the fact that the doctor does not make a deduction under s 323
of the 1998 Act of the whole person impairment he assessed
for the cervical
spine. Counsel submitted that the last report of Dr Shahzad makes it clear that
the mechanism of injury is directly
related to cervical disc pathology.
argues that a delay in onset of symptoms does not mean that there was no injury
because the injury causes the change in pathology
and as it progresses it
becomes symptomatic. He submits the test is whether there has been a sudden
change in pathology. The applicant’s
counsel submits there has been a
sudden change of pathology in Mr Yu’s case with the desiccation of the
applicant’s counsel submits that the respondent’s medico-legal
opinion from
Dr Wallace’s should be rejected because his history, that
Mr Yu did not complain of cervical symptoms, is totally at odds with
Yu’s statement and the other medical evidence. Counsel also submits that
Dr Wallace did not examine Mr Yu’s cervical
spine unlike Dr Shahzad and
even though Dr Wallace did refer to the MRI scan of the cervical spine, he did
not refer to its significance.
Counsel submits that at no stage does Dr Wallace
engage with the views of A/Professor Papantoniou and Dr Shahzad.
respondent submitted that the mechanism of injury is far from clear because
there are different accounts recorded. He submits
this matters because Dr
Shahzad has said the mechanism of incident is consistent with an injury to his
cervical spine having occurred.
The respondent’s counsel submits that when
Dr Shahzad talks about the forces on the spine one might think he has taken into
account the lumbar injury. However, counsel submits, while the respondent
accepts there was a lumbar injury, in the first medical
examination by Dr Han he
refers to a chest wall injury with no mention of the back at that stage. Counsel
refers to the clinical
entry by Dr Han on 19 July 2022 which refers to low back
pain from “compensating”. It was submitted that these matters
history differ to that in Mr Yu’s statement. The respondent’s
counsel poses the question, what does this tell one
injury and the forces exerted on the spine when the history is of
“compensating”. It is submitted
that it diminishes the opinion of Dr
Shahzad. The respondent’s counsel submitted that in his first report Dr
Shahzad did not
record the delayed onset of neck symptoms and he has mistaken
the correct date of referral for the MRI scan. Counsel also submits
Shahzad in his first report also refers to A/Prof Papantoniou’s report
which seemed to relate the neck pain to onset
at the time of the accident.
Counsel is critical of Dr Shahzad’s opinion relying on A/Prof
Papantoniou’s report.
respondent then referred to the last report of Dr Shahzad where he discusses the
mechanism of injury and submits he does not disclose
the reasoning for his
conclusion that the accident involved a sudden impact resulting in force being
exerted down the spine. The
respondent submits the mechanism of injury is in
doubt and the applicant’s counsel argued that there was “a
progression
of the pathology” but this was without any support of medical
opinion. It was submitted that Dr Shahzad does not support such
a theory and the
respondent submits his opinion is really superficial and should not be
respondent also submitted that the applicant does not tell us in his statement
or to anyone where his neck symptoms were and how
they started. Also, it is
submitted that it has not been explained how there was disc desiccation
occurring. It was submitted that
Dr Lam records that the co-worker was putting
the metal sheet down and the sheet jerked upwards catching him on the right side
his ribs and there was a near- fall.
respondent submits it does not need to rely upon the opinion of Dr Wallace
because the applicant has not explained the mechanism
of injury to the cervical
spine and the delayed onset of neck symptoms. The upshot of the
respondent’s submissions is that
the applicant has not discharged his onus
of proof and an award for the respondent should be found for the alleged injury
cervical spine.
reply the applicant’s counsel submitted that the respondent’s
counsel’s submission was that Dr Shahzad, being
aware that the lumbar
injury had been accepted, had led to him finding there were forces occurring on
the spine that also injured
the neck. However, the applicant submits there is no
basis to infer that this was part of Dr Shahzad’s reasoning. It was also
submitted that the respondent had suggested an inference be drawn that Dr
Shahzad, when quoting from A/Prof Papantoniou, had been
influenced in concluding
the neck had been injured. Again the applicant submits that this inference is
not one that can be drawn
from Dr Shahzad’s opinion. The applicant submits
that Dr Shahzad deals with the chain of causation and explains that it is
consistent with an injury having occurred to the neck at the time of the
incident, but with symptoms coming on later.
relation to the respondent’s submissions about the mechanism of injury,
the applicant submitted that the most crucial part
is that there was an
extremely heavy metal sheet which was put down and struck his chest and whether
or not it pinned him against
the bin is not material. It is clear he was thrown
sideways. He says the versions recorded by Dr Lam and Dr Han are essentially
and, as the respondent conceded they would have been more concerned
with treatment than pinning down the fine details of the incident.
the applicant submitted that there is no contrary view to that of Dr Shahzad
that notwithstanding the delay in onset of symptoms
it is consistent with the
accident causing the pathology found on the MRI scan and symptoms becoming
apparent later. Counsel argues,
absent a contradictor, Dr Shahzad does not need
to expand upon this opinion.
Determination
applicant has the onus of proof to establish the work accident on or about 12
July 2022 caused an injury to his cervical spine.
The respondent’s case
has been made more difficult because Dr Wallace did not even examine Mr
Yu’s cervical spine, comment
on the significance of the MRI scan findings
or deal with Dr Shahzad’s opinion about causation. These deficiencies in
Dr Wallace’s
report have led me to place no weight on it. He bases his
conclusion on the statement he attributes to the applicant that he did
complain about his cervical spine. I find I cannot rely upon this history as it
is contrary to the histories recorded by Dr Shahad,
A/Prof Papantoniou and Dr
Lam of complaints of symptoms in the neck. The fact that an MRI scan of the
cervical spine was undertaken
indicates there must have been a cervical
complaint to warrant Dr Lam to request the same. It is surprising that Dr
Wallace does
not comment on the significance of the pathology disclosed by the
scan in a 37 year old man.
the fact that I place no weight on the respondent’s medico-legal opinion
does not mean that the applicant has discharged
his onus of proof.
applicant states he had a delayed onset of neck symptoms and made no complaint
of them until the consultation with Dr Lam on 29
March 2023, about seven and a
half months post-accident. I find I cannot place weight on A/Prof
Papantoniou’s finding about
causation because it is not clear that he knew
am not assisted by physical examination findings of the applicant. He does
refer to the MRI scan and accepts without any reasoning
that the small disc
bulge at C6/7 was caused by the work injury.
MRI scan revealed mild disc desiccation at C3/4 and a small disc bulge at C6/7.
There was no neural compression and all exiting
nerves pass freely. The
applicant was about 37 when this scan was performed and the findings may or may
not be caused by trauma or
early degenerative changes. I cannot determine the
significance of these finding without medical evidence. As the respondent
the applicant has not given evidence as to where in the cervical spine
he had symptoms and details of the onset. I also do not accept
applicant’s counsel about a progression of pathology as there is no
medical evidence to support that. I do not accept the
respondent’s
submission that Dr Shahzad was influenced by A/Prof Papantoniou because it is
evident that Dr Shahzad, unlike
A/Prof Papantoniou, did conduct a detailed
physical examination of Mr Yu.
Shahzad is really the only doctor to provide a thorough examination of the
cervical spine. He found muscle guarding over the cervical
spine and tenderness
or muscle atrophy of the sternocleidomastoid, levator scapulae, trapezius or
paravertebral muscles. Also tenderness
over the spine or paraspinal region. Dr
Shahzad found the range of movement in all planes to be two thirds of normal.
Asymmetry of
spinal motion was recorded. Dr Shahzad found cervical compression
test was positive. The neurological examination of the upper limbs
motor examination of C5 to T1 had abnormal muscle strength but otherwise was
Shahzad, when he was finally asked about the causation of the cervical symptoms,
does provide an opinion consistent with injury
having been sustained at work on
12 July 2022. I do have concerns about the length of delay in the
applicant experiencing neck symptoms however, Dr Shahzad is cognisant
delay and supports a causal link. The respondent was critical of his opinion
because it was based upon his view that the
mechanism of injury exerted forces
on the spine. I find that Dr Shahzad does have a history of the incident that is
fairly consistent
with that taken by Dr Lam and related by the applicant in his
statement. It seems it was the force of the heavy metal plate striking
applicant that he attributes to exerting forces sufficient to injure Mr
applicant also drew attention to the fact that Dr Lam did find tenderness in the
right shoulder on 14 September 2022 and submitted
that this shows the blow did
not just cause a discrete injury to the chest/rib area. I accept this submission
but had this been the
only finding I would not necessarily place weight upon it.
However, coupled with Dr Shahzad’s objective findings on physical
examination of the cervical spine and his opinion about causation I am satisfied
that the applicant has discharged his onus of proof
that on the balance of
probabilities he did sustain an injury to his cervical spine in the workplace
incident on or about 12 July
2022. The degree of impairment is a matter for a
Medical Assessor.
Accordingly,
I remit the lump sum claim to the President for referral to a Medical Assessor
to assess permanent impairment of the
lumbar spine and cervical spine with a
date of injury on or about 12 July 2022. The documents to be referred to a
Medical Assessor
are those attached to the ARD and Reply.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.06 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter