URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/1097.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:59:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NSW Ambulance Administrative and Clerical Employees (State) Award 2024 [2025] NSWIRComm 1097 (4 November 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
NSW Ambulance Administrative and Clerical Employees (State) Award
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 1097
Hearing Date(s):
Matter determined in chambers
Date of Orders:
04 November 2025
Decision Date:
4 November 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Commissioner Muir
The Commission orders that:
(1) NSW Ambulance Administrative and
Clerical Employees (State) Award 2024 is made in the terms sought in the
Application; and
(2) NSW Ambulance Administrative and Clerical Employees
(State) Award 2023 is revoked.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW – Awards and enterprise agreements
– Approval and creation – Remuneration –
Equal remuneration
– consent award – no issue of principle
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Principal judgment
Health Secretary, in respect of NSW Ambulance Health (Applicant)
Local Government, Clerical, Administrative, Energy, Airlines and Utilities Union
(Respondent)
Representation:
Alice Murphy (Health Secretary)
Bill O’Kell (USU)
File Number(s):
2024/242576
Publication Restriction:
29 October 2025 the Health Secretary applied to the Industrial Relations
Commission (Commission) for the making of a new award,
being the NSW Ambulance
Administrative and Clerical Employees (State) Award 2024 (2024 AAC Award).
Described as “Further Amended”
Application (Application), the
Application sought a three-year award, effective from 1 July 2024.
original application by the Health Secretary for the making of the 2024 AAC
Award was filed on 1 July 2024. The Application is
“Further Amended”
in respect of the 1 July 2024 application.
5 February 2025, the Commission made an interim consent award providing for a
3.0 per cent increase to salary and salary related
allowances, from 1 July 2024.
The interim increase was made on the basis that the parties agreed that at least
a 3.0 per cent increase
salary increase for the 12-month period commencing 1
July 2024 would flow to the employees covered by the 2024 CCCA Award when made,
whether by consent or arbitrated.
Application sets out that the 2025 Award:
(1) gives effect to salary and salary related allowances increases for three
years being:
(a) an additional 0.5%, above the interim increase already made, for FY
(b) an increase of 4.0% for FY 2025/26, in addition to the statutory increase of
0.5% in superannuation; and
(c) an increase of a further 4.0% in FY 2026/27;
(2) includes the following changes from the 2023 Award;
(a) two further increments, a realignment of rates, and change of title for the
call taker classification, to be Emergency Medical
Call Takers;
(b) change to the title of operations centre supervisors, to now be Emergency
Communications Team Leader;
(c) removal of obsolete classifications of Pay Clerk, Operations Centre
Assistance Supervisor and Computer Programmer;
(d) the introduction of domestic and family violence leave;
(e) updates to the language of the anti-discrimination clause; and
(f) change to the dispute provisions of the hours of duty clause.
(3) replaces the NSW Ambulance Administrative and Clerical Employees (State)
Award 2023;
(4) other than set out above, rolls over existing terms and conditions from the
2023 Award;
(5) includes an updated “No Extra Claims” clause, in accordance with
the NSW Government Fair Pay and Bargaining Policy
2024-25, published by the
Premier’s Department.
(6) applies for a three-year duration effective from 1 July 2024 subject to any
order or award the Commission may make.
29 October 2025, the Health Secretary filed an affidavit of Alice Murphy,
Director, Industrial Relations and Change, which set
out the background matters
outlined above in respect of the Application.
Murphy deposed that the 2024 AAC Award meets the requirement for approval under
(2) of the Act. Ms Murphy gave evidence that:
(1) the 2024 AAC Award provides for equal remuneration and other conditions of
employment for male and female employees doing work
of equal and comparable
value, including some details with respect to the basis upon which she has
formed that view;
(2) the making of the 2024 AAC Award is in the public interest having regard to
the matters set out in
if the Act, namely the objectives of the Act,
and in particular that:
(a) the changed classification structure, and the extended increment for senior
call takers, would assist with retention of a suitably
qualified workforce:
objective (i);
(b) the continuing clause 33 promotes participation in industrial relations at
the workplace level: objective (c); and
(c) the updated provisions of clause 36 are directed to the prevention and
elimination of discrimination in the workplace: objective
29 October 2025, the USU filed submissions, which although not in the form of an
affidavit, are accepted by the Commission, because
much of what was set out by
the USU was concerning matters which had occurred in proceedings before the
Commission. Those submissions
set out that:
(1) the USU supported the making of the 2024 AAC Award, for the reasons advanced
by the Health Secretary;
(2) the terms had been negotiated between the Health Secretary and the US for
nearly 17 months, including lengthy proceedings in
the Commission at which
various workplace delegates of the relevant employees had attended with the
USU’s industrial officers;
(3) the USU had conducted meetings to explain the proposed award and had polled
its members with over 90% supporting the proposed
Consideration
requirements for making an award under the Act are set out in Division 1 of Part
1 of Chapter 2. Relevantly, the Act provides:
Division 1 Awards generally
10 Commission may make awards
The Commission may make an award in accordance with this Act setting fair and
reasonable conditions of employment for employees.
11 When award may be made
(1) An award may be made—
(a) on application to the Commission or on the Commission’s own
initiative, or
(2) An application for an award may be made only by—
(a) an employer, or
(b) an industrial organisation of employers or employees, or
(3) Anyone who can apply for an award may become a party to any proceedings for
making an award.
(4) An applicant for an award, or to become a party to the making of an award,
is required to satisfy the Commission that it or any
one or more of its members
has a sufficient interest in the proposed award.
13 Formal matters relating to making of award
(1) An award is required to be in writing, expressed to be an award and signed
by at least one member of the Commission.
(2) An award is to be published by the Industrial Registrar on the NSW
industrial relations website.
(3) An award is to comply with such other requirements as to form and procedure
for its making as may be made by the regulations
or (subject to any such
regulations) by the rules of the Commission.
14 Mandatory dispute resolution procedures in awards
(1) An award is not to be made unless it contains procedures for the resolution
of industrial disputes under the award (dispute resolution
procedures).
(3) Dispute resolution procedures are to include procedures for—
(a) consultation at the workplace, and
(b) the involvement of relevant industrial organisations.
15 Commencement of award
(1) An award comes into force on the date specified by the Commission.
(3) An award may be expressed to apply retrospectively, but not earlier than the
date on which—
(a) application for the award was lodged with the Industrial Registrar, or
(b) the Commission itself initiated proceedings for the award, or
(c) the industrial dispute giving rise to the award was notified to the
Commission.
(4) Despite subsection (3), the following awards may, with the consent of the
parties to the making of the award, apply retrospectively
from a date, specified
in the award, that is earlier than any date referred to in that
subsection—
(b) an award that sets conditions of employment for employees of a single
employer or for employees of two or more associated employers.
16 Term of award
(1) An award applies for the period specified in it as its nominal term and,
after that period, until rescinded by the Commission.
(2) The nominal term of an award must not be less than 12 months nor more than 3
Consideration
consider that the requirements of s 10 are satisfied based on:
(1) The award continuing the terms of the 2023 Award, other than increases to
rates of pay and salary related allowances, and those
matter to which are
referred to already;
(2) The consent of all parties and their submissions that the 2024 AAC Award
would set fair and reasonable conditions; and
(3) The evidence of Ms Murphy as to the 2024 AAC Award complying with equal
remuneration principles.
consider that the requirements of s 11 are satisfied based on:
(1) The Application having been made by an employer;
(2) The proposed parties to the award being persons who are permitted to apply
for the making of an award; and
(3) Both of those parties having a sufficient interest in the 2024 AAC Award
because they have either members who will be covered
by the award, or are the
employer of employees to be covered by the award.
consider that the requirements of s 13 are satisfied based on:
(1) The 2024 AAC Award being in writing and expressed to be an award;
(2) That it will be signed by a member of the Commission in due course and
published by the Industrial Registrar; and
(3) The 2024 AAC Award otherwise apparently conforming as to form and procedure
with the regulations and rules of the Commission.
consider that the requirements of s 14 are satisfied based on the 2024 AAC Award
containing a dispute resolution procedure, which
includes procedures for
consultation at the workplace and the involvement of relevant industrial
organisations.
consider that I am able to make the 2024 AAC Award apply retrospectively
pursuant to either s 15(3)(a) or s 15(4)(b).
requirements of s 16 are satisfied, given that the nominal term of the 2024 AAC
Award will be 3 years, commencing on 1 July 2024.
146(2) provides that:
146 General functions of Commission
(2) The Commission must take into account the public interest in the exercise of
its functions and, for that purpose, must have regard
(a) the objects of this Act, and
(b) the state of the economy of New South Wales and the likely effect of its
decisions on that economy, and
(c) for the exercise of a function about public sector employees—the
fiscal position and outlook of the Government and the
likely effect of the
exercise of the Commission’s function on the position and outlook.
consider that it is in the public interest to make the 2024 AAC Award. In
arriving at this decision, I have taken into account the
objects of the Act and
in particular those matters referred to in Ms Murphy’s evidence at [16].
have also considered those matters in s 146(2)(b) and (c) namely the likely
effect of the decision to make the 2024 AAC Award on
the economy in New South
Wales and the fiscal position and outlook of the Government and the likely
effect of the making of the 2024
AAC Award to it. On the basis of the evidence
of Ms Murphy that approximately 529 full time equivalent staff (as at the
commencement
of FY 25/26) will be covered by the 2024 AAC Award, I consider that
the making of the 2024 AAC Award to have a negligible impact.
deciding it is in the public interest to make the 2024 AAC Award, I have also
had due regard to the fact that the parties both
consent to it.
these reasons, I have decided it is appropriate to order the making of the 2024
AAC Award in the terms sought by the Application.
Consequently,
I have also decided that it is appropriate to order that the 2023 Award be
Commission orders that:
(1) NSW Ambulance Administrative and Clerical Employees (State) Award 2024 is
made in the terms sought in the Application; and
(2) NSW Ambulance Administrative and Clerical Employees (State) Award 2023 is
Commissioner
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (256 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter