URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMR/2025/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rasul v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited [2025] NSWPICMR 26; (16 July 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
OF MERIT REVIEWER
Rasul v Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
[2025] NSWPICMR 26
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited
MERIT REVIEWER:
Bianca Montgomery-Hribar
DATE OF DECISION:
16 July 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; statutory
benefits claim; merit review; costs dispute; other costs and expenses; costs
arising from medical assessment matter; occupational
therapist report; report
alleged to have been obtained solely for medical assessment matter; dispute
or necessary; costs of report significantly
exceeded treatment and care subject of medical assessment matter;
proportionality considered;
Allianz Australia Insurance Limited v Rymer
considered;
section 8.10
considered and applied;
AAI Limited v Moon
considered and applied;
–costs of report reasonable and
necessary however significant portion of report addressed issues outside scope
of medical assessment;
claimant entitled to recover partial costs of report from
insurer under
section 8.10.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
the purposes of
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
, the costs
of the Activities of Daily Living Assessment Report prepared by Melissa Sale of
Evidex dated 12 December 2023 are recoverable
in part. The claimant is entitled
to recover 40% of the costs of this report from the insurer.
is no other order as to costs.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
current dispute regards costs arising from a Medical Assessment (Domestic
Assistance) matter.
Relevantly,
Medical Assessor Clive Kenna was asked to resolve a dispute between Afin Rasul
(claimant) and Allianz Insurance (Australia)
Limited (insurer) under Sch 2, s
2(b) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(MAI Act). This dispute
regarded whether the claimant’s request for four weekly cleans of four
hours per service and four fortnightly
cleans of four hours per service is
reasonable and necessary in the circumstances and related to an injury caused by
the accident
(the Medical Assessment Dispute).
decision dated 13 June 2023, the insurer partly approved the claimant’s
request and approved eight fortnightly cleans of
three hours per service,
totalling 24 hours of cleaning over 16 weeks. The insurer determined that any
provision of services beyond
this was not reasonable and necessary.
Accordingly,
in effect, the Medical Assessment Dispute regarded the provision of eight hours
of cleaning, being the difference between
the cleaning services sought by the
claimant (totalling 32 hours) and that approved by the insurer (totalling 24
Assessor Kenna noted that his physical examination indicated that Ms Rasul had
made a reasonable recovery over the past almost
three years, and considered
there had been more than a reasonable provision of domestic assistance. He held
that the request for
future domestic assistance was neither caused by the
accident, nor reasonable or necessary.
Rasul’s legal representatives sought $27,633.53 from the insurer in
respect of the Medical Assessment Dispute, comprised
of $2,191.73 of
professional fees and $25,441.80 of disbursements. The insurer accepted
liability of $3,353.84 and refused to pay
the balance of the costs sought.
Rasul commenced the current proceedings seeking a determination that the insurer
is liable to pay the amount of $21,232.43 in respect
of her costs of the Medical
Assessment Dispute. At the preliminary conference before me on 9 July 2025, the
claimant’s solicitor
conceded that several of the disbursement costs
sought to be recovered were not relevant to the Medical Assessment Dispute. For
purposes of the issue before me, the claimant only pressed recovery of the
Activities of Daily Living Assessment Report prepared
by Melissa Sale of Evidex
dated 12 December 2023 (the Evidex Report), being $8,214.69.
Accordingly,
the current dispute is whether the costs incurred by the claimant by virtue of
obtaining the Evidex Report were reasonable
and necessary.
1(aa) of Schedule 2 of the MAI Act provides that “whether for the purposes
of section 8.10 (Recovery of costs and expenses
in relation to claims for
statutory benefits) the costs and expenses incurred by the claimant are
reasonable and necessary”
is a merit review matter.
RELEVANT LEGISLATION
Medical Assessment Dispute was in respect of the claimant’s statutory
benefits claim.
claimant’s entitlement to recover costs from the insurer is governed by
Part 8 of the MAI Act.
8.10 provides for the recovery of costs and expenses in relation to claims for
statutory benefits and states:
“(1) A claimant for statutory
benefits is (subject to this section) entitled to recover from the insurer
against whom the claim
is made the reasonable and necessary legal costs, and
other costs and expenses, incurred by the claimant in connection with the claim.
Other costs and expenses include the cost of medical and other tests and
(2) The regulations may make provision for or with respect to fixing the
maximum costs and expenses recoverable by a claimant under
this section
(including any matters for which no costs and expenses are recoverable from the
(3) A claimant for statutory benefits is only entitled to recover from the
insurer against whom the claim is made reasonable and
necessary legal costs
incurred by the claimant if payment of those costs is permitted by the
regulations or the Commission.
(4) The Commission can permit payment of legal costs incurred by a claimant
but only if satisfied that—
(a) the claimant is a person under legal incapacity, or
(b) exceptional circumstances exist that justify payment of legal costs
incurred by the claimant.
(5) An insurer is not entitled to recover from a claimant for statutory
benefits any legal costs, or other costs and expenses, of
the insurer in
relation to the claim.”
6 of the Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017 (Regulations) pertains to
costs. Clause 20 of the Regulations provides for “Costs
not regulated by
this Part” and provides:
“Costs referred to in this
Part (Division 4 excepted) do not include any of the following –
(c) fees for reports from health practitioners (other than medical
practitioners),
(d) fees for other professional reports relating to treatment or rehabilitation
(for example, architects’ reports concerning
house modifications),
health practitioner
for the purpose of the Part and Schedule
2, providing that it “has the same meaning as in the Health Practitioner
National Law.
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) 2009
health practitioner
is defined to mean an individual who practises a
health profession.
Health profession
is defined to mean a list of
professions, including (h) occupational therapy.
also draw attention of the parties to the guiding principle contained in s 42 of
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
(the PIC Act). That principle is
that the Personal Injury Commission (Commission) and the parties must co-operate
and facilitate
the just, quick and cost effective resolution of the real issues
in the proceedings.
a party to proceedings in the Commission and an Australian legal practitioner
representing a party in proceedings in the Commission
is under a duty to
co-operate with the Commission to give effect to the guiding principle.
the context of this case, I especially underscore sub-s 42(4). The Commission
and the parties should seek to resolve issues together
in such a way that the
cost to the parties and the Commission is proportionate to the importance and
complexity of the subject matter
of the proceedings.
also briefly note the objects of the MAI Act include, at s 1.3(2)(g), “to
encourage the early resolution of motor accident
claims and the quick, cost
effective and just resolution of disputes”.
the interpretation of a provision of the MAI Act or the Regulations, a
construction that would promote the objects of the MAI Act
or the provision is
to be preferred to a construction that would not promote those objects (s
1.3(4)). In the exercise of a discretion
conferred by a provision of the MAI Act
or the Regulations, the person exercising the discretion must do so in the way
best promote the objects of the MAI Act or of the provision concerned
(s 1.3(5)).
ON THE PAPERS
52(3) of the PIC Act provides:
“(3) If the Commission is
satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with
proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act and enabling
legislation without holding any conference or formal hearing.”
the preliminary conference on 9 July 2025, the parties confirmed they had
nothing further to say in respect of the dispute.
considered s 52 of the PIC Act, Procedural Direction PIC2 and the documents
before me, I am satisfied that I have sufficient
information available to me to
allow me to determine the issues in dispute ‘on the papers’ and
without holding a formal
hearing, and that this is the appropriate course in the
circumstances.
SUBMISSIONS
Claimant’s submissions
claimant relies on written submissions dated 10 June 2025. The claimant’s
legal representative also made oral submissions
at the preliminary conference on
9 July 2025.
claimant’s submissions refer to her physical and psychological injuries
said to be caused by the accident. She submits that
the claimant’s legal
representative is required to investigate the claimant’s injuries and the
necessary and reasonable
prospects of the Medical Assessment Dispute.
claimant recognises that Medical Assessor Kenna held that the request for
domestic assistance was not related to the injury caused
by the accident and not
reasonable and necessary in the circumstances. However, the claimant submits
that the fact she was unsuccessful
in the Medical Assessment Dispute is not
relevant to recovery of her costs.
claimant’s written submissions refer to the correspondence with the
insurer regarding the costs and disbursements sought
in respect of the Medical
Assessment Dispute.
claimant refers to
AAI Limited t/as GIO v Moon
[2020] NSWSC 714
and recognises that, for the costs sought to be
recoverable, they must be reasonable and necessary. The claimant also referred
Barnes v AAI Limited t/as GIO
[2023] NSWPICMR 9
, which held that the
claimant’s solicitor needed to account exactly what work they did and why
it was reasonable and necessary
to be done to advance the claimant’s
medical assessment and review matter.
the preliminary hearing, the claimant’s solicitor made oral submissions
that the Evidex Report was reasonable and necessary
because the claimant’s
instructions were that the amount of cleaning approved by the insurer was not
sufficient. The claimant
submits that it is paramount that solicitors can
investigate a matter and provide legal advice based on their investigations. The
claimant submits that the Evidex Report provides opinion on the claimant’s
degree of incapacity to undertake domestic activities.
claimant submits that the Evidex Report was obtained to dispute the domestic
assistance decision of the insurer. This report was
relied upon to establish the
reasonable and necessary nature of the treatment in dispute, as required by the
was also made to the insurer’s reliance on the Greenlight HC Activities of
Daily Living Assessment Report dated 1
November 2022 (Greenlight Report). It was
submitted that it was reasonable and necessary in the circumstances for the
claimant to
obtain their own report that accounts for her injuries and abilities
to undertake domestic duties, in response to the insurer’s
claimant submits that the Evidex Report was relied upon by the claimant in her
application and was referred to by Medical Assessor
Kenna in his certificate.
claimant refers to s 1.3(2)(b) of the MAI Act and submits that the purpose of
the MAI Act is to provide early and ongoing financial
assistance for persons
injured in motor accidents.
the claimant’s concession that only the costs of the Evidex Report were
pressed, the balance of the claimant’s written
submissions have not been
summarised.
Insurer’s submissions
insurer relies upon written submissions dated 1 July 2025. The insurer’s
legal representative also made oral submissions
at the preliminary conference on
9 July 2025.
insurer notes that the Medical Assessor Kenna determined that the claimed
domestic assistance was not related to the accident
and not reasonable and
necessary. It further submits that the Medical Assessor found that the dispute
had no merit.
insurer submits that the alleged injuries said by the claimant to have been
caused by the accident are misleading. Relevantly,
the insurer submits that the
accident caused a soft tissue injury to the claimant’s lumbar spine (0%
WPI), a soft tissue right
hip injury (2% WPI) and post-traumatic stress disorder
insurer submits that the disbursements sought to be recovered by the claimant
are not reasonable and necessary.
Specifically,
in respect of the Evidex Report, the insurer submits that the Medical Assessor
did not rely on this report in his determination
and that it was of no relevance
to the assessment. The insurer notes that the claim for domestic assistance
insurer submits that the disbursement costs exceeded the value of the claim,
which the insurer describes as a “simple medical
dispute about home
insurer also made oral submissions to this effect, being that the costs of the
Evidex Report were not reasonable and necessary
given they significantly
exceeded the value of the Medical Assessment Dispute.
is noted that the insurer has agreed to pay regulated legal costs and costs
itemised as “clinical notes”.
with the claimant’s submissions, the balance of the written submissions
have not been summarised given the concession by
the claimant that only the
costs of the Evidex Report are pressed.
addition to the submissions of the parties, I have had regard to the bundle of
documents provided by each of the parties in relation
to this application. While
I have considered all documents in the bundles, not all are summarised or
referenced.
Certificate of Determination – Internal
Certificate of Determination – Internal Review of the insurer dated 5
September 2023 maintained the decision to partially
decline the request for
weekly domestic cleaning services.
Relevantly,
the internal reviewer concluded that the provision of weekly cleaning services
is not cost-effective for the purposes
of the MAI Act, and that the request for
was not considered reasonable and necessary.
determination referred to the short-term domestic assistance that had been
previously approved, being the four weekly and four
fortnightly cleaning
services as recommended by Greenlight HC, the claimant’s rehabilitation
provider. The report also noted
that the insurer continued to support
fortnightly cleaning services and that a further eight fortnightly cleaning
services had been
approved by the insurer on 23 June 2023.
determination also referred to the insurer’s approval of the purchase of a
mop and bucket Vieda with refills, Villeda pro
mist with refills, and a robot
vacuum cleaner to assist with the claimant’s day to day activities.
Greenlight Report
have considered the Greenlight HC Activities of Daily Living Assessment Report
dated 1 November 2022. I understand this was prepared
on instruction by the
insurer to address the claimant’s rehabilitation needs. This is supported
by the statement in the “Objective
of Assessment”, which notes:
“Ms Rasul was referred to Greenlight for an initial
assessment of aids/adaptations and/or services that would assist her safety,
independence and optional functional capacity in relation to her performance of
activities of daily living following injury on 30
December 2021”.
“Home Management” it is recorded, in respect of her
“Reported/observed abilities during assessment”
“Reported to be continuing to complete most tasks
but at a reduced frequency and trying to pace tasks, or completing less
thoroughly.
She finds the repetitive bending, twisting and squatting difficult
to manage. Ms Rasul reported that completing the housework now
significant proportion of her available time and energy, and leaves little room
for other tasks, including assisting her
Ms Rasul reported attempting to request assistance from her husband with
limited success; he did organise a cleaner as a one-off,
however found the
service too expensive to continue. Ms Rasul reported she has been relying on her
12-year-old daughter for assistance
but feels this is not appropriate on an
ongoing basis and became teary as she discussed their situation.
Ms Rasul owns a stick vacuum cleaner, however this is insufficient for the
large size of their home.
Recommendations:
services temporarily to free Ms Rasul for attending, treatment and work, and
assist with heavier cleaning tasks
including robot vacuum cleaner, spin mop for thorough cleaning and spray mop for
spot cleaning.”
In terms of “Issues / Barriers Identified”, it is noted:
“Ms Rasul has been struggling to complete household tasks
since the date of injury due to physical and psychological symptoms
sustained in
the MVA as detailed in the report. This is impacting on her capacity to maintain
her pre-MVA life roles including capacity
Ms Rasul presents with limited capacity for managing work hours and tasks,
limited improvements with physical and psychological function
since the date of
injury and limited understanding of injury management and her rights and
obligations within the CTP scheme.”
“Recommendations” it is recorded:
provision of short-term cleaning services, including vacuuming, mopping,
bathroom cleaning and bed linen changes,
to reduce the physical and mental load
on Ms Rasul and facilitate recovery and return to work. Frequency to be weekly x
4 services,
followed by fortnightly x 4 services, at 4 hours per service due to
bed linen changes.
Please note, cleaning services have been approved with Blue Bear Cleaning at
the time of reporting, commenced on 18 October 2022.
An ADL review after 4 weeks
(8 November 2022) is recommended to determine the need for additional weekly
b) The provision of lightweight cleaning equipment to minimise physical demands
of cleaning tasks and support a return to independence
with cleaning:
Lightweight spray mop with removeable and machine-washable pads to facilitate
spot cleans, particularly whilst toilet training youngest
child. Ms Rasul has
already purchased a spray mop as recommended and reimbursement is supported by
Greenlight.
Lightweight spin mop for general mopping Ms Rasul has already purchased a
spin mop as recommended and reimbursement is supported by
Greenlight.
Robot vacuum cleaner for house-wide vacuuming to minimise repetitive
trunk/hip flexion and prolonged standing and to support energy
conservation.
Although Ms Rasul has a stick vacuum cleaner which is helpful for spot cleaning,
it continues to encourage repetitive
and prolonged activity to vacuum the whole
house, even with pacing, thereby limiting her available energy and time for
other activities
including work.”
Evidex Report
have read and considered the Activities of Daily Living report prepared by
Melissa Sale, a Registered Occupational Therapist, of
The Evidex Report was
prepared following a 2.5-hour interview at Ms Rasul’s home, including an
examination of her physical
function, and a review of the documents provided by
the claimant’s solicitors.
Relevantly,
it states that since the accident, Ms Rasul has struggled to perform many of her
usual domestic tasks, receiving gratuitous
support from her daughter and
It also states that, in
addition to gratuitous support, she has received commercially funded domestic
support from her compulsory
third party (CTP) insurer for aspects of the
cleaning, laundry and bed linen
“Domestic activities” it records that Ms Rasul confirmed that she is
independent with cooking and meal preparation
tasks, noting modifications she
has made to her food preparation and meals. It notes that she has trouble
washing dishes up in the
sink due to the degree of standing and bending forward
required. Instead, she uses a dishwasher which she loads / unloads with the
assistance of a small stood. She has assistance from family cleaning items that
cannot go in the dishwasher.
notes she is independent with laundering tasks through pacing and task
modification.
is noted that Ms Rasul has difficulty with bed making and changing due to the
degree of bending / stooping required and that she
is dependent on support from
commercially funded cleaners for assistance with bed making / changes. The
report states that this task
was likely to exacerbate her pain given the degree
of physical handing and forward reaching, stooping and bending required.
respect of cleaning, it notes:
“Ms Rasul is independent with
light to moderate cleaning duties. She can wipe over kitchen benchtops, the
dining table and perform
a general tidy/clean by pacing herself.
She is also able to complete a spot clean of the floors using a lightweight
stick vacuum. For day-to-day cleaning, Ms Rasul relies
on her robotic vacuum
that was provided to her by her CTP insurer.
For large scale cleaning duties including that of the bathroom, toilet, and
floors (mopping), Ms Rasul is dependent on commercially
funded services.
Based on my observations of function, Ms Rasul does not have the capacity for
cleaning duties that require sustained or repetitive
bending, stooping and
low-level cleaning. This includes scrubbing of bathroom floor areas and cleaning
low level areas. She would
also trouble mopping the floors, a task that requires
a degree of sustained forward flexion, a position that currently exacerbates
pain (as noted with her limitations with dish washing tasks).”
it opines that Ms Rasul requires 2.5 hours of heavy cleaning (low level
scrubbing, bathroom cleaning, floors etc) per fortnight,
and bed linen changes
at 30 minutes per fortnight, totalling 1.5 hours of domestic assistance per
Statements of the claimant
bundle of documents contains three statements from the claimant dated 22 July
2022, 14 March 2024 and 3 December 2024. The first
of these statements was
considered by Medical Assessor Kenna and referenced in paragraph 18 of his
statements of the claimant are detailed. The paint a picture of the devastating
impacts she says the accident has had on her life,
and how it has impacted her
work and future study plans. It also describes the impact it has had on her
relationship with her husband,
children and family members. There is a reference
to the claimant’s mother, sister and daughter assisting with cooking and
preparing food, and cleaning the kitchen.
statements are compelling and convey the claimant as a stoic and hard-working
individual. However, there is no explanation for
why the claimant says that the
cleaning approved by the insurer was insufficient. There is also minimal
reference to the cleaning
activities said to be required by the claimant due to
her accident-related injuries.
Medical Assessment Dispute regarded approval of approximately eight hours of
cleaning, being the difference between that approved
by the insurer and that
submitted to be reasonable and necessary by the claimant.
no document before me is it explained by the why the amount of cleaning approved
by the insurer is insufficient. However, that
is not the issue before me.
must be determined is whether, in the context of the Medical Assessment Dispute,
the costs of the Evidex Report are reasonable
and necessary, and incurred in
connect with the claim.
Were the costs incurred by the claimant
in connect with the claim?
, “incur” is “to become liable for or
subject to”, and regards an actual liability to pay. It is not necessary
that the claimant has actually paid the costs, an actual liability to pay is
sufficient.
am satisfied that that the costs of the Evidex Report are liable to be paid by
the claimant, based on the invoice dated 12 December
2023 in the amount of
$8,214.69 which is included in the claimant’s bundle. I note that the
Preliminary Quantum Assessment
section of the report refers to a different
claimant at several points. However, I have assumed these references are
typographical
errors and that this section of the Evidex Report was also
prepared in relation to the claimant.
insurer has not submitted that these costs have not been incurred.
find that the costs of the Evidex Report were incurred by the claimant in
connection with the claim.
Are the costs reasonable and
costs are ‘reasonable and necessary’ is determined on a case-by-case
fact that the claimant was unsuccessful in the Medical Assessment Dispute is not
recognised in
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Rymer
[2025] NSWPICMRP 7
, the issue of proportionality is important. This was not a medical
assessment dispute where the claimant’s entitlement to damages
ongoing statutory benefits was in issue. It was a dispute limited to the
provision of eight hours of domestic assistance.
Accordingly, the reasonableness
and necessity of the Evidex Report must be considered in that context.
note that the claimant initially sought recovery of the costs of a suite of
reports totalling over $20,000. Appropriately, the claimant’s
representative conceded at the preliminary conference that the claimant was only
pressing recovery of the costs of the Evidex
have considered the documents included in the insurer’s bundle and accept
that they evidence medical opinions to support the
insurer’s submission
that the accident caused a soft tissue injury to the claimant’s lumbar
spine (0% WPI), a soft tissue
right hip injury (2% WPI) and post-traumatic
stress disorder (8% WPI). However, I find this is of little relevance to the
issue before
accept that the Medical Assessor does not reference the Evidex Report, save for
a possible reference in paragraph
However, I do not accept the
insurer’s submission that it necessarily follows that the Evidex report
was of no relevance to
the assessment. I find that the Evidex Report may have
assisted the Medical Assessor to determine whether the need for cleaning as
reported by the claimant was accurate and therefore may have been relevant to
the Medical Assessment Dispute, even if not specifically
referenced by the
Medical Assessor.
respect of the claimant’s submission regarding the objects of the MAI Act,
I note that the competing objects and purposes
of the MAI Act are well
recognised.
While I accept
providing early and ongoing financial assistance for persons injured in motor
accidents is one object of the MAI Act,
it must be considered in context of the
other objects, which include, inter alia, to keep premiums affordable (s
1.3(2)(d)), and
to encourage the early resolution of motor accident claims and
the quick, cost effective and just resolution of disputes (s 1.3(2)(g)).
1.3(3)(a) is also important to acknowledge, which states:
must be acknowledged in the application and administration of this
(a) that participants in the third-party insurance scheme have shared and
integrated roles with the overall aim of benefiting all
members of the motoring
public by keeping the overall costs of the scheme within reasonable bounds so as
to keep premiums affordable
and of promoting the recovery and return to work or
other activities of those injured in motor accidents.”
acknowledges that the roles of the parties are integrated. Noting the low
financial value of the Medical Assessment Dispute,
it was open to the insurer to
request a further statement from the claimant if it was not satisfied that the
cleaning approved was
inadequate. Equally, it was open to the claimant to
provide a statement to this effect and to make inquiries of the insurer as to
whether this was adequate before going to the expense of expert evidence.
I consider that a statement from the claimant as to why the approved hours of
cleaning were insufficient may have been a more
appropriate way of establishing
whether the services were reasonable and necessary, this is not how the parties
approached resolution
of this dispute.
claimant’s solicitor submitted that he did not know how else he could have
proceeded with the matter other than to obtain
an occupational therapist report.
accept that the claimant should be able to investigate her claim and not be
prevented from obtaining reports in response to those
obtained by an insurer. I
also accept the insurer’s submission that the Greenlight Report was
commissioned as a rehabilitation
report and provided to the claimant’s
general practitioner, rather than being commission for the purposes of the
Medical Assessment
Dispute. However, given the insurer’s reliance on the
report for the purposes of the Medical Assessment Dispute, I accept the
claimant’s submission that she considered it reasonable and necessary in
the circumstances to obtain an occupational therapist
report in response.
Indeed, I note that the insurer upheld its decision on internal review to deny
the additional cleaning services
by, inter alia, reliance on the Greenlight
accept that the claimant may have considered that obtaining her own activities
of daily living assessment was appropriate to determine
the extent of domestic
assistance she should be provided.
terms of costs, the insurer submitted that the costs of the report exceeded the
costs of the dispute in question, which is a consideration
weighing against a
finding that the report is reasonable and necessary. I agree with this
submission.
claimant’s solicitor conceded that the costs of the Evidex Report were
disproportionately high and that he did not anticipate
an invoice of over
the circumstances, I would have expected that a quote for this type of report
would have first been obtained. The claimant’s
solicitor, an experienced
personal injury lawyer who confirmed that he had used Evidex to prepare similar
reports in the past, should
have had an idea of the usual cost of these reports
and considered whether there was an alternative, more cost appropriate method
obtaining the evidence required.
I find that the costs of the Evidex Report were disproportionately high when
considered in the context of the Medical Assessment
Dispute, this is only one
factor to be considered regarding whether the report is reasonable and
noted above, I accept the claimant’s solicitor’s submission that he
considered that obtaining the Evidex Report was
reasonable and necessary to
understand why the claimant said the approved hours of cleaning was
insufficient. He submitted that he
did not see any other way to progress the
the recommendations of Evidex as to the domestic assistance required by the
claimant, I find that the Evidex Report may have
assisted in resolution of the
matter as between the insurer and the claimant.
Evidex Report was prepared by Melissa Sale, a Registered Occupational Therapist.
I find she is a health practitioner for the purposes
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) 2009
and therefore the fees for
the Evidex Report fall within cl 20 of the Regulations and are not regulated per
s 8.10(2) of the MAI
determining what costs should be allowed, the claimant submits that the Evidex
Report was commissioned solely for the Medical Assessment
Dispute. However, it
was conceded by the claimant’s solicitor at the preliminary conference
that the Evidex Report addresses
issues that go beyond that dispute.
report addresses the claimant’s vocational capacity, driving ability,
occupational therapy service needs, pain management
and other therapies. The
claimant’s likely future occupational therapy needs was also a direct
question raised by the claimant’s
solicitor, being an issue not related to
the Medical Assessment Dispute.
find that the inclusion of these irrelevant aspects were not reasonable and
necessary and would have increased the costs of the
Evidex Report. Accordingly,
I do not consider it is appropriate for the claimant to recover the full costs
of the Evidex Report.
determining the amount that is appropriate, I have considered that the Evidex
Report examines the following aspects, in addition
to the claimant’s
domestic activities, capabilities and future needs: required occupational
therapy, assumed life expectancy,
past gratuitous care, diagnoses and symptoms,
pre-injury status, pre-existing medical history, current home environment,
social situation, physical function, psychological impact of the injury,
experience of pain, personal care, vocational capacity,
and driving. It also
sets out her equipment and home modification needs, occupational therapy service
needs, vocational service needs,
“other therapies” such as exercise
physiology and psychology, and pain management.
I accept that some aspects of these considerations may have had a bearing on the
conclusion of Ms Sale as to the appropriate
hours of domestic assistance
required by the claimant, the Evidex Report goes significantly beyond the bounds
of the Medical Assessment
balance, based on the above, I find that the Evidex Report, in part, was
reasonable and necessary for the purposes of s 8.10 of
the MAI Act. I find it is
appropriate to allow 40% of the costs of the Evidex Report.
Appropriately,
as this is a merit review application in respect of costs, neither party sought
costs in relation to this application,
and I make no orders as to the costs.
OutcomeDocumentSignee
OutcomeDocumentSignature
It is noted that the
Preliminary Quantum Assessment aspects of the Evidex Report prepared by David
Woolf reference a different matter
and claimant. It is assumed these references
are typographical errors and that the report was prepared solely in respect of
the claimant.
Evidex Report at
Evidex Report at
Evidex Report at 5.9.
[109]-[112].
It is unclear whether
this is a reference to the Evidex Report or the Greenlight
See e.g., the comments
of Kirk JA in
Allianz Australia Insurance Ltd v Estate of Late Summer
[2025] NSWCA 85
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (486 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter