URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2018/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Omar [2018] NSWMHRT 4; (21 August 2018)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO OMAR AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
TRIBUNAL ON
17 SEPTEMBER 2018
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2018] NSWMHRT 4
s 46(1) Review of forensic patient
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Judge Richard Cogswell SC
Dr Kristin Kerr
Psychiatrist
Mr Peter Bazzana
Other Member
DATE OF HEARING:
24 May 2018
Forensic Hospital
APPLICATION:
Special Fixture
1. In the Tribunal’s opinion, in this case the phrase “member of
the public” as it appears in
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
does not extend to the members of the public
of a foreign country.
His Honour Judge
Richard Cogswell SC
Dated 21 August 2018
1. This is a review of Mr Omar who is currently
detained in a mental health facility.
2. The Tribunal has set a Special Fixture to hear arguments as to whether the
expression “
any member of the public
” as it appears in
sections 43(a)
(d), is capable of extending to members of the public of
foreign countries.
3. Mr Omar represented himself. Also in attendance were:
Sterry, solicitor for Justice Health and Forensic Mental Health Network;
Mr Rob Rancken,
counsel for the Attorney General;
Ms Lucy Nichols,
solicitor from the Crown Solicitor’s Office
Mr Jonathan
Vasilliou, senior solicitor from the Crown Solicitor’s Office, and
4. Does the expression “member of the public” as it appears in
sections 43(a)
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act
(Forensic Act) extend to members of the public of a foreign country?
This question was reserved for legal argument. That argument
took place before
the Tribunal on 24 May 2018. The question arises in the following circumstances.
5. After a special hearing, the Supreme Court found Mr Omar not guilty on the
ground of mental illness of the offence of manslaughter
and other offences.
6. Mr Omar is therefore a forensic patient under the Forensic Act. He has
been detained in mental health facilities since then.
7. Mr Omar does not want to be in the current facility. Nor does he want
compulsory treatment. He wants to be repatriated to his home
8. Being repatriated to his home country is likely to mean that the Tribunal
would need to unconditionally release Mr Omar.
9. The Tribunal “must not” order a person’s release (with
or without conditions) “unless it is satisfied ...
that ... the safety of
the patient or any
member of the public
will not be seriously endangered
by the patient’s release” (section 43(a) of the Forensic Act). In
addition, amongst
the matters that the Tribunal “must have regard
to” when determining what order to make about a person’s release,
a report by an independent psychiatrist on “whether the safety of the
person or any
member of the public
will be seriously endangered by the
person’s release” (section 74(d) of the same Act). (Emphasis added
in both instances.)
10. Hence, the question arises whether the expression “member of the
public” extends to the public in a foreign country
or is it limited to the
public in Australia, or even in New South Wales.
THE HEARING
11. Mr Omar elected not to be legally represented at the hearing. He appeared
in person at the commencement, read out a statement
to the Tribunal and then
left the hearing room. The hearing proceeded in his absence.
12. The Tribunal received written submissions from Mr Robert Ranken of
counsel (dated 23 April 2018) on behalf of the Attorney General.
received submissions from Mr Gary Forrest (dated 10 May 2018), Chief
Executive of Justice Health & Forensic Mental Health
Network (JH&FMHN).
The Tribunal heard from both Mr Ranken and the solicitor appearing for
JH&FMHN, Mr Michael Sterry.
SUBMISSIONS
13. Mr Ranken argued on behalf of his client that the expression “any
member of the public” extended to a citizen of a
foreign country. He
pointed to the objects of the Forensic Act (in section 40) which particularly
included the issue of “the
safety of members of the public” and to
the fact that section 75(1)(k) of the Act permitted the Tribunal to impose
conditions relating to “overseas or interstate travel”. The
legislation, he said, contemplated conditions related to
a patient who may be
overseas. He pointed to the discretionary power invested in the Tribunal by
section 47 of the Forensic Act and
the requirement for the Tribunal to make a
finding as to the safety of members of the public before it could proceed to
a release application. That requirement is, he argued, a jurisdictional
fact. Section 74 of the Forensic Act governs how the Tribunal
exercises its
discretionary power under section 47 by requiring certain mandatory conditions
to be taken into account. It was not
a discretion at large; it was a discretion
governed by its context which would include the section 40 objects. He pointed
[2017] NSWCA 288
Beazely ACJ pointed out that the
Tribunal’s power is not exercised in a vacuum and the Tribunal makes its
section 43(a) finding
bearing in mind conditions that it would impose (at [85]).
Sections 43 and 47 focus on an outcome: what is the situation going to
regard to the safety of the public including those in another country? He
pointed out that the correctness of the Tribunal’s
decision (by Deputy
President Sperling QC) in
could be doubted for a number of
reasons and also was decided before
[2014] NSWCA 466
contained persuasive
to the contrary by Beazley P and Basten JA. Mr Ranken argued that no
order made by the Tribunal has any application in the foreign
country, so in a
practical way it does not impact on members of the public of a foreign country.
14. Mr Sterry on behalf of JH&FMHN accepted the interpretation of the
legislation put forward by Mr Ranken on behalf of the Attorney
General. Mr
Sterry focused on the evidentiary consequences of such an interpretation. One
agency of his client is the Community Forensic
Mental Health Service (CFMHS).
That agency is usually the one that provides the section 74(d) independent
psychiatric report. He
said that the CFMHS would be looking for direction from
the Tribunal to meet its obligation under section 74(d). He referred to the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. He posed the rhetorical
question whether the present proposal by Mr Omar’s
treating psychiatrist,
was sufficient for the CFMHS or needed enhancement. He posed the question
whether there is a set of indicators
to present to the Tribunal and whether the
patient needs to get to the point of unconditional release in New South Wales or
another standard is applicable that may not comply with what is done in
New South Wales. He reminded the Tribunal that it has conditionally
patients to another country in other cases. He pointed out the prospect of
criticism of the Forensic Mental Health Network
from UN agencies and posed the
rhetorical question of what sort of mental health service is needed to be
available in another country
for the Tribunal to be satisfied that a patient
could be released to that country. He pointed out that some mental health
in New South Wales are reluctant to take on patients such as Mr Omar
who is not an Australian Citizen. On the other hand, there is
institutionalisation in Mr Omar remaining where he is. Resources are being used
up by the continuing detention of Mr Omar
despite his request to be repatriated.
15. In reply, Mr Ranken acknowledged that there needed to be evidence about
the facilities and services available in a foreign country
so that the Tribunal
could determine whether or not any conditions regarding safety of members of its
public would be effective.
The ameliorating impact of any cultural factors
needed also to have an evidentiary basis. Factors such as predictable benefits
Mr Omar of being repatriated can be taken into account by CFMHS but there
needed to be evidence for such factors. Questions raised
by Mr Sterry such as
follow up services in the foreign country and measurement of clinical progress
and risk tolerance in the other
country would also be matters for enquiry and
evidence. He argued that UN criticism was not a relevant consideration and that
availability of resources may not be, except to the extent that the higher
resources are being used instead of those of a different
mental health facility.
He acknowledged that enforceability of conditions was virtually impossible and
the Tribunal was confronted
by the fact that Mr Omar himself refused to go into
a secure mental health facility in his home country.
16. In his reply, Mr Sterry acknowledged that Mr Omar’s level of risk
is probably lower than that required for detention in
his current placement.
17. Mr Ranken argued that there may be difficulties with Mr Omar obtaining
leave from a medium secure facility because of his non-citizen
status. (However
the Tribunal is aware of at least one other non-citizen forensic patient at a
medium secure unit who has access
CONSIDERATION OF ATTORNEY
GENERAL’S SUBMISSIONS
18. It should be noted at the outset that the Tribunal did not have the
benefit of a contradictor in this case. Mr Ranken’s
submissions on behalf
of the Attorney General are cogent and persuasive. On the central legal issue,
Mr Sterry agreed with them.
However, on a close examination, the Tribunal has
concluded that they ought not to be accepted.
19. Mr Ranken
pointed to Deputy President Sperling QC’s reliance on the presumption of
statutory construction “that legislation
is not intended to deal with
matters occurring beyond the territorial limits of the locality in relation to
which the particular
legislation is constituted” and its statutory
equivalent in
Interpretation Act 1987
. Mr Ranken referred to the
learned Deputy President’s reasons and some of the authorities referred to
by his Honour.
20. Mr Ranken argued that the “correctness of the learned Deputy
President’s reasoning respectfully may be doubted”
on three grounds.
First, he said that a construction of the relevant provisions that requires a
Tribunal to have regard to the safety
of members of the public in another
country “does not involve a trespass upon that other sovereign
state’s legislative
purview.” There is no order applying to another
person in another country: the provisions “simply recognise ... that
order for the release of a forensic patient with a view to repatriation to
another country may have an impact on the safety of
the members of that other
21. Mr Ranken’s point is correct so far as it goes. It is a point more
extraterritorial
effect. However, a further question is the statutory one whether the
applicability of
to the phrase “member of the public” has
been displaced. Mr Omar is not an Australian citizen travelling interstate.
is not even an Australian citizen travelling overseas for a period of time
before returning to Australia. Mr Omar is a non-citizen
(of Australia) and he is
going to return to live in the country where he was born. He is being
repatriated, as the learned Deputy
President pointed out about Mr Ban. If Mr
Omar wanted to return to Australia, he would be regarded as a person with a
“substantial
criminal record”
(section 501
Migration Act
(Cth), subss (6) and (7)(e)). These are circumstances that do not
warrant, in the Tribunal’s opinion, overriding the presumption
Interpretation Act
that “members of the
public” constitute, as a category, a “matter or thing in and of New
South Wales.” This
is to be contrasted with the situation where an
Australian patient may travel interstate within Australia. Adopting the
explanation
used by the learned authors of
Statutory Interpretation in
the “concept
of the federal system, the homogeneity of the population, the frequent movement
of people between states and the
commonality of problems of meeting a common and
cooperative solution point to the presumption being more readily
(at 220, [5.9]). Although those remarks were made in the
context of the common law presumption that legislation is presumed not to
an extraterritorial effect, it applies with equal force, in the Tribunal’s
opinion, to the applicability of
Interpretation Act
Likewise the presumption would be more readily displaced in a case where a
forensic patient was travelling overseas for a period
of time with the intention
to return to New South Wales.
22. The second reason advanced by Mr Ranken for doubting the correctness of
the reasoning in
points to section 75(1)(k) of the Forensic
Act. The Tribunal would make its determination on the assumption that it
could impose conditions relating to overseas travel. For
example, points out Mr
Ranken, the Tribunal would have to take into account people in overseas
countries visited by a forensic patient
on conditional release. Because it would
apply in such an instance, “there is no reason why the phrase should not
be so construed
when considering the unconditional release of a forensic patient
with a view to repatriation to another country.”
23. One reason for not so construing the phrase in the case of repatriation
is that advanced above regarding Mr Ranken’s first
point. It is important
to appreciate that section 75(1)(k) has an effective operation falling short of
the circumstances of this
case. The phrase which is the subject of construction
is contained in mental health legislation. Unrestricted overseas or interstate
travel could bring with it a risk that a forensic patient would become unwell
while travelling. This could be because the patient
is using travel as an escape
from restrictions of their conditional release (for example, remaining drug free
or taking prescribed
medications). The experience of the Tribunal suggests that
travelling could be unsettling for people with mental health difficulties
its concomitant sleep deprivation, time changes or new and stressful experiences
which could lead them to become unwell. In
that context, section 75(1)(k)
permits the Tribunal to regulate interstate or overseas travel in a way that
protects the safety of
the NSW public when a forensic patient returns to the
state. Anyone who is an Australian citizen or resident has the right of return.
Reading the section 75(1)(k) provision of conditions for “overseas or
interstate travel” in that way gives it a good
deal of utility without
displacing the presumption contained in
Interpretation
. On the other hand, the presumption would be more readily displaced in
the case of a forensic patient who is conditionally or unconditionally
to live interstate. That is because of Australia’s federal system, of
which at NSW is part, for the reasons articulated
by the learned authors of
Statutory Interpretation in Australia
quoted above.
24. Mr Ranken’s third argument was to point to Deputy President
Sperling QC’s consideration of the safety of members of
the public of
another country as a discretionary factor in
. Mr Ranken points
out that the opening words of section 74 of the Forensic Act expressly remove
any limit to “any other matters
the Tribunal may consider” so
“there is no good reason why the learned Deputy President’s
observations concerning
the relevance of the safety of members of the public in
another country to the Tribunal’s exercise of the discretion should
apply with equal force at least to the consideration in section 74(b) and (d),
if not section 43(a) as well.” But there
is a good reason why the
discretionary considerations of the learned Deputy President ought not to be
applied to section 74 and section
43; that good reason is the statutory
presumption contained in
Interpretation Act
presumption is more likely appropriately displaced by the
legislature’s grant of a broad discretion in the opening words of
than to the specific phrase “member of the public” in a case
where a forensic patient is being repatriated to another
25. Finally, Mr Ranken refers to the
remarks by Beazley P in
(at [52]) in the following terms:
“The Attorney General submitted that the reference to ‘any
member of the public’ in
included the public in both New South
Wales and Queensland. The Tribunal accepted this submission, given that, at the
time of his
arrival in Queensland, XY would still be subject to the New South
Wales Order. This was not in dispute on the appeal. It should be
said, however,
that any member of ‘the public’ in s 43(a) may extend to any member
of the public with whom the patient
comes or may come into contact with. For
example, if the Tribunal was considering conditional release to enable a patient
overseas, any member of ‘the public’ would presumably
encompass persons encountered in the course of travelling and whilst
26. In the same case, as Mr Ranken points out, Basten JA made observations at
[163]-[164] which were set out in his (Mr Ranken’s)
submissions. In the
circumstances of that case, the Tribunal’s finding that “any member
of the public” included
interstate public was not challenged in the Court
of Appeal. Mr Ranken pointed out that Basten JA went on to further
“It should not, however, be treated as a restrictive finding. The
phrase is apt to cover members of the public anywhere in Australia
and, indeed,
may well extend to other countries. It is by no means clear that the Tribunal
could properly disregard the consequences
of the unconditional release of a
forensic patient due to depart for a foreign country.”
27. Mr Ranken pointed out that in
, Beazley ACJ “cited
each of the above passages from
with apparent approval.”
Mr Ranken acknowledged that while the remarks were “strictly obiter dicta,
they support the
submissions ... above and are persuasive.”
28. The Tribunal notes that Beazley P’s example was the Tribunal
“considering conditional release to enable a patient
overseas” encompassing “persons encountered in the course of
travelling overseas.” That is, with respect
to her Honour, consistent with
the Tribunal’s concern for the public in NSW because her Honour’s
example was one of conditional
release which suggests a return to Australia.
That point cannot be taken, of course, regarding Basten JA’s example which
one of “the unconditional release of a forensic patient due to depart
for a foreign country.” The Tribunal takes some
comfort from the fact that
his Honour acknowledged that the issue in the Court of Appeal had been the
subject of a concession and
was therefore not fully argued in that Court. The
Tribunal accepts, with great respect to Basten JA, that his Honour’s
observation
is, as Mr Ranken points out, “persuasive.” But the
Tribunal respectfully regards the considerations advanced above to
persuasive and to point to the non-displacement in this case of the statutory
presumption contained in
Interpretation
CONSIDERATION OF JH&FMHN SUBMISSIONS
section 74(d)
, the CFMHS has to report on three things:
the condition of
the patient;
whether the
safety of the patient will be seriously endangered by the patient’s
release, and
whether the
safety of any member of the public will be seriously endangered by the
patient’s release.
30. The release of course may be conditional or unconditional. The
“proposed release” envisaged by
section 74(d)
is usually recommended
by the patient’s treating team which will make a case for release in their
own reports. It may be sought
on behalf of the patient by the patient’s
lawyer. In the case of such a “proposed release”, the CFMHS must
its report on the three topics. In practical terms, either the patient,
the patient’s treating team or the patient’s
lawyer (or any
combination) will provide the proposal (conditional or unconditional release)
and the kinds of conditions envisaged
if it is conditional release that is
sought. CFMHS will then undertake its statutory function of reporting on the
three topics. In
the CFMHS report, the forensic psychiatrist (or other person)
may express the opinion that no one’s safety will be “seriously
endangered” by the patient’s release. Or the author may say that if
certain conditions are in place, then no one’s
safety will be seriously
endangered. CFMHS reports often recommend conditions. If a patient is being
proposed for conditional release
within New South Wales, then the report may
refer to local services and facilities that the author knows are available
NSW community. If the proposed conditional release is to a foreign
country, then the CFMHS report author may need to express the
conditions in more
generic terms. For example, supervision (by a health professional or not), the
regular administration of medication
and the requirement that the patient take
that medication or the conduct of tests such as drug screening. In any given
would expect it to be in the interests of the person proposing release
(patient, treating team or lawyer) to provide information
facilities that are available in the foreign country or, at least, information
in the foreign country who will be responsible for
the patient on their release. CFMHS may then make their own enquiries regarding
the reliability and security of the supervision regime. The ameliorating effect
of family or culture on the risk posed by the patient
may be something which it
would be in the interests of the patient to source and put before the CFMHS.
31. The Tribunal, for the reasons above, does not accept Mr Ranken’s
argument, despite its cogency and adoption by Mr Sterry.
DETERMINATION
32. Accordingly, in the Tribunal’s opinion, in this case the phrase
“member of the public” as it appears in
and s 74(d) of the
Forensic Act does not extend to the members of the public of a foreign country.
His Honour Judge Richard Cogswell
Dated 21 August
Section 12 provides as follows:
References to New South Wales to be
(1) In any Act or instrument:
(a) a reference to an officer, office or statutory body is a reference
to such an officer, office or statutory body in and for New
South Wales, and
(b) a reference to a locality, jurisdiction or other matter or
thing is a reference to such a locality, jurisdiction or other matter
in and of New South Wales.
(2) In any Act or instrument, a reference to a body constituted by or
under an Act or instrument need not include the words “New
Wales” or “of New South Wales” merely because those words form
part of the body’s name or
Emeritus Professor Pearce
and Adjunct Professor Geddes
Edition, 2014
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (386 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter