URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/435.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v 2 Types Constructions Pty Ltd [2025] NSWDC 435 (29 October 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v 2 Types Constructions Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 435
Hearing Date(s):
21 October 2025
Date of Orders:
29 October 2025
Decision Date:
29 October 2025
Russell SC DCJ
(1) 2 Types Constructions Pty Ltd is
(2) The appropriate fine is $360,000 but that
will be reduced by 25% to reflect the early plea of
(3) Order 2 Types Constructions Pty Ltd to pay a
fine of $270,000.
(4) Order pursuant to
Section 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) that 50% of the fine is to be paid to the
prosecutor.
(5) Order 2 Types Constructions Pty Ltd to pay
the prosecutor’s costs.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW – prosecution – work health and safety –
duty of persons undertaking business – risk of death
SENTENCE – objective seriousness – mitigating
factors – aggravating factors – plea of guilty – general
deterrence – specific deterrence – capacity to pay appropriate
COSTS – prosecution costs
fall from height – roofing work – fall through unprotected skylight
– unauthorised access to roof
– no measures to prevent unauthorised
access to roof
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Cases Cited:
Baumer v R [1988] HCA 67; (1988) 166 CLR 51
Bulga Underground Operations
Pty Limited v Nash
[2016] NSWCCA 37
; (2016) 93 NSWLR 338
[2011] NSWCCA
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
NSWIRComm 71
; (2000) 49 NSWLR 610
Mahdi Jahandideh v The Queen
[2014] NSWCCA
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
(2011) 244 CLR 120
Nash v Silver
City Drilling (NSW) Pty Limited; Attorney General for NSW v Silver City Drilling
(NSW) Pty Limited [2017] NSWCCA 96
R v McNaughton
[2006] NSWCCA 242
66 NSWLR 566
R v Wilkinson (No. 5)
[2009] NSWSC 432
Unity Pty Limited v
SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
Veen v The Queen (No. 2)
[1988] HCA 14
164 CLR 465
Texts Cited:
SafeWork NSW, Code of Practice - Construction Work, August 2019
NSW, Code of Practice - Managing the risk of falls in the workplace, August
SafeWork NSW, Safety Alert - Work Safely at heights in construction, 28
SafeWork NSW, Safety Alert Fall through plastic skylight panel, 6
December 2019
SafeWork NSW, Safety Alert Falls through skylights and plastic
roof sheeting safety alert, 6 July 2020
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
2 Types Constructions Pty Ltd
(Defendant)
Representation:
K Curry (Prosecutor)
(Defendant)
Solicitors:
Department of Customer Service
(Prosecutor)
Holman Webb (Defendant)
File Number(s):
2024/144764
project manage the refurbishment of a school building
which included upgrading
the existing roof. MB Master Builders Pty Ltd (MB) was contracted to remove
asbestos containing materials
from the building. Mr Omar Malas (Mr Malas), who
was employed by MB to perform truck driving and general labour services,
the roof. He fell approximately four metres through an unprotected
skylight to the concrete floor below and suffered serious injuries.
and safety duty pursuant to
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(NSW) (the WHS Act) it failed to comply with that duty and thereby exposed Mr
Malas to a risk of death or serious injury contrary
to s 32 of the WHS Act.
maximum penalty for the offence is a fine of $1,782,579.
risk described in par 16 of Annexure A of the Amended Summons is as follows:
“The risk was the risk of workers, in particular Mr Malas, suffering
serious injury or death as a result of falling from a
height through skylights
at the site.”
Reasonably Practicable Measures
17 of Annexure A of the Amended Summons pleads particulars of the
defendant’s failure to comply with the duty under
s 19(1) of the WHS Act
as follows:
“The defendant failed to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the
health and safety of workers, in particular Mr Malas,
in that it failed to take
one or more of the following reasonably practicable measures, to eliminate, or
alternatively minimise if
it was not reasonably practicable to eliminate, the
(a) Undertaking a risk assessment, or an adequate risk assessment, for the
roofing works that identified the risk of a fall through
a plastic or perspex
skylight, assessed the risk and determined the most effective control measures
to manage the risk;
(b) Install a temporary barrier at the top or bottom of the scaffold stairs,
including signage to restrict unauthorised workers access
to the roof;
(c) Implement or verify control measures in place to protect against the risk,
i. Covering the skylights with material strong enough to prevent people falling
through them, for example plywood boxes marked with
warning signs; or
ii. Erecting a guardrail around the skylights;
(d) Developing, implementing and enforcing a Safe Work Method Statement (SWMS)
for the work that identified the hazard of the skylight
and described the
measures to be implemented to manage the hazard (or alternatively, requiring its
subcontractor MB to develop, implement
and enforce a SWMS for the work that
identified the hazard of the skylight and described the measures to be
implemented to manage
the hazard) such as:
i. Covering the skylights with material strong enough to prevent people falling
through them, for example plywood boxes marked with
warning signs; or
ii. Erecting a guardrail around the skylights;
(e) Require MB to complete WAH permits while carrying out work on the roof;
(f) Providing information, training and instruction to workers about working at
heights and the hazard of the skylights and the measures
implemented to guard
against them.”
parties presented a Statement of Agreed Facts (PX 1, Tab 2) and this material is
summarised below.
buildings and grounds.
Shannon Andrews was Operations Director and Mr Luke Richardson was Managing
Director of 2 Types.
The Workplace
NSW (the Site). The Site was a “workplace”
within the meaning of
section 8 of the WHS Act.
Catholic Schools Limited engaged 2 Types in or around December 2021 as the
principal contractor to project manage the refurbishment
of a building at the
Site. The minor works agreement set out the scope of works which included
upgrading the existing roof, replacing
roof sheeting, installing flashings for
existing roof equipment and penetrations, and refurbishment of classrooms
including new ceilings
and carpets.
was contracted by 2 Types to remove asbestos containing materials from the
building and carry out demolition work on the roof.
scope of MB’s work also included the removal of skylights, ceilings,
cabling, and roof sheeting. The removal of the roof
sheeting was to be done in
stages. The purchase order specified that a job-specific Safe Work Method
Statement (SWMS)
was to be provided prior to site commencement.
Malas was employed by MB to perform truck driving and general labour services.
His role was to drive a truck and remove rubbish
from the Site every few days.
Mr Malas is the uncle of Mr Mustafa Malas, the sole director of MB.
Malas commenced employment at MB on 16 October 2021 and usually worked
approximately 8 hours per week. He was 72 years old at the
time of the
work to remove the roof sheets commenced on 5 April 2022.
19 April 2022 several sections of the building’s roof had been removed and
timber sheets and tarps were placed over the roof
area to prevent rain damage to
the inside of the building.
The Incident
19 April 2022 Mr Malas was at the Site carrying out his work as an employee of
Malas used the existing scaffold to access the roof. Mr Malas does not recall
why he was on the roof, but it is understood from
witnesses that he was looking
for lost keys.
Mustafa Malas had previously instructed Mr Malas not to access the roof. Mr
Malas knew and agreed that he was prohibited from accessing
and entering the
were three skylights on the roof, each measuring 1150mm x 1150mm and made from
3mm plastic material. On the day of the Incident,
none of the skylights were
covered or barricaded and there was no safety mesh under the roof.
on the roof, Mr Malas fell approximately four metres through an unprotected
skylight to the concrete floor below.
Malas was treated on Site and transported by ambulance to hospital. He was put
into an induced coma with a fractured eye socket,
broken wrists, and a broken
System of Work
were no covers over the skylights to prevent falls through them, or safety mesh
under the roof cladding. There were no measures
in place to prevent unauthorised
access to the roof when work was not being conducted.
in place for the Site. The
Plan contained measures to manage construction hazards. It stated that falls
from heights (Part 9.6) were
to be managed as follows:
(1) all work to be completed on the ground or a solid work surface, such as an
elevated work platform;
(2) but if not reasonably practicable, provide fall prevention devices, such as
secure fencing and edge protection;
(3) but if not reasonably practicable, provide a fall arrest system.
leading edge of the roof was open and had no edge protection or barrier
installed. There was some edge protection installed along
the perimeter of the
roof, including near the scaffolding.
from SafeWork. 2 Types also made admissions that
no work at heights permits were
completed for the removal of the roof sheets in accordance with the Plan.
had two SWMSs, however, neither addressed the risk of falls. These had been
reviewed by 2 Types, but no feedback was provided.
2 Types Site Plan referred to a 2 Types SWMS for working at height. However,
this was not produced in response to notices issued
to 2 Types. The only SWMS
received by SafeWork was from MB.
the Plan, workers were to be inducted to the Site by 2 Types.
had been inducted to the Site by 2 Types, however these inductions were generic
and did not address the Site-specific risks.
Malas had been instructed not to go onto the roof by Mr Mustafa
Guidance Material
material was available to 2 Types in relation to controlling the risk of death
or serious injury associated with falling
from a height while working at the
SafeWork NSW,
Code of Practice - Construction Work
, August 2019
(Construction Code) and the
Code of Practice - Managing the risk of falls in
the workplace
, August 2019 (Risk of Falls Code) were published and available
to 2 Types prior to the incident.
Construction Code provided “practical guidance for PCBUs on how to
eliminate, or if that is not possible, minimise the risks
relating to
construction work”. These included risks relating to falling from heights.
Measures to manage the risks included
providing a secure barrier, setting up
exclusion zones that prohibit persons from entering, and erecting catch
platforms and/or nets.
Risk of Falls Code contained further guidance on “minimising the risk of
falls from height in workplaces”. This Code
provided clear guidance for
identifying fall hazards, including falls through brittle roofing materials and
skylights. This Code
specifically stated that particular attention should be
given to work tasks that are carried out on or alongside a fragile surface
as brittle roofs and skylights.
Safety Alert - Fall through plastic skylight panel
, 6 December 2019
outlined an incident where a worker was injured after falling from height
through a plastic roof-panel on a worksite.
It provided guidance on identifying
risks relating to falls from height, and methods to mitigate the hazard.
Safety Alert - Falls through skylights and plastic roof sheeting safety
, 6 July 2020
outlined a similar incident in which two workers
received serious injuries after falling through a skylight and plastic roof
It provided guidance as to identifying and minimising risks of falling
when working near skylights and plastic roof sheeting.
Safety Alert - Work Safely at heights in construction
, 28 March 2022
provided further guidance as to necessary SWMSs and procedures required in the
workplace when working from heights
over two metres.
interactions with SafeWork
had interactions with 2 Types on previous occasions shortly prior to the
Incident, in relation to falls from height and fall
requirements.
SafeWork inspector visited the premises of Eastern Portable Buildings Pty Ltd
(Eastern Portable)
on 21 March 2022 and met with Mr Dane Dreyer, a 2
was subcontracting to Eastern Portable, constructing portable buildings at the
site. The Inspector identified that there was no current
system of work for high
risk working at heights during construction of the modular buildings. There was
no SWMS for the works that
were being carried out. Risks were observed relating
to working at heights without edge protection and fall arrest systems.
24 March 2022 the Inspector provided advice to 2 Types, including to Mr Andrews,
in relation to falls from height and fall protection
requirements. Mr Andrews
was asked to develop or update a SWMS for fall from heights above two
Prohibition Notices
issued two Prohibition Notices to 2 Types following the incident.
19 April 2022 SafeWork issued Prohibition Notice 58205, which required 2 Types
to cease allowing access to the roof area until
an Inspector was satisfied that
the risk to workers had been remedied. This included fixing secured covers over
the skylights to
prevent a fall from height.
19 April 2022 SafeWork also issued Prohibition Notice 58206, which required 2
until an Inspector was
satisfied that risks to workers had been remedied. This involved developing a
safe system of work, as 2 Types
could not provide a SWMS or other documentation
to show that the risk of falls from two metres had been
Systems of Work Following the Incident
response to Prohibition Notice 58205, 2 Types installed ply covers over all 3
skylights and marked them “Do not walk”.
response to Prohibition Notice 58206, 2 Types engaged a roofing contractor who
developed a SWMS that addressed the risk of falls
from height. The control
measures included installing a catch platform below the bottom chords of the
roof trusses and fall restraint.
response to the Incident 2 Types also:
(1) Erected ‘No entry’ signs at the top of the scaffold and
installed a physical barrier.
(2) Conducted and documented weekly toolbox talks.
(3) Completed “Take 5” checklists for all tradespeople.
(4) Re-inducted all workers to the site.
6 May 2022 SafeWork confirmed that Prohibition Notice 58205 and 58206 had been
complied with.
the Incident, Sydney Catholic Schools engaged an independent safety auditor to
inspect the construction works to identify
WHS hazards and recommend
improvements.
Evidence for the Defendant
Luke Richardson affirmed an affidavit on 9 October 2025 (DX 1). Mr Richardson is
the managing director and founding partner of
Richardson outlined his qualifications and experience related to carpentry and
construction. Mr Richardson has considerable experience
in government projects.
significant incident that 2 Types have had on site. 2 Types
have only had one
other interaction with SafeWork which was referred to at par 41 of the Statement
of Agreed Facts.
Inspectors.
Statement of Regret
behalf of 2 Types, Mr Richardson deeply regretted the circumstances that led to
the serious injury to Mr Malas on 19 April 2022.
Richardson recognised that as the principal contractor 2 Types should have done
more to recognise the risk that eventuated and
to protect persons from falls
through skylights and to prevent unauthorised access to the scaffold.
behalf of 2 Types, Mr Richardson unreservedly apologised to Mr Malas, his
family, all the workers who were there and could have
been affected, and the
Court for what happened.
the incident Mr Richarson had made attempts to keep in touch with Mr Malas. He
had made several calls to him to enquire of his
health, most recently on 14
April 2025.
Background to Company and Safety in the
construction of modular buildings for schools and
commercial businesses.
Richardson set out the background and history of 2 Types. This included a
history of 2 Types’ safety systems.
Richardson explained that it had always been 2 Types’ intention to operate
as Tier 1 safety conscious principal contractors,
even if they were not
considered Tier 1 by the industry.
Richardson took a small loan from his parents to cover the cost of engaging Mel
Crookes and Associates to develop a safety, environmental
and quality system.
sub-contractors refused to work with 2 Types because they needed to be
well-resourced to meet the 2 Types safety standards.
2020 2 Types partnered with ISO Safe to develop an integrated safety,
environment and quality system. As a result 2 Types achieved
the following ISO
accreditations for the first time on 27 September 2021:
(1) ISO 45001:2018 (Occupational Health and Safety),
(2) ISO 9001:2015 (Quality Management),
(3) ISO 14001:2015 (Environmental Management).
The ISO accreditations have been maintained since.
part of the ISO Accreditation, annual audits are conducted by ISO Safe, which
provide feedback and plan corrective actions to maintain
the safety systems. 2
Changes to the Business
Modstruct Group Pty Ltd (Modstruct).
construction of modular buildings) were incorporated.
The purpose of this was so
that the separate risks associated with the construction of modular buildings
could be equally shared
and better managed.
uses the 2 Types safety systems. These are managed by ISO Safe.
Richardson is responsible for the day-to-day management of the safety,
environmental and quality systems. He relies on ISO Safe
to ensure that
Modstruct is advised and updated on changes. ISO Safe sends Mr Richardson
updates which he turns into company-wide
updates which are presented as toolbox
talks and other safety alerts.
Richardson set out the safety training provided to workers and costs related to
workplace safety.
The Safety System
main components of the 2 Types safety system included:
(1) All workers were required to be adequately trained before they attended
site, including first aid training, working at heights
and elevated work
platform training.
(2) All workers were required to be inducted to site, and each site had
site-specific Safety Rules, which workers were trained on.
(3) Monthly and weekly toolbox talks.
(4) Daily Take-5s were completed on each site.
(5) WhatsApp was used to communicate safety messages to all staff in a timely
manner. Messages were capable of being communicated
without waiting for the next
weekly toolbox talk.
(6) The platform “Procore” was used to maintain training records and
as a portal for all important site documents, templates
and contracts.
Specifically, the system called “workforce management”, from the
Procore management tool, was used. This
acts like a training matrix.
(7) ISO Safe was engaged to provide advice, feedback and management services to
ensure that the system remained compliant and up
(8) 2 Types followed the SafeWork LinkedIn page and gathered information on
industry news to share around the company.
Changes to the systems
the incident, 2 Types took immediate action to make changes to its systems on
how it treated skylights and other risks relating
to falling from heights. These
changes included:
(1) Improving Site signage, including the warning about unauthorised access to
(2) Reviewing all skylights on the Site to prevent further incidents.
(3) Reviewing live edges to prevent falls from unprotected edges; part of this
review was to create a guardrail-edge protection installation
(4) Conducting a review of SWMSs and retraining on the SWMS to ensure that all
relevant risks, as far as reasonably foreseeable,
were identified.
(5) Issuing a safety memo after the incident to remind workers of the dangers of
falling from heights.
(6) Conducting toolbox talks to reiterate that no one should work alone on
roofs, and to increase general awareness for working at
heights safety.
review of all skylights on Site resulted in:
(1) Identifying all the skylights and covering them with weight-bearing
(2) Retraining workers and raising awareness of the dangers of skylights,
including when they are not protected. This involved a
toolbox talk discussing
the incident.
(3) Rewriting the SWMS for working at heights and re-inducting all workers into
with a spring-swing gate that can be locked. The issue
of a chain being removed
or not replaced when someone goes through it is eliminated by a self-closing
skylights and from edges without protection has increased.
Modstruct, additional changes have been implemented:
(1) Changing the manufacturing process of the modular buildings to reduce the
size of the purlins and including a full handrail system
around the roof so that
the risks associated with the use of fall arrest harnesses are eliminated.
(2) Establishing a system to provide feedback to subcontractors when they
produce their SWMSs to Modstruct. Previously, SWMSs from
subcontractors were
collected and marked as such, but 2 Types did not have a system to check for
missing risks.
Model Corporate Citizenship
football teams.
Consideration
have had regard to the objects in s 3 of the WHS Act
and the purposes of
sentencing set out in
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) (CSP Act).
Objective Seriousness of the Offence
proportionality principle requires that a sentence should neither exceed nor be
less than the gravity of the crime having regard
to the objective circumstances:
Veen v The Queen (No. 2)
[1988] HCA 14
; (1988) 164 CLR 465 at 472, 485-6,
490-1 and 496. At common law, the term “objective circumstances” was
used to describe
the circumstances of the crime. The gravity of the offence was
assessed by reference to its objective seriousness:
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
task requires the court to consider where in the range of conduct covered by the
offence the conduct of the offender falls:
[1988] HCA 67;
(1988) 166 CLR 51 at 57. This assessment will generally indicate the appropriate
range of sentences available which
will reflect the objective seriousness of the
offence committed, and set the limits within which a sentence proportional to
the criminality
of the offender will lie:
[2011] NSWCCA 176
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
(2011) 244 CLR 120
Court said:
“The objective seriousness of an offence is to be assessed without
reference to matters personal to a particular offender or
class of offenders. It
is to be determined wholly by reference to the nature of the offending.”
sentencing judge should take into account not only the conduct which actually
constitutes the crime, but also such of the surrounding
circumstances as are
directly related to that crime and are properly regarded as circumstances of
aggravation or mitigation:
R v Wilkinson
[2009] NSWSC 432
existence of a reasonably foreseeable risk to safety that is likely to result in
serious injury or death is a factor relative
to the gravity of the offence:
Capral Aluminium Limited v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
NSWIRComm 71
; (2000) 49 NSWLR 610 at
. The question of foreseeability of the
risk is to be determined objectively.
court must identify all the factors that are relevant to the sentence, discuss
their significance and then make a value judgment
as to what is the appropriate
sentence given all the factors of the case:
. This approach to
sentencing, known as the “instinctive synthesis” approach, involves
the making of a global judgment
without any attempt to state precisely how any
given factor has influenced the judgment.
Court of Criminal Appeal has examined the sentencing process with regard to the
WHS Act in the matter of
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Limited
Attorney General for NSW v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Limited
NSWCCA 96. Justice Basten at [34], under the heading “Assessment of
Risk” said:
“The sentencing judge commenced his consideration with the proposition
that ‘greater culpability attaches to the failure
to guard against an
event the occurrence of which is probable rather than an event the occurrence of
which is extremely unlikely’.
However the truth of that proposition
depends upon other considerations including (a) the potential consequences of
the risk, which
may be mild or catastrophic, (b) the availability of steps
to lessen, minimise or remove the risk, and (c) whether such steps are
complex and burdensome or only mildly inconvenient. Relative culpability depends
on assessment of all those factors.”
at [42] his Honour continued:
“The culpability of the Respondent is not necessarily to be determined by
the remoteness of the risk occurring, nor by a step‑by‑step
assessment of the various elements. Culpability will turn upon an overall
evaluation of various factors, which may pull in different
directions.
Culpability in this case is reasonably high because, even if the [event] which
occurred might not be expected to occur
often, the seriousness of the
foreseeable resultant harm is extreme and the steps to be taken to avoid it,
which were not even assessed,
were straightforward and involved only minor
inconvenience and little, if any, costs.”
[53] his Honour dealt with the proper approach to considering the objective
seriousness of offences under the WHS Act, saying:
“It is important to note that the risk to be assessed is not the risk of
the consequence, to the extent that a worker is in
fact injured, but is the risk
arising from the failure to take reasonably practicable steps to avoid the
injury occurring. To discount
the seriousness of the risk by reference to the
unlikelihood of injury resulting is apt to lead to error. The conduct in
is the failure to respond to a risk of injury, conduct which will be
more serious, the more serious the potential injuries, whether
or not they are
likely to materialize. The objective seriousness of the conduct will also be
affected by the ease with which mitigating
steps could have been taken.”
findings about the defendant’s level of culpability are based upon the
(1) The risk of a fall from height was known to 2 Types. Further, the risk was
identified by readily available guidance material.
(2) There was previous contact with a SafeWork inspector on another site which
specifically drew attention to the failings of the
2 Types system for working at
height. Yet nothing adequate was done.
(3) The likelihood of the risk occurring was significant.
(4) The potential consequences of the risk were death or serious injury.
(5) There were simple and effective steps to eliminate or minimise the risk.
(6) There was no burden or inconvenience of those steps being implemented.
(7) Serious harm was caused to Mr Malas.
(8) The maximum penalty for the offence is a fine of $1,782,579, which reflects
the legislature’s view of the seriousness of
the offence.
(9) Counsel for 2 Types submitted (MFI 2, par 46) that “the culpability of
the Defendant must be evaluated by the contribution
of MB”. The only
“contribution” identified in the submission was that Mr Malas, who
had been prohibited from accessing
the roof by MB, went up there anyway. Both 2
means of accessing the roof but then failed to control such access. Further,
it was 2 Types which had the power and duty to cover
the skylights; require a
proper SWMS; require working at heights permits; and warn all workers about the
hazard posed by fragile,
brittle plastic skylights.
find that the level of culpability of 2 Types is in the mid
penalty imposed in relation to this offence must provide for general deterrence.
Employers must take the obligations imposed by
the WHS Act very seriously. The
community is entitled to expect that both small and large employers will comply
with safety requirements.
General deterrence is a significant factor when safety
obligations are breached:
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Limited v Nash
[2016] NSWCCA 37
; (2016) 93 NSWLR 338 at
penalty must reflect the need for specific deterrence. 2 Types is still
conducting a business. Its operations involve constructing
modular buildings
and the continuing engagement of workers.
Aggravating
injury, emotional harm, loss or damage caused by the offence was substantial: s
21A(2)(g) CSP Act.
Mitigating Factors
took after the incident demonstrate this. 2 Types
has been in business for
approximately 15 years.
positive steps to guard against the risk of an incident
such as this ever
happening again. It has brought its documentation and its procedures into line
with those which, on all the evidence,
should have been in place before this
incident occurred.
evidence that it has accepted responsibility for its actions
acknowledged that the injury to Mr Malas was caused by its actions.
account the fact that the offender has pleaded guilty,
when the offender pleaded
guilty, and the circumstances in which the offender indicated an intention to
plead guilty: s 22(1) CSP
Act. It is appropriate to give 2 Types a 25% discount
for an early plea.
cooperated at all times with the prosecutor and provided
all documents requested
in a prompt fashion.
Capacity to Pay a Fine
am required to have regard to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) before
imposing a fine. Where an offender seeks to have a fine reduced on the basis of
a limited capacity to pay, it bears
the evidentiary onus of convincing the court
that it should exercise its discretion to limit the amount of the fine. The
capacity to pay is relevant but not decisive:
Jahandideh v The Queen
[2014] NSWCCA 178
. A substantial fine may
still be warranted as a result of the seriousness of the offence and the need
for general deterrence.
Unity Pty Limited v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
the Court of
Criminal Appeal said:
“First, and more generally, questions of specific deterrence should take
into account the size and scope of the operations
of the defendant; a fine which
may be crippling to a small business may have virtually no impact on the
financial operations of a
large corporation. The maximum penalty for the offence
is undoubtedly set having regard to such a factor. Secondly, the Court is
required to have regard to ‘the means’ of the defendant, pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
was no submission about capacity to pay, so this issue does not
will be an order that the defendant is to pay the prosecutor’s
orders are:
(1) 2 Types Constructions Pty Ltd is convicted.
(2) The appropriate fine is $360,000 but that will be reduced by 25% to reflect
the early plea of guilty.
(3) Order 2 Types Constructions Pty Ltd to pay a fine of $270,000.
(4) Order pursuant to
Section 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) that 50%
of the fine is to be paid to the prosecutor.
(5) Order 2 Types Constructions Pty Ltd to pay the prosecutor’s costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (305 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter