URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Nguyen [2013] NSWMT 18 (19 November 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Nguyen
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 18
Hearing Date(s):
28, 29 & 30/10/2013
Decision Date:
19 November 2013
Levy SC DCJ
Dr M Wright
The complaints are dismissed.
Catchwords:
MEDICAL PRACTITIONER - allegations of inappropriate conduct by general
practitioner concerning vaginal examination and offer of breast
examination
-allegations not proven on required standard: Briginshaw v Briginshaw
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) s 139B, s 139E, cl 7 Sch
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Luxton v Vines
[1952] HCA 19
(1952) 85 CLR 352
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Complainant)
Dr Don Nguyen
(Respondent)
Representation
Mr G Farmer SC (Complainant)
Mr P Boulten SC with Mr A Williams
(Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Complainant)
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Suppression order in respect of the patient named in the complaint and the
witnesses named in the evidence
REASONS FOR
Table of Contents
The proceedings
Non-publication order
The complaints and the issues
Dr Nguyen's background and registration history
[11] - [21]
Credibility of the key witnesses
[22] - [38]
Credit of the patient
[23] - [26]
Credit of Dr Nguyen
[27] - [34]
Conclusions on the credit of key witnesses
[35] - [38]
Reliability of the evidence of the patient
[39] - [61]
Reliability of the evidence of Dr Nguyen
[62] - [66]
Ancillary matters
[67] - [76]
Facts leading to the complaints
[77] - [160]
Background to the doctor patient relationship
[78] - [94]
Background to the consultation on 3 September 2009
[95] - [98]
Consultation on 3 September 2009
[99] - [141]
Report to the police
[142] - [147]
Listening device recording
[148] - [153]
Supplementary statement
[154] - [156]
Committal proceedings
HCCC interview
The present proceedings
[159] - [160]
Construction of the listening device recording
[161] - [285]
Assertion 1
[177] - [188]
Assertion 2
[189] - [201]
Assertion 3
[202] - [213]
Assertion 4
[214] - [228]
Assertion 5
[229] - [233]
Assertion 6
[234] - [246]
Assertion 7
[247] - [250]
Assertion 8
[251] - [266]
Assertion 9
[267] - [285]
Whether there was sexualised behaviour by Dr Nguyen
[286] - [291]
Consideration of Particulars of Complaint
[292] - [371]
Particular 1 - Alleged gloveless vulvo-vaginal examination
[293] - [307]
Particular 2 - Time taken for vulvo-vaginal examination
[308] - [320]
Particular 3 - Alleged inappropriate touching of the
[321] - [332]
Particular 4 - Alleged rubbing of patient's bare leg
[333] - [345]
Particular 5 - Offer for internal examination
[346] - [355]
Particular 7 - Offer for breast examination
[356] - [366]
Particular 8 - Representation for examining the female
[367] - [371]
The proceedings
tribunal was convened to inquire into two inter-related disciplinary complaints
filed by the Health Care Complaints Commission
["HCCC"] concerning alleged
inappropriate sexualised clinical behaviour by Dr Don Nguyen on 3 September
Nguyen was at the time, and still is, a general practitioner practising in
Bankstown, NSW. The proceedings are governed by the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
National Law (NSW)"
alleged facts that underlie the complaints are disputed by Dr Nguyen.
Unfortunately for both the patient and for Dr Nguyen, the
protracted legal
processes associated with, first, the related criminal proceedings brought
against Dr Nguyen for alleged sexual
assault, which were ultimately withdrawn by
the Director of Public Prosecutions, and then the subsequent delays leading to
the hearing
of these complaints, have been outside the control of Dr Nguyen and
his patient. This has resulted in a cumulative delay of a little
over 4 years
before the issues now calling for decision could be fully considered and
resolved in this tribunal hearing.
tribunal hearing took place over the course of 3 of the 5 scheduled days. That
relative brevity belied the volume of documentary
and audio material that was
tendered for consideration in these proceedings. That material included evidence
given in the earlier
committal proceedings. The requirement to analyse that
material with reasons, has determined the extent of these reasons for
hearing and considering the evidence in respect of those matters, and for the
reasons that follow, the tribunal has determined
that each of the complaints
brought against Dr Nguyen should be dismissed.
Non-publication order
a preliminary matter, at the commencement of the hearing on 28 October 2013, the
tribunal made an order pursuant to cl 7 Sch 5D
National Law (NSW)
prohibiting the publication or disclosure of the name, address, or any other
evidence and information that might tend to, or lead
to, the identification of
the female patient who is the subject of these proceedings. That order was
extended to include the details
of the witness to whom that patient had spoken
in corroboration of her complaint about Dr Nguyen.
The complaints and the issues
first complaint, which was made under s 139B of the
National Law (NSW)
alleged that Dr Nguyen had engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct. In
reliance on the same underlying circumstances, the
second complaint, which was
made under s 139E of the
National Law (NSW)
, alleged that Dr Nguyen had
engaged in professional misconduct.
Particulars of Complaint
relating to each of the complaints, which
are to be read collectively and cumulatively, were identical, and alleged that
on 3 September
2009, in a professional consultation with the subject patient, Dr
Nguyen had:
(1) Performed a vulvo-vaginal examination without wearing
(2) Took approximately 3-5 minutes to perform the vulvo-vaginal
examination:
(3) Inappropriately touched the patient's clitoris during the course of the
examination;
(4) Rubbed the patient's bare leg at the time proximate to the vulvo-vaginal
examination;
(5) Inappropriately offered to do an internal examination without proper and
sufficient clinical indications for a further internal
examination of the
Withdrawn particular - alleged inappropriate touching of the patient's
right leg whilst she was seated beside Dr Nguyen's consultation
(7) Inappropriately offered to perform a breast examination on the patient
without proper and sufficient clinical indications for
examination;
(8) When the patient refused his offer to perform a breast examination, he
inappropriately stated "
It's important to check the female
Nguyen contested the factual basis of each of the above
Particulars of
relied upon by the HCCC. Resolution of those contested factual
matters, and the tribunal's assessment of the reliability of the testimony
the patient and of Dr Nguyen, have determined the outcome of the proceedings.
was no real dispute on the content of the expert and peer review evidence that
was necessarily called as a framework for the
proceedings. The outcome of the
proceedings essentially stood to be determined by the resolution of the disputed
matters of fact.
Dr Nguyen's background and registration history
paragraphs that immediately follow set out Dr Nguyen's personal background and
his registration details.
Nguyen is presently aged 43 years. He arrived in Australia from Vietnam with his
parents and siblings when he was aged 13 years.
He is the youngest of nine
children. He is married and has three sons. His wife, whom he has known since
they were in Year 8 of their
schooling, works as his practice
undertaking intensive English language tuition, and completing his secondary
education, Dr Nguyen studied medicine at the University
of Sydney. In 1996, he
graduated with the degrees of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery.
21 January 1997 Dr Nguyen obtained general registration as a medical
practitioner. That registration, which was under the former
Medical Practice
, continued until 1 July 2010, when the
National Law
came into force. Since then, his registration has continued under
that legislation, and remains current.
2000, after satisfying examination requirements, Dr Nguyen obtained his
fellowship of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners.
chosen to practise in Bankstown, which he described as a disadvantaged area in
western Sydney. He said that he chose to practise
in that area because of a
perceived need he recognised from his own disadvantaged
background.
Nguyen initially worked in a group practice in Bankstown. Since 2006 he has
worked in his present solo practice. There is no challenge
qualifications, or to the appropriateness of his professional associations. Nor
has there been any challenge regarding his
efforts in maintaining his
professional skills through his reading of journals, and his attention to his
continuing medical education.
is no issue that at the relevant time, Dr Nguyen's practice rooms were anything
other than appropriately equipped, maintained,
and laid out in a manner that
served to facilitate his efficient engagement in general practice. This is
confirmed by what is shown
in the photographs the investigating police took of
his premises.
the subject matter of the present complaints came to the notice of the
authorities, first to the investigating police, who then
proceeded to prosecute
Dr Nguyen, and then to the HCCC which brought these complaints, pending the
resolution of these proceedings,
and in the interests of the protection of the
public, understandably, Dr Nguyen's practice has been the subject of a number of
and restrictive conditions concerning his treatment of his
conditions have included the need for a chaperone to be present during Dr
Nguyen's examination of female patients. Those conditions
also included an
absolute prohibition on him conducting perineal or genital area examinations on
any female patient. The conditions
have also required Dr Nguyen to display
professionally demeaning chaperone notices in his practice
their nature, those conditions have necessarily had an incidental negative and
punitive impact upon Dr Nguyen's practice. This
was an inevitable consequence of
the need to ensure that the public was protected pending the resolution of these
proceedings.
the initiation of these proceedings, no other complaints of any kind have come
to light concerning Dr Nguyen's practice of medicine.
He must be seen to be a
practitioner of good standing and character.
Credibility of the key witnesses
determining the validity of the complaints, it was necessary to assess the
credibility of the two key witnesses, namely, the patient
and Dr Nguyen. There
was no issue as to the credibility of the witness to whom the patient had made
her corroborative complaint on
the same evening as the alleged conduct which is
the subject of the complaints.
Credit of the patient
the credit of the patient, the tribunal records the view that she handled the
burden of cross-examination on matters that most
people would ordinarily find
embarrassing, in a dignified manner that was frank and open. From an emotional
perspective, the patient
gave her evidence in circumstances that were obviously
very difficult for her. At her request, her evidence was given from behind
partition screen so that she was not in the line of Dr Nguyen's sight in the
tribunal hearing room.
patient demonstrated a mature and intelligent approach to the task of giving
evidence, even when she was at times clearly upset
by the subject matter
canvassed in her evidence. She carefully considered and answered questions asked
of her in cross-examination.
She made concessions when it was fair and
appropriate for her to do so. The tribunal is satisfied that she did her best to
truthful account of the events in question in accordance with her
perception of the events in question, and how she recalled them.
September 2009, following the events in question, the patient has had to endure
a process of police interviews, the preparation
of her successive statements to
the police concerning events she said she had tried to forget, and then later,
she had to give contested
evidence in committal proceedings against Dr Nguyen in
respect of criminal charges of alleged sexual assault, which were ultimately
withdrawn by the prosecuting authority. All of those events preceded her
appearance as a witness in these proceedings, years after
the events in
for some reservations that have emerged from an analysis of the content of a
surreptitious recording obtained by the use of a
police listening device, the
tribunal has concluded that the patient was an impressive, honest and credible
witness. The detail of
that matter is identified in the course of the analysis
of the listening device recording. The reliability of her evidence on the
disputed matters of fact underlying the complaints requires a separate
consideration having regard to the evidence as a whole.
Credit of Dr Nguyen
tribunal is also satisfied that Dr Nguyen gave his evidence in an open, honest,
and straightforward manner without attempts at
obfuscation. The tribunal rejects
the submission made on behalf of the HCCC to the effect that in his evidence, Dr
Nguyen had sought
to place the most advantageous complexion on the facts in
order to benefit himself and in order to seek to avoid possible adverse
disciplinary consequences for himself.
tribunal considered that Dr Nguyen gave credible evidence. The burden of giving
evidence in these proceedings also took an emotional
toll on Dr Nguyen. At times
he had to pause whilst giving his evidence in order to gain control over what
the tribunal considered
was a genuine and burgeoning state of emotional upset at
the gravity of what was being alleged against him. The tribunal considered
his reactions in that regard were spontaneous, and were not contrived in order
to seek to obtain a perceived advantage.
Furthermore,
given the subject matter of the questioning, and the potentially serious adverse
implications for Dr Nguyen's professional
status if the subject matter of the
complaints were to be found to have been proven, the tribunal considers that Dr
Nguyen's responses
to the questions that were put to him in cross-examination
were appropriately thoughtful, forthright, factual, non-argumentative,
included appropriate concessions, even where one of those concessions appeared
to be against his interests in these proceedings.
last mentioned matter concerned Dr Nguyen's hindsight concession to the effect
that on reflection, he could see that due to factors
within the circumstances of
the consultation that were subjective to the patient, his offer to provide the
patient with a breast
examination near the conclusion of the consultation,
appeared to have had the unfortunate effect of breaking the bond of trust which
he had taken particular care to build and to develop with his patient over the
course of the years that marked their clinical relationship.
Dr Nguyen made the qualified concession that his offer of a breast examination
was in hindsight inappropriate, the tribunal
is of the view that his offer to
examine the patient's breasts was on the evidence, medically justified, and was
therefore not inappropriate
at the time it was made.
evidence which indicated that the offer was medically justified was the
patient's prescription for the contraceptive pill, and
the need to educate the
patient in self-examination of her breasts, especially given that at the time,
she was about to leave the
country for an extended period of time, with
resultant uncertainty of the nature of any definite plans for further medical
according to the dictates of her medical needs.
said, it is plain that the patient had reacted poorly to that offer due to her
own subjective thought processes that were affecting
her disposition at the
time, where significantly, at that time, the patient had not made those thought
processes known to Dr Nguyen.
patient's reaction to those circumstances have led to a cascading series of
events which this tribunal is now required to consider
and to resolve in the
course of its fact-finding task.
Conclusions on the credit of the key witnesses
circumstances where the respective opposing witnesses have been assessed as
having been honest and truthful in providing their
respective evidentiary
accounts of the relevant events as they perceived them, the essential
preliminary matter for the tribunal
to resolve is the question of which critical
aspects of the opposing factual accounts are more probably than not likely to be
and which of the accounts if any, should therefore be accepted as
being the most accurate and correct account.
resolving the issue of reliability of the evidence, as formulated in the
preceding paragraph, for the reasons that follow in the
ensuing paragraphs, the
tribunal has concluded that the factual account of the events as has been
provided by the evidence of the
patient must, in the non-pejorative sense of the
word, be considered to be unreliable in a number of material respects.
conclusion has required that the evidence of the patient on some critical
matters should be viewed with an appropriate degree
of caution. The reasons for
that view on any particular issue of dispute are identified in the context of
the particular analysis.
arriving at that conclusion concerning the reliability of the evidence of the
patient, the tribunal wishes to make it clear, that
conclusion should be in no
way read as a personal criticism of the patient, whom the tribunal considers to
have done her best to
accurately relate the events as she perceived them to have
Reliability of the evidence of the patient
tribunal considers that the key content of the patient's evidence was influenced
and distorted by her escalating but misplaced
emotional perceptions on the day
in question. This must be seen in the context of her pre-existing
vulnerabilities in a number of
emotions have been variously described as comprising her self-described
" over the presenting problem of a possible sexually transmitted
condition and infection ["STI"], and then her subsequent feelings
of evolving
concern, panic and anger that were based upon what the tribunal considers to
have been fundamental misunderstandings
that arose between herself and Dr Nguyen
concerning a number of events occurring at various stages of, and surrounding
the consultation
on the day in question.
matters are more fully explained in the tribunal's findings on the individual
matters calling for decision. Such misunderstandings
occurred in an evolving
framework of suspicion in the mind of the patient concerning Dr Nguyen's
clinical actions, which the patient
had initially downplayed in her mind at the
time, thinking she was "
being silly
", before she "
freaked out
when Dr Nguyen offered her a breast examination.
tribunal is of the view that the perceptual differences between the patient and
Dr Nguyen concerning the events of the consultation
arose because, it appears,
that the patient experienced an emergent groundswell feeling that something was
wrong and inappropriate
at the time when Dr Nguyen offered her a breast
examination, and then, in her mind, she characterised the preceding events of
consultation in a different light. This is a matter that will be revisited
in further detail in outlining the tribunal's findings
of fact and in the
resolution of the individual
Particulars of Complaint
this point, it is relevant to flag a significant concession made by the patient
in her evidence given at the committal proceedings
in the Local Court on 2 and 3
December 2010 (at transcript page 71 on the first day, and at transcript page 32
on the second day),
to the effect that due to the feeling of panic on her part
at the time of the consultation, she was confused and uncertain as to
in which the events in question had occurred on the day. It was apparent that
such confusion was also reflected in her
evidence tendered in the tribunal
hearing, and in some comparative aspects of the underlying police statements
that were tendered.
tribunal makes the observation that by reason of a confluence of unfortunate
circumstances on the day of the consultation in question,
where the patient
ended up being late for her appointment, which in turn meant that without prior
design, she had in effect become
Dr Nguyen's last patient for the day, her
apprehensions and thoughts on the intended subject matter of the consultation,
sensitivity and reaction to those circumstances, had affected the way
that she had perceived the events. Those matters then also
affected her
understanding concerning the events that followed.
the relevant time, Dr Nguyen was alone on the premises without the presence of
potential chaperones. In other circumstances, that
was in itself unremarkable.
There is no suggestion that chaperones had been required by either the patient
or by Dr Nguyen at any
of the earlier and numerous intimate examinations that Dr
Nguyen had carried out on the patient between 2004 and 2009 concerning
sexual health, including at consultations that had previously taken place at the
end of the day to accommodate the request of
the patient due to her work
commitments.
on the day in question, the patient's uncommunicated perception to the effect
that there was something she thought was wrong
during the consultation, became a
determining feature of her recollection of the events, which has in turn
influenced the content
of her evidence.
pivotal feature that emerged from the patient's evidence was her abruptly formed
reaction to Dr Nguyen's expression of apology
to her, which he made in response
to her abrupt rejection of his offer of a breast examination.
that regard, the patient said that were it not for Dr Nguyen's expression of
apology when he realised from her reaction that his
offer of a breast
examination had caused her offence, she would have shrugged off her suspicion
based perceptions, and she would
have continued to think that she was just
being silly
" in her construction of the events.
as events turned out, as a consequence of Dr Nguyen's apology, rather than
viewing the events in a benign way, the patient
placed a different and far more
sinister construction on the events of the consultation. The tribunal is of the
view that this occurred
in an atmosphere of misunderstanding on the part of the
patient, which then led her to believe that Dr Nguyen had harboured
inappropriate
and sexualised motives towards her. The effect of that
misunderstanding was to then propel the patient into a course of events which
has resulted in these proceedings.
matters emerge from the context of the events summarised in the preceding
paragraphs.
the patient's emotional response to the circumstances was that of heightening or
escalating concern and suspicion where she was
not in control of the
consultation and the subject matter of the conversation made her feel awkward
and apprehensive.
, she did not communicate any of her concerns
to Dr Nguyen regarding such matters. The patient had given no prior indication
Nguyen that she was becoming concerned about any aspect of the
circumstances of the consultation until she reacted abruptly to his
that she have a breast examination. It was not until that offer of a breast
examination was made by Dr Nguyen that matters
began to spiral out of
tribunal considers that the evolving misunderstanding between the patient and
her doctor then escalated further, and became magnified
and distorted by
subsequent events. Those events included the reinforcing effect of the remarks
made to the patient by her friend
when she spoke to her later that evening, and
which resulted in the patient making a report of the events as she perceived
to the police.
influential was the process by which the police obtained the statements of the
patient that were used in the committal proceedings,
as was the process by which
the police sought to surreptitiously obtain, by means of a pretext, potentially
incriminating evidence
from Dr Nguyen by means of a listening device they had
secreted onto the patient when, on 11 September 2009, they sent her to see
Nguyen under the guise that she had presented herself to obtain her medical
that date, when the listening device was employed, the investigating police
assisted and provided support to the patient for her
to go to Dr Nguyen's
surgery under the pretext of her seeking to obtain from him her medical records.
The police later obtained the
medical records later, as they had planned to do
in any event. In truth, what was actually being sought from Dr Nguyen on that
was his responses to a number of assertions the patient had made to him
in a personal confrontation that had been contrived in the
manner described.
those circumstances, the tribunal was not persuaded as to the correctness of the
interpretation that the HCCC had sought to place
on the ensuing recorded
conversation that occurred during the patient's confrontation with Dr Nguyen on
11 September 2009.
HCCC had argued that Dr Nguyen's recorded and transcribed responses to the
comments made to him by the patient on that occasion
should be understood to
constitute a material acknowledgment of wrongdoing or professional impropriety
on his part. The tribunal
took a very different view to that which was urged by
the HCCC, as will be made plain at a later point in the tribunal's reasons
that discrete subject.
regard to the general reliability of the evidence of the patient, the tribunal
accepts that, as was submitted on behalf of Dr
Nguyen, the sequence of the
events, as has emerged from the evidence of the patient, and the patient's
acknowledgement of her confusion
over some of those events, have given rise to
concerns over the reliability of her account of events she has given over time.
view is explained more particularly in the course of the tribunal's
findings of fact.
should be clearly understood that in assessing the reliability of the patient's
evidence, the tribunal considered that the detail
of her past medical history,
including matters concerning her past sexual health history, and her treatment
by Dr Nguyen for her
history of depression, whilst being relevant to a
consideration of her background, and being relevant to an understanding of her
reaction to events occurring in the clinical setting, should not of themselves,
be seen as being relevant factors detracting from
the reliability of her
the reliability of the patient's evidence must be assessed on the various
differences of significance in the factual content
of the patient's statements
and her evidence, and on the inherent probabilities or otherwise of the facts
recounted in the evidence,
when the respective conflicting testimonies are
matters of conflict, ambiguity or uncertainty within the evidence have to be
resolved, especially where evidence on factual
matters has the potential to be
distorted by perceptions influenced by the emotions that prevailed at the time,
and where the patient
has acknowledged that her recall of the order of events
was in parts confused, the tribunal has been guided by the need to exercise
caution when evaluating her evidence.
is especially so where the gravity of the consequences for the affected party is
significant, as is the case in these proceedings:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
Reliability of the evidence of Dr Nguyen
background to Dr Nguyen's evidence is the context of his clinical records
concerning his treatment of the patient over a number
of years. As a preliminary
observation, the tribunal notes that Dr Nguyen has kept appropriate and
sufficiently detailed medical
records of his treatment of the patient, not only
as an aide to his own memory, but if the need arose, for other practitioners to
follow his clinical methods, observations and clinical thinking concerning his
treatment of the patient.
relevance of that observation is that in cross-examination, Dr Nguyen was
challenged in respect of the absence of a particular
entry in his patient
records. In that regard, it was suggested that the absence of a record that he
had offered the patient a breast
examination which she had refused, meant his
records were incomplete.
on one view that may be so, this has little if any significance to the
reliability of Dr Nguyen's notes and records when the
purpose of those notes is
borne in mind. The notes in question are not a transcript, they serve as an
aide memoire
, and as was confirmed by Dr Nguyen, his method of note
taking was to record tasks performed, and not to record tasks not performed.
tribunal considers that in this instance, that evidence by Dr Nguyen constitutes
a reasonable explanation for the construction
he seeks to have placed on his
notes. Accordingly, the argued omission from the notes does not represent a
justified focus for criticising
the reliability of Dr Nguyen's testimony or the
adequacy of his records.
tribunal is satisfied that in all other respects, Dr Nguyen's written statement,
the 23 June 2011 record of his interview by the
HCCC, and his oral evidence,
provided the tribunal with no basis for a concern that his evidence lacked
reliability.
tribunal is comfortably satisfied that reliance can be placed upon the
explanatory evidence given by Dr Nguyen, including the
reliability of his
evidence that explains the apparent ambiguity of the content of his conversation
with the patient that was recorded
under pretext using a listening device. More
will be said later in these reasons on that discrete subject.
Ancillary matters
after the conversation recorded by the listening device, Dr Nguyen was charged
with two counts of aggravated sexual assault
on a victim under his authority,
and with two counts of aggravated indecent assault in relation to the events of
the consultation
on 3 September 2009.
committal proceedings in respect of those charges took place at Burwood Local
Court on 2 and 3 December 2010. On that occasion,
the charge sheet under
read as follows:
"That Don NGUYEN on the 3rd day of September 2009, at BANKSTOWN, in the State
of New South Wales, did have sexual intercourse with
[name of patient] without
her consent, and knowing that she was not consenting to the sexual intercourse,
in circumstances of aggravation,
to wit, that at the time of the offence [name
of patient] was under the authority of Don NGUYEN, by reason of Don NGUYEN being
Medical Practitioner."
the committal proceedings in the Local Court, the patient gave her evidence by
means of closed circuit television arrangements
as she did not want to have to
see Dr Nguyen.
transcript of those committal proceedings was tendered as part of the evidence
in these proceedings. Unfortunately, some parts
of that transcript included
portions that were "
not transcribable
". In addition, the transcript of
those proceedings also noted a significant number of non-verbal replies to
questions that were asked
of the patient.
3 December 2010, the proceedings were stood over partly heard for further
mention on 11 February 2011, and also on 9 March 2011.
However, before those
scheduled listings, those charges against Dr Nguyen were withdrawn at the
further listing at Burwood Local
Court on 20 December 2010.
appears from the HCCC materials that the HCCC had paused its investigations into
the complaints pending the outcome of the committal
proceedings that had been
initiated by the police. After the charges laid by the police were withdrawn in
December 2010, the HCCC
convened an interview with Dr Nguyen on 23 June
that interview, counsel for Dr Nguyen identified what was described as a
resourcing question in expressing his concern at the time
it had taken for the
investigation of this matter to get to that stage. He also identified the
substantial impact the outstanding
issues were having on Dr Nguyen. The HCCC
Manager of Investigations responded by noting that concern, and acknowledged the
requirement
to deal with such matters as quickly as possible, and indicated that
since the criminal charges against Dr Nguyen were no longer
causing delay, the
HCCC would deal with the matter as quickly as it could.
tribunal file indicates that the Notice of Complaint was filed a little over 12
months later, on 29 August 2012. The first directions
hearing took place in the
tribunal on 14 March 2013, at which time a further directions date was fixed for
11 April 2013 to enable
the HCCC to prepare documents. The HCCC was already in
possession of its expert peer review opinion in the form of a report from
Emery Kertesz, dated 14 April 2010.
subpoena process then followed. At the directions hearing on 11 April 2013, Dr
Nguyen was required to file and serve his documents
by 9 May 2013. He complied
with that direction. A further directions date was fixed for 16 May 2013, at
which time the hearing of
the proceedings was fixed to commence on 28 October
arriving at its findings of fact, the tribunal has had to consider multiple
sources of evidence. This has included the statements
obtained by the police,
the transcript of the listening device recording, the evidence given by the
patient in the committal proceedings
against Dr Nguyen, the transcripts of HCCC
interviews, a statement prepared by Dr Nguyen, and the oral evidence of the
patient and
Dr Nguyen given in the present proceedings before the tribunal. Some
of those sources are identified as follows:
Patient's statement
dated 3 September 2009
Listening device transcript dated 11 September 2009
Patient's statement dated 12 August 2010
Committal hearing transcript - Day 1, 2 December 2010
Committal hearing transcript - Day 2, 3 December 2010
HCCC record of interview of Dr Nguyen dated 23 June 2011
Dr Nguyen's statement dated 11 April 2013
Tribunal hearing transcript between 28 and 30 October 2013
Facts leading to the complaints
addressing the issues calling for decision, it is necessary to set out the
findings of fact arrived at by the tribunal. Unless
otherwise stated to be
qualified, these findings appear in the series of paragraphs that immediately
Background to the doctor patient relationship
patient commenced consulting Dr Nguyen as her general practitioner when she was
aged about 16 years. Her therapeutic relationship
with Dr Nguyen then continued
without interruption until 3 September 2009, at which time the patient was aged
that time, as a consequence of the subject matter of these complaints, the
patient abruptly terminated her therapeutic relationship
with Dr Nguyen.
is relevant to provide some detail of the patient's background circumstances.
The factual description that follows is not intended
to be in any way
disparaging of the patient.
patient's parents had separated when she was about 18 months old. Thereafter,
the patient continued to live with her father who
was frequently away from home
due to his work as a truck driver. It appears from the evidence that she
continued to have some contact
with her mother.
patient became sexually active at a young age, and as a result, she had formed a
number of unsatisfactory relationships with males.
She also harboured some
trust-related issues. One of those issues appeared to have had its origins in
her knowledge that her mother
had been the subject of sexual advances from
another general medical practitioner who had practised in Bankstown, and who was
de-registered due to patient boundary violation issues. It is not known
whether that de-registration occurred because of that practitioner's
with the patient's mother. It was those events that had apparently led the
patient to commence seeing Dr Nguyen as her general
practitioner, as she had
previously consulted her mother's former general practitioner before he was
deregistered.
has emerged that the patient was sensitive to such issues. A question arose in
these proceedings as to whether the misconduct of
the other practitioner was
known to Dr Nguyen. To a degree, on a peripheral issue, this question had some
impact on the assessment
of the reliability of the testimony of the patient
because she claimed she had not previously discussed that matter with Dr Nguyen,
yet that subject had featured as part of her conversation with Dr Nguyen that
was recorded with a listening device on 11 September
2009. In that conversation,
the patient raised this issue in a way that indicated the other practitioner's
misbehaviour was known
to them both. Based upon the content of the listening
device recording, this aspect of the patient's evidence to the effect she had
not previously discussed that issue with Dr Nguyen, was
unreliable.
patient had a significant history of depression requiring treatment. This
involved her in taking anti-depressant medication and
receiving counselling. The
patient had some time earlier refused Dr Nguyen's suggestion that she consult a
psychologist for this
condition. Therefore, over the time that Dr Nguyen had
been responsible for the care of the patient, he had taken on the role of
providing her with such treatment. This was in the form of counselling and
advice, as well as treatment for matters of a physical
nature, including matters
concerning her sexual health.
Nguyen said, and the tribunal unreservedly accepts, that in that context, and in
his treatment of the patient over time, he had
developed an approach to the task
of managing her health needs in a way that can be described as involving a
degree of benevolent
paternalism, using that term in the benign sense. The
tribunal accepts, that at all relevant times before the events in question,
Nguyen had the best interests of his patient in mind.
question that needs to be resolved is whether Dr Nguyen had harboured any
sexualised motives towards his patient at the particular
consultation which is
the subject of the present complaints. The resolution of that question involves
an analysis of the perceptions
of the patient when she was interpreting Dr
Nguyen's clinical actions. In that regard, on a number of grounds, the tribunal
has concluded
that on 3 September 2009, the patient had grossly misperceived and
misinterpreted Dr Nguyen's behaviour as being sexualised, when
it was not. The
basis for that conclusion will be identified as a separate topic of analysis in
the tribunal's reasons for decision.
appears that from the time of the patient's first consultation with Dr Nguyen in
2004, until the events of her last consultation
with him on 3 September 2009,
she had not been at all concerned about his role in the management of any aspect
of her health care,
including Dr Nguyen providing her with care on matters
pertaining to her sexual health. Until the events under present consideration,
she clearly had trust in Dr Nguyen carrying out that role. This is evidenced by
the fact that on numerous occasions, the patient
had from time to time permitted
Dr Nguyen to carry out necessarily intimate examinations of her private parts in
connection with
those matters.
that regard, Dr Nguyen's clinical records concerning his treatment of the
patient show that between 2004 and the subject consultation,
she had consulted
with him on a total of 36 occasions. Some 24 of those occasions related to
matters concerning her sexual health.
In that context, there were numerous
occasions on which Dr Nguyen had from time to time legitimately conducted
intimate clinical
examinations of the patient's genital area in the course of
investigating her presenting complaints. In respect of those previous
consultations and examinations, the patient had never raised any questions or
doubts about Dr Nguyen's professionalism or motives.
of those examinations, including the very first of those intimate examinations,
were conducted by Dr Nguyen for sound medical
reasons. Over the course of time,
those reasons included the investigation and treatment of a number of STI's,
including perineal
abrasions, vulvo-vaginal irritation, rashes, recurrent
Monilia or thrush, the herpes simplex virus, and Chlamydia.
patient stated that on each occasion that she had previously consulted Dr Nguyen
in respect of matters pertaining to her sexual
health, except for the
consultation on 3 September 2009, he had worn protective gloves when examining
her vulvo-vaginal area.
Nguyen disputed the patient's evidence to the effect that he had not used gloves
on that last occasion. This is a critical matter
of fact to be resolved in the
tribunal's consideration of the first of the particulars of complaint.
that regard, it is a significant issue of contention as to whether at the
relevant time, the patient had been in a position to
either see or to feel
whether or not Dr Nguyen was wearing gloves when he examined her private parts.
For the reasons set out in
respect of the consideration of
of the complaints, the tribunal accepts Dr Nguyen's evidence that he
was wearing gloves when he conducted a genital area examination
of the patient
on 3 September 2009.
has already been made of the patient's history of depression and psychological
problems as being of background relevance to
the consideration of the
complaints. Since 2005, Dr Nguyen had been counselling the patient for stress
and anxiety related conditions.
In April 2008, he began treating her for a
depressive illness. He commenced treatment of that illness with anti-depressant
medication.
of the patient with anti-depressant medication had continued over time. This
was, appropriately clinically monitored by
Dr Nguyen, including up until the
subject consultation. His records pertaining to the patient confirmed his
clinical observation
that her depression had remained stable since January 2009.
Stabilisation had been achieved after he had made some alterations to
prescriptions and to her dosages of anti-depression medication.
Background to the consultation on 3 September 2009
the consultation on 3 September 2009, the patient said that since July 2009, she
feeling very sad
" since the ending of her relationship with her
boyfriend. This description was consistent with her history of depression for
she was taking anti-depressant medication.
context of the consultation on 3 September 2009 was that the patient had
recently terminated her relationship with her boyfriend,
and had quit her job.
This was an apparently precipitous reaction to her then prevailing social and
work circumstances. She told
Dr Nguyen she was intending to travel to the UK,
first for a holiday, and to then seek work in the longer term, in order to get
from her situation.
part of that plan, on the previous day she had made an appointment to see Dr
Nguyen in a late appointment after her work on the
day in question. She said it
had been her usual practice to make the last appointment of the day due to the
requirements of her work.
Nothing turns on that fact other than the observation
that she had never before felt uncomfortable about seeing Dr Nguyen alone in
such circumstances. Although she was running late for that appointment, Dr
Nguyen was still with another patient. He then saw her
as his last patient for
was the intention of the patient to raise with Dr Nguyen her wish to have an
intimate examination of her private parts as she was
very concerned about STI
issues. She was apprehensive about that anticipated
examination.
Consultation on 3 September 2009
3 September 2009, when Dr Nguyen first saw the patient, she told him of her
travel plans. It was initially determined that she
needed a series of
prescriptions for vaccinations, the contraceptive pill, her anti-depressant
medication, and other travel related
medication advice.
Nguyen quickly printed the necessary prescriptions for her so she could get them
dispensed before the nearby pharmacy closed. Dr
Nguyen then waited for her to
return for the consultation to continue. He then ushered her into his consulting
room where the remainder
of the consultation in question took
patient's account of what then followed has to be understood in the light of her
acknowledged confusion as to the sequence in
which the ensuing events occurred,
and her acknowledgment that some of the events described in her second statement
to the police
were not accurate. As a result of that confusion, the tribunal
prefers and accepts the chronological account as described by Dr
the patient had indicated to Dr Nguyen that her relationship with her boyfriend
had recently broken up, and that she was intending
to go overseas, Dr Nguyen
expressed concern over those plans and questioned her about them. He also asked
questions as to her reasons
for her decision, and as to how her father felt
job, and her travel plans, had been poorly thought through, and because he was
concerned about her welfare. This was consistent with
the benevolent and
paternalistic attitude that Dr Nguyen had formed towards his patient over
the patient's return from the pharmacy, the resumed consultation first dealt
with vaccination and medication issues. The patient
then disclosed to Dr Nguyen
her current sexual health concerns, which raised the indication for an
examination of her vulvo-vaginal
area. In fact, the patient indicated that she
wanted to have an examination of her vulvo-vaginal area because she was
experiencing
a rash and some irritation. She was concerned to determine whether
she had acquired an STI from her former boyfriend.
this context, the patient had described herself as having an attitude of
feeling a bit paranoid
" about any abnormalities in her vagina. She said
that she had felt that way ever since she was treated for HPV in 2005/2006.
that time, according to her own description, Dr Nguyen had in fact
performed some 12 Pap smear test investigations for her.
patient acknowledged that in the lead-up to the examination on 3 September 2009,
she had felt sensitive, anxious and awkward about
having a vaginal examination,
even though it was to be performed by her regular doctor. Although she had not
communicated those concerns
to Dr Nguyen, it appears that by reason of his
general training and experience, he would have had some degree of general
understanding
that his patient might have had such apprehensions in the
circumstances.
is plain from the history presented to Dr Nguyen, and from the patient's account
of the background circumstances, that on 3 September
2009, she had in fact
requested and agreed to Dr Nguyen examining and inspecting her private parts, at
least externally. The purpose
of the examination had clearly been legitimate. It
is also plain that such an examination would have necessarily included some
need for Dr Nguyen to carry out some degree of manual manipulation of
her labia and the surrounding skin and associated parts.
was not only indicated by the patient's description of the history of the
presenting problem at that consultation, but also by
the patient's description
of the progress of the examination where Dr Nguyen was looking for abnormalities
that co-related to the
patient's complaints, and she repeatedly guided him by
", by which she was directing him towards her vaginal
introitus. In those circumstances Dr Nguyen acted in accordance with his
for such examinations, as summarised by the adage "
look, feel,
patient stated that on the previous occasions on which Dr Nguyen had examined
her private parts she had not felt uncomfortable
in the psychological sense, and
she considered that Dr Nguyen had always acted in an appropriate professional
the patient said that on this particular occasion, she had gained an impression
that something was not right in connection
with Dr Nguyen's examination of her.
It is difficult for the tribunal to form a view on whether that impression was
soundly based,
as the extent of the previous intimate examinations may have been
different to a material degree. This was not explored in detail
patient's impression that something may not have been right was not based on any
particular standout event that occurred during
the examination. It appeared that
her impression was based on a combination of thoughts that she had later linked,
and upon which
she placed significance. Essentially, this was the combination of
Dr Nguyen closing and locking the trellis door to the premises,
and her own
uncommunicated evolving perception of what Dr Nguyen was doing during his
examination.
matters did not result in the patient actually forming a conclusion that
something wrong had occurred until later, and at the
time when she was again
clothed. At that time, Dr Nguyen raised the suggestion that she might have a
breast examination. It was her
abrupt negative reaction to that suggestion, in
which she then drew upon her earlier impressions, that led her to the view that
had been impropriety on the part of Dr Nguyen.
matter that requires resolution is whether, on an objective view, the
impressions of the patient were justified by the circumstances.
The reason the
question needs to be reviewed objectively is because significantly, at no stage
during the examination now complained
of, did the patient share with Dr Nguyen
any aspect of the evolving impression-based concerns she later described having
regard. Instead, the patient had only reacted at the end, and she did so
angrily, stating that she had "
freaked out
then to the events of the examination. To facilitate the examination of her
vulvo-vaginal area, the patient said that she
had proceeded to remove one leg
out of her trousers, and from her underpants. She said that she then pulled
these garments down to
her ankle and she then lay on the examination table in Dr
Nguyen's consultation room whilst Dr Nguyen attended to the preliminary
before commencing the examination.
Nguyen disputed that the patient had on this occasion only partially removed her
lower garments as she had described. Instead,
he stated that she had removed
them entirely, and had placed them on a nearby chair before getting onto the
examination couch. He
said that she had carried out those actions whilst he had
his back turned to her during which time he was preparing for the examination
that was to follow, and when he turned around he had observed her clothes on the
Nguyen was adamant that she had totally removed her lower garments and had
placed them on a nearby chair and he observed this when
he had turned around to
commence the examination. He said if the garments had been left around the
patient's ankle this would have
interfered with the
examination.
is therefore necessary to resolve that issue of conflicting factual accounts. In
doing so, the tribunal considers that Dr Nguyen's
account of the events is the
more reliable and the most probably correct version.
patient was confused as to whether she had left her trousers on and pulled down
to her left or right leg for the purposes of the
examination. This conclusion
arises because at different times she had given different versions of some of
the details of these events.
The tribunal prefers Dr Nguyen's account on this
is convenient to next refer to and analyse another critical matter of disputed
fact over whether the door to the premises had been
locked before the
commencement of the examination. That analysis has to be undertaken in
recognition of the evidence given by the
patient that she had been confused in
her description as to the order of the events.
before the physical examination had commenced, and unbeknown to Dr Nguyen, the
patient had harboured a concern in her own
mind over the fact that the front
door of the premises had been locked by Dr Nguyen, and they were in the premises
alone. Contrary
to the perceptions of the patient concerning Dr Nguyen's motives
in locking the door, the tribunal is satisfied that the door self-locked
closure, without a key, contrary to her perception that a key had been used to
lock the door. The tribunal finds that there was
no improper motive on the part
of Dr Nguyen in that regard, although it is accepted that the patient perceived
things very differently.
tribunal is not persuaded that Dr Nguyen's action in closing, and therefore
locking the door to the premises, was in any way untoward
in the circumstances
where he had come to realise that he was going to have to conduct an intimate
examination of the patient.
tribunal considers Dr Nguyen's action of closing and therefore locking the door
to the premises was justified on account of his
need to ensure patient privacy
and to ensure security once it was determined that an intimate patient
examination was required. This
was so especially where his staff, who had
previously been on duty, had left to go home after finishing their work for the
tribunal considers that the evidence of the patient to the effect that Dr Nguyen
went to lock the door is incorrect as the door
was self-locking without a key
being required to lock it. It would appear that the patient has made an
incorrect assumption in the
course of reconstructing this facet of her evidence.
It would appear that she has assumed the door was locked with a key because
key had been required to unlock it, when in fact, contrary to her earlier
evidence, she did not see a key being used to lock the
door. The tribunal
prefers and accepts Dr Nguyen's uncontradicted evidence on the door locking
Nguyen said that in preparation for the examination he had laid down a blue
hygiene sheet on the examination table. In her evidence,
the patient agreed that
Dr Nguyen had provided a hygiene sheet for that examination.
Nguyen had on previous such examinations provided the patient with a modesty
sheet. The patient said she could not recall whether
he had also provided her
with a modesty sheet on this particular occasion. Given the sensitive nature of
the examination, and the
patient's stated apprehensions over her need for such
an examination, the tribunal considers it remarkable that the patient could
recall whether or not a modesty sheet had been provided on the occasion of the
examination under present consideration. This
suggests that the patient's
recollection was not entirely complete or accurate, and that her evidence on the
surrounding details
of the events should therefore be viewed with
was explained in the evidence, the photographic exhibits obtained by the
investigating police show that a modesty sheet was stored
nearby, and was
readily on hand on the shelf behind the examination table. The tribunal accepts
Dr Nguyen's evidence that both a
hygiene sheet and a modesty sheet were
appropriately provided to the patient on the occasion in
than summarise and thereby dilute the force of the patient's initial account of
the course of the examination in question,
the key portions of the patient's
police statement dated 3 September 2009 are cited in full.
importance of citing the relevant portions of that statement arises for a number
of reasons.
, to assess the event in terms of the patient's
concession that she was confused as to the sequence of the events that took
in the examination, but where she regarded her statement as being the most
accurate account. This was in circumstances where she
had tried over time not to
recall the events because she found it upsetting to remember them. The
reason for citing the actual terms of the patient's account as set
out in her initial statement is to enable a critical comparison
to be made with
her later accounts when recording findings on the particularised
complaints.
initial statement which the patient gave to the police on the evening in
question had been completed after she had undergone extensive
questioning. That process had concluded at 1.30am on 4 September 2009. In that
statement the patient described the key events
as follows:
"22. He opened his office door and went to lock the front door. I lost sigh
of the doctor and I heard the front door getting locked.
I started to freak out
a bit. I then thought to myself, I'm being silly. He walked back in and I was on
the bed looking at the ceiling.
I had my left leg completely out of my pants and
my right leg was pulled down to my ankle.
23. Dr NGUYEN took his lamp which he uses whenever he examines. Dr NGUYEN
stood directly where my feet were. He said,"Ok, then" and
he spread both my legs
open and said, "Oh, you have your period."
I said, "Yes."
He touched the lips of my vagina. I noticed he wasn't wearing gloves. He
separated the lips of my vagina and said, "Where is the rash?"
He kept moving
his fingers around my vaginal lips. I used my right hand to point towards the
inside of my vagina. He started making
'mmm' noises, not in a weird way but in
an observing way. He said, "It all looks good." He then used one finger to press
on my clitoris
and said, "It all looks healthy." He kept saying, "It all looks
good, it all looks healthy." I could feel his finger moving inside
my vagina but
not deep since I had my tampon inside. His finger went inside my vagina to about
one centimetre deep. He had his finger
inside me for maybe a couple of seconds.
He then started pulling on the outside so he could see inside. I started feeling
out since he kept saying, "Its all good, it's healthy' but he wouldn't
stop doing it. He continued moving his fingers around my vagina
for about three
to five minutes.
24. I started to move and said, "Ok, then thanks." I was still lying down and
he started to rub my bare left leg with his hand. I
couldn't see which hand he
was using. He went up and down my left leg starting from my knee to my mid
thigh. I started panicking
and I pulled my jeans up as fast as I could. He said,
"Do you want me to do an internal examination?" I said, "No."
He was still standing near my feet and was staring at me the whole time
without saying anything. His eyes appeared to be glazed over.
I haven't seen
that sort of a look in his eyes before."
is of some importance to note that Dr Nguyen was not cross-examined on the last
three sentences of paragraph [24] of the above
cited statement.
the content of the statement of 3 September 2009 is compared with the patient's
supplementary statement dated 12 August 2010,
an inconsistent and incorrect
statement becomes apparent.
first account has the patient saying she heard the door being locked out of her
line of sight. The second account has her saying
she saw the door being locked
with a key. She later agreed she could not have seen the key locking the door
and had simply assumed
this to be so. This insight into the way the patient's
evidence has evolved emphasises the need for caution before accepting her
evidence as being reliable.
number of factual matters emerge from the cited paragraphs of the patient's 3
September 2009 statement. As they relate to the
Particulars of
, they are more conveniently analysed separately in the context
of each such allegation.
Those matters
whether Dr Nguyen was wearing gloves
the time taken for the examination
the extent of touching of the patient's clitoris
the alleged rubbing of the patient's bare leg
the offer of a further internal examination
the offer of a breast examination
the representation that it was important to examine the female body
present purposes, it is sufficient to say that after Dr Nguyen had completed the
intimate examination, and when the patient was
clothed, a further discussion
occurred about the patient's need for future vaccinations and medical advice
whilst she was overseas,
and there was some discussion about medication for
travel sickness.
that point, the patient was confused as to whether she was on the examination
table or seated beside his desk when Dr Nguyen allegedly
touched her on the
thigh. It is no longer necessary to resolve that issue in these proceedings as
the HCCC has abandoned its complaint
the fact that such confusion exists within the evidence of the patient, is a
matter that
reflects on the reliability of her evidence.
critical event of the consultation was Dr Nguyen's suggestion of a breast
examination. The appropriateness or otherwise of that
suggestion is the subject
of a separate analysis. In the meantime, some consideration of the circumstances
surrounding that suggestion
is required.
was confusion within the patient's evidence as to whether she was seated or
standing when Dr Nguyen raised the topic of a breast
examination. This too is a
matter that suggests the patient's perception of events is not
fact that aspects of the patient's account was confused is further confirmed by
paragraph [24] of her statement, which suggests
that she has given a conflated,
if not confused account. She said that she had started panicking when Dr Nguyen
allegedly rubbed
her bare leg. Putting aside the question of whether he had in
fact rubbed her leg in the manner she described, her evidence was that
panicking well before that time, but had not given Dr Nguyen any indication that
this was so. This could possibly be explained
by the fact that he was examining
her genital area at the time, and was not in a position to see any of her facial
expressions that
might have otherwise provided him with a clue to her emotional
state at that time.
then to the topic of the suggested breast examination, the patient said that Dr
Nguyen had said "
Should I check your breasts
". She said she refused this
suggestion, and she said that he then added "
It's important to check the
female body
". She said she responded to Dr Nguyen by saying to him "
is very inappropriate and I am going
patient then said that she gathered her belongings and intended to leave, but
before leaving she had leaned over Dr Nguyen's desk
and had used his pen to make
a note in her diary to remind herself of the advice that Dr Nguyen had given her
regarding her need
for further vaccinations, and possibly to note the details of
the travel sickness medication he had suggested to her. Those actions
be inconsistent with the state of abrupt anger as described by the
tribunal considers that the confusion evident in the patient's account of the
events is a confounding factor that undermines the
reliability of her evidence.
This factor becomes evident when considering the patient's description of the
timing of the alleged
offer by Dr Nguyen for an internal examination. It would
seem unlikely that Dr Nguyen would, after examining the patient's vagina,
after she had dressed herself, then offer to carry out an internal examination,
which would necessarily require that she get
undressed again.
the patient's initial statement she described the termination of the
consultation in the following terse terms:
I quickly walked to the front door and realised that I couldn't get out. I
had to wait for him to come behind me to open the door.
He unlocked the door and
didn't say anything. As he was unlocking he said, "I'm sorry if I had made you
feel uncomfortable."
I said, "This is very inappropriate when you have a practice." I left and I
didn't look back."
Report to the police
leaving Dr Nguyen's premises, the patient rang a female friend, and she then
arranged to meet that friend and another female
friend for dinner. Later, when
she was alone with the first of those friends, whom she trusted, she recounted
her version of the
events of the examination by Dr Nguyen.
friend then encouraged the patient to attend Revesby Police Station to report Dr
Nguyen on account of the conduct that had been
related to her. From there they
went together to Bankstown Police Station, where statements of evidence were
taken. That friend,
whose corroborative statement was also dated 3 September
2009, and which formed part of the evidence, was not required for
cross-examination
on the content of her statement.
turns on the fact that the corroborative witness did not give oral evidence to
confirm her statement as there is no dispute
that the patient had made a
relatively contemporaneous corroborative statement of her version of the events.
The only real issue
in that regard was the reliability of the patient's own
descriptions of her perceptions regarding the matters that she has described
having occurred when she had consulted Dr Nguyen.
patient's initial statement dated 3 September 2009 went on to conclude as
"29. I feel really disgusting and shocked this has happened. I know the
doctor for years and I still can't believe this has happened
to me. I trusted
the doctor and I feel violated by the doctor. This was the one and only occasion
when Dr NGUYEN examined me without
wearing any gloves. Every other occasion, he
always wore his gloves.
30. While the doctor was touching me in an inappropriate way, I never asked
him to stop. I didn't ask him to stop since I felt too
scared when he was
touching me as I knew the front door was locked and even if I screamed for help
no one would hear anything. I
just froze and I could not believe what was
happening to me at that time."
tribunal considers that the content of the patient's statement to the effect
" and felt "
" to scream, serves to
confirm that the effect those emotions had upon her, had also served to distort
her perception of the events,
which led her to believe that something untoward
had occurred. Notwithstanding that the patient did not consider this to be the
the tribunal considers this view is also confirmed by the patient's
confused perception of the sequence in which the events occurred.
suggests she has reconstructed her account albeit in an honest but unreliable
way due to the effect of those emotions, rather
than providing an actual factual
recollection of the events. The tribunal also considers this to be so because it
was not until Dr
Nguyen had apologised to her when she had adversely reacted to
the suggestion for a breast examination, that she then came to consider
whole conduct in a sinister way that disgusted her.
Listening device recording on 11 September 2009
11 September 2009, in the course of an arrangement reached with the
investigating police, the patient assisted the police to obtain
a recording of a
conversation between herself and Dr Nguyen using the pretext of wanting her
medical records. The police obtained
that recording by duly authorised legal
the lead-up to those events, the patient had to undergo medical examinations in
accordance with police investigation protocols.
The question of whether that had
also served to focus, reinforce and perhaps magnify her reaction to the
circumstances was not explored.
that recorded conversation the police arrested Dr Nguyen and then laid charges
of sexual assault against him. Those charges
were later withdrawn, as described
content of the conversation recorded using the listening device is the subject
of a more detailed consideration and analysis that
will shortly
the meantime, for present purposes, it is sufficient to say the tribunal
considers that an overly simplistic and incorrect construction
had been placed
on the significance and import of that recording. This initially occurred when
the police analysed the conversation,
and again later, when the HCCC relied upon
the content of that conversation in these proceedings.
the day following the recorded conversation, the patient travelled overseas to
the UK as she had planned. Whilst she was there,
the police officer who was
involved in prosecuting Dr Nguyen over these events remained in contact with her
as they continued their
preparation of the criminal charges that they had laid
against Dr Nguyen in relation to the events in question. It is not in any
suggested that such contact was untoward.
Supplementary statement
the course of that preparation, some email exchanges took place between that
police officer and the patient, regarding the preparation
of a supplementary
statement by the patient. That correspondence was tendered in evidence. It sheds
light on how inaccuracies had
crept into the patient's evidence of the critical
12 August 2010, which was almost a year after the consultation with Dr Nguyen on
3 September 2009, whilst she was still in the
UK, the patient then signed a
further police statement. The relevant parts of that statement are as
"3. On the 3 September 2009 I attended the Family Doctor Surgery, located at
114 Bankstown City Plaza, Bankstown NSW. I have been
attending this surgery for
a number of years, since I was 15 or 16 I think. The reason I changed doctor's
from my family doctor is
because my mum (parents separated when I was 18 months)
told me that our family doctor assaulted her years ago but she never said
anything because she didn't speak very good English at the time and was a bit
naive as to what happened. That scared me and so I
looked for a new doctor and
seeing as I was at Bankstown Station everyday to get to and from school, I just
went in the first surgery
I saw which was Dr NGUYEN'S surgery. When in
attendance at the surgery I have only ever been treated by Doctor NGUYEN and
else. My main reason for attending the surgery was because I suffer from
severe thrush, where it occurs quite frequently and I often
discomfort in this area. In addition to this, I had HPV a few years ago and had
an operation to remove it. My last boyfriend
had cheated on me so I am always
paranoid about that area and constantly think that I have contracted some sort
of STD at the first
sign of irritation in this area. To assist me with this
problem I would have regular check ups to make sure that it was gone and
were no signs of it coming back.
4. Therefore, given my medical history I attended Doctor NGUYEN'S surgery on
the above date and informed Doctor NGUYEN that I needed
a vaginal examination
because of a rash on the exterior of my vagina. Almost immediately alter
informing Doctor NGUYEN of this I
saw him walk out of the examination room and
towards the front door to the surgery in the foyer area. I saw him lock the
the surgery door with a key, before walking back to the examination
room. When I saw him do this I was very uncomfortable because
I was the last
patient in the surgery and there was no one else, not even the receptionist, in
at the front desk. I saw Doctor NGUYEN
walk back into the examination room,
where he left the door of his office / examination room open. Again this made me
feel even more
uncomfortable, because it felt like there was no privacy. At this
time I got up onto the examination bed and Doctor NGUYEN proceeded
preparing for the examination. I starting thinking at the time that I was just
being paranoid and silly and that there was nothing
to be worried about. I
started thinking how Doctor NGUYEN and I had a doctor / patient relationship
that extended not only to medical
health but to psychological and social issues.
I also thought about times when I had spent over an hour with Dr NGUYEN at his
where we have spoken about my relationships and sexual issue's, because
I had HPV and was concerned that it would come back. This
has always been an
issue for me.
5. Dr NGUYEN diagnosed me with depression around two or three years ago. To
assist me with his condition Dr NGUYEN has prescribed
a number of
antidepressants, some of which I have had a bad reaction to and therefore had to
switch medications, causing me to return
to the surgery for the medication to be
prescribed.
EXAMINATION:
6. Just prior to the examination taking place I recall getting onto the
examination bed / table as I have done several times before.
When lying on the
bed I saw Doctor NGUYEN appear to look at me in an odd way, which made me feel
uneasy. I did not know why he was
looking at me differently and whether or not
it had something to do with my medical condition. I saw Doctor NGUYEN, who was
standing at the end of the bed at the time, get a lamp for the examination
and move the lamp over towards the end of the examination
bed / table. I
distinctly remember Doctor NGUYEN was not wearing gloves at the time. This made
me concerned because on every other
occasion when I had been to the surgery he
had worn gloves when conducting an examination.
7. After moving the lamp to the right position l could feel Dr NGUYEN'S
fingers on me and he was rubbing me in a strange way on my
clitoris. He then
parted my labia with his finger and inserted his fingertip to look inside my
vagina. When I felt this happening
I heard Doctor NGUYEN says; 'You have your
period?' I said, 'Yes.' Immediately after he said this to me I started to get
more nervous so I hurriedly said, 'It's probably just nothing,' before
quickly getting off the bed / table and putting my clothes
back on. After
putting my clothes back on I sat down on a chair next to the examination bed and
Doctor NGUYEN sat across from me,
approximately 1.5 meters away from where I was
seated. I saw Doctor NGUYEN lean towards me, where he was about half a meter
from me and was facing me front on. At this point, I felt very confused and
I think I must have been babbling, because I can not
remember what I said to
him. During this time I can remember Doctor NGUYEN placing his hand on my thigh
before saying, 'Is there
anything else?' I said, No.' before getting up from my
seat. Doctor NGUYEN said, 'Would you like a breast examination?' I started
get angry at this point and said, 'That's a little inappropriate.' Doctor NGUYEN
did not say anything in reply. I exited the examination
room and walked to the
front door. Dr NGUYEN followed me because he had locked the front door of the
surgery and I couldn't get out.
He started to say something but I cut him off
and said, 'this is so wrong, you have a family.' He tried to talk but I
interrupted
and told him to open the door immediately. He did and I left quickly
without looking back."
supplementary statement dated 12 August 2010 has served to identify the elements
of confusion in the patient's account of aspects
of the events in a way that
serves to undermine the reliability of her evidence.
Committal proceedings for sexual assault charges
the committal hearing, fairly, the patient made a concession in acknowledging
her uncertainty, over the sequence of events she
said had occurred at the
consultation on 3 September 2009. The tribunal considers that concession is an
important and significant
matter that influences the assessment of the
reliability of the patient's evidence as to the relevant sequence of events in
HCCC interview on 23 June 2011
was not until 23 June 2011 that Dr Nguyen had the opportunity to provide his
explanation of the content of the conversation recorded
by means of the
listening device. That explanation, which was in answer to questions, will be
drawn upon in the tribunal's findings
concerning the construction to be placed
upon the content of that recorded conversation.
The present proceedings
the present proceedings, the patient gave her evidence on the first day of the
hearing. She did so from behind a partition screen
that shielded her from view
by Dr Nguyen, and vice versa. This was at her request as she did not want to
see, or be seen by, Dr Nguyen.
The tribunal members and counsel were
nevertheless able to observe the patient whilst she gave her evidence, and form
views as to
her manner of giving evidence and the content of her answers to
stating the findings of the tribunal on the individual
Particulars
of Complaint
, and before outlining the interpretation to be placed
on them, it is necessary to identify the tribunal's conclusions on the
significance
of the evidence obtained surreptitiously by the police through the
use of a listening device to record the conversation between the
patient and Dr
Nguyen on 11 September 2009. That analysis is a necessary preliminary step to
the tribunal drawing its conclusions
on the issue of whether, on 3 September
2009, Dr Nguyen had an improper sexual motive towards the
Construction of the listening device recording
11 September 2009, by arrangement with the investigating police, the patient was
fitted with a concealed listening device. The
device started recording at about
3.15pm and it continued for an unstated time which was approximately 1 hour and
the course of the recording, the patient is heard to make a telephone call to
make an appointment to attend Dr Nguyen's premises.
Because of the need of the
police to establish continuity for evidence purposes, the recording included
some irrelevant conversation
between the police officers and the patient. That
material has no relevance to these proceedings other than to provide a
understanding to the recording.
relevant portion of the recording is not timed
in transcript. It proceeds
for a little under 14 minutes. At the beginning of those 14 minutes the patient
can be heard walking, and
after a short time she can be heard asking Dr Nguyen
for her medical records. A conversation between them then ensued, in which the
patient put a number of assertions to Dr Nguyen. The sound recording indicates
that Dr Nguyen was obviously taken aback by that confrontation.
His responses
were obviously, and understandably, awkward in parts due to the circumstances of
that confrontation.
these proceedings, and as the prosecution did in the discontinued committal
proceedings, the HCCC sought to make much of that recording
as constituting
evidence of material wrongdoing on the part of Dr Nguyen.
deference to that argument, although on the face of it, it is embarrassing to Dr
Nguyen, the tribunal has decided to incorporate
the complete transcribed text of
the relevant parts of the conversation, but broken down into identifiable
segments for analysis.
is done with the caveat that unanimated, without annotations for pauses, sighs
and the like, including the absence of any description
of any non-verbal
communication that was likely to have accompanied the conversation, the text has
the potential to create an unbalanced
impression of the content. Nevertheless,
the tribunal considers the transcribed text should be set out in order to
understand the
tribunal's interpretation of it in the context of the evidence as
order to address the concerns raised in the preceding paragraph, it is
appropriate to summarise Dr Nguyen's explanations in respect
of that recording
when he eventually had the opportunity to comment upon its contents when
interviewed by the HCCC nearly 2 years
later, on 23 June 2011.
that regard, Dr Nguyen explained that on 11 September 2009, before he had a
chance to say anything to the patient apart from calling
her into his consulting
room, the patient demanded her records and demanded an apology. His reaction of
shock on realising she had
misunderstood his intentions still remained. In
accordance with his training, he set about trying to defuse her anger and
frustration,
apologising and being empathic. The tribunal considers that Dr
Nguyen's annotation to the recording to reflect the overall tone,
including the
prevailing non-verbal events of that conversation is relevant to an
understanding of it.
Nguyen said that it was not immediately apparent to him what the patient was
talking about in that conversation. In accordance
with his training, he was
seeking to make neutral statements to try and defuse the situation. He said he
had been frequently interrupted
by the patient, and never had a chance to fully
explain what he was trying to tell her. Ultimately, he became aware they were
of totally different things, and this had confused him to a
Nguyen explained that the overall tenor of his conversation with the patient on
that day was that his patient's wellbeing was foremost
in his mind. In that
regard, his aim was to defuse the situation. In those circumstances, it was
unlikely that he was going to challenge
her and debate with her the correctness
or otherwise of what she was saying to him.
Nguyen identified the patient's attitude as displaying anger and upset. The
matters put to Dr Nguyen by the two HCCC representatives
on that occasion when
they sought to question him on the content of his comments to the patient need
not be engaged here, as they
can be adequately covered in the course of
analysing the specific segments of the conversation that have been separated out
paragraphs that will shortly follow.
that background explanation, it is appropriate to now set out the tribunal's
interpretation of that conversation.
recording shows that the conversation in question started with the patient
requesting her medical records. Dr Nguyen immediately
and without hesitation,
indicated to the patient that he would oblige her request. In doing so he said
he wanted to apologise for
what happened at the last consultation. The patient
responded by seizing the agenda and asking for an apology. Dr Nguyen responded
by saying he was really sorry for what had happened and gave a sincere apology
without including any content to that apology. Dr
Nguyen's expression of apology
was given in an apparently awkward tone. It is plain that he was bewildered. The
patient then took
the initiative in the conversation and adopted a forthright
tone in putting a series of assertions to Dr Nguyen.
assertions that the patient made to Dr Nguyen in the recorded conversation can
be summarised as follows:
(1) An assertion was made of two separate elements of impropriety, comprising
two separate attempts
". These were identified as being first, whilst the
was in here
", indicating the consulting room, and the second
was on the table
". The order in which those assertions were
made, did not accurately reflect the chronology of the events that occurred
consultation: (
Claim of two attempts of
impropriety
(2) An assertion that there was "
" [for what was left unstated]
as Dr Nguyen was "
in a position of authority
inexcusable abuse of authority
(3) An exclamatory reference was made to "
the doctor across the road
this being a reference to another general practitioner who had, to the apparent
knowledge of the parties, acted inappropriately
to a patient, approximately 3
years earlier: (
Reference to an abusive
(4) An assertion that perhaps Dr Nguyen should not be in his profession if he
can't handle
natural human feelings
Reference to
human feelings
(5) An assertion that Dr Nguyen knew the patient had been in "
a vulnerable
half clothed
Claim of vulnerability when
patient half clothed
(6) A rebuttal statement to the effect that Dr Nguyen's work in having acted in
the patient's best interests as her doctor over a
number of years, had now
gone out the window
Work gone out the
(7) An assertion that Dr Nguyen had "
just completely broken all of
trust in male doctors
Broken trust in male
(8) An assertion that the patient had felt "
sick and disgusting
had left Dr Nguyen's premises, and the related statement that because he was a
doctor he was "
not meant to do
[unspecified]
things like that
Claim of feelings of disgust
(9) A refusal of Dr Nguyen's offers of apology, the patient stating that she had
no intention of returning to him as her doctor because
what just happened
[which was left unspecified and which]
has just changed everything
Refusal of apology
of the above (9) elements of assertion require a contextual analysis that takes
into consideration the entire circumstances of
the recorded conversation between
the patient and Dr Nguyen. That analysis follows.
striking preliminary observation about the conversation is that no particular
admissions were made by Dr Nguyen, consistent with
his stated empathic approach
to the confrontation. In the sequence of paragraphs that follows, each of the
assertions made by the
patient are examined in the order in which they arose in
the conversation.
Assertion 1 - Claim of two attempts of impropriety
patient started the conversation by requesting her medical records. Dr Nguyen
can be heard to immediately agree to provide them,
which did not suggest that he
had something to hide. In that initial interchange, the patient also took the
initiative by requesting
an apology. Dr Nguyen, who was initially hesitant, and
clearly bewildered, responded immediately with an apology without particular
content. In his evidence, he explained that at the time he was trying to
empathise with the patient.
patient made her request in an assertive tone. The tribunal considers that
empathetic response would have been appropriate in
order to avoid confrontation.
Dr Nguyen's recorded response was consistent with an empathetic approach to
having been confronted
in the manner described. Dr Nguyen's bewildered response
is considered to be naturally appropriate to those circumstances. That initial
exchange was as follows:
Pt: ... I wanted to get my medical records.
Dr: Oh, right. Do you want the copy of ---
Pt: Yeah, that's fine.
Dr: Yeah. Well, I've, can I just explain what, what happened?
Pt: I would like an apology.
Dr: I'm really sorry for what happened. I'm very sorry that, that I, I
don't know what to say but to really sincerely say sorry to
be honest."
portion of the conversation had been relatively straightforward and was not
overly pressured, although Dr Nguyen can be heard
to sigh and exhale as he
apologised. This was consistent with an air of bewilderment on his part. There
were also some pauses that
are not reflected in the transcript.
patient then took an assertive tone, and alleged two incidents of impropriety in
a way that indicated she was calling upon Dr
Nguyen for an answer. In his
response, Dr Nguyen did not acknowledge any impropriety. He adopted an empathic
response as he sought
details. In that part of the conversation, the patient
responded by referring to the offer of a breast examination, and to the alleged
touching of her leg. That interchange was as follows:
Pt: Do you know how inappropriate that was, on two separate attempts
while I was in here, once when I was on the table and then when
I was leaving?
What were you, what were you trying to do?
Dr: When was, when you were leaving?
Pt: When I was leaving and you said, "Would you like me, should I check
your breasts."
Dr: What, when was on the table, what do you mean?
Pt: You, oh, you know that that was inappropriate, touching my leg.
Dr: I just can't remember what I did. I'm really sorry. But I did make
the inappropriate comments about you when you stand up, when
you were standing
here, and I, I've been very very very sad about all of this. I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm,
I don't know what to say but be
really really sorry about the whole thing. I
don't know what got over me on, on that particular day and I've been trying my
to be very professional and I know that I've, I've broken your trust, I, I
don't know what to say, to be honest, I've, on that particular
day I think, and
you can just hear me out ---"
this part of the conversation the patient had elevated her tone in asking her
questions. She had proceeded to talk over Dr Nguyen
when he tried to say
something. There was obviously some incompletely verbalised expression on the
part of the patient when she said
" and then sighed, as if in
the patient made the allegation of leg touching, there was a significant pause
before Dr Nguyen replied. He seemed to have a
perplexed tone in his reply. His
reply was hesitant in parts, with brief exhalatory pauses as he found his words
to reply. It is
not clear why he said "
can you just hear me out
may or may not have been some non-verbal behaviour from the patient that led him
to say this, as this appeared to have been
said by him in a tone of frustration.
Alternatively, Dr Nguyen may have been scrambling for words to reply. It is
difficult to determine
which was the case, but the conversation fits in with Dr
Nguyen's description that he was being interrupted, and that he was not
adequate opportunity to explain himself.
several matters of significance emerge from the above portion of the
conversation.
the patient's allegations of impropriety made no reference to any aspect of Dr
Nguyen's touching of her private parts.
, when the patient
referred to a touching of her leg, Dr Nguyen's response was one of bewilderment.
, Dr Nguyen was clearly regretful that the patient was unhappy
, his tone was one of abject apology, not
self-justification. This was consistent with his description of his approach to
in which that conversation had developed. The terms of Dr Nguyen's
apology at this point in the conversation are worthy of
is plain that the apology made by Dr Nguyen at this point was not an
acknowledgment of particular wrongdoing. Dr Nguyen was clearly
upset at the
confrontation. He was grappling with how he should respond in an empathic way
towards his patient, who was herself clearly
upset. This was not a normal
conversational interchange. As is clear from the purpose of the patient's
attendance to record the conversation,
she was not going to be placated. She was
there with a pre-arranged agenda in mind. Although she stated at the outset,
that she wanted
an apology, she was clearly not open to receiving or accepting
any apology from Dr Nguyen, as the course of the conversation later
this part of the conversation, Dr Nguyen had clearly recognised that he had to
empathise with the patient, and not antagonise her,
as he had explained.
approach was entirely understandable, given his knowledge of her history of
psychological issues. In that context, the tribunal
does not consider Dr
Nguyen's non-specific expression "
I don't know what got over me
constitute an admission of guilt of any kind. This view arises because of the
limited and non-particularised content of the conversation,
where the statement
was said in juxtaposition with his other statement that he had been trying to do
his best for the patient over
many years.
message Dr Nguyen was seeking to convey by those words was incompletely
recorded. He only got as far as saying that he was sorry
he had broken her
trust. Whatever else he was about to say was then cut off by the patient
interrupting him by her redoubled effort
at confronting him at that
Assertion 2 - Claim of inexcusable abuse of authority
further confrontation was sharply aimed at seeking a more elaborate response
from Dr Nguyen, as is evident from the following
Pt: There's no excuse. You're in a position of authority.
Dr: I understand that, yeah. There's, there, I don't have, I'm not
trying to look for any excuses at all."
portion of the conversation is marked by the patient having adopted an
exclamatory tone and elevating the tone of her voice,
placing extra emphasis on
Nguyen's response to that rebuke was initially hesitant in the face of the
patient's sustained assertiveness. His response appeared
to be self-deprecatory
in the sense he was scrambling for words. It is clear that he was not seeking to
argue with her. This was
consistent with his explanation of those
patient then took the initiative, sensing either that Dr Nguyen was not in
control of the conversation, or that he was not arguing
with her. At this point
she asserted herself by demanding he explain what he wanted to say. In this
confrontation, Dr Nguyen's response
was to a degree rambling. He was obviously
upset at the confrontation, and his attempts to explain himself were abruptly
by the patient, as the following extract shows:
Pt: Well, then what is there to hear out?
Dr: I just want you to understand that on that particular day I don't,
I don't know why I behaved like that. Normally and so far
all other, all the
other patients, including yourself, I have been trying to maintain myself and be
as professional as I could. I
don't know, because I was, there are two sides to
the, to a human and as I always trying to help patients understand that. One is
the professional side of you and one is just being a normal human being. And
doctor it is very hard for us every day we are trying to suppress
normal natural human being response and there was just that one
particular time that I don't know because I was tired, I was sick
or hearing you
that you were leaving um, to England, I was worried that you, you, there were
just too many things going through my
mind and it got the better of me
Pt: No excuse. What about ---
Dr: I understand that."
Emphasis added
portion of the conversation was characterised by a moderate matter-of-fact tone
of delivery, occasionally marked by pauses. At
one point Dr Nguyen's thoughts
must have been merging on a point, and he became side-tracked when he said
because I was
" followed by "
there are two sides
" to being human
in the clinical setting. He was clearly speaking in the abstract at that point.
The emphasised text in the above
citation has been added to complete the
non-transcribed portions in the transcribed recording.
that portion of the conversation is considered in its context, Dr Nguyen's
attempts to explain his clinical attitude to the patient
on the day in question
was being abruptly dismissed by the patient.
is significant to observe that when Dr Nguyen's remarks thus far into the
conversation as cited above are analysed, it is plain
that he had not made any
admission of wrongdoing, either particularly or generally.
Essentially,
in the context of the overall events, Dr Nguyen was saying that on 3 September
2009, he, as a human and a professional,
was sick and he was tired (it was the
end of his working day) and his human side had erred in making a judgment as to
what he had
said regarding her medical needs, and that had caused offence. It is
plain from the evidence that he was referring to his offer of
examination, notwithstanding whatever else may have been the focus of the
patient's thoughts at that time.
would appear that Dr Nguyen was justifying himself, by reference to his human
feelings of benevolence towards his patient in whom
he had invested a lot of his
time and effort, successfully it seemed, until this moment.
tribunal considers that Dr Nguyen was referring to his feelings of concern and
worry that by the patient leaving to go to England,
she would be lost to
follow-up. As he explained, those were the matters that were, understandably,
going through his mind at the
time. He had expressed his sadness that he had
upset her at the time she had left his consultation room on the day in question.
would have been unusual for him not to have felt that way, given the history
of his care for the patient and especially given the
abrupt manner in which the
consultation had been terminated by the patient.
light of the foregoing analysis on this part of the consultation, were Dr
Nguyen's responses reasonable in the circumstances? The
tribunal considers they
those responses indicate by their nature, content or context that Dr Nguyen was
exhibiting a consciousness of his guilt or wrongdoing
with regard to his
conduct? The tribunal considers they did not.
this part of the content of the conversation indicate that Dr Nguyen was
acknowledging that he had behaved towards his patient
in a sexualised way? The
tribunal considers that it does not.
Assertion 3 - Reference to an abusive doctor
this point in the recorded conversation, in talking over Dr Nguyen, and in order
to pursue her own agenda, the patient introduced
the notion of an alleged
sexualised component having been part of the events of the consultation on 3
September 2009, as is evident
in the following extract:
Pt: --- after you told me the doctor across the road -
Dr: I understand that. I ---
Pt: You told me about him and like I never, I never thought, after you
told me, that was how many years ago you told me about that?
Maybe three years
ago you told me about that doctor and, you know, how horrible it was, what he
was doing, and then you went and
tried to do the same thing."
this portion of the conversation, Dr Nguyen was clearly on the back-foot as the
patient was proceeding to repeatedly interrupt
him in what he was trying to say
to her. She did so in an accusatory tone.
patient's non-specific reference to Dr Nguyen having "
tried to do the same
" is a clear reference to an apprehension on her part of there having
been a doctor patient boundary violation, to her way of
are four matters of significance that arise from Dr Nguyen's response, which was
as follows:
Dr: Well, like I said, I, I don't know what happened to me on that day
but I was, I was wrong by you. I sincerely from the bottom
of my heart, I did
want to ring you up to say sorry but I thought that would make you feel even
more inappropriate that I was taking
advantage of the situation."
matter of significance is that Dr Nguyen was plainly searching for
words by which he should respond to the accusation that the patient
had levelled
at him in this way.
matter of significance from Dr Nguyen's response is that he was
empathising with the patient by acknowledging her feelings that in
estimation, he had wronged her. That acknowledgment was entirely devoid of any
specific content. Dr Nguyen was again apologising
to her, saying it had been on
his mind, and he had thought of ringing her, but he had decided not to, in order
to avoid exacerbating
the situation by compounding her perception that something
inappropriate had occurred at the consultation on 3 September 2009, contrary
his perception of the events.
matter of significance is that in offering his sincere apology to
the patient, again, he made no admission of any specific guilt
or wrongdoing. It
is plain that he was simply trying to placate his patient, who was being
assertive, accusatory, and plainly displaying
some anger towards
Nguyen's apology had no effect on the patient's approach to the conversation.
She continued on with an assertive and provocative
Pt: If you are in this profession and you think that you can't handle
it, then maybe you shouldn't be. You know ---
Dr: Well ---"
this point, the accusatory tone of the patient and the content of what she was
saying, although unparticularised, escalated the
accusation.
matter of significance is that to the extent that it might be
thought Dr Nguyen's responses appeared to be glib, that impression
is dispelled
when the content of his HCCC interview on 23 June 2011 is taken into
conversation that followed was stultified. It did not flow naturally. It was
characterised by the patient being assertive, according
to the agenda that she
had at the time, and which is now known. Dr Nguyen was in effect put on the
spot. He was obviously torn between
the need to empathise and placate the
assertions of his patient, as opposed to his need to protect himself from the
onslaught of
her assertions. He was endeavouring to pursue both objectives. His
attempt at a response was cut off by the patient as she launched
into her next
impression gained from the recording is that in the circumstances, Dr Nguyen had
remained dignified but bewildered by what was
Assertion 4 - Reference to human feelings
the assertion that followed, the patient picked upon Dr Nguyen's earlier
expression of his feelings for her as a patient. At this
point the agendas of
the participants to the conversation were well and truly at
cross-purposes.
patient had turned Dr Nguyen's reference to human feelings, which may have been,
in hindsight, an infelicitous choice of expression
on his part, into an implied
boundary violation, as the following cited extract shows:
Pt: --- if you, if you think that you can't suppress these feelings,
natural, natural human feelings as you so called them, maybe
you shouldn't be
this point, the patient's tone included a sarcastic edge when she suggested that
Dr Nguyen shouldn't be in practice, which was
the clear contextual meaning of
her cited remark.
Nguyen's response, which requires analysis, was in the following
Dr: Well, that's, they are, we're being, when we come out to general
practice we do have lectures and tutorials on what to do, 'cause
we, we know
that we do have to deal with this every day and what they were advising us is if
you start to have feelings towards the
patient or if the patient have feelings
towards you and you feel uncomfortable, you should make the patient aware so
they can find
another doctor. Most of the time we should be able to suppress
that and carry on with our work, and so far I honestly promise you
that I have
been utmost professional until that particular day. And I don't know what got
over me, to be honest, I just don't know
what happened and, and I have not, if
you can ask all the female patient I had so far, I have, I have not had any
incidents apart
from you. I have to say that I, I'm not, I should have asked you
that when it start to affect doctors and patient relationship"
tone of Dr Nguyen's response as cited above was a bland, matter-of-fact but
non-particularised defence of himself. He remained
calm and dignified throughout
this part of the conversation.
first part of Dr Nguyen's cited answer was a rendition of the effect of standard
risk management principles, and was unremarkable,
until he used the words "
honestly promise you that I have been utmost professional until that particular
day. And I don't know what got over me, ... I just
don't know what
portion cited above is ambiguous in a number of respects. It contains no
specific admission of wrongdoing. Whilst it implies there
may have possibly been
some inappropriate feelings, a matter that is far from certain, it would be
unreasonable to infer that Dr
Nguyen was conceding he had acted inappropriately
in some unspecified way. The conversation was vague and not
incriminating.
Nguyen's use of the expression "
until that day
" is also open to differing
interpretations. It could be taken to mean he was admitting that something
untoward had occurred on that
day. Alternatively, it could also be taken to mean
he had consistently behaved correctly, including up until that particular day.
It was a sentinel day for their professional relationship because, contrary to
the rapport he had built up with her as a patient
over the course of the 6
previous years, she had stormed out of his premises, and had now returned,
assertively displaying anger
when directing her questions at him. Dr Nguyen may
have simply been trying to highlight that he had not behaved in an untoward
The remarks are too general to base a specific inference that Dr Nguyen
was acknowledging turpitude on his part.
similar analysis arises as to the meaning of the words "
I have not had any
incidents apart from you
could have meant he had not had a patient display offence in the manner that had
occurred when she terminated the consultation
on 3 September 2009 and stormed
out of his premises. That event could certainly be described as "
". It could have possibly meant that he was acknowledging having
harboured improper thoughts. It could have also possibly meant that
he had acted
improperly.
because of the lack of the particularity from the content and context, all of
the above interpretations amount to nothing
more than unweighted speculation. In
the total context of the evidence, the cited statement therefore cannot serve as
a sound basis
for reasonably inferring the occurrence of professional conduct
that should attract peer criticism:
Luxton v Vines
[1952] HCA 19
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
further matter to be considered in relation to the cited portion of the
conversation is the meaning of the phrase "...
I should have asked you that
when it start to affect doctors and patient relationship
". It's noteworthy
that this comment was made in an abstract context.
statement has to be evaluated in light of the clinical setting, where the
patient agreed in her evidence to the tribunal, that
she had not told Dr Nguyen
of any of the concerns she described as having arisen in the course of the
consultation until she had
reacted at the end of that consultation. It must also
be viewed in light of the patient's acknowledged confusion over the events
that consultation. Those matters of qualification must serve to diminish the
potentially negative significance of the cited comments.
is also distinctly possible that Dr Nguyen was simply saying that in cases where
there is a perception or feelings of discomfort
on the part of the patient, this
could or should have been explored and a referral made to another
tribunal considers that on the state of the evidence, any interpretation in
favour of turpitude on Dr Nguyen's part must be seen
as being speculative. His
cited comments do not represent an acknowledgment of any particular or general
wrongdoing on his part.
Assertion 5 - Claim of vulnerability when patient was half
patient then stepped up the nature of assertions by stating that she had felt
vulnerable when she was half clothed, thereby implying
something untoward had
occurred, although no particular allegation of wrongdoing was made concerning Dr
Nguyen's actions. This is
evident from the following
interchange:
Pt: You knew what a vulnerable situation I was in as well ---
Dr: Yeah. And so far ---
Pt: --- half-clothed."
patient was at this point talking over Dr Nguyen, who had been previously been
trying to respond. She maintained the upper hand
in the conversation. This is
consistent with Dr Nguyen's description of the conversation as set out in his
HCCC record of interview.
is plain from Dr Nguyen's response, that not only did he not make any relevant
admissions in this part of the conversation, but
there was a distinct
possibility that the parties were at cross-purposes. This is because at this
point in the conversation, he was
reminding her that he had looked after her
over the years with her best interests in mind, as the following extract
Dr: I'm not, I'm not talking about on that particular day, I'm talking
I do best as a doctor
and not do anything to harm you and you observed
throughout that, all these years I've been looking after you."
Transcription correction added
this point, there was no discernable space between that answer and the patient's
next statement. The rapidity of the patient's
next words do not permit a
conclusion on whether Dr Nguyen had in fact finished his answer. The highlighted
text in the above quotation
corrects the transcription error.
tribunal considers that Dr Nguyen's statement as cited above should be seen as a
rebuttal of any assertion of wrongdoing. The
reference to "
that particular
" is equivocal, and certainly does not represent an admission of any
misconduct or wrongdoing. The balance of Dr Nguyen's response
was in effect
telling the patient he always had her best interests in mind. It was not a plea
in mitigation of an underlying assumption
of wrongdoing. It was simply a
rebuttal of any suggestion of wrongdoing over the course of their clinical
relationship.
Assertion 6 - Work gone out the window
Notwithstanding
the conciliatory stance taken by Dr Nguyen, in the course of the conversation,
the patient was not going to be placated,
as her following statement in response
Pt: Well, that's kind of gone out the window now, hasn't it."
Nguyen's reply, in the context of the patient's repeated assertions of some
implied misconduct on his part, bears analysis. His
response was in the
following terms:
Dr: Well, I know. It just takes one fraction of one second of the
stupidity and it's undoing all my good work. And I have been so
depressed and,
and I got sick because of that, of that incidence, because of my (immune system
changed) so I'm not trying to make
up an excuse but I have. Not until this week
I'm starting to get, to come to term with it, that, that, that what I done was
inappropriate. So all I could ask you is for your sincere, to give you my
sincere apologies and I hope that the things that I done
for you all this time,
you were able to forgive me as, as a man that has suggest to you this, but
definitely not as a, not as doctor.
And I know you've been through a lot and I,
it hurt me so much to see you hurt by this, because I do really care about you,
that. And that care has gone in a way that made me inappropriately said
something like that. I don't know what I can do to, to make
up the situation or
that cited response, Dr Nguyen was being hesitant and his delivery was
disjointed in parts.
Dr Nguyen was trying to say in his response, which was to some degree rambling,
was then cut off by the patient's next words,
which were in the form of a
strongly delivered rebuff, with what was to be her seventh
the extent that Dr Nguyen gave an answer to the previous assertion, it is
ambiguous and does not compel a finding of wrongdoing.
Nguyen's explanation of the misunderstanding was obviously being delivered to an
unreceptive audience. The preamble of the answer
clearly indicates his distress
at the shattered state of his relationship with his patient. He was telling her
he had been depressed
and sick because he had been ruminating upon that
circumstance when the implications of her actions in storming out of his
room fully came home to him. His unchallenged description of his
depressed state at the time of that conversation also has to be
account in his favour, as this could have influenced the terms of his response,
and it could influence the interpretation
of that response.
that context, where Dr Nguyen's acknowledgment in the terms "...
what I done
was quite inappropriate
", this must be interpreted for its possible
such meaning is that Dr Nguyen was acknowledging that he had done something
wrong in a professional conduct sense. However, before
such an interpretation
can be adopted, it must be seen to be attached to a clinical event. An inchoate
remark, unanchored to such
an event, merely confirms its foundation in
speculation, which cannot reasonably ground a finding of conduct that attracts
the criticism
of peers. Speculation along those lines is contrary to the
evidence of Dr Nguyen to the effect that he was simply trying to empathise
his patient.
such meaning is that Dr Nguyen was referring to the offer of a breast
examination when he should have known he was dealing
with a person who, because
of her history which was known to him, was in some way psychologically
vulnerable. That interpretation
seems a more likely one because Dr Nguyen went
on to refer to having "
inappropriately said something
interpretation requires a separate evaluation in due course, in the context and
the terms of the allegations that comprise
the seventh
Particular of
the course of Dr Nguyen's rambling reply at this point in the conversation, he
was offering an explanation for the misunderstanding
that had arisen over his
offer to the patient of a breast examination, and he was asking for the
patient's forgiveness if he had
caused her offence due to any human failing on
his part that might have led to his failure to appreciate this possible
consequence
that had precipitated. That circumstance falls far short of an
acknowledgment of unsatisfactory professional conduct, or alternatively,
professional misconduct.
turns on the rambling nature of Dr Nguyen's reply. It was a human response to
the untoward events that were unfolding before
him, and which were patently
beyond his control, where his attempts to empathise and apologise to his patient
were being rebuffed
by the patient in a manner and tone he had not hitherto
experienced in their 6 year clinical relationship.
the efforts that Dr Nguyen had made over the years in helping the patient, and
realising that an apparently irremediable misunderstanding
had occurred,
evidenced by the fallout that was occurring in front of him, it would be unusual
for a dedicated general practitioner
not to display upset in such
circumstances.
Nguyen's statement of apology was couched in terms of humility. It is plain that
he was apologising for something he said that
had made the patient think
something had occurred which was inappropriate. On the patient's own evidence,
this could only have been
a reference to the offer of a breast examination.
However, having regard to the terms used by Dr Nguyen, it could not be
inferred from his cited response, that he was conceding some form of
wrongful conduct on his part.
Assertion 7 - Broken trust in male doctors
the patient's response to Dr Nguyen's attempt to explain, which she delivered in
the form of an interruption to what Dr Nguyen
was trying to say, the patient
brushed off his attempts to apologise when he sought to assuage her expressions
is difficult to assess the patient's motives at that point. Whilst the tribunal
accepts that at all times after Dr Nguyen had offered
her a breast examination
she had sincerely believed Dr Nguyen had misconducted himself towards her, at
this stage of her assertions
to Dr Nguyen, knowing the intended evidentiary
purpose of the recording of that conversation, questions arise as to the
thought processes, and what drove her thoughts and responses at this
point in the conversation.
fairness, such questions cannot be resolved here because the details were not
explored in the patient's evidence. It is therefore
sufficient to simply
observe, as is shown in the following cited extract from the conversation, that
the patient would not be placated,
notwithstanding that Dr Nguyen was still
trying to do so by seeking to empathise with her:
Pt: You can't do anything. You've just completely broken all of my
trust in male doctors.
Dr: I understand."
this point in the recording the patient's voice had displayed a distinct tone of
Assertion 8 - Claim of feelings of disgust
this point, a curious matter was introduced into the conversation by the
patient, which gives rise to a doubt as to the genuineness
of what she was
asserting to Dr Nguyen in her endeavour to provoke some verbal responses from
him to the assertions she had put to
him. The relevant content of the
conversation was as follows:
Pt: I've grown up with men. I have no problems with male doctors,
professionals, nothing like that. I've always grown up with men
and I've, had no
problems until now. I feel sick thinking about it.
Dr: I understand that, [patient's first name]. Is there anything that I
Pt: No, there's nothing you can do because I'm leaving on Saturday and
Dr: Can I ask you ---
It's affected me personally. You know, me and my boyfriend were
sorting things out. I can't sleep with him because every time he touches
think how disgusting I felt when I left here
Emphasis added
this point the patient's voice sounded increasingly upset. There was a pause and
an inhalation then an exhalation, and then a sigh,
when she said "...
leaving on Saturday and
...". She sounded as if she was sniffling, maybe
even crying, when she said she was leaving on Saturday. The transcript reads as
Dr Nguyen had interrupted her, but this was not so. In the pause at that
point, she may have been simply gathering her thoughts before
putting her next
assertion to him.
she said she had been affected personally, she appeared to have had a tearful
and pressured tone in her voice. When she used
the words "
pronounced those words in an emphatic tone. It was not reasonably possible to
draw meaningful conclusions from those emphases.
matter that arouses some curiosity in that part of the patient's statement to Dr
Nguyen concerned her assertion, which has been
emphasised in the cited text,
that as a result of Dr Nguyen's actions that are the subject of the present
complaints, she could not
sleep with her boyfriend, and that every time he
touched her, she felt disgusted, whereas to that point, they "
were sorting
cited remarks were at odds with the effect of the other evidence given by the
patient, and they were at odds with the patient's
history given to Dr Nguyen.
this regard, those statements were inconsistent with the patient's historical
account to the effect that she and her boyfriend
had separated. Nothing in the
evidence of the intervening 8 days between 3 September 2009 and 11 September
2009 (noting she was leaving
for the UK the next day) suggests that she and her
boyfriend had reconciled, or had made up, and that they had attempted to resume
physical relations in circumstances that had caused her to feel disgusted.
the state of the evidence, the tribunal considers that this aspect of the
recorded conversation raised considerable doubt as to
the truthfulness of the
assertions being put to Dr Nguyen by the patient in the recorded conversation.
This tends to confirm the
provocative nature of the patient's
patient continued to display an assertive attitude in which she again expressed
her disgust, including when she then reiterated
her request for her records, as
Dr: I'm sorry so much, [patient's first name]. I didn't mean it that
way. Why would you feel disgusted?
Pt: Because you're a doctor. Because you're not meant to do things like
Dr: Well, why, so that is me, it's not you. Why would you just be
disgusted about yourself?
Pt: Because I just think of, every time he tries to touch me I think of
you touching me. I just, I'd just like my records and I'll
Dr: Sure. Can you please trust me that to that date ---
Dr: --- that I have not had any ill intentions or done anything wrong
by you. I have always acted as professional as I could."
transcript of that cited portion of the conversation does not identify the
apparently upset tone that was evident in Dr Nguyen's
reply. Nor does it
identify the pauses in his reply. Nor does the transcript demonstrate the
patient's sighing, and the accusatory
emphasis on the words "
is plain from the portion of the conversation cited above, that Dr Nguyen was
maintaining that he had not done anything wrong by
the patient, despite her
implied assertion to the contrary when she made the unparticularised statement
you're not meant to do things like that
", and when she made her
statement "
I think of you touching me
much of this part of the conversation is left ambiguous and left open to
interpretation. Was the patient complaining about Dr Nguyen
touching her in a
way that disgusted her? Was she saying that in her mind, she was associating her
boyfriend's attempts to touch
her with Dr Nguyen having touched her? Was the
latter notion an imagined association or was there a similarity being asserted.
evidence of the recording, and the other evidence, does not allow these
questions to be reasonably resolved. Resolution of such matters
by speculation
is not permissible:
Luxton v Vines
[1952] HCA 19
(1952) 85 CLR
Furthermore,
the complete lack of particularity of those statements by the patient
significantly diminishes their probative value
in these proceedings:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
the conversation continued, the patient proceeded to issue a general rebuff to
Dr Nguyen, consistent with the pretext purpose for
her being there, as is
evident from the following interchanges:
Pt: It doesn't matter what happened, it doesn't matter what it was like
before, what just happened has just changed everything.
Dr: Is there anything that I could do to make you feel that I'm, all
this time I'm always doing what's best for you. That one moment
of time I just,
you're going to England. Why would you need your file, [patient's name]?
Pt: Because I have no intention of coming back here.
Dr: O.K. Well, I definitely would not want to withhold anything from
you, so I'll, do you want me to do it now or do you want ---
Dr: Can I copy it and leave it for you out there to pick up or ---
Pt: No, I'd prefer you to do it now.
Dr: Yeah, it will take quite a bit of a time so if you could just leave
me um, can you give me until the end of the day so I can
copy it and leave it
out there for you? I'll ask [staff member's name] to copy it and you can pick it
up at the end of the day."
component of the patient's conversation sounded pressured. The patient's voice
sounded impatient as she spoke. Dr Nguyen's comments
were hesitant. He was
clearly worried at that time, hence his question as to why the patient wanted
her file. His response in that
regard was an open one that was beyond criticism,
especially as he had already agreed to give her a copy of her
Dr Nguyen was still stunned and bewildered by the patient's performance. He had
been trying to assuage the affronted stance
she was very apparently displaying
towards him, although at the time, he did not appreciate the futility of his
attempts at trying
to empathise, apologise and placate.
the conversation petered out with Dr Nguyen agreeing to get the patient's
records copied.
Assertion 9 - Refusal of apology
Dr Nguyen reiterated his agreement to provide a copy of the patient's records,
he unsuccessfully tried one more time to beseech
her to forgive any shortcoming
on his part, which he still did not understand, as the following cited extract
of the conversation
Dr: Can you go do some shopping or, but [patient's name], please, like,
I beg you, can you please forget what happened because I
genuinely, I don't know
what to say to you to reverse the time so you don't feel anything bad about
Pt: You can't do anything.
Dr: Would you accept my apologies?
part of the conversation was accompanied by pauses and the sound of pages
turning. The patient's response using the words "
you can't do anything
was delivered rapidly, as was her refusal of Dr Nguyen's apology. There was a
gap before Dr Nguyen asked her to accept his apologies.
appears that Dr Nguyen then realised the futility of pursuing a conversation
with the patient on the subject matter of her still
only vaguely articulated
grievances towards him.
conversation ended with a final unilateral effort on the part of Dr Nguyen
seeking to convey a conciliatory message to the patient,
Dr: I've said what I need to say and I hope you, in time you can not be
affected by this, so I genuinely feel very bad about this
'cause all these year
I've been trying to help you and yet I undo all my, all my good work. So. Can
you, I'll get Marie to leave
it out for you.
Pt: O.K. (INAUDIBLE CONVERSATION)"
last part of the conversation appeared to be accompanied by the patient
sniffling. The entire conversation took place over the
course of a little under
14 minutes, after which the patient's footsteps could be heard as she walked
meaning of what Dr Nguyen had referred to as "
", which was affecting
the patient, and for which he had felt bad, remains unclear, even when the
conversation is examined as a whole.
pervading sense of ambiguity remains from the overall content of the
conversation. When the conversation, both in its audio and
transcribed form is
considered as a whole, the following conclusions emerge.
it is important to recognise the nature of the viewing prism by which the
recorded conversation is analysed. When the ambiguity
of the conversation is
considered from a stand-point overshadowed by an analytical bias primed to seize
upon evidence that might
be useful to support an argued case of wrongdoing on
the part of Dr Nguyen, this must be recognised as having the very real potential
to produce a skewed and misleading analysis delivered by the natural potential
for distortion that necessarily comes from using such
recognising the potential for a misdirected analysis to emerge in the form
identified above, it is of the utmost importance to analyse
the conversation for
its factual content before seeking to draw any adverse inferences from that
factual content.
once the essential factual content is winnowed from the conversation so it can
be examined, it becomes plain that the patient's
verbalised complaints to Dr
Nguyen, and to which he was responding were, (a), the offer of a breast
examination, and (b), an allegation
that Dr Nguyen had done something, that was
unspecified, whilst she was on the examination table.
of those matters require analysis in the context of the professional clinical
setting in which they arose. The tribunal has undertaken
that exercise in its
reasons for decision on the individual
Particulars of Complaint
Those reasons shortly follow, in the sections that follow the present analysis.
in interpreting the recorded conversation for the purpose of assessing whether
it can be considered to reasonably provide evidence
that is confirmatory of the
alleged professional wrongdoing on the part of Dr Nguyen, it must be borne in
mind that this was no ordinary
conversation. Instead, it was orchestrated by
pretext and provocation, and it was also driven by the patient's display of
possibly for those purposes. In those senses, the conversation was, on
the patient's side, contrived.
that context, it was therefore inevitable that Dr Nguyen, as the patient's
longstanding doctor who had more than just a superficial
understanding of her
psychological vulnerabilities, would respond in a conciliatory, apologetic and
empathic manner, to seek to placate
his obviously angry patient, and at the same
time try to find out precisely what it was that was bothering her. Dr Nguyen's
apologies to the patient have to be viewed in that pronouncedly
artificial light, which must necessarily severely limit and constrain
inferential process that might be reasonably applied to that
conversation.
in assessing the conversation for its potential probative value, it must be
recognised that the patient was asserting her control
of a predetermined agenda
for a conversation that was punctuated by her provocative and accusatory
statements. Dr Nguyen's attempts
to defuse the intensity of those comments and
to focus the discussion by apologising and to seek particularity, were being
deflected by the patient. Dr Nguyen was obviously trying to work out
not only what the patient was going on about, but to also try
to work out how he
should manage such an assertive confrontation that was hitherto uncharacteristic
of this patient.
heard Dr Nguyen's evidence in response to relevantly focussed questions in the
structural framework of the particularised criticisms
raised in these
proceedings, including his evidence explaining his responses that are recorded
in his 11 September 2009 conversation
with the patient, the tribunal is
satisfied that the recorded conversation should be seen to be neutral material
insofar as it does
not provide any reliable proof of professional wrongdoing on
the part of Dr Nguyen.
tribunal is also satisfied that the recorded conversation provided no factual or
reasonable basis for inferring that Dr Nguyen
had a consciousness of
professional turpitude, either at the time of the examination of the patient on
3 September 2009, or at the
time when the later conversation with the patient
was recorded on 11 September 2009.
the reasons outlined in the above analysis, the tribunal is satisfied that the
recorded conversation provides no reasonable evidence
for the allegation that Dr
Nguyen had in any way acted in a manner that properly attracts the criticisms of
a consequence of the above analysis, the tribunal considers that the content of
the conversation between the patient and Dr Nguyen
that was recorded by the
police under pretext, is so lacking in particularity that it does not provide a
reasonable basis for inferring
that Dr Nguyen was guilty of the conduct alleged
against him.
therefore becomes necessary to examine the individual
Particulars of
and to set out the tribunal's reasons for determining each of
Particulars of Complaint
. That consideration is as
Whether Dr Nguyen had an improper sexual motive towards the
the reasons that follow, the tribunal rejects the proposition that Dr Nguyen had
at any time, and in any respect, either intentionally
or unintentionally, acted
in a manner that sexualised, or sought to sexualise, or tended to sexualise, the
doctor patient relationship
in this case.
the tribunal has formed the view that none of the content of the interchanges
between Dr Nguyen and the patient described in the
evidence and within the
tendered material, indicates an inappropriate or sexualised motive on Dr
Nguyen's part in the course of the
evidence of that doctor and patient
discussion.
the tribunal accepts Dr Nguyen's evidence that at no time did his actions
regarding the patient involve sexual impropriety of any
kind. In this regard,
the tribunal accepts that Dr Nguyen at all times, had the best interests of his
patient in mind. The tribunal
finds that at no time did Dr Nguyen cross any
professional boundaries regarding his patient.
insofar as it is arguable that the conversation between Dr Nguyen and the
patient, recorded by means of a listening device on 11
September 2009, could be
said to imply some acknowledgment of feelings or actions of impropriety in the
circumstances of the consultation
on 3 September 2009, the tribunal does not
accept that interpretation. This is because, as Dr Nguyen's interview with the
23 November 2011 makes clear, the recorded conversation in question was
not fully indicative of Dr Nguyen's thought processes. Dr
Nguyen has explained
that his aim at that time was to use neutral language to try and empathise with
his apparently angry patient.
In trying to placate her assertive remarks he was
trying to defuse the situation. The tribunal accepts those explanations. When
content of the recorded conversation is considered in the light of Dr
Nguyen's stated objective as described above, it reveals no
the patient's perception that there was a sexualised and inappropriate component
to Dr Nguyen's clinical actions and statements
on 3 September 2009, was based on
an unfortunate misunderstanding on her part, the causes for which have already
been described in
the tribunal's reasons.
Accordingly,
the tribunal rejects the proposition that Dr Nguyen had behaved with sexual
impropriety of any kind in his professional
dealings with the
Consideration of the Particulars of Complaint
following paragraphs set out the consideration and the findings of the tribunal
on the remaining 7 contested issues of fact that
remain from the 8 issues that
were originally particularised against Dr Nguyen.
Particular 1 - Alleged vulvo-vaginal examination without
tribunal considers that the patient was mistaken in her evidence to the effect
that she had seen Dr Nguyen was not wearing gloves
at the time when he
approached her for the purpose of carrying out his examination of her. The
tribunal has reached this conclusion
for the following reasons.
Dr Nguyen's evidence that he wore gloves was not inherently improbable, and it
therefore needs to be weighed carefully before it
the tribunal reiterates it is satisfied that in agreeing to carry out and
actually carrying out an intimate examination of the patient,
Dr Nguyen did not
harbour any improper sexual motives towards the patient.
notwithstanding the expert evidence to the effect that some medical
practitioners would routinely not use gloves when carrying out
external genital
examinations of their female patients, given Dr Nguyen's past practice, when he
conducted intimate examinations
of the patient's genital area whilst using
gloves, it seems very unlikely he would not have used gloves on this
the tribunal considers that given Dr Nguyen's examination facilities included a
ready supply of gloves within easy reach of the
area where he was conducting his
examination, and given the tribunal's rejection of the suggestion that Dr Nguyen
had some improper
and sexualised motives towards the patient, it would seem
unlikely that he did not use examination gloves on the occasion in
the tribunal considers it most unlikely that Dr Nguyen would have carried out a
vaginal examination of any kind without using gloves.
The tribunal considers
this to be so given the nature of the presenting problem, namely a presenting
history of a possible STI requiring
investigation. On grounds of infection
control issues alone, in the context of the patient's concerns that she may have
a recent STI from her boyfriend whom she said had been unfaithful to
her, for Dr Nguyen to undertake such an examination without
gloves in those
circumstances would have necessarily courted the risk of STI contagion. The
tribunal considers that it was unlikely
that Dr Nguyen would have acted in that
the above views are reinforced by the expert evidence of Dr Kertesz, which the
tribunal accepts, concerning the RACGP guidelines
for using gloves in such
circumstances. Given Dr Nguyen's appropriate pursuit of continuing medical
education, which would have included
knowledge of such guidelines, in the
presenting circumstances, the tribunal is of the view it was improbable that Dr
Nguyen did not
wear gloves on the occasion in question. The tribunal accepts his
evidence that he wore gloves, as was his practice in such
circumstances.
in weighing the evidence the patient gave to the effect that Dr Nguyen was not
wearing gloves when he examined her, and accepting
that she had a perception to
that effect, and that she had made a relatively contemporaneous complaint to the
same effect on the
day in question, that evidence has to be considered in the
light of what the patient was in a position to have observed at the time
examination.
matter relevant to the glove issue is the nature and content of the patient's
recollection of the other surrounding circumstances
generally. In that regard,
she said she could not recall Dr Nguyen having provided her with a modesty
sheet. Her recollection of
the events was not a complete one, and it was
affected by a degree of confusion on her part, as has already been described.
The tribunal
accepts Dr Nguyen's evidence that he had provided the patient with
a modesty sheet before he proceeded with his examination of
Furthermore,
whilst Dr Nguyen had his back turned to the patient and whilst he was preparing
the materials required for the examination,
it is entirely plausible that Dr
Nguyen would have reached for and then put on gloves from the box on the nearby
shelf behind the
patient as he had described in his evidence. Similarly, it was
very unlikely that the patient would have been in a position to see
happening behind her head whilst she was in the supine position on the
examination table looking at the ceiling, as has
been described.
evidence did not suggest that the sequential actions taken by Dr Nguyen in
taking gloves from the box and putting them on and
then adjusting them would
have necessarily made characteristic or definitive sounds to indicate that he
was donning gloves. The patient
gave no evidence on that matter.
tribunal accepts that, consistent with the layout of Dr Nguyen's consulting room
and the juxtaposition of the examination table,
it was more likely than not that
Dr Nguyen had his back to the patient whilst she was removing her lower garments
and was positioning
herself on the examination table as was stated by Dr Nguyen.
In that position, whilst laying supine with her legs drawn towards her
more likely to have been looking up towards the ceiling with a modesty sheet
covering the lower part of her body. In those
circumstances, the tribunal
considers that it was most unlikely that the patient would have been in a
position to see Dr Nguyen's
hands, and whether or not they were gloved or
ungloved, as he approached the examination table in order to examine
the evidence did not suggest that during the physical palpation component of Dr
Nguyen's examination of the patient's vulvo-vaginal
area, or during any hand
patient would have necessarily
felt that she was being examined or touched by
either a gloved hand or by an ungloved hand in circumstances where she was not
a position to see what was occurring in her vulvo-vaginal area. This must be
so irrespective of whether or not a modesty sheet was
being used. The tribunal
considers that on any reasonable analysis, absent the patient stating that she
had sat up to look at the
procedure, it was unlikely she would have had a view
of the examination area.
a consequence of the preceding analysis the tribunal is not persuaded that it
should reject Dr Nguyen's evidence that he wore examination
gloves during his
examination of the patient in favour of an acceptance of the patient's evidence
to the contrary. The tribunal considers
that the patient's evidence in that
regard was unreliable, mistaken, and on the balance of probabilities, it is
unlikely to be correct.
tribunal therefore finds that contrary to the allegation made in the complaint,
Dr Nguyen in fact wore gloves when he conducted
an examination of the patient's
private parts.
Particular 2 - Time taken for vulvo-vaginal examination
the patient honestly believed that the interval of time for the examination of
her private parts had taken too long, and that
the examination may have been
different to the intimate examinations she had experienced in the past, that
belief has to be weighed
alongside the patient's evolving emotional perceptions
and attitudes that arose during the course of this particular examination,
the after-analysis put together by the patient when she took offence at the
offer of a breast examination.
the reasons that follow, the tribunal does not accept the allegation made in the
complaint that Dr Nguyen took an inordinate amount
of time to professionally
carry out his intimate examination on the patient on the day in
neither person present was observing, recording or taking account of the time
taken for the examination. The examination included
exploratory questions,
patient responses, and Dr Nguyen's diagnostic statements, all of which
influenced the time taken.
the varied estimates provided by the patient in respect of that examination,
namely 3 to 5 minutes, which was later varied to about
7 minutes, was in any
event not proffered as being an accurate estimate of the time involved in the
examination.
the independent expert opinion of Dr Bland on this subject was expressed in
general terms. The opinion of Dr Bland on the likely
time required for such an
examination was of limited probative value in assessing this issue. This is
because his evidence was given
from the perspective of his position as a
specialist obstetrician and gynaecologist. From that perspective, he indicated
he was able
to carry out an examination of the kind in question in about 30
seconds or so. That opinion took no account of the less specialised
practice setting in which Dr Nguyen worked, and it did not appear to take into
account the actual clinical circumstances
with which Dr Nguyen was presented,
where the patient was participating by verbally guiding the examination.
intending any disrespect to Dr Bland, his opinion did not take into account any
background psychological factors concerning
the patient, such as apprehension
over the examination, which Dr Nguyen would have been expected to be aware of,
and adjust his examination
style accordingly, to take such matters into account.
Furthermore, Dr Bland's opinion did not include any allowance for a range of
possible patient-related anatomical variations, of which there was no particular
evidence given in this case, other than that the
patient had presented without
pubic hair.
the course and the progress of the examination in question was to a significant
extent being guided by the patient having repeatedly
told Dr Nguyen "
", indicating that as his examination had proceeded, she felt that he
had not yet located the area of her discomfort. This should
be seen as being a
factor that to some extent must have relevantly prolonged the time taken for the
examination.
since the plaintiff's complaint of a rash located in her vulval area was not
visually confirmed by Dr Nguyen's examination, and
given the patient's inability
to correlate any area of irritation to the places where Dr Nguyen was palpating
in the vulval area,
this too suggests that some significant and additional time
would have been taken for Dr Nguyen to carry out this intimate examination,
compared to a more theoretical construct.
Dr Nguyen's estimate of having taken about 2 minutes for his intimate
examination of the patient was not materially challenged.
That estimate did not
seem to be of an inordinate duration where there was scope for widely divergent
perceptions with regard to
the passage of time during such an examination.
may have seemed to have been a relatively quick and routine procedure to a
medical practitioner, may have equally seemed to the
patient to have involved an
indeterminably prolonged period. In view of the expert evidence concerning the
incomplete verbalisations
by Dr Nguyen during the examination to reassure the
patient, to the effect "
it all looks healthy
like, to indicate to the patient that no abnormality was detected in the course
of the examination, it would seem that Dr
Nguyen had conducted a close and
methodical examination over the entire area.
of itself would account for the patient's impression of a significantly longer
period of time having been taken for the examination
compared to other such
examinations she had in the past. Nothing turns on the verbalisations Dr Nguyen
made during his examinations,
which essentially served to report progress and
reassure the patient.
patient's untimed comparisons with her perceptions of the time taken in earlier
vaginal examinations must involve a significant
element of unreliability, and
makes no allowance for Dr Nguyen's need to adjust his examination to the
patient's apprehensions and
sensitivities, which could well have been conveyed,
given her self-described "
" on the subject
Accordingly,
the tribunal is not persuaded that the examination in question involved an
inappropriately prolonged period of time as
alleged in the
Particular 3 - Alleged inappropriate touching of the
the reasons that follow, the tribunal does not accept the allegation that Dr
Nguyen had inappropriately touched the patient's
clitoris during the examination
he carried out on her vulvo-vaginal area.
the expert evidence indicates that touching of the clitoris was an appropriate
action to undertake during the course of a clinical
examination and inspection
of the external genitalia for the purpose of investigating the presenting
complaints of vaginal itchiness
or rash. Generally speaking, and depending upon
a possible range of relevant anatomical variations, as was acknowledged in the
evidence, such an examination could include the possible need for
manipulation of the clitoral prepuce to enable an effective inspection
surrounding skin and the folds underneath or at the base of the clitoris, to
determine whether there were signs of herpes
simplex infection, such as
blisters, sores or fissures. This was consistent with Dr Nguyen's clinical
approach which was based on
his training, namely, to "
look, feel, move
Therefore, the evidence indicates that in circumstances where the patient's
presenting complaints were as stated by her, some clinical
touching of the
clitoris by Dr Nguyen in the course of the vulvo-vaginal examination would have
been an appropriate measure for an
examining medical practitioner to
whilst Dr Nguyen could not specifically recall touching the patient's clitoris
in the course of his examination of her, and whilst
he conceded he could have
done so, the patient's ultimate estimate of the time during which her clitoris
was touched, namely 1 to
2 seconds, in the above context, does not of itself
suggest that there had been inappropriate touching of her clitoris.
the evidence discloses that some clinical touching of the clitoris could have
been appropriate in the context of the intimate examination
in question. Over
the course of time, there were significant changes in the patient's evidentiary
account as to the time that was
taken concerning the touching of her clitoris
during the consultation. Those variations ranged from the clitoris being
pressed, touched in a way that felt strange, or rubbed for an extended
period, to being touched for 1 to 2 seconds.
the context of the patient's acknowledged psychological sensitivity to the
subject matter of the consultation, her stated apprehensiveness,
evolving but misplaced concern over the significance of the locked door, the
patient's description implying inappropriate
touching of her clitoris should be
read down to reflect her ultimate acknowledgment that this part of the
examination only occupied
1 to 2 seconds. The patient's evidence on this topic
must therefore be viewed with the required degree of caution.
tribunal accepts the submission made on behalf of Dr Nguyen to the effect that
no particular adverse significance should be invested
in the uncommunicated
apprehension of the patient that something wrong and untoward was occurring when
she felt that her clitoris
had been touched in the course of Dr Nguyen's
examination. This response influenced and distorted her perceptions. Her
during the consultation caused her to "
described it. Although not a criticism of the patient, it is unfortunate that
this particular apprehension was not raised
by the patient at the
in arriving at the view that there had been no inappropriate touching of the
patient's clitoris by Dr Nguyen, the tribunal has not
overlooked the submission
made on behalf of the HCCC to the effect that Dr Nguyen was alleged to have been
disingenuous in his evidence
that he could not recall having touched the
clitoris in the course of his examination of the patient.
tribunal does not accept that submission, and instead considers that Dr Nguyen
gave an honest and truthful account when he said
he could not recall touching
the patient's clitoris in that examination.
Dr Nguyen was pressed on that matter, he acknowledged that he could have touched
the patient's clitoris in the course of that
examination. The tribunal considers
that concession, which was against his interests, was fairly and reasonably
made, and this is
a matter which goes to the credit of Dr Nguyen's testimony. On
behalf of the HCCC it was submitted that concession, along with a
suggestion by
Dr Nguyen that it was possible he had inadvertently touched the patient's
clitoris, was deliberately disingenuous.
tribunal does not accept that submission, as there is nothing in the evidence
that would reasonably suggest Dr Nguyen did in fact
have a recollection of
touching the patient's clitoris. Therefore, there is no proper basis for
inferring that he was avoiding any
acknowledgment of a recollection of having
touched the patient's clitoris. In the absence of such evidence, it would be
give weight to unsupported suspicion-based speculation to the contrary,
along the lines that based the cited HCCC submission:
Luxton v Vines
[1952] HCA 19
(1952) 85 CLR 352.
given the significant variations in the descriptions of the alleged
inappropriate touching of the patient's clitoris, and after
tracking the changes
in the patient's police statements, from the clitoris being rubbed in a strange
way, or pressed, to the clitoris
being touched for about 1 to 2 seconds, and the
tracking of the manner in which those changes occurred in the police statements,
as has already been identified in the evidence and highlighted in the
respondent's submissions, the tribunal had some considerable
disquiet about
accepting the submission made by the HCCC to the effect that Dr Nguyen had
inappropriately touched the patient's clitoris.
the light of the evidence cited, the tribunal accepts the submission made on
behalf of Dr Nguyen that the clitoris issue should
be discarded as having no
particular significance to the outcome of this case.
Particular 4 - Rubbing of patient's bare leg proximate to vulvo-vaginal
examination
the reasons that follow, the tribunal does not accept the allegation that Dr
Nguyen had rubbed the patient's bare leg during the
course of his examination,
although it may have been the patient's perception that he did
for the reasons already stated, the tribunal reiterates that it has not accepted
the submission that Dr Nguyen had any improper
or sexualised motives towards the
patient when he examined her on 3 September 2009.
the tribunal considers the patient's perception of alleged impropriety on Dr
Nguyen's part was disproportionate to the circumstances
and that perception had
been influenced and distorted by her acknowledged sensitivities and
apprehensions over the subject matter
of the examination.
the evidence of the medical experts as to the appropriate manner and positioning
for carrying out an examination of the vagina and
vulval area indicates that it
may have been appropriate for the examiner to place a hand on the patient's leg
or thigh. This could
serve to not only steady the examiner's approach to the
examination, but also to provide some degree of psychological reassurance
patient in that awkward and vulnerable position. In the light of the evidence of
Dr Bland and Dr Kertesz on this subject,
it cannot be reasonably said that
touching the patient's thigh during an examination of the kind under present
consideration was
necessarily inappropriate.
the tribunal considers that the patient's evidence that her inside thigh was
rubbed or stroked along its length during this examination
is unpersuasive,
especially given the already described variations, confusions and misperceptions
concerning the patient's recollection
of the events.
the patient's evidence to the effect that Dr Nguyen had touched her on her thigh
involved a significant degree of confusion on her
part. Her evidence on this
topic underwent a number of changes over time. The manner in which this aspect
of the patient's evidence
had evolved and changed has caused the tribunal some
considerable disquiet with regard to the reliability of that evidence. The
in the patient's evidence included confusion as to whether it was her
left or her right thigh that was touched. There was also variation
evidence as to whether she had been touched on the thigh when seated at Dr
Nguyen's consultation desk after the vulvo-vaginal
examination, or whilst she
was laying on the examination table. This is the very reason why the HCCC
properly withdrew
Particular of Complaint
the fact that the evidence of the patient, concerning the allegation that Dr
Nguyen had touched her on the inside thigh whilst she
was on the examination
table, was surrounded by some confusion suggests that her evidence in that
regard was based on unreliable
reconstruction rather than on actual
recollection.
a reconstructed account may in some circumstances be entirely unremarkable in
terms of its reliability, in the circumstances
of this case the tribunal
considers that the converse applies. This is because the patient's
reconstruction has arisen against the
background of her emotionally charged and
therefore distorted recollections. In cases where the content of the detail of
the evidence
has varied in the reconstruction process, great caution must be
applied to considering such evidence when applying the required standard
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
this context, a great degree of caution is required in evaluating the patient's
account on this topic because of the significance
of the changes in the
recollections of the patient.
the patient's first statement was made, her account was that Dr Nguyen placed
his hand on her thigh whilst she was sitting beside
his desk. A year later, when
she provided a clarification statement at the request of the police, she was
confused about where she
was when she said she was touched on the thigh. At the
time she made her second statement, in August 2012, she had no memory of having
been touched on her thigh whilst laying on the examination table. Her subsequent
recollection of having been touched on the thigh
arose once she had re-read her
initial statement and considered that she had then remembered the order in which
she believed the
events in question had occurred, and at that time she realised
she had made some mistakes in the second statement. That course of
the content of her evidence reinforces the view that her evidence was based on
unreliable reconstruction rather than an
actual recollection.
process of reconstruction is entirely understandable in this case given the
patient made her second statement whilst she was overseas,
through a process of
email exchanges with the investigating police officer, at a time when she was
without access to her original
statement, and it concerned a subject matter that
she would rather not have brought to mind.
in a case where the gravity of the outcome dependent upon such evidence is high,
and where a commensurate degree of satisfaction
is required before acceptance of
such evidence in accordance with the
standard, the tribunal
finds that the evidence of the patient concerning the allegation that Dr Nguyen
touched her on her thigh during
the examination, to be an unreliable basis upon
which to make an adverse finding of impropriety against Dr
the above reasons, the tribunal is not persuaded that Dr Nguyen inappropriately
touched the patient on her thigh as has been alleged.
Particular 5 - Offer for internal examination without sufficient
clinical indication
the reasons that follow, the tribunal does not accept the allegation that Dr
Nguyen had offered the patient an intimate examination
without sufficient
clinical indication, or that a second internal examination was offered to
as to the initial examination, the factual context was that the patient had a
background history of having experienced recurrent
STI issues for which she had
sought advice from Dr Nguyen. He knew the patient was sexually active and had
presented with an apprehension
over whether she had recently contracted an STI
in circumstances which gave her concern. She described her concern in terms that
" about the prospect of having acquired an STI. She was
therefore requesting an examination of her vaginal area notwithstanding that
had two previous STI screening tests that returned negative results in recent
months and notwithstanding Dr Nguyen's reassurances
to her that those two
consecutive test results had been negative. She was clearly anxious to exclude
the possibility she had an STI.
In those circumstances, the tribunal considers
that it was entirely appropriate for Dr Nguyen to accede to the patient's
for such an examination.
having already accepted that the intimate examination of the patient had
proceeded with Dr Nguyen having used gloves, and given
that a systematic
inspection of the patient's external genital area had revealed no abnormalities,
and also given that during the
course of that examination the patient was not
able to identify anything by way of a relevant or significant response to
suggestive of localised pathology, the tribunal considers that it was
reasonable for Dr Nguyen to then proceed to inspect that part
of the patient's
vaginal introitus that was available for inspection for the presence of any
relevant signs, to the extent that he
was able to do so, given also that the
patient had a menstrual tampon in situ.
on the question of whether Dr Nguyen had performed an unreasonable digital
penetration of the patient's vagina in the course of
his examination, according
to the evidence of Dr Bland, and given that a tampon was in situ, it would seem
that this is an issue
on which it was unlikely that the patient would have been
able to give reliable evidence especially where she was not in a position
able to see what was occurring in the course of the examination.
that regard, Dr Bland gave a compelling analogous demonstration of this
did so by holding up the palm of his hand in an attitude of vertical and lateral
extension, and then applying pressure from the
pad of his index finger of the
opposing hand onto the palmar aspect of the outstretched skin of the thenar
space between the thumb
and the forefinger.
means of that demonstrative evidence Dr Bland explained that the limited
sensitivity of the skin to touch at the base of the vaginal
introitus would have
made it difficult for the patient to accurately determine whether external
digital pressure was being applied
to that area in the course of an examination
attempting to achieve visual inspection exposure of the vaginal introitus, or a
in fact a slight degree of reasonable and permissible digital intrusion
had occurred in exposing the vaginal introitus to view in
the course of looking
for a possible area of tissue pathology that coincided with a pain response on
palpation. In this latter regard,
the tribunal interpolates that this would
appear to be especially so in circumstances where the patient had been guiding
Dr Nguyen's
examination by repeatedly saying "
the light of that analysis, the tribunal is not persuaded that the patient could
reasonably describe Dr Nguyen as having performed
a digital penetration of her
vagina to the extent of about 1cm as limited by the presence of a tampon, and
that in the course of
doing so, he had moved his finger around in her vaginal
Accordingly,
where the state of the evidence is left in the terms summarised in the
immediately preceding paragraphs on the issue
under present consideration, the
tribunal is of the view this represents an insufficient basis upon which to
reasonably conclude,
on the required standard of proof on the balance of
probabilities, that in offering and in carrying out an internal examination of
his patient in the circumstances, Dr Nguyen had unacceptably departed from the
clinical standards of examination that would have
been expected of him in the
circumstances:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
on the evidence, the tribunal is not satisfied that Dr Nguyen had offered the
patient a further internal examination after
he had carried out his first
examination. The proposition to the contrary seems to have been based on the
patient's confused perceptions
of the events as already described, and that does
not provide a sufficiently persuasive basis upon which to make an adverse
against Dr Nguyen on that subject.
Particular 7 - Offer for breast examination without sufficient clinical
the reasons that follow, the tribunal does not accept the allegation that Dr
Nguyen had offered his patient a breast examination
without there having been a
sufficient clinical indication for him to have done so.
the patient had been prescribed the oral contraceptive pill. According to the
evidence of Dr Bland and Dr Kertesz, which the tribunal
considers to be
supportive of the position of Dr Nguyen on this point, Dr Nguyen's offer to the
patient of a breast examination was
clinically indicated and justified. In that
regard, it is significant to note that it was also considered to have been
and appropriate as recorded in Dr Nguyen's clinical notes for the
consultation with the patient in April 2004, when he had offered
his patient
advice on self-breast examination in the context of a prescription for the oral
contraceptive pill.
in circumstances where it was clear to Dr Nguyen that his long term patient,
whom over time he had come to view with what the tribunal
considers to have been
an appropriate sense of benevolent paternalism and concern for her welfare, and
whose physical and emotional
health had been appropriately monitored by him over
time for a number of years, would be lost to follow-up, he considered it
to offer her such an examination.
should be observed that the purpose for this offer was not only to ascertain
whether pathology was present, which was unlikely
in the case of someone so
young, but more because it was reasonable to seek to instruct such a patient on
appropriate self-examination
of her breasts, particularly as coincidence would
have it, she was at an opportune stage of her menstrual cycle for a breast
examination.
The tribunal considers that this description by Dr Nguyen was
consistent with him having provided the patient with a good standard
particularly as she was about to be lost to long term follow-up by him, and
beforehand, he had consistently provided her
with a good standard of health
the tribunal does not consider the hindsight concession made by Dr Nguyen in his
evidence in these proceedings as to the inappropriateness
of his offer of a
breast examination as determinative of this aspect of the complaint against him.
gist of Dr Nguyen's concession was that after the event, when he had realised
that he had offended the patient's sensibilities
by the offer of a breast
examination, he considered the offer to have been inappropriate because it was
to a degree insensitive to
the patient in view of her past issues of trust. The
context was that over time he had worked hard in order to gain her trust because
of her particular circumstances. When viewed in that light, Dr Nguyen's offer to
perform a breast examination was not inappropriate
at the time it was
tribunal is of the view that when properly understood, the hindsight concessions
by Dr Nguyen did not support the submitted contrary
conclusion that he had acted
inappropriately, or in any sense that mandated disciplinary consequences.
view is also supported by an understanding of the circumstances of the
concession, namely the occasion of the recording obtained
by pretext with the
aid of a listening device. That situation did not constitute a normal
consultation or conversational setting
where his clinical reasoning would have
been appropriately tailored and ventilated to suit the needs of the occasion.
very different process prevailed. Dr Nguyen was confronted with an
uncharacteristically assertive and angry conversation driven by
the patient
according to an agenda to which Dr Nguyen was not a party. He had to assimilate
and assess this view of his patient's
presentation, which occurred in
circumstances he had believed was a professional consultation by appointment,
although from the patient's
perspective, it was no such thing. It was therefore
not surprising that Dr Nguyen was somewhat taken aback by this presentation by
his patient.
subjective factors must also necessarily be taken into account as a relevant
part of the consideration. Those matters included
the fact that at the time of
the recorded conversation, Dr Nguyen was not just considering the nature of the
verbal responses to
be made to the patient's assertions, he was also considering
her subjective factors and trying to formulate his comments whilst at
time seeking to empathise and apologise for any offence she had taken. That was
not a normal unpressured conversation occurring
naturally between the
participants. It is therefore artificial to seek to examine it as if it was,
which seems to have been the approach
taken by the HCCC in its analysis and
submissions.
Accordingly,
the tribunal rejects the submission that there had been an inappropriate offer
of a breast examination.
rejection marks the collapse of the central plank in the case against Dr Nguyen,
as it was the patient's perception of the appropriateness
of that offer that set
off the chain of events that led to these proceedings.
Particular 8 - Representation concerning the importance of examining
the female body
tribunal considers that the statement attributed to Dr Nguyen to the effect that
it is important to examine the female body is
a self-evident truism for which,
in the context of the examination of the patient on the issues she raised in
consultation, no further
explanatory evidence is required.
content of that statement was not specifically explored in cross-examination
with Dr Nguyen to suggest that the statement was
untoward in the circumstances.
Given the tribunal's earlier stated findings rejecting the submission that Dr
Nguyen had somehow sought
to obtain some form of personal sexual gratification
from the examination of the patient, the tribunal considers that this element
the complaint is unfounded.
basis for that view has already been identified, namely because it was
reasonable for Dr Nguyen to have offered the patient a
breast examination, or to
at least have offered to instruct her on self-examination of her breasts given
that she was going to be
lost to follow-up by him and because she had been
prescribed the oral contraceptive pill.
tribunal has accepted the evidence of Dr Nguyen and the expert evidence on that
topic. Dr Nguyen's remark along the lines cited
was therefore relevant and
beyond criticism. This should have been seen as an ordinary incident of the
expected communications that
would flow from a doctor to his patient.
reason the patient thought otherwise, and therefore angrily rejected the offer
of a breast examination out of hand, appears to
be because she had fundamentally
misperceived and misunderstood the events and the
circumstances.
Accordingly,
the tribunal has concluded that none of the complaints the HCCC has brought
against Dr Nguyen have been made out. The
tribunal therefore finds that Dr
Nguyen had not engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct, or professional
misconduct, as alleged.
The inevitable result of that conclusion is that each of
the complaints must be dismissed, with the question of which party should
the costs of these proceedings, to follow that event.
Tribunal makes the following orders:
(1) Each of the two complaints against Dr Nguyen as filed by the HCCC are
(2) The Medical Council is directed to forthwith remove the presently applicable
practice conditions and restrictions on Dr Nguyen's
right to practise medicine;
(3) The HCCC is ordered to pay Dr Nguyen's costs of the
proceedings;
(4) The exhibits may be returned;
(5) Liberty to apply on 7 days notice if further orders are
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (696 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter