URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ANDERSON v HCCC [2013] NSWNMT 9 (21 June 2013)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Citation: ANDERSON v HCCC
[2013] NSWNMT 9
Inquiry into an Application for Review
Applicant: Ms Veronica Anderson
Respondent: Health Care Complaints Commission
Tribunal: Ms Diane
Robinson, Deputy Chairperson
Ms Karen Sherwood, Nurse Member
Ms Elizabeth Bide, Nurse Member
Mr Boyd Higgins, Lay Member
Date and Place of Hearing: 21 August 2012, 22 August 2012, 9 November 2012 at
Date of Orders and Reasons for Decision: 21 June
Representation
Applicant: Ms Veronica Anderson, in person
Respondent: Ms H Bennett of counsel, instructed by Ms F Westwood,
Reinstatement application – Application
dismissed – Applicant unable to satisfy Tribunal that order under review
now inappropriate
Legislation cited: Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW) No 86a
Cases cited:
HCCC v Anderson
[2009] NSWNMT 4
; In Re Jason Martin [2010]NSWMT 13; Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1936) 60 CLR 336
REASONS FOR DECISION
the Tribunal decided
Tribunal dismissed Ms Anderson's application for review. The Tribunal was not
satisfied that the order, made by the Nurses and
Midwives Tribunal on 28 January
2009, to remove Ms Anderson’s name from the register of nurses, is now
inappropriate.
Tribunal imposed a period of 12 months before any further review can be
requested by Ms Anderson.
Tribunal also ordered that Ms Anderson pay the costs of the Health Care
Complaints Commission (the Commission).
Veronica Anderson (also known as Vera Anderson, Veronika Anderson and Mrs Vera
Kostenko) was first registered as a nurse by the
Nurses and Midwives Board of
New South Wales on 21 August 1995.
2008 a Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal was convened to consider Complaints made
in relation to Ms Anderson. The Complaints alleged
that Ms Anderson was guilty
of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct in that, in
March 2006, while she
was employed by Dalcross Private Hospital and rostered as
the “nurse in charge”, she removed, without lawful authority,
boxes of Digesic from the office of the Nursing Unit Manager.
28 January 2009, the Tribunal found that Ms Anderson was guilty of professional
misconduct and determined that her name be removed
from the register of nurses.
The Tribunal also ordered that Ms Anderson was not entitled to apply for
registration for a period of
18 months from the date of that order. (See
[2009] NSWNMT 4.)
Tribunal also stated,
“Any application for re-registration
should be made to a Tribunal to ensure the lack of judgement, improper and
ethical issues
have been appropriately addressed by the
Respondent.”
5 March 2012 the Nursing and Midwifery Council of New South Wales (the Council)
received a letter, dated 1 March 2010, from Ms
Anderson requesting a review of
the Tribunal's decision and to have her name reinstated on the Register. The
Council referred Ms
Anderson’s application to the
The Hearing and Procedural matters
hearings were held on 5 April 2012, 22 May 2012 and 18 October 2012. Ms Anderson
provided the Tribunal with two written
statements, both of which were unsigned
and undated. The first was received after the first Directions Hearing and for
clarity will
be referred to as the First 2012 Statement. The second statement
was received after Ms Anderson consulted Dr Anthony Samuels, psychiatrist,
will be referred to as the Second 2012 Statement.
The Commission tendered 2 bundles of documents, the first including a report
from Dr Samuels. The second volume consisted of documents
produced under Summons
from Westmead Hospital and Chatswood 24 hour Medical Centre. All documents were
received by the Tribunal without
The Inquiry commenced on 21 August 2012. Although the Commission had written to
Ms Anderson making her aware of the documents produced
under Summons and
indicating how she could access these documents and although these documents
had, in addition, been sent to Ms
Anderson's postal address, Ms Anderson
informed the Tribunal that she had not seen or read the documents. As the
material in question
contained information relevant to the Inquiry and about
which Ms Anderson might wish to cross-examine Dr Samuels, the Tribunal
to adjourn the proceedings until 22 August 2012, to give Ms Anderson
opportunity to read the documents. Ms Anderson did not request
this adjournment
but the Tribunal considered it appropriate, particularly as Ms Anderson did not
have the benefit of legal representation.
On 22 August 2012 Ms Anderson did not attend the Tribunal hearing. She
telephoned the Tribunal and indicated that her son was unwell
and in hospital
and requested that the Tribunal adjourn its Inquiry. The Commission opposed the
application for an adjournment and
submitted that it would be appropriate to
dismiss the application at this stage. However, mindful of Ms Anderson’s
legal representation, the nature of the application and the consequences
for her professional employment and the requirements of
procedural fairness, the
Tribunal determined to adjourn the application for review until 9 November
On 9 November 2012 Ms Anderson gave evidence on her own behalf and Dr Anthony
Samuels gave evidence for the Commission.
submissions were received from both the Commission and Ms
Legal considerations
Ms Anderson has made an application for review under s163A of the Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No 86a (the National
Tribunal's role in dealing with such an application is to determine the
appropriateness, at the time of the review hearing,
of the order under review
(see s 163C of the National Law).
The Commission has helpfully set out the relevant legal principles in its
written submission in the following way:
order to determine the appropriateness, at the time of the review, of the 2009
Order, the Tribunal will have regard to the objectives
and guiding principles of
the National Law (see s3). These include the objective of the protection of the
public by ensuring that
only health practitioners who are suitably trained and
qualified to practise in a competent and ethical manner are registered
(s3(2)(a)).
addition the Tribunal will also give consideration to relevant parts of the
common law developed in relation to the proper exercise
protective/disciplinary powers of courts and tribunals, particularly in relation
to health professionals..............
key principle..........is that when reinstatement is being considered, the
Tribunal must satisfy itself that the Applicant is, at
the time of the review, a
fit and proper person to be registered as a nurse.
making this assessment of fitness, the Tribunal will, amongst other things,
consider the basis of the decision to deregister and
whether the basis of that
decision has been displaced. In this, the onus will be on the Applicant to
prove...... she has addressed
the issues identified by that Tribunal as
warranting the removal of her name from the register of
Tribunal will also have regard to the provisions of ss 52 and 55 of the National
Law, which set out the eligibility requirements
for general
registration............
S 3 of the National Law sets out the Objectives and Guiding Principles of the
legislation. The objectives of the national registration
scheme are, amongst
other things,
(a) to provide for the protection of the public by ensuring that only
health practitioners who are suitably trained and qualified
to practise in a
competent and ethical manner are registered.
The provisions of s 3A reinforce the protection of the health and safety of
the public as the paramount consideration for the Tribunal
in considering this
review application.
The standard and onus of proof
appropriate standard of proof is the civil standard so the Tribunal has to be
satisfied on the balance of probabilities that it
is appropriate to make a
reinstatement order. Bearing in mind the nature of that order and its
consequences in relation to professional
registration and employment, the
standard of proof is to the Briginshaw standard (see
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1936) 60 CLR 336
The onus of proof rests with the Applicant who must produce sufficient evidence
to convince the Tribunal to make an order under section
163B (1)(c) of the
National Law. (see
In Re Jason Martin [2010]NSWMT 13)
The 2009 Tribunal Decision
The 2009 Tribunal, which made the order removing Ms Anderson's name from the
register of nurses, found that she was guilty of professional
misconduct on the
basis that she had, without lawful authority, removed 12 boxes of Digesic from
the Nursing Unit Manager's office
at Dalcross Private Hospital.
The Tribunal noted that the evidence against the Applicant was substantial,
including CCTV footage of the events in question. Nevertheless,
the Applicant
made no admissions and maintained that she had not removed boxes of Digesic. Her
explanation was that other members
of the nursing staff had a vendetta against
Tribunal found that Ms Anderson lacked professional judgment and insight into
her improper and unethical conduct; she abused the
trust of her employer and the
Tribunal observed an element of defiance in her attitude; she failed to
demonstrate an understanding
of the seriousness of the complaints against her
and the Tribunal noted the changeable and unreliable nature of her evidence and
did not find Ms Anderson to be a credible witness.
In relation to any possible future application for registration, the Tribunal
It is difficult to see how the Respondent may be able
to demonstrate she would be suitable to once again practise as a nurse unless
she admits the conduct and provides appropriate explanation.
Ms Anderson’s evidence
In her oral evidence Ms Anderson outlined her employment history and her
personal and social circumstances. She is currently living
with her parents and
her two sons, having recently separated from her husband. Ms Anderson told the
Tribunal that she is generally
well and has no major health
Although Ms Anderson maintained her innocence throughout the Tribunal
proceedings in 2008, in her First 2012 Statement she admits
taking the boxes of
Digesic. She states,
“On 13 July 2003 I suffered a stillbirth at 37 weeks which also lead
to multiple organ failure and other medical complications.
I also suffered
amnesia and remained unconscious for several days whilst in ICU at Westmead
Hospital. Medical staff at Westmead Hospital
were confused as to the reason why
I suffered a stillbirth and medical complications and did not manage my pain
well (both physically
and mentally). I also developed an infection and became
MRSA positive. In all, I spent approximately 3 months in hospital
recovering.
Upon discharge I remained in pain, but, money was an issue and I embarked
on finding employment. I eventually found employment as
a registered nurse at
Dalcross Private Hospital and commenced on 27 October 2003. All the while in
pain and I guess to some degree,
depression. I had visited General Practitioners
in the hope of getting some sort of pain relief other than over the counter
medication,
but was told that “it should resolve soon” and to
“hang in there”.
So on 3 March 2006 in a moment of desperation, I took the opportunity to
take some boxes of Digesic with which to self administer
for my ongoing pain. I
admit that I took advantage of the inadequacy of the drug keeping, reporting
procedures and unlocked filing
cabinet at Dalcross Private Hospital. As this is
the only time I have ever done anything like this, I feel genuinely remorseful
doing it. Had medical practitioners I had seen done something to help me,
then this would never have happened.”
In oral evidence Ms Anderson told the Tribunal that she was desperate when she
took the Digesic tablets from the unlocked filing
cabinet. She said that her
whole body was in pain, including her skin and that she even found wearing
clothing uncomfortable. She
said she had seen doctors who told her the pain
would resolve by itself but this didn't happen.
Ms Anderson stated that when confronted by the Nursing Unit Manager after taking
the Digesic, she said she had not done it. She said
she didn't know what to say
and thought she would get legal advice. Ms Anderson stated that she is now
appalled by her behaviour
but at the time she was desperate for someone to help
with her pain and she couldn't find anybody to do so.
Ms Anderson denies that she had a problem with substance abuse. She says in her
“It was a lack of judgement, improper and
ethically wrong on my part. And in no way do I have an ongoing dependency. But I
learnt that substance abuse is frequently a means of self-medication for a
person with depression, which I do believe I was suffering
I also believe that I have overcome my dependence and depression that have
impaired my practice, at least to the extent that these
conditions are no longer
likely to have a detrimental effect on my future practice.”
Ms Anderson told the Tribunal that she had not sought professional advice or
treatment for depression and she produced no medical
evidence in relation to
this matter.
In oral evidence Ms Anderson stated that she has had years to think about what
she did. She told the Tribunal that she would like
a second chance and she
assured the Tribunal that she “would not do it
During cross-examination by counsel for the Commission, Ms Anderson acknowledged
that much of her First 2012 statement was inaccurate
and could not be considered
reliable evidence by the Tribunal. She accepted that she had only been in
hospital in 2003 for one month
rather than three months. She accepted that she
had been seen by a clinical psychologist, a social worker and the pain team
in Westmead Hospital and had received assistance and support with her
pain. She stated that she had been seen by a neuropsychologist
who suggested a
follow-up assessment but that she had declined to do this.
Ms Anderson was cross-examined about the care she received from general
practitioners following her discharge from hospital. She
acknowledged that she
did see general practitioners who prescribed pain medication for her. She
conceded that her statement regarding
the lack of support she received from
general practitioners was wrong, although at the time she felt she was not
receiving sufficient
Ms Anderson agreed that she gave false evidence in the earlier Tribunal
proceedings. She agreed that she falsely accused other nurses
of a vendetta
against her and she agreed that she had maintained these falsehoods from 2006 up
until 2012. Ms Anderson acknowledged
that her lack of honesty and candour in the
past may cause the Tribunal concern in accepting her as an honest witness now.
Q. The original proceedings where the complaint was made of you
taking the boxes of DiGesic and you denied taking the DiGesic?
Q. So you would agree you gave false evidence at that time?
Q. You would also agree that that means that you falsely accused other
nurses at the time during the proceedings of trying to frame
you and of having a
vendetta against you?
A. In this particular instance, yes.
Q. You would agree that you maintained that falsehood from 2006, through
the hearing in 2008, right up until recently in 2012?
Q. So you agree that you have not been honest and candid in the
Q. You would agree that because of that, maintaining that falsehood for
that number of years, that there has to be serious concern
were being honest and candid now?
Q. You would agree that the only reason you've admitted to taking the
DiGesic now is because you think you need to become reregistered?
A. Well, yes.
(Transcript 9/11/2012, pp 35- 36)
Ms Anderson was cross examined about her denial of a problem with substance
abuse. In the admission documents relating to her 2003
admission to Westmead
Hospital a history of substance misuse in relation to benzodiazepines is
recorded. Ms Anderson acknowledged
that she would have given this history and
that she had suffered from headaches for many years for which she had been
benzodiazepines by her doctor.
Ms Anderson’s clinical progress notes, for the Westmead Hospital
admission, document chronic paracetamol and Mersyndol use
and note that at the
time of admission Ms Anderson’s paracetamol levels were elevated. Ms
Anderson denied taking Mersyndol
and surmised that her husband may have referred
to Mersyndol use as he himself was taking that medication.
Ms Anderson acknowledged that she took Panadol. She stated that she was not
allowed to have Panadol in the hospital and she was not
told why. She denied
paracetamol abuse and said that no one had ever told her that she was taking too
much Panadol.
Ms Anderson told the Tribunal that she had had legal advice to deny the theft of
the Digesic. In response to questions from the Commission
she stated that her
lawyer had advised her to lie under oath. She also conceded that at the 2008
Tribunal hearing she was unrepresented
and no legal representative was present
to advise her in relation to her evidence on the day.
Ms Anderson was also asked about Dr Samuels’ report. Ms Anderson saw Dr
Samuels on 2 July 2012. She acknowledged that she
had discussed various issues
with Dr Samuels, such as an abusive relationship with her husband, which she had
not documented in either
of her statements. She also acknowledged that she had
not been entirely candid with Dr Samuels.
Q. So you didn't tell
him about the Endone or the OxyContin that you were being prescribed from the
GP, did you?
Q. You didn't mention to him any ongoing substance abuse or dependency
Q. So you weren't being honest or candid with him, were you?
A. Well, I guess not. But that's I didn't remember any of
those things when I was actually talking to him.
(Transcript 9/11/2012, p 39)
Ms Anderson also acknowledged that parts of her Second 2012 Statement are
inaccurate. In that statement she says she was never offered
any psychiatric or
psychological intervention by Westmead Hospital, however Ms Anderson
acknowledged in her oral evidence that this
is not the case. She was offered
such assistance but declined to follow up with it.
Ms Anderson’s statement also asserts her genuine remorse, but in her oral
evidence she stated,
Q. In your first statement you recall that
you said that medical practitioners had the medical practitioners
done something to help
me out this never would have happened. I asked you about
that, and you agree that in fact you were blaming the doctors at that point,
not helping you out, do you recall that?
A. Yes I do.
Q. You'd agree that in blaming the doctors, that demonstrates a lack of
A. I hadn't thought of it that way. See, I wrote all of this before I
even read the document from that was given to me, that was
from Westmead and from the GPs, so that's why I wrote that those
statements the way I wrote them.
Q. That's correct, and so you were blaming the doctors and not
Q. You'd agree that that demonstrated you hadn't taken personal
responsibility for what happened, had you?
Q. You'd agree that it demonstrated a lack of insight into your own
person responsibility?
A. That's right.
(Transcript 9/11/2012, p 45)
In response to her evidence in cross-examination, Ms Anderson said that she
prepared her written statements from memory without seeing
her medical records.
She said that after having read the medical notes she remembered more and
acknowledges that some of what she
said in the written Statements is not
She explained that she had failed to follow up with the proposed medical
appointments either because she had not received information
because her husband had forbidden her to attend.
She acknowledged that she had taken drugs prescribed by her doctor. She did not
consider this to be drug dependency as she had not
taken these drugs
“not for the sake of feeling good”
but because they were
essential to stop the pain.
Evidence of Dr Anthony Samuels
Dr Samuels graduated MB BCh from the University of the Witwatersrand in South
Africa and MCrim from the University of Sydney. He
is a Fellow of the Royal
Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists.
Dr Samuels’ report, dated 20 July 2012, describes Ms Anderson as giving
rather superficial explanations of the events that
have occurred and due to the
lack of any real treatment intervention to date, Dr Samuels states he is left
with some reservations
in regard to Ms Anderson resuming nursing practice. He
“She was difficult to interview, didn't give much
information that was particularly relevant and tended to give a lot of
detail when questioned about things. I am still left unclear as to
exactly what happened in 2003, why things are better now, and
somewhat puzzled
by the fact that she has not sought any particular treatment to deal with these
events that have occurred over the
last eight years.”
Dr Samuels concludes his report by stating that he is left with a lot of
unanswered questions in relation to Ms Anderson's presentation.
He states that
his preliminary viewpoint, given the lack of a satisfactory explanation for the
events to date, is that he would
have reservations about whether or not she is
ready to return to work as a registered nurse.
After having reviewed Ms Anderson's medical notes, Dr Samuels told the Tribunal
that further questions have been raised. He considered
there may be a pattern of
drug misuse preceding her 2003 hospital admission, serious medical events
occurred in 2003 including the
possibility of domestic violence but only a
superficial clinical picture is available, neuropsychological assessment
indicated there
may be the possibility of a mild brain injury requiring
follow-up assessment which has not been undertaken. Ms Anderson was prescribed
various types of opioids following discharge from hospital and continued to take
painkilling medication after 2003.
Dr Samuels referred the Tribunal to Ms Anderson’s medical notes from
Westmead Hospital (Tab 9C),
“On page 2 there is a
reference to previous use of benzodiazepines in the form of Temazepam, use of
Codeine. There is suggestions
from the note of an assault. Page 4 there
is suggestion of dependency on opioids, also suggestions of possible toxicity
alcohol use, but I don't think that's substantiated. Page 47 there
is a reference made to the use of basically Mersyndol, so paracetamol,
and doxylamine. Page 59 there are comments on longstanding analgesic use.
Page 65, a reference is made to chronic paracetamol
and Mersyndol use.
History of Temazepam use. Page 123 another reference to chronic
paracetamol abuse and paracetamol toxicity.
Page 326 history of
paracetamol and codeine abuse. So there are extensive references through those
notes suggesting abuse or dependence
on analgesic and opioid type drugs, as well
as benzodiazepines.”
(Transcript 9/11/2012, p 56)
Dr Samuels commented on Ms Anderson’s evidence as
She also says she was never offered any psychiatric or
psychological interventions by Westmead Hospital and that's clearly not true
she says I can honestly say I do not have any prior history of drug abuse,
ongoing drug dependencies or behaviours, well that's
clearly not true either and
she said I fully recognise the seriousness of my behaviour and I'm very
remorseful, well I don't believe
that she does recognise or have clear insight
into what has happened, and any remorse would be clearly superficial I think at
So, she goes on to say that the misconduct can be explained as an error of
judgment, but it wasn't an isolated incident as we know,
there is clearly
history of drug, prescription drug use before 2003, after 2003 and up to the
time that she's caught on the CCTV,
so I don't for one moment think it was an
isolated event or a lapse of judgment and also to go on, I have overcome my
and depression that have impaired my practice, well she hasn't
actually had any treatment or interventions to suggest that that's
(Transcript 9/11.2012. p 57)
Dr Samuels’ evidence was not challenged by Ms
Submissions
Ms Anderson’s Submissions
Ms Anderson's short oral submission was to the effect that she sought
reregistration and wished to practice as a registered nurse
Ms Anderson also provided a hand written submission. It states,
“With regards to the evidence heard today 9
2012, I need to clarify that the evidence which I had submitted to the Tribunal
was in fact incorrect. I wrote this statement
solely reliant from my memory and
what my family had told me whilst I was in Westmead Hospital. Now that I have
read the documents
which were subpoenaed from Westmead Hospital and Chatswood 24
hour Medical Centre, I am now aware of facts which I did not know and
remembered facts which should have been included in my evidence to the Tribunal.
At the time of submitting my evidence,
I believed that what I was submitting was
fact. I apologise for this and for wasting the Tribunal’s time.
I admit to the fact that I did take some boxes of Digesic from Dalcross
Private Hospital. This was improper and unethical. I have
done what the Tribunal
have asked of me since having my registration suspended – this being not
employed as a Registered Nurse.
I am reluctant to make statements such as
“I feel genuinely remorseful for my actions” as these are only
words. Or that
I believe that “I have overcome my dependence and
depression that have impaired my practice", only a medical doctor can make
assumption. What I can say is that I have not taken any medication whether it be
over the counter pain relief or prescription
pain medication since the birth of
my second child in 2010. And what I have learnt today is that there are far more
questions than
answers as to what happened on 13th July 2003. I came here today
to try to get my Registration back but now all I want is to know
what actually
happened on 13th July 2003.
I thank the Tribunal for their patience in this matter.”
The Commission’s Submissions
The Commission submitted that Ms Anderson had the ability to access her medical
records and the opportunity to supplement her written
statements during the
course of these proceedings, but failed to do so. The Commission also noted that
other than her own assertions,
Ms Anderson failed to produce any medical or
other evidence to show she had overcome her depression, any dependency she may
had and that she had not consumed pain medication since 2010.
The Commission submits that the events which occurred at Dalcross Private
Hospital in relation to the use of Digesic were not an
isolated incident, but
part of a pattern of drug use spanning a period of years.
The Commission submits that Ms Anderson acknowledged that her written Statements
contain evidence which is incorrect and can not
be relied on by the
The Commission relies on Dr Samuel’s evidence noting his concern that
there was no adequate explanation for the events which
occurred in 2003 and his
reservations in relation to Ms Anderson resuming professional practice. Ms
Anderson acknowledged that she
had not been candid or forthright in her
communications with Dr Samuels.
The Commission submits that Ms Anderson has not demonstrated a mature
understanding of her circumstances or earlier behaviour and
that her insight and
remorse in relation to her past actions is limited. The Commission
“The evidence provided by the Applicant, taken together with the
medical documents and evidence provided by Dr Samuels, supports
the submission
the Applicant has failed to fully take responsibility for past actions or
demonstrate an understanding of how the
issues arose or how to responsibly deal
with them. Given this, if a similar situation were to arise in the future, the
Tribunal could
not be satisfied the Applicant would be able to apply sound
personal or professional judgement in order to resolve the
situation.”
The Commission submits that Ms Anderson has not discharged the onus she
bears of proving that she is a person currently capable of
practising as a
registered nurse. Accordingly the Commission submits that her application be
dismissed and additionally that a further
review cannot be sought until after a
period of 12 months.
The Tribunal’s Decision
A Tribunal has to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities, by the
evidence before it, that it is appropriate to make a reinstatement
order. It is
up to the Applicant to put before the Tribunal the evidence which establishes
this. In this case the onus is on Ms Anderson
to show through her own evidence
and if necessary through the production of medical or other evidence that the
order which was made
by the Tribunal in 2009 is no longer appropriate and that
she is now a proper person to be registered as a nurse.
In Re Jason Martin
[2010] NSWMT 13
at page 8 the Medical Tribunal
"An Applicant who seeks to establish fitness to have his
name restored to the Register having been earlier removed from it bears the
of proving the case. It is a heavy onus and the question whether the Applicant
is a fit and proper person, is one to be trusted
to exercise the high
responsibilities of the profession is one to be determined on solid and
substantial grounds and as an applicant
for reinstatement to the Medical
Register he is in a more disadvantageous position than an original
applicant.”
Ms Anderson's evidence to the Tribunal consisted of two written statements, her
curriculum vitae and her oral evidence, in which
she conceded that much of what
was contained in her written statements was incorrect and could not be relied on
by the Tribunal.
Ms Anderson admitted to having stolen the Digesic from Dalcross Private
Hospital. Her explanation was that she needed pain relief,
not having been given
proper assistance in this regard from medical practitioners. However the
evidence before the Tribunal indicates
that she did receive such assistance,
including the prescription of painkillers.
Ms Anderson acknowledged that she may have been suffering from depression at the
time of the theft. She denies that she has had a
drug dependency. However she
also asserts that she has overcome her dependency and depression. Ms Anderson
was unable to explain
to the Tribunal how she has managed these issues of
depression and drug dependency and she provided no professional or medical
in relation to treatment for these conditions.
From the time of the theft in 2006 and during the 2009 Tribunal hearing Ms
Anderson denied the theft of the Digesic. She maintained
this denial until these
proceedings and admitted that her admission of theft was a reactive one, in the
sense that she understood
she needed to make such an admission in order to gain
reregistration.
Although Ms Anderson has been open with this Tribunal in relation to the theft
of the Digesic, she has previously lied about this
matter and also given false
evidence in relation to a vendetta against her by her former co- workers. In
these circumstances it is
difficult for the Tribunal to accept Ms
Anderson’s evidence or give it substantial weight.
Ms Anderson appeared to the Tribunal to have some difficulty answering questions
in a direct manner. She was not always candid, although
the Tribunal does accept
that she may have had some memory problems in relation to events in the past.
The Tribunal also notes that
a recommended follow up neuropsychological
assessment has not be undertaken.
The Tribunal considers that Ms Anderson continues to lack insight into the
events which resulted in her name being removed from the
register of nurses.
Although her attitude before this Tribunal was not one of defiance, she
presented as having a somewhat blunted
affect and it was difficult to gauge if
Ms Anderson fully understood the seriousness of the matters under consideration
by the Tribunal.
It is also difficult for the Tribunal to assess Ms Anderson’s assertions
of remorse given her acknowledgement that her admission
of theft was in response
to her understanding of what was necessary to gain
reregistration.
The Tribunal considers that Ms Anderson has failed to discharge the onus on her
and has not satisfied the Tribunal that the order
under review is no longer
appropriate. Accordingly the Tribunal determines to dismiss Ms Anderson's
application for review.
Tribunal also imposes a non-review period of 12 months from the date of this
order. This means Ms Anderson cannot apply for a
reinstatement order until after
The Commission sought an order that Ms Anderson pay the costs of the Commission.
Ms Anderson made no submissions in relation to costs.
Tribunal orders that Ms Anderson pays the costs of the
Commission.
Recommendations
If Ms Anderson applies for review in the future, the Tribunal notes that
evidence of a further neuropsychological assessment, medical
especially from a drug and alcohol specialist and medical evidence in relation
to the treatment of depression may be of
benefit to the
In addition in any future review application Ms Anderson must address, not only
the issues of her own insight and remorse, but also
the plans she has for
reskilling and updating her knowledge of professional nursing
Having reviewed the appropriateness of the order made by the Nurses and
Midwives Tribunal on 28 January 2009 in relation to Ms Veronica
Anderson, the
Tribunal made the following orders:
Anderson’s application is dismissed.
Anderson cannot apply for a further review until after a 12 month period from
the date of this order i.e. 21 June 2013.
Anderson is to pay the cost of the Health Care Complaints
Commission.
Dated: 2013
______________________________
Diane Robinson - Deputy Chairperson
______________________________
Karen Sherwood - Nurse Member
______________________________
Elizabeth Bide - Nurse Member
______________________________
Boyd Higgins - Lay Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (203 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter