URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2006/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pahos, Leros & Mesiti [2006] NSWPB 1 (8 March 2006)
PAHOS & LEROS & MESITI
[2006] NSWPB 1
Health Care Complaints Commission v Nicholas Pahos & George Leros and
Ralph Mesiti
8 March 2006
The complaints alleged that each pharmacist was guilty of professional
misconduct in demonstrating a lack of adequate knowledge, experience,
judgment or care in the practice of pharmacy and unethical or improper conduct
relating to the practice of pharmacy. By consent
all three complainants were
dealt with concurrently. Messrs Pahos & Leros were initially employed
pharmacists at the Campbelltown
pharmacy until June 2000 and in July 2000 they
became joint proprietors with Mr Mesiti. The complaints dealt with the supply of
restricted substances, namely, anabolic and androgenic steroids to
over 100 patients, in a quantity and for a purpose that was not
in accordance
with recognised therapeutic standards and in circumstances where, the
pharmacists knew or ought to have known that
the substances were commonly abused
for body building purposes. The second aspect of the complaints dealt with
contraventions of
the Poisons regulations in the dispensing of such substances
e.g. failure to make endorsements on prescriptions, failure to record
of the dispensing pharmacist and the storage of the relevant prescriptions.
During the period covered by the complaint Mr
Mesiti was not involved in
dispensing any prescriptions at the pharmacy and had considered himself
'retired' from pharmaceutical
duties. Mr Mesiti was only involved in business
side of the practice. All three pharmacists conceded professional misconduct in
with some of the particulars of the complaint but they disputed that
they had engaged in conduct relating to the practice of pharmacy
improper or unethical. The pharmacy dispensed almost 800 prescriptions per day
and had a staff of 60 including 2 pharmacists,
one graduate trainee and two
dispensing technicians.
Held: Messrs Pahos & Leros
supply by the pharmacists of anabolic/androgenic steroids (AAS's) on
prescription was for the purpose of body building and such
supplies did not
accord with appropriate therapeutic standards. The pharmacists knew that such
substances were subject to abuse.
pharmacists failed to ensure that their partner and any employed pharmacists
supplied AAS's in accordance with the provisions
of the Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation 1994.
pharmacists did not have procedures in place, which would have assisted them to
identify the large quantities of AAS’s being
dispensed at the pharmacy at
frequent intervals.
did not access professional publications to assist in supplying AAS's in
appropriate quantities and for appropriate purposes
to patients. This conduct
demonstrated a lack of knowledge about AAS's.
pharmacists demonstrated a lack of understanding of their responsibilities under
the Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
1994. They demonstrated a lack of
adequate experience judgment and skill in the practice of pharmacy and a lack of
care for the health
and well-being of their patients.
pharmacists did not behave in accordance with the professional rules of conduct
accepted by pharmacists of good repute and competence,
in particular in failing
to observe the Code of Professional Conduct of the Pharmaceutical Society of
Australia, principles one and
Particulars
1 - 9 and 11 - 16 of the complaint have been proved to the Board's reasonable
satisfaction and the conduct proven demonstrates
a lack of adequate knowledge,
skill, judgment and care in the practice of pharmacy as well as improper and
unethical conduct in such
pharmacists were severely reprimanded, fined and were the subject of extensive
educative orders at their expense.
pharmacist during the period of the complaint abrogated his professional
responsibilities as a pharmacist owner of this pharmacy.
He had neither
knowledge of, nor apparent interest in the dispensary procedures at the
pharmacy. He believed, improperly, that he
could ensure that the legislative
requirements applicable to the practice of pharmacy were being observed by
placing total trust
in his pharmacist partners.
pharmacist did not behave in accordance with the Code of Professional Conduct of
the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia (principles
one and two).
the period of the complaint, the pharmacist has assisted in development of
procedures and protocols within the pharmacy and
takes an overview of both
professional and business matters affecting the pharmacy.
Particulars
1 - 4 and 6 - 8 have been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board.
The pharmacist is guilty of professional
misconduct in that he has demonstrated
a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the practice of
pharmacy and has
engaged in improper and unethical conduct.
pharmacist was severely reprimanded, fined and was the subject of extensive
educative orders at his cost.
Findings of a Board of Inquiry
held on 2 and 3 November 2005 into complaints of professional misconduct, within
the meaning of
Section 19A
Pharmacy Act
("the Act"), made by
the Health Care Complaints Commission against Nicholas Pahos, George Leros and
Ralph Mesiti, all of Ralph's
Day and Night Pharmacy, 246 Queen Street,
Campbelltown in the State of New South Wales, all being pharmacists registered
in the State
of New South Wales.
The Inquiry dealt with a complaint relating to Nicholas Pahos (Pahos), George
Leros (Leros) and Ralph Mesiti (Mesiti).
The complaints allege that each has
been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of
section 19A
Act in that each has:
demonstrated
a lack of adequate knowledge, experience, skill judgment or care in the
practice of pharmacy and
ii) engaged in conduct
relating to the practice of pharmacy that is improper or unethical.
The complaint against Mesiti differs to the complaint against Pahos and Leros
in that during the entire period covered by the complaint
Mesiti was the
proprietor of the pharmacy whereas Pahos and Leros were employed pharmacists at
the pharmacy until June 2000 and from
the beginning of July 2000 Pahos and Leros
became joint proprietors with Mesiti.
As set out by counsel for the complainant, the Board of Inquiry was asked to
deal with two areas of complaint in each of the complaints.
The first was in
relation to the supply of prescribed and restricted substances, anabolic and
androgenic steroids to just over 100
patients in a quantity and for a purpose
not in accordance with recognised therapeutic standards. The second is that it
that each of the pharmacists dispensed and stored the prescriptions
for those steroids not in accordance with the regulations.
By consent all
three complaints were dealt with concurrently.
In respect of the three respondents, Counsel for the complainant tendered,
with the consent of the respondents, the following documents
which became
volumes of material in relation to the complaint including:
report from Mr David North,
b) The complaints as amended,
c) Schedule of anabolic androgenic steroids dispensed at Ralph's Day and
Night Pharmacy (Annexure A)
d) Clause 42 particulars, relating to the dispensed substances, where
prescriptions for the anabolic androgenic steroids were defective
or were not
handled or stored in accordance with the regulations (Annexure B)
2. Certificates under
of the Act.
Counsel for the respondents tendered with the consent of the complainant, the
following documents which also became exhibits:
3. Responses to the complaints by each respondent;
4. Letter from Pharmacy Guild;
5. Letter from Mr John Bell;
6. Character reference for Mr Leros from Dr Parmakellis;
of the Medical Tribunal of New South Wales in the matter of The
Tribunal of NSW v Phillip Guest.
The responses tendered by the
respondents, conceded that a finding of professional misconduct could be made in
connection with specific
particulars of the complaints which were admitted. Some
of the particulars were admitted and the respondents set out circumstances
how the breaches had occurred. None of the respondents conceded that they had
engaged in conduct relating to the practice of
pharmacy that was improper or
The Board of Inquiry was provided, by the complainant's counsel and with the
consent of the respondents, with a document called an
aide memoire in relation
to Annexure A. This document set out the quantity allegedly supplied pursuant to
the scripts with colour
coding of drugs, dosage set out from MIMS applicable at
the time, scripts ordered by patient and within each patient by drug and
each drug by date. The prescription number is included, the strength, the
quantity dispensed and the days between the scripts.
This was a most useful
document for the members of the Board of Inquiry.
PAHOS and LEROS
These findings now deal with Pahos and Leros together ("the
respondents") and then Mesiti.
Mr Pahos is a pharmacist first registered in New South Wales on 31 July
Mr Leros is a pharmacist first registered in New South Wales on 15
November 1989.
Between December 1998 and June 2000 each pharmacist was employed as a
registered pharmacist at Ralph's Day and Night Pharmacy at Campbelltown
South Wales ("the pharmacy"). Between July 2000 and February 2001 each
pharmacist was one of the registered proprietors of
the pharmacy in partnership
with two other pharmacists.
The particulars of the complaint are the same for
each of these two pharmacists.
The responses to the complaints and to the particulars, tendered by counsel,
are essentially the same for each of these two pharmacists.
Particular 1
During the period February 1999 to June 2000, the pharmacist was employed by
and worked as a registered pharmacist in the pharmacy
which supplied the
prescribed restricted substances (anabolic androgenic steroids)("AAS's") set out
in Annexure A and highlighted
in grey, in a quantity or for a purpose which did
not accord with recognised therapeutic standards of what was appropriate in the
circumstances where the pharmacist knew or ought to have known that the
substances were commonly abused for a non therapeutic purpose,
namely to achieve
greater muscle mass.
The respondents admitted, in their responses, that they had been employed as
registered pharmacists in the pharmacy which had supplied
the substances listed
in Annexure A.
Neither respondent could identify specific supplies which he had made to
patients. However, each admitted in his written response,
(point 1) that he
would have been involved in a large number of the supplies.
Each respondent stated in his written response (point 1) that "
on Annexure A did not accord with
recognised therapeutic standards
of what was appropriate
circumstances
" but each did admit that during the period February 1999 to
June 2000 he "
would have supplied many AAS's in a quantity or for a purpose
which did not accord with recognised therapeutic standards of what was
appropriate in the circumstances
Each respondent admitted in his response (point 1) that "
he knew that the
AAS's could be abused for a non-therapeutic purpose, namely to achieve greater
muscle mass
Mr David North, in his peer review states:
in the dispensing of all prescriptions, it is a pharmacist's duty to
ensure that dispensing occurs in accordance with statutory regulations,
accurately reflects the prescriber's intentions and is consistent with the needs
and safety of the patient
The respondents calculated the average dose of medicines used by patients to
be less that that calculated by the HCCC in the aide
The Board of Inquiry is of the opinion that in the overall picture of supply
this makes very little difference to the outcome. Clearly
the substances were
being supplied for body building.
It crossed my mind that (body building) was one of the outcomes being
achieved by using such products
"I said I thought they were being used for body
There were numerous instances of prescriptions for two and sometimes three
anabolic androgenic steroids being dispensed. Mr Leros,
when asked agreed
"Many, if not most, of the scripts included multiple steroids
He also agreed that he dispensed both Halotestin and Primobolan for males
when the indication for each in MIMS is clearly only for
treatment for
The Board of Inquiry is of the opinion that all supplies shaded in grey did
not accord with appropriate therapeutic standards. In
coming to this decision,
the Board has looked at both the quantity and purpose of supply.
Particular 2
During the period July 2000 to February 2001, the pharmacist supplied and/or
failed to ensure that his partners and/or his employed
pharmacists did not
supply the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic androgenic steroids) set
out in annexure A and highlighted
in grey, in a quantity or for a purpose which
did not accord with recognised therapeutic standards of what was appropriate in
circumstances where the pharmacist knew or ought to have known that the
substances were commonly abused for a non- therapeutic purpose,
achieve greater muscle mass.
The admissions made by each respondent, in his
response to this particular (point 2) were as for particular 1. There was an
admission on the part of each respondent that he:
"failed to ensure that (his partner) and employed pharmacists supplied the
AAS's in accordance with the 1994 Regulation
Particular 3
During the period February 1999 to June 2000, the pharmacist was employed by
and worked as a registered pharmacist in the pharmacy
which dispensed
prescriptions for the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic androgenic
steroids) set out on annexure B as repeats
when the interval of repeat was not
included on the prescription by the prescriber, contrary to clause 41(3)
Poisons and
Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
Although unable
to identify specific supplies each respondent admitted in his response (point 3)
"would have been involved in a large number of the supplies
identified in Annexure B
Mr David North in his peer review states:
they did depart from a recognised acceptable standard of care when
repeats were dispensed when interval of repeat was not included
prescription by the prescriber. "
Neither respondent was aware of what was required by clause 41(3).
"aware of something to that effect. I was not aware of the
strictness of the legislation."
"At the time we were dispensing the prescription I was unaware of that
requirement with the repeat intervals being written on the
prescription."
Particular 4
During the period July 2000 to February 2001, the pharmacist dispensed and/or
failed to ensure that his partners and/or his employed
pharmacists did not
dispense prescriptions for the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic
androgenic steroids) set out in annexure
B as repeats when the interval of
repeat was not included on the prescription by the prescriber, contrary to
clause 41(3)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
The admission made by each respondent, in his response to this particular was
as for Particular 3. There was an extra admission on
the part of each respondent
(point 4) that he:
failed to ensure that (his partner) and employed pharmacists supplied
the AAS's in accordance with the 1994 Regulation.”
Particular 5
During the period February 1999 to June 2000, the pharmacist
was employed by and worked as a registered pharmacist in the pharmacy
dispensed prescriptions for the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic
androgenic steroids) set out in annexure B when
the prescription was or appeared
to have been defaced contrary to clause 44(1)(d)
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
By agreement, prescriptions 68 and 161 were not pressed.
Whilst unable to identify individual prescriptions which he would have
dispensed, in his response (point 5) to this particular, each
admitted that;
"in all probability he would have been involved in the dispensing of AAS's
on some of the prescriptions identified."
Each respondent admitted (point
"with the exception of prescriptions 68 and 161, the prescriptions appear
to have been altered. "
"believes the alterations were made by the prescribing doctor and
therefore does not believe that he dispensed AAS's on prescriptions
someone other than the prescribing doctor. "
Mr North, in his peer review states:
"Generally a pharmacist is at a higher awareness for altered prescriptions
when dispensing special restricted substances and checking
for altered
strengths, quantities and number of repeats and dates of prescriptions."
Each respondent admitted (point 5);
"that on occasions he may have relied on his own judgment rather than
telephoning the prescribing doctor to confirm that the alteration
prescription had in fact been made by the doctor."
During the period July 2000 to February 2001, the pharmacist dispensed and/or
failed to ensure that his partners and/or his employed
pharmacists did not
dispense prescriptions for the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic
androgenic steroids) set out in annexure
B when the prescription was or appeared
to have been defaced, contrary to clause 44(1)(d)
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
The admissions made by each respondent, in his response to this Particular
were as for Particular 5. There was an extra admission
on the part of each
respondent (point 6) that he
"failed to ensure that (his Partner) and employed pharmacists supplied the
AAS's in accordance with the 1994 Regulation."
Particular 7
During the period February 1999 to June 2000, the pharmacist was employed by
and worked as a registered pharmacist in the pharmacy
which failed to store
prescriptions for the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic androgenic
steroids) set out in annexure B
in a location separate to other general
prescriptions, contrary to clause 44(2)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Whilst unable to identify individual prescriptions which he would have
dispensed, in his response (point 7) to this Particular each
respondent admitted
"he would have been involved in a large number of the
supplies identified in annexure 8."
Each respondent knew of this requirement but had not acted upon it.
I was aware that there was something special about them and that was - I
thought I was doing the right thing by keeping the repeats
I was aware of the requirement and we did store repeats
Mr North in his peer review states:
This appears to be one of many procedures that were not in place
and is indicative of
dispensary management. "
Particular 8
During the period July 2000 to February 2001, the pharmacist failed to store
and/or failed to ensure that his partners and/or his
employed pharmacists stored
prescriptions for the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic androgenic
steroids) set out in annexure
B in a location separate to other general
prescriptions, contrary to clause 44(2)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
In his response (point 8) to the complaint, each respondent admitted this
particular.
Particular 9
During the period February 1999 to June 2000, the pharmacist was employed by
and worked as a registered pharmacist in the pharmacy
which, when dispensing
prescriptions for the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic androgenic
steroids) set out in annexure
B failed to record the name of the person by whom
the substance was supplied, contrary to clause 58(2)(d)
Poisons and
Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
In his response (point 9) to the complaint each respondent stated in relation
to this particular;
"During the period February 1999 to June 2000 the
initials of the pharmacist who supplied the AAS's were recorded on the label
on the AAS's supplied to the patient and on any repeat but the software
system did not allow the pharmacist to retrieve that information.
recording the initials in this way may technically satisfy the 1994 Regulation
... (he) accepts that in the spirit of the
law the record should have been kept
at the pharmacy
It was argued by Counsel for the respondents, that in fact a record had been
made, as required in clause 58.
It is clause 153 of
Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
, which currently requires a record to be kept.
The Board of Inquiry agrees that this does not make a great deal of
difference to the overall complaint. It is however, of the opinion
spirit of the law was not met.
Particular 10
During the period July 2000 to February 2001, the pharmacist dispensed
prescriptions and/or failed to ensure his partners and/or his
pharmacists did not dispense prescriptions for the prescribed restricted
substances (anabolic androgenic steroids) set out
in annexure B without
recording the name of the person by whom the substance was supplied, contrary to
clause 58(2)(d)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
response (point 10) to the complaint each respondent made the same concession as
for particular 9.
Particular 11
During the period February 1999 to June 2000, the pharmacist was employed by
and worked as a registered pharmacist in the pharmacy
which, when dispensing
prescriptions for the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic androgenic
steroids) set out in annexure
B failed to endorse the required particulars on
the prescription in ink, contrary to clauses 43(1)(a)(b) and (c)
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
In his response (point 11) to the
complaint each respondent stated that he;
"is unable to identify the supplies that he made as set out in the
annexure B but admits that he would have been involved in a large
number of the
supplies identified in annexure B. On that basis ... (he)... admits particular
11 of the complaint
The respondents gave evidence that these details were entered into the
computer during the period of complaint but not recorded on
the prescription.
Evidence was also given that this breach of the regulation has been rectified
Particular 12
During the period July 2000 to February 2001, the pharmacist dispensed and/or
failed to ensure that his partners and/or employed pharmacists
did not dispense
prescriptions for the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic androgenic
steroids) set out in annexure B without
endorsing the required particulars on
the prescription in ink, contrary to clauses 43(1)(a)(b) and (c)
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Each respondent in his response (point 12) to the complaint admitted this
particular.
Particular 13
During the period February 1999 to June 2000, the pharmacist was employed by
and worked as a registered pharmacist in the pharmacy
which, when dispensing
prescriptions for the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic androgenic
steroids) set out in annexure
B failed to cancel the prescriptions in ink when
the intervals at which the substances may be supplied were not clearly
contrary to clause 43(2)(b)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
In his response (point 13) to the complaint each
respondent stated that he;
is unable to identify the supplies that he made as set out in annexure B
but admits that he would have been involved in a large number
of the supplies
identified in annexure B
On that basis each respondent admitted particular 13.
Particular 14
During the period July 2000 to February 2001, the pharmacist dispensed
prescriptions and/or failed to ensure that his partners and/or
his employed
pharmacists did not dispense prescriptions for the prescribed restricted
substances (anabolic androgenic steroids) set
out in annexure B without
canceling the prescriptions in ink when the intervals at which the substances
may be supplied was not clearly
specified, contrary to clause 43(2)(b)
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
Each respondent in his response (point 14) to the complaint admitted this
particular.
Particular 15
During the period February 1999 to June 2000, the pharmacist
was employed and worked as a registered pharmacist in the pharmacy which,
dispensing prescriptions for the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic
androgenic steroids) set out in annexure B failed
to cancel the prescriptions in
ink when the prescription had reached the last occasion on which it could be
supplied according to
the maximum number of times specified on it, contrary to
clause 43(2)(c)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
In his response (point 15) to the complaint each respondent stated that
"is unable to identify the supplies that he made as set out in annexure
but admits that he would have been involved in a large number
of the supplies
identified in annexure B. "
On that basis each respondent admitted particular 15 of the complaint.
Particular 16
During the period July 2000 to February 2001, the pharmacist dispensed
prescriptions and/or failed to ensure that his partners and/or
his employed
pharmacists did not dispense prescriptions for the prescribed restricted
substances (anabolic androgenic steroids) set
out in annexure B without
canceling the prescriptions in ink when the prescription had reached the last
occasion on which it could
be supplied according to the maximum number of times
specified on it, contrary to clause 43(2)(c)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Regulation 1994.
In his response (point 16) to the complaint, each respondent admitted this
particular of the amended complaint.
Evidence was given by each respondent that he had not been aware of the
requirement to cancel prescriptions as referred to in particulars
Mr Pahos, in answer to question about the requirement to cancel AAS's at that
time replied: "
"I didn't know it applied to
anabolic androgenic steroids"
Mr North, in his peer review states:
"This is a part of good practice in dispensing and the duty of a
pharmacist to ensure that it is carried out."
Particular 17
During the period July 2000 to February 2001 the pharmacist failed to ensure
that proper systems were employed at the pharmacy to
record and account for the
receipt, supply and disposal of all prescribed restricted substances (anabolic
androgenic steroids) by
the pharmacy.
This particular was not pressed.
The respondents indicated to the Board of Inquiry that they are sorry for
what happened and that they have put into place protocols
to ensure the same
mistakes are not made again.
The pharmacy is now Quality Care Accredited.
Protocols for management and dispensing of AAS's are now in place.
The respondents enrolled in Drugs of Abuse and Misuse 1 and II almost two
years ago at the time of this Inquiry. However, neither
respondent has completed
the units of this course.
The pharmacy dispenses almost 800 prescriptions a
day. There is a staff of sixty. At any one time a maximum of two pharmacists and
one graduate trainee and two dispensary technicians are on duty. During the week
those two pharmacists apart from dispensing, have
the responsibility
i) ordering dispensary stock,
ii) supervising the
iii) supervision of responses to customer requests,
iv) personal
supply of schedule 3 medications, and
v) weekly meetings with Mr Mesiti,
within business hours.
Mr Leros said that he had a heavy workload.
"We have tried employing some pharmacists in the past. I think
see the workload that has to be done in the pharmacy
On the days of the Board of Inquiry there was only one pharmacist supervising
all the professional responsibilities.
Evidence was given that both pharmacists knew that AAS's could be abused and
had serious adverse effects.
Mr Pahos agreed that their computer system at the time of the complaint had
the facility for reviewing dispensing histories.
Neither respondent questioned the supply of these substances at such frequent
Mr Mesiti, in answer to a question as to whether he thought what had happened
had been unprofessional on the part of his partners
It was unbelievable. I think when they turn up each day for work they
just get caught up in just the day to day, one script leads
into the next and
they were unable to pull back and sort of see what they were doing. They needed
someone to say, hey, something
is wrong. "
When asked if he thought what his partners were doing was unethical he
It was unethical but not deliberately so
The respondents' inattention to the requirements of safe dispensing
procedures for these substances is indicative of the lack of care
for the needs
and safety of patients.
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
1994 places upon the
pharmacist the responsibility for supply in accordance with appropriate
therapeutic quantity and purpose.
Both Mr Pahos and Mr Leros apparently
considered that by making phone calls to the prescribing doctor in some
instances they were
doing all that was required by the Regulation. In a joint
letter to Ken Thompson, Pharmaceutical Services Branch, dated 24 April
respondents stated;
it is an area where community Pharmacists need more exacting definitions
and guidance by the law and we should not be left to interpret
intentions, then be left liable to prosecution if the wrong interpretation is
Mr North in his peer review indicates he was at a loss to which part of the
Regulation they were not clear about and didn't understand.
Counsel for the Complainant in submissions said that both respondents;
"knew at the relevant time that steroids were open to abuse"...
"knew that the primary purpose was sporting related injuries
Mr Leros had the belief that 90 per cent of it was for body building
Counsel also submitted that both respondents;
"believed they were doing the right thing at the time, clearly indicating
that they had no knowledge of the legal requirements of
a pharmacist and the
pharmacy at that time".
Counsel for the complainant
"The complaint is termed lack of adequate skill, care or knowledge and/or
other improper or unethical conduct. The usual form of complaint
is and/or and
in my submission this complaint should be read in those terms, rather than
strictly in terms of "and" It was not submitted
in this case that improper or
unethical conduct need be found. "
Counsel for the Respondents submitted that both had been cooperative with the
investigation, had shown genuine regret and had immediately
taken effective
action to correct their errors. Further
"The doctor whose advice they were relying on was to their knowledge - and
it is borne out by the Medical Tribunal document too -
a doctor of considerable
experience and standing."
In the view of the Board of Inquiry a pharmacist does not properly discharge
his duty to the public at large by simply dispensing
every drug in relation to
which he or she is given a prescription without question, even if the
prescription is issued by a medical
practitioner who appears to be of
considerable experience and standing within the community. The enquiry of the
pharmacist must go
deeper than that
Counsel for the respondents also
"while one would not say they were inexperienced, they were younger and
less experienced. .......... whole range of practicing pharmacists"
Board of Inquiry finds on the evidence both written and oral that
the respondents:
1. Knew that AAS's were subject to abuse,
2. Did not have procedures in place which would have assisted them to
identify the large quantities being dispensed at frequent intervals,
3. Had information available to them in MIMS which would have assisted them
to carry out their responsibility of supplying AAS's in
appropriate quantities
and for appropriate purposes to patients. They did not access this information
and demonstrated a lack of
knowledge about the substances,
4. Demonstrated a lack of understanding of their responsibilities in relation
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
1994, relying instead on
asking questions, on occasions of the doctor. In doing this they demonstrated a
lack of experience, judgment
and skill in the practice of pharmacy, and a lack
of care for the health and well-being of their patients,
5. During the period of the complaint, did not behave in accordance with the
rules of behaviour accepted by pharmacists of competence
and good repute. The
Code of Professional Conduct of the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia states
in Principle Two
; "A pharmacist must at all times uphold the reputation of
the profession and adhere to the legislation applicable to the practice
The Code also states, in Principle One
"The primary concern of the pharmacist must be the health and wellbeing of
both clients and the community.
Obligation 1.3 A pharmacist must exercise professional judgment to prevent
the supply of products likely to constitute an unacceptable
hazard to health or
the supply of unnecessary and/or excessive quantities of medicines and other
products, particularly those which
have a potential for abuse or
dependency."
The Board has to consider its protective function which includes not only
deterring the pharmacist in question from re-offending,
but also deterring
others who might be tempted to fall short of the high standards required of
(Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
1994 34NSWLR408).
Having regard to all of the evidence, the gravity and importance of the
matters being dealt with, in respect of Nicholas Michael Pahos,
the Board is
"comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities" (Bannister v Walton
(1993) 30 NSWLR699) that particulars 1-9 and 11-16 of the complaint have
been proved to the Board's reasonable satisfaction and that
the conduct
constitutes professional misconduct within the meaning of Section 19A of the Act
in that the Board finds that Nicholas
Michael Pahos has engaged in:
that has demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment and care in
the practice of pharmacy and
ii) conduct relating to the practice of
pharmacy that is improper and unethical.
Accordingly the Pharmacy Board of New South Wales makes the following orders
pursuant to
Pharmacy Act
1. Nicholas Michael Pahos is severely reprimanded.
2. Nicholas Michael Pahos is fined $4,400.
Michael Pahos is required to complete, in each of the years 2006, 2007 and 2008,
at least 30 hours of continuing professional
education (CPE), approved by the
Board of which at least 15 hours each year is to be in lecture, seminar,
workshop or other activity.
At the conclusion of each year he is to submit to
the Pharmacy Board a report of the CPE he has completed.
4. Nicholas
Michael Pahos is to provide, by 30 September 2006, evidence of satisfactory
completion of the course Drug Abuse and Misuse
I and II. This course is provided
by Australian College of Pharmacy Practice and Management.
Michael Pahos is to use his best endeavors to obtain and/or maintain membership
of Pharmaceutical Society of Australia and
Pharmacy Guild of Australia for a
period of 5 years following the date of these Orders. Evidence of these
memberships are to be provided
to the Board on an annual basis.
Nicholas Michael Pahos is to maintain Quality Care Program accreditation at
Ralph's Day and Night Chemist and in any pharmacy in
which he acquires a
pecuniary interest, for a period of 5 years from the date of these Orders. As
part of the ongoing accreditation,
Mr Pahos is to agree to the conduct of an
annual Standards Maintenance Assessment for each of the 5 years and to provide
the results
of these assessments to the Board annually.
These orders are to be carried out at Mr Pahos' expense.
In respect of George Leros, having regard to all of the evidence, the gravity
and importance of the matters being dealt with, the
"comfortably
on the balance of probabilities" (Bannister
v Walton (1993)
30 NSWLR699) that particulars 1-9 and 11-16 of the complaint have been proved to
the Board's reasonable satisfaction
and that the conduct constitutes
professional misconduct within the meaning of
Section 19A
of the Act in that the
Board finds that George Leros has engaged in:
that has demonstrated a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment and care in
the practice of pharmacy and
ii) conduct relating to the practice of
pharmacy that is improper and unethical.
Accordingly, the Pharmacy Board of New South Wales makes the following orders
pursuant to
Pharmacy Act
1. George Leros is severely reprimanded.
2. George Leros is fined $4,400.
Leros is required to complete, in each of the years 2006, 2007 and 2008, at
least 30 hours of continuing professional education
(CPE), approved by the Board
of which at least 15 hours each year is to be in lecture, seminar, workshop or
other activity. At the
conclusion of each year he is to submit to the Pharmacy
Board a report of the CPE he has completed.
Leros is to provide, by 30 September 2006, evidence of satisfactory completion
of the course Drug Abuse and Misuse I and II.
This course is provided by
Australian College of Pharmacy Practice and Management.
Leros is to use his best endeavors to obtain and/or maintain membership of
Pharmaceutical Society of Australia and Pharmacy
Guild of Australia for a period
of 5 years following the date of these Orders. Evidence of these memberships is
to be provided to
the Board on an annual basis.
Leros is to maintain Quality Care Program accreditation at Ralph's Day and Night
Chemist and in any pharmacy in which he acquires
a pecuniary interest, for a
period of 5 years from the date of these Orders. As part of the ongoing
accreditation, Mr Pahos is to
agree to the conduct of an annual Standards
Maintenance Assessment for each of the 5 years and to provide the results of
these assessments
to the Board annually.
These orders are to be carried out at Mr Leros'
Mr Mesiti is a pharmacist first registered in New South Wales on 28 December
1973. During the period until 1 July 2000 the pharmacist
was sole proprietor of
Ralph's Day and Night Pharmacy at Campbelltown in New South Wales ("the
pharmacy") and employer of registered
pharmacists. Between 1 July 2000 and
February 2001 he was joint proprietor of the pharmacy.
The Board of Inquiry accepts that during the entire period of the complaint,
Mesiti was not involved in dispensing any prescriptions.
It is accepted that he
did not personally supply any of the substances.
Particular 1
During the period February 1999 to February 2001, the pharmacist supplied
and/or failed to ensure that his partners and/or his employed
pharmacists did
not supply the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic androgenic steroids)
set out in annexure A and highlighted
in grey, in a quantity or for a purpose
which did not accord with recognised therapeutic standards of what was
appropriate in the
circumstances where the pharmacist knew or ought to have
known that the substances were commonly abused for a non- therapeutic purpose,
namely to achieve greater muscle mass.
The respondent agreed that he knew AAS's should be supplied in a quantity and
for a purpose which accords with recognised therapeutic
standards. In his
response (point 1), the respondent admitted that he knew
"AAS's could be
abused for non therapeutic purpose, namely to achieve greater muscle mass.
However, when asked as to whether "
he was aware at any point in the
complaint period that steroids were being supplied from the pharmacy for the
purposes which could
be called body building?",
he answered;
I didn't really give it much thought."
By his own admission, the
respondent failed to have appropriate procedures and protocols for dispensing in
place in the pharmacy.
I really didn't take much interest or participation, I should say, in the
dispensing."
Particular 2
During the period February 1999 to February 2001, the pharmacist dispensed
and/or failed to ensure that his partners and/or his employed
pharmacists did
not dispense prescriptions for the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic
androgenic steroids) set out in annexure
B as repeats when the interval of
repeat was not included on the prescription by the prescriber, contrary to
clause 41(3)
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
The respondent was not aware of this requirement.
In his response (point 2) the respondent admitted his failure to ensure his
partners did not dispense prescriptions in this manner.
Particular 3
During the period February 1999 to February 2001, the
pharmacist dispensed and/or failed to ensure that his partners and/or his
pharmacists did not dispense prescriptions for the prescribed
restricted substances (anabolic androgenic steroids) set out in annexure
the prescription was or appeared to have been defaced, contrary to clause
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
By agreement Prescriptions 68 and 161 were not pressed.
In his response (point 3) the respondent did not agree that the prescriptions
had been defaced but admitted the particular if they
were defaced.
When shown the original prescriptions, under cross-examination he agreed that
there had been some alterations to prescriptions.
Particular 4
During the period February 1999 to February 2001, the
pharmacist failed to store and/or failed to ensure that his partners and/or
employed pharmacists stored prescriptions for the prescribed restricted
substances (anabolic androgenic steroids) set out in
annexure B in a location
separate to other general prescriptions, contrary to clause 44(2)
and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
The respondent "
felt they were ... filed separately
In his response (point 4) he admitted he did not have appropriate procedures
in place in the pharmacy.
Particular 5
During the period February 1999 to February 2001, the
pharmacist dispensed prescriptions and/or failed to ensure his partners and/or
his employed pharmacists did not dispense prescriptions for the prescribed
restricted substances (anabolic androgenic steroids) set
out in annexure B
without recording the name of the person by whom the substance was supplied,
contrary to clause 58(2)(d)
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
At the time of the complaint the respondent "
didn't realise
requirement".
In his response to the amended complaint
(point 5) he said he accepted that;
"In the spirit of the law the records
should also have been kept at the pharmacy."
Particular 6
During the period February 1999 to February 2001, the pharmacist dispensed
and/or failed to ensure that his partners and/or employed
pharmacists did not
dispense prescriptions for the prescribed restricted substances (anabolic
androgenic steroids) set out in annexure
B without endorsing the required
particulars on the prescription in ink, contrary to clauses 43(1)(a)(b) and (c)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
The respondent was aware of this requirement and he thought that those
conditions were being met at the time of the complaint.
The Board of Inquiry is of the opinion that he could not have been certain
that they were being met as he did not take any interest
in the dispensary.
Particular 7
During the period February 1999 to February 2001, the pharmacist dispensed
prescriptions and/or failed to ensure that his partners
and/or his employed
pharmacists did not dispense prescriptions for the prescribed restricted
substances (anabolic androgenic steroids)
set out in annexure B without
canceling the prescriptions in ink when the intervals at which the substances
may be supplied was not
clearly specified, contrary to clause 43(2)(b)
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
The respondent said he was not aware of this requirement for steroids.
In his response (point 7) the respondent admitted this particular.
Particular 8
During the period February 1999 to February 2001, the pharmacist dispensed
prescriptions and/or failed to ensure that his partners
and/or his employed
pharmacists did not dispense prescriptions for the prescribed restricted
substances (anabolic androgenic steroids)
set out in annexure B without
canceling the prescriptions in ink when the prescription had reached the last
occasion on which it
could be supplied according to the maximum number of times
specified on it, contrary to clause 43(2)(c)
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
The respondent was unaware of this requirement for steroids.
In his response, (point 8) he admitted that he did not have appropriate
procedures in place in the pharmacy.
Particular 9
During the period February 1999 to February 2001 the pharmacist failed to
ensure that proper systems were employed at the pharmacy
to record and account
for the receipt, supply and disposal of all prescribed restricted substances
(anabolic androgenic steroids)
by the pharmacy.
This particular was not pressed.
In a letter to HCCC dated 6 July 2004, Mr
Mesiti stated that he had retired as a pharmacist on 16 December 1998. After
that date he
had never dispensed any prescriptions.
In evidence he said he had retired from pharmaceutical duties. He admitted
that during the period of the complaint his involvement
in the pharmacy was more
of a business nature.
"it was minimal. I took on two partners and I was burnt out. I didn't at
that time have much to do with the pharmacy
The Pharmacist has indicated he is sorry for what happened.
devastated ....... it just shouldn't have happened. I'm sorry that it
When the problem came to light, he realised it had to be rectified and after
discussions with his partners, protocols were put in
place to prevent it
happening again.
All three of us now have got a full understanding of the regulations, the
Act, what needs to be done."
" I now check and see what is
happening within the pharmacy
The respondent now spends one hour a week in the pharmacy, out of hours, and
reviews data at home, looking at dispensary trends of
purchases and supply. He
instigated the implementation of Quality Care Program and
"pointed them (Nick and George) in the right direction what to
He did not indicate any personal involvement in the actual accreditation
process. He had personal involvement in the accreditation
process for another,
smaller pharmacy which he owns.
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
places upon
the pharmacist the responsibility for supply in accordance with appropriate
therapeutic quantity and purpose. At the time
of the complaint, the respondent
had no knowledge at all as to whether there were any procedures in place to
ensure this regulation
was followed. He was not aware of all the requirements
relating to storage and handling of anabolic androgenic steroids. He trusted
had utmost faith in both boys, otherwise I would
not have left my pharmacy to them
He was not aware that any problem existed.
The respondent in the document at tab 10 Exhibit 1, "Further Response of Mr
Ralph Mesiti" said at point 8;
"Although my role has changed (since 1998), I understand that as a partner
and owner of the pharmacy, I had a continuing duty to supervise
and ensure that
procedures, protocols and staffing were adequate
In order that professional outcomes are satisfactory staffing must be
adequate. Currently the pharmacy dispenses almost 800 prescriptions
a day. There
is a staff of sixty. At any one time a maximum of two pharmacists are on duty,
supported in the dispensary by one graduate
trainee and two dispensary
technicians. On the day of the Inquiry there was only one pharmacist on
The respondent is not sure of the number of hours worked by his partners.
Neither is he aware of any pressure which they might be
experiencing.
"Look it is a pressure of their own making. .......... they can do what
they like because I trust them enough to do what they want
to do, so if they
feel they have got a lot of pressure they must be happy with it, otherwise they
are free to change it.
Counsel for the Complainant in submissions referred the Board of Inquiry to
two decisions of the Board, that of Vivienne Beck
[1998] NSWPB 8
(9 December
1998) and Drummond & Dyer
[2002] NSWPB 3
(13 February 2002).
The VL Beck decision determined that:
The responsibility of ownership extends to ensure that at all relevant
times, suitable procedures, protocols and validation are in
place to eliminate
professional misconduct in the pharmacy
" The responsibility of the owner is to ensure that the pharmacy has
adequate qualified staff to enable all procedures to be properly
Counsel submitted that the fact that the respondent had considered himself to
be retired in no way diminished his responsibility for
the dispensing.
Counsel submitted that the respondent's involvement with the Pharmacy
throughout the time of the complaint was essentially financial
rather than in
any professional sense and that he had showed inadequate oversight of the
pharmacy. Counsel further submitted that
even at the time of the Inquiry:
he has little knowledge of the staffing requirements and, indeed the
staffing in reality
it is clear from Mr Mesiti's evidence that he does not understand his
responsibilities as a proprietor
Counsel for the Respondent submitted that he, together with his partners had
been cooperative with the investigation, had shown genuine
regret and had
immediately taken effective action to correct his errors.
What was being done was yes, not in accordance with the procedures but it
wasn't totally without procedures
This pharmacy has been operated for well over four and a half years to a
very high standard, as recognized by their Quality Care Program
accreditation
and by the inspections of Mr Bell."
Mr Mesiti by his actions during the complaint period, and by his comments
made pursuant to this, believed that he could not only devolve
responsibilities for the day to day running of the pharmacy but also devolve
responsibility for the outcomes.
Pharmacists receive a number of privileges under pharmacy legislation, and
these privileges are offset by professional obligations
and responsibilities to
the community.
Since the period of the complaint, Mr Mesiti has assisted in development of
procedures and protocols within the pharmacy. He now takes
an overview of
professional matters as well as business matters. It is of concern to the Board
that he does however still depend
on his trust of his partners to ensure
adequate staffing of the pharmacy. Without adequate staffing it is extremely
difficult for
the working partners to implement the procedures and protocols and
to fulfill their professional obligations and responsibilities
During the period of the complaint, Mr Mesiti did not behave in
accordance with the rules of behaviour accepted by pharmacists of
competence and
good repute. The Code of Professional Conduct of the Pharmaceutical Society of
Australia states in Principle Two;
A pharmacist must at all times uphold the reputation of the profession
and adhere to the legislation applicable to the practice of
The Code also states, in Principle One;
The primary concern of the pharmacist must be the health and wellbeing of
both clients and the community.
Obligation 1.3 A pharmacist must exercise professional judgment to prevent
the supply of products likely to constitute an unacceptable
hazard to health or
the supply of unnecessary and/or excessive quantities of medicines and other
products, particularly those which
have a potential for abuse or
The respondent, during the period of the complaint abrogated his
responsibilities in that he had neither knowledge of, nor apparent
interest in
the dispensary procedures at the pharmacy. He thought, improperly, that he could
ensure that legislation applicable to
the practice of pharmacy was adhered to by
placing total trust in his partners.
The Pharmacy Board has to consider its protective function which includes not
only deterring the pharmacist in question from re-offending,
but also deterring
others who might be tempted to fall short of the high standards required of
Law Society of New South
In respect of Ralph Mesiti, the Board of Inquiry has considered the totality
of the evidence, both written and oral. Having regard
to all of the evidence,
the gravity and importance of the matters being dealt with, the Board is
comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities
(1999) 30 NSWLR 699)
that particulars 1-4 and 6-8 of the
complaint have been proved to the Board's reasonable satisfaction.
The Board finds that Ralph Mesiti is guilty of professional misconduct within
the meaning of s19A of the Act in that he;
demonstrated
a lack of adequate knowledge, skill, judgment and care in the practice of
in conduct relating to the practice of pharmacy that is improper and
Accordingly the Pharmacy Board of New South Wales makes
the following orders pursuant to
Pharmacy Act
1. Ralph Mesiti is severely reprimanded.
2. Ralph Mesiti is fined $4,400.
Mesiti is required to complete, in each of the years 2006, 2007 and 2008, at
least 30 hours of continuing professional education
(CPE), approved by the Board
of which at least 15 hours each year is to be in lecture, seminar, workshop or
other activity. At the
conclusion of each year he is to submit to the Pharmacy
Board a report of the CPE he has completed.
Mesiti is to prepare a paper entitled "Legislation Privileges of Pharmacists and
ensuing Responsibilities and Obligations".
This paper is to be presented to a
peer group appointed by the Board and to the satisfaction of that peer group.
This is to be completed
by 31 July 2006.
Mesiti is to use his best endeavors to obtain and/or maintain membership of
Pharmaceutical Society of Australia and Pharmacy
Guild of Australia for a period
of 5 years following the date of these Orders. Evidence of these memberships is
to be provided to
the Board on an annual basis.
Mesiti is to maintain Quality Care Program accreditation at Ralph's Day and
Night Chemist and in any pharmacy in which he acquires
a pecuniary interest, for
a period of 5 years from the date of these Orders. Mr Mesiti is to be personally
accredited in any such
pharmacy. As part of the ongoing accreditation, Mr Mesiti
is to agree to the conduct of an annual Standards Maintenance Assessment
each of the 5 years and to provide the results of these assessments to the Board
These orders are to be carried out at Mr Mesiti's
The effective date of these orders is one month from the date on
which the pharmacists have been advised by registered post at their
addresses as
they appear on the Register.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (133 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter