URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC V TWOMEY [2013] NSWNMT 6 (19 June 2013)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Matter No: 016/2013
CITATION: HCCC V TWOMEY
[2013] NSWNMT
INQUIRY INTO A COMPLAINT AGAINST A
Complainant
Health Care Complaints Commission
Amanda Marie TWOMEY
O’Neill (Chairperson)
Jocalyn Lawler (Nurse Member)
Smiltnieks (Nurse Member)
James Lyon (Lay Member)
Date and Place of
21, 22 and 23 May and 4 June 2013, Sydney
Date of Order
and Reasons for Decision
19 June 2013
Representation
Complainant Hayley Bennett, barrister, instructed on 21, 22 and 23 May by
Jaimee Dinihan and on 4 June by Michael Darmody, both solicitors,
for the Health
Care Complaints Commission.
Respondent Mrs Patricia Robertson, solicitor, NSW Nurses’ and
Midwives’ Association
Complaint against a nurse – crossing professional
boundaries - unsatisfactory professional conduct – professional misconduct
– non-publication order – protective orders -
Legislation cited
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
ss 3A, 139B, 139E, 149A, 149C.
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
Stanoevski v
Council of the Law Society of NSW
[2008] NSWCA 93
HCCC v King
Pillai v Messiter (No 2)
(1989) 16 NSWLR 97
Clyne v NSW Bar
Association
[1960] HCA 40.
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal was satisfied that the conduct alleged against Amanda Marie Twomey was
unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently
serious nature as to
justify the suspension or cancellation of Ms Twomey’s registration as an
Endorsed Enrolled Nurse.
Tribunal ordered that Amanda Marie Twomey’s registration on the public
national register as an enrolled nurse (Division
2) be suspended for a period of
six months from the date of the order in this
Tribunal also imposed a condition on her registration requiring her, to complete
to the satisfaction of the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of New South Wales (the
Council), within one year of the date of the order in this matter or within such
longer period approved
by the Council, a course on ethical boundaries or on
ethics more generally but with a substantial component of the course dealing
with the question of ethical boundaries. That condition is to remain on her
registration as an enrolled nurse until the Council is
satisfied that Ms Twomey
has complied with this condition.
Tribunal made a non-publication order to the effect that the names of Patient A,
his sister and mother and Mr B are not to be
published in any medium other than
in the Reasons for Decision and attached material that is sent to the parties in
this matter.
Tribunal ordered that Ms Twomey pay the costs of the Health Care Complaints
Commission (HCCC) in this matter on the ordinary basis
as defined in
Procedure Act 2005
, except for the costs incurred by the HCCC
relating to the first day of the hearing of this matter, namely 21 May 2013. In
to the costs relating to that day, the parties are to bear their own
Background to this hearing
Marie Twomey was born on 17 August 1971. After completing her School Certificate
in 1987, she undertook a number of jobs before
commencing training as an
enrolled nurse in September 2008 at Broken Hill TAFE. She first became an
enrolled nurse in December 2009
and has remained on the relevant register as
such ever since.
her registration, Ms Twomey was employed as a casual nurse in Broken Hill
Hospital, but a majority of her work was as a
District Nurse which involved
providing nursing care to patients in their homes.
began working at Manning Base Rural Referral Hospital (the Hospital) as a
permanent, part-time endorsed enrolled nurse on 10 January
2011. She worked in
the Level 4 Medical Unit of the Hospital.
A was admitted to that Medical Unit on 20 April 2011. He was discharged home on
5 May 2011. Ms Twomey cared for him when he
was a patient in the Unit on 21
April 2011, 2 May 2011, 3 May 2011 and 5 May 2011. She signed Patient A’s
progress/clinical
notes as awaiting discharge at 1200 hours on 5 May 2011.
day after his discharge or very soon after that, Patient A and Ms Twomey began a
relationship that became a sexual one. Ms Twomey
moved into Patient A’s
house, but by 2 July 2011 the relationship had collapsed and Ms Twomey moved
into a hotel and subsequently
a women’s refuge.
Ms Twomey brought this matter to the notice of her employers when seeking leave
to manage the breakdown of the relationship,
the matter was investigated. The
Chief Executive of the Hunter New England Local Health District brought the
matter to the attention
of the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency.
The matter was referred on and was investigated as a complaint by the NSW
Care Complaints Commission (HCCC). The HCCC’s formal Complaint against Ms
Twomey, dated 1 March 2013, was lodged with
the Tribunal on 6 March 2013. At a
directions hearing held 20 March, arrangements were made for the exchange of
documents between
the parties and the matter was set down for hearing commencing
on 21 May 2013.
The Complaint
12. The HCCC’s Complaint in this matter set out two complaints against Ms
Twomey. Complaint one alleged that she was guilty
of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and complaint two alleged that she was guilty of professional
misconduct.
complaints alleged that she:
in conduct that demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment she
possessed, or the care that she exercised, in the practice
of nursing, was
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a nurse of an equivalent
level of training or experience;
in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice
of nursing.
particulars of both complaints were the same namely:
failed to observe proper professional boundaries in that:
(a) On or around 6 May 2011, she gave Patient A her personal telephone
(b) Between 6 and 20 May 2011, she had frequent telephone conversations of a
personal nature with Patient A;
(c) Sometime shortly after 5 May 2011, she visited Patient A at his
(d) On or around 20 May 2011, Patient A visited Ms Twomey at her home following
an invitation by the practitioner;
Between 20 May 2011 and 2 July 2011 Ms Twomey engaged in an inappropriate
personal and sexual relationship with Patient A in the course
(a) On or around 20 May 2011 she engaged in sexual intercourse with Patient A on
more than one occasion in her home;
(b) Ms Twomey moved into Patient A’s home and cohabited with Patient A;
(c) On or around 16 June 2011, the practitioner signed paperwork at Centrelink
declaring to be Patient A’s de facto partner.
Twomey admitted the particulars to both complaints, but did not admit to either
of the complaints.
The onus and standard of proof
as in this case, where the respondent, Ms Twomey, has admitted to the
particulars of both complaints, the Tribunal must still
be satisfied on the
balance of probabilities by the evidence that the subject-matter of each of the
complaints against her has been
proved. Only after the Tribunal finds the
subject-matter of a complaint has been proved may it take action in relation to
responsibility for proving the subject-matter of a complaint lies with
the party alleging it – in this case the HCCC.
sources of the evidence
three volumes of documentary material relied upon by the HCCC in this case were
tendered by Ms Bennett, without objection. The
first two volumes of this
material were marked Complainant’s Exhibits 1- 32. The material in the
third volume was marked volume
3 tabs 1-4. The documentary material relied upon
by Ms Twomey in this case was tendered by Mrs Robertson, without objection. This
material was marked Respondent’s Exhibits 1and 2. The tendered documents
are listed in Attachment A to these reasons for decision.
The following gave
oral evidence to the Tribunal in person in this matter: Adam Whitby, the peer
reviewer, Mr B and Ms Twomey. Ms
Donna Muscardin gave evidence by
The evidence
Patient A was admitted to the Manning Base Hospital on 20 April 2011, he was 44
years old. He had diagnoses of Kaposi’s
sarcoma, cystic lung disease and
Hepatitis C. He was also HIV positive. This was not his first admission and
since 2007 at least,
he had been receiving clinical and counselling support for
his chronic HIV from clinics in the Manning region. During his April-May
admission, Patient A was given a provisional diagnosis of mesothelioma. That
diagnosis was confirmed by a second pathologist
on 28 April 2011.
the time Patient A was admitted to the Level 4 Medical Unit at the Hospital, Ms
Twomey had been working there for more than four
months providing what she
described as general nursing care to patients with chronic illnesses including
administering medications,
personal care, feeding and some palliative care.
While Ms Twomey nursed Patient A on 21 April 2011, 2 May 2011, 3 May 2011 and 5
May 2011, it was her evidence that she did not provide a lot of care to Patient
A because he was self-caring. She attended to his
oral medication for pain
relief and attended to his observations. She noted that, around the end of May
2011, Patient A gave her
Nursing Unit Manager (NUM) a box of chocolates to pass
on to her. The NUM told her that she was, “not supposed to receive
from patients”. Ms Twomey further noted in her statement dated
14 February 2012 that the NUM took her to Patient A’s
bedside to explain
to him why she “was not supposed to receive chocolates from
patients”. Ms Twomey’s statement
continues: “From the
conversation I had with the NUM at the time, it was obvious that I was confused
no time did she explain or inquire whether I had
completed the compulsory Code of Conduct training”.
Nevertheless,
during his admission to the Medical Unit, Ms Twomey gave Patient A her business
card for her pottery business.
his written statement dated 7 May 2013, Mr B, who had become a friend of Patient
A and went fishing with him a number of times
per week, stated that he visited
Patient A each day he was in the Hospital. According to Mr B, during one of
these visits Patient
A told him that it didn’t matter what it would take
but, when he got out of hospital, he would chase up Ms Twomey because he
taken a liking to her.
already noted, Ms Twomey signed Patient A’s progress/clinical notes as
awaiting discharge at 1200 hours on 5 May 2011. This
was done on the top of a
new page. In her oral evidence to the Tribunal, Ms Twomey stated that she did
not see Patient A’s
Discharge Report/Referral Letter of the same date.
This was a separate document that noted Patient A’s new diagnosis of
mesothelioma,
that there were plans to reassess it in 2 months and a decision to
hold off on chemotherapy in order to prolong current “good”
of life. It is possible that Ms Twomey did not read this as she claimed in her
oral evidence to the Tribunal. However, also
in her oral evidence to the
Tribunal Ms Twomey claimed that she did not know what oncology was.
Nevertheless, an entry in Patient
A’s progress/clinical notes dated 3 May
2011 and timed at 1430 hours, written and signed by Ms Twomey, includes the
“family in attendance awaiting visit to Dr Bonaventura in
Oncology between 1430 – 1530”. When asked about this
entry in her
oral evidence, Ms Twomey stated that she wrote the note without knowing what
oncology was and that she had “never
had any experience with any
oncology”. She also told the Tribunal that she did not know what
mesothelioma was and, around
this time, bought a book to try to understand the
as already noted, by 28 April 2011, a confirmed diagnosis of mesothilioma had
been recorded in relation to Patient A. The progress/clinical
note written by a
Dr Knight confirmed that Patient A was informed of the diagnosis on 28 April. It
was also Mr B’s evidence
that he was with Patient A in the Hospital when
Dr Knight and another doctor came in to give him the results of the test for
mesothelioma
and tell him of the diagnosis. Mr B said that, “after the
doctors left, which I could not believe that he would say, but he
beauty, I'm going to get a big payout" and it absolutely shocked me because I'd
never heard anybody that's just been told
that he's got a terminal illness to
just say that he's after a big payout”.
to Ms Twomey, in her fact-finding interview on 19 July 2011, soon after Patient
A’s discharge from Manning Hospital
on 5 May 2011, she saw him down the
street. They exchanged phone numbers and she gave him her card [which contained
her non-business
telephone number]. Patient A then began calling her every day.
Ms Twomey also stated that “around 10 May 2011”, she went
Hill for six days but Patient A continued to call her every day.
in her fact-finding interview on 19 July 2011, Ms Twomey noted that, at that
time, she was getting a lot of attention from Patient
A; “so we were
starting to get along really well”. She also noted in that statement that,
on 10 May 2011, Patient A “boasted”
to her about “his
claim” (the payment) “that he was going to receive from the Dust
that statement, she also noted that she and Patient A continued to become
friends because he was ringing every day and they were
talking every day. She
didn’t know anyone in the area and she thought that he was the first real
friend that she had met. In
a further statement dated 14 February 2012, but
signed and witnessed on 2 March 2012, Ms Twomey reiterated the matters set out
the last two sentences. She noted that Patient A rang her three or four times
a day and that they talked on the phone for about two
hours on one occasion. She
noted that she had not had that kind of attention for seven years.
her 2012 statement, Ms Twomey also stated that Patient A invited her to his
house on 2 May 2011(when Patient A was still in hospital).
She stated that she
knew that it was not right to be in a relationship with a patient while the
patient was in (the hospital she
worked in) but thought that “this would
be okay” (if) he was no longer a patient. She stated that she visited
A’s home before she went to Broken Hill. In her oral evidence to
the Tribunal this was raised with Ms Twomey. She confirmed
that what was set out
in her statement was correct, “because he wasn’t a patient any
more”. She stated that she
returned from Broken Hill on 20 May
she got back from Broken Hill, Patient A came over to her house either on the
night of 20 May or the night of 21 May. (It was
the night Patient A’s
mother died that he came to Ms Twomey’s home. Mr B’s statement has
this as 24 May.) Patient
A brought gifts, including French Champagne and cookies
which, Ms Twomey realised later in the evening, contained marijuana. Ms Twomey
stated that she and Patient A became intimate that night and had sexual
intercourse. In her oral evidence to the Tribunal, Ms Twomey
said that she had
sexual intercourse with Patient A only once. However, in her 2012 statement, Ms
Twomey said that this was the beginning
of their sexual relationship but that
they slept together “only a couple of times”. When asked during her
oral evidence
to the Tribunal to clarify this matter, Ms Twomey stated that she
had sexual intercourse with Patient A twice on the night Patient
A brought gifts
to her house night. She explained that she was extremely intoxicated that
night and under the influence of the marijuana
cookies that Patient A had given
her. Further, she stated that there was no more intimacy after that night
because she was worried
catching any diseases from Patient A. She admitted that she knew then that
had certain conditions and named them as HIV, Hep C and Hep B.
the night that she had intercourse with Patient A, Ms Twomey went over to his
house to help him clean it. She noted that, because
of the state of the house,
this was a big job. She began to move into Patient A’s house during the
last week of May 2011. In
his statement, Mr B advised that he first met Ms
Twomey at Patient A’s house in late May.
was Ms Twomey’s evidence that Patient A became very stressed about his
idea of her becoming his de facto spouse so that on
16 June 2011, she went with
him to the Centrelink office and “signed papers to become his de facto
because he continually nagged
me”. She told the Tribunal that Patient
A’s solicitor had advised him that he “would receive double the
of moneys if he was in a de facto relationship”. Ms Twomey also
stated that she had to advise Centrelink of her change of
address and of her
circumstances as she received benefits from Centrelink. Ms Twomey told the
Tribunal that the effect of the advice
given to Centrelink about her new status
was to reduce Patient A’s disability pension by $200 per payment period
and that when
Patient A became aware of this development, “he became
extremely irrational about it and went in the next day and changed
In her oral evidence to the Tribunal, Ms Twomey said that after his
mother’s death when she was visiting Patient A’s
came over with a bag of watches. She said they were very expensive watches and
she felt obliged to take one because
she didn't want to be rude and say no. So
Patient A’s sister gave her one of the watches as a gift. She continued by
the Tribunal that Patient A gave her a ring and told her that he had
made it. Again not to be rude she took it. However, when her
relationship
with Patient A began to fall apart, he asked for the ring and the watch back.
Ms Twomey told the Tribunal that she
couldn't find the ring. She looked
everywhere for it and then Patient A accused her of stealing and
“hocking” the ring.
At that time he told her that the ring was his
mother’s ring, not one he had made. Consequently, it was very sentimental
to him and he demanded it back. Then he claimed it was his sister's ring and
started to demand $2,000 for the ring. Ms Twomey’s
evidence continued:
“when things blew up between us he said, "If you don't get me that $2,000,
I'm going to go to the hospital
and tell everybody that you've taken advantage
of me. I want the $2,000”, and he kept going on and on and on and he
me some 80 times wanting the $2,000 for the ring so now it was all about
the money or the ring, not the sentimental value of whose
ring it was and where
it came from. It was all about the money, that he needed $2,000. At this time
it was the same time that I
found the bag of opioids in his room and I'd counted
them out and he had been taking way too many and I believe that well,
know if it's true or how he felt but I believe he wanted money to buy
more narcotics from somewhere. I don't know but that's the
way I felt about
her statement of 14 February 2012, Ms Twomey said that while she was [in her
relationship] with Patient A, he spoke to his sexual
health community care
worker about their relationship. She continued: “[Patient A] and I agreed
that as long as he was no longer
a patient it was ok. I spoke with the community
care worker and she asked me about ethics and I told her that I wasn’t
comfortable
well. I also didn’t feel honoured enough, not because I had
been his nurse
and he had been my patient but because I didn’t know him that long. She
did not exactly tell me that the relationship
with him was not proper because he
was a patient but she did tell me to contact the Employee Assistance Program
A’s sexual health community care worker was in fact Ms Donna Muscardin.
Her qualifications are as follows: registered
nurse, registered midwife,
registered counsellor in HIV and sexuality counselling and an authorised nurse
practitioner in HIV, Hepatitis
and family planning. She had been a registered
nurse for 30 years. Her position, at the clinic where she had been working when
A rang her and she spoke to him and also Ms Twomey, was that of as
Clinical Nurse Consultant. In 2011, she did all the HIV and Hep
C monitoring and
sexual health work. She was also the counsellor for the service and had been so
for over 20 years. She stated that
she tried to do what she called the
“heavy cases” if there were issues about counselling. She first met
Patient A when
he came to her clinic in 2007 and was first diagnosed.
Muscardin had a note of this telephone call which she dated as occurring on
Wednesday 28 June 2011. Her note was as follows: “I
received a phone call
from [Patient A] who told me he rang AHPRA for advice re protecting his new
girlfriend's job. At this point
[Patient A] advised me they were both
prepared to lie about when and where they met if that was an issue of ethical or
moral concern
and would harm [Ms Twomey’s] job in any way. He was
concerned about any other level 4 nurse reporting her conduct. He said
been his girlfriend for about six weeks and that she was now living at his
house. He had changed his “asbestos carer's
allowance” from the Dust
company so it would go to her and be paid to her ongoing even after his death.
At [Patient A’s]
request [Ms Twomey] got on the phone to speak to me. She
said her name was Amanda and she worked as an EN on level 4. She'd met
A] there as a patient some weeks before and was now living with him. She said
she felt guilty; he was wanting to give her
anything for being there with him
when he died. I agreed with [Ms Twomey’s] discomfort re the situation and
advised her of
the ethical, legal and moral issues from nursing viewpoint,
suggesting she go to EAP counselling via her supervisor for assistance.
[Patient A] again advised, with [Ms Twomey] in the background, that they were
both prepared to lie on when and where they met”.
Muscardin was then asked: “Can you just clarify when you did raise the
ethical, legal and moral issues from a nursing viewpoint?
Was it narrowly in
relation to the issue of the money from the Dust company or was it more broad,
do you recall that?” She
answered as follows: “Even though it was
more broad it was in regard it was broadly in regard to getting into
a relationship
with a patient at all. He was vulnerable and that sort of thing,
but I didn't go into it in any depth like that but I didn't get
the feedback
particularly when I spoke to the nurse it wasn't
like it it appeared to me like the nurse felt guilty about
want anything from him, but didn't seem to have any insight into the
fact that why was she in a relationship with someone who was
dying and an
inpatient on the ward but their first intimate act was in the ward and on the
same week the guy's mother dies ..(not
transcribable).. red
the time they were in their relationship, Patient A made Ms Twomey a beneficiary
of some of his estate under his will. Patient
A changed his will again and Ms
Twomey was not a beneficiary under his will at the time of his death. On 10 June
2011 Patient A appointed
Ms Twomey as his attorney under an enduring power of
attorney. However he revoked that appointment on 11 July 2011. He also appointed
Ms Twomey as his enduring guardian but he also revoked that appointment, on 14
her 2012 statement, Ms Twomey stated that after her visits to solicitors’
offices with Patient A he began to act irrationally.
She found a bag of drugs in
his house containing a number of prescription drugs that were drugs of
addiction. She told him at that
time that he was taking too many pills. Ms
Twomey moved out of Patient A’s home on 2 July 2011. She stated that, at
he was extremely verbally abusive to her. She stated further that,
before she moved out and around the time she found the drugs,
she informed her
manager at the Hospital of her relationship with Patient A.
Twomey also noted in her 2012 statement that she rang the NSW Nurses’
Association on 5 July 2011for advice “on this
matter” and was
emailed “a copy of the NSW Nurses Code of Conduct
documents”.
that statement she noted that, as she remembered it, she was given the Code of
Conduct but not required to study it. However, in
her oral evidence to the
Tribunal, Ms Twomey conceded that she was given a copy of the Code of Conduct
during her TAFE course and
that she was expected, in her own time, to read that
document. She also remembered that the teacher had brought up a story in class
hospital. That was all she remembered about the
Code of Conduct.
the breakup of the relationship, on 8 July 2011, Patient A sought admission to
the Hospital. The progress/clinical notes describe
the reason for the admission
as “a situational crisis with threat of harm to others”. Patient A
needed oxygen during
that admission but was discharged on 11 July. He spoke to
Ms Muscardin on 13 July and her notes state; “Hospitalised emotional
buildup ++”. Patient A was admitted again in August and on 3 and 25
September. He died in the Hospital on 5 October 2011.
Whitby, a Registered Nurse of approximately 25 years standing and currently a
Nursing Unit Manager at a palliative care service,
was asked by the HCCC to
conduct an independent review of the complaint against Ms Twomey. He was asked
specifically to advise whether
Ms Twomey’s conduct fell below the standard
reasonably expected of a nurse of an equivalent level of training or experience
and if he considered that her conduct did fall below that standard, to indicate
three things. These were:
(a) the standard reasonably expected
of a nurse of an equivalent level of training or experience applicable at the
time of the conduct;
(b) whether the departure from the standard was significantly below the
standard or otherwise, and if it were significantly below;
(c) whether the departure from the standard invited his strong
providing his opinion, Mr Whitby was invited to refer to any professional
guidelines, standards or literature that he considered
to be relevant to the
matter. In his report, Mr Whitby referred to the NSW Health Code of Conduct
(2005), the Australian Nursing
& Midwifery Council Code of Professional
Conduct for Nurses in Australia (2008), Australian Nursing & Midwifery
A Nurse Guide to Professional Boundaries (2010).
Whitby gave an opinion on what became six of the seven particulars to both
complaints. These were particulars 1(a), (c) and (d)
and 2(a), (b) and (c).
Particular 1(b) relating to the frequent personal phone calls between Patient A
and Ms Twomey from 6 to 20
May 2011 is amply proved by Ms Twomey’s ample
description of what occurred and is conduct that is consistent with and
of the conduct that make up the other particulars.
first of the admitted allegations that Mr Whitby deals with is the allegation
that Ms Twomey failed to observe proper professional
boundaries in that shortly
after 5 May 2011, she visited Patient A at his home.
was Mr Whitby’s view that Ms Twomey created “a dual relationship
with [Patient A] by giving him her personal phone
number when she met him soon
after his discharge from the Hospital and by visiting him at his home before she
went to Broken Hill.
He noted that the Australian Nursing & Midwifery
Council (ANMC) Code of Professional Conduct for Nurses in Australia, conduct
statement (8) states:
Nurses promote and preserve the trust
and privilege inherent in the relationship between nurses and people receiving
gave the opinion that Ms Twomey breached the ANMC Code of Professional Conduct
for Nurses in Australia, explanation (3) of conduct
Nurses have a responsibility to maintain a professional
boundary between themselves and the person being cared for, and between
and others, such as the person’s partner and other people
nominated by the person to be involved in their care.
was Mr Whitby’s view that Ms Twomey should have recognised the
complexities that would have arisen by her creation of the
dual relationship
with Patient A before she made the decision to visit him in his home. In support
of his opinion he quoted part
of page 7 of the ANMC: A Nurses Guide to
Professional Boundaries as follows:
Nurses establish and
maintain the boundaries in their professional relationships with persons
receiving care; and where necessary
communicate these to that person.
Nurses seek support and guidance from professional leaders
when they have concerns relating to boundaries in therapeutic
relationships.
was also of the opinion that Ms Twomey should have recognised the conflict of
interest with the creation of her dual relationship
with Patient A and if she
was unsure a conflict of interest existed, she should have discussed the matter
with her NUM. In support
of that opinion, he quoted page 12 of the NSW Health
Code of Conduct as follows:
If I am not sure whether a
conflict exists, I will discuss the matter with my immediate supervisor to try
and resolve the matter.
relation to this admitted allegation, it was Mr Whitby’s opinion that Ms
Twomey’s conduct fell significantly below
the standard reasonably expected
of a nurse with her experience and level of training. As to Ms Twomey’s
view that because
Patient A was not a patient in the Hospital a relationship
with him would be “OK”, Mr Whitby stated that she should have
out guidelines and policies readily available via the internet from the relevant
bodies such as the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (AHPRA) or
NSW Health before she entered into any relationship with a patient who had been
in her care. He also
stated that Ms Twomey’s conduct in this regard
invited his strong criticism and continued that Ms Twomey; “should have
considered that, given his medical condition, which she admits to acquiring
resources to learn more about mesothelioma, he would
need subsequent admissions
to Manning Hospital”.
Whitby then dealt with two of the admitted allegations together, these were Ms
Twomey’s conduct in inviting Patient A to
her home [after her return from
Broken Hill on 20 May 2011] and consequently having sexual intercourse with him
that same night.
It was Mr Whitby’s opinion that by doing so Ms Twomey
seriously breached the ANMC Code of Professional Conduct for Nurses in
Australia, explanation (5) of conduct statement (8) which
Sexual relationships between nurses and persons with
whom they have previously entered into a professional relationship are
inappropriate
in most circumstances. Such relationships automatically raise
questions of integrity in relation to nurses exploiting the vulnerability
persons who are or who have been in their care. Consent is not an acceptable
defence in the case of sexual or intimate behaviour
within such
relationship.
addition he considered that she had also seriously breached the NSW Health Code
of Conduct, Document (2005) which states at page
not have personal relationships with patients or clients that result in any form
of exploitation, obligation or sexual gratification.
Specifically
related to the sexual intercourse that occurred that night, it was Mr
Whitby’s opinion that Ms Twomey had seriously
breached the following
statement on page 5of the ANMC: A Nurses Guide to Professional Boundaries which
Sexual misconduct by a nurse is an extremely serious
violation of the nurse’s professional responsibility to the person in
care. Even if the person (or their legal representative) consents, or the
person initiates the sexual conduct it is still the nurse’s
responsibility
to maintain the professional boundary in the relationship.
NSW Health Code of Conduct states at paragraph 1.5 on page 11; “I will
not have a sexual relationship with a patient or client
during the professional
relationship”
Also, when referring to sexual
relationships with patients and professional standards the NSW Health Code of
Conduct in paragraph
1.5 of its explanatory section at page 24 states;
“These standards apply during, and in many cases, after the
professional relationship has ended”.
setting out these matters, Mr Whitby described Ms Twomey’s conduct in
inviting Patient A to her home and having sexual
intercourse with him as falling
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of an Enrolled Nurse
regardless of their level
of experience and training. EN Twomey’s conduct
invited his strong criticism. This was because she had breached NSW Health
policy and the ANMC Code of Professional Conduct, both of which documents were
easily accessible on the internet. It was Mr Whitby’s
opinion that sexual
relationships with a patient, whether or not the patient is still in the direct
care of the nurse is grossly
unethical, especially when, as in this case, the
patient had very recently been in the care of Ms Twomey and the patient had a
limiting illness. Further, the patient was also on medications which, in Mr
Whitby’s opinion, may have impaired his judgment.
next admitted allegation was that Ms Twomey moved into Patient A’s home
and cohabited with him. This cohabitation began
around the end of May 2011 and
ended on 2 July 2011. Mr Whitby considered this conduct to be unethical in the
extreme. This was because,
in his opinion, Ms Twomey did not appear to have
considered her professional obligations under the NSW Health Code of Conduct
states at paragraph 1.4 on page 23:
relationships with patients/clients, as referred to in this section, may be
social, sexual or other types of relationships
(e.g. financial) and may not be
acceptable conduct. Any of these kinds of relationships may result in some form
of exploitation of
a patient/client or involve some kind of obligation or
expectation being created in the patient/client.
Staff must be aware that there is a power imbalance and that
unconscious processes are at work in relationships with patients, clients
their carers.
Staff must be aware that many patients or
clients may be particularly vulnerable through having experienced abuse or
exploitation
in the past.
Whitby went on to suggest that if Ms Twomey had accessed the NSW Health Code of
Conduct via the internet she would have been compelled
to question her actions
of moving in with Patient A and at the very least would have sought advice from
senior staff at Manning Hospital
regarding his request for her to reside with
him. It was Mr Whitby’s opinion that Ms Twomey appeared not to have given
thought to the future medical needs of Patient A who had a life limiting
illness and was a person with very limited social supports
who would almost
certainly have needed subsequent admissions to Manning Hospital. His subsequent
admissions could have placed Ms
Twomey in a position where she would be exposed
to the deepening complexities of their “dual relationship” and the
to severely compromise the health needs of Patient A.
was Mr Whitby’s opinion that Ms Twomey’s conduct in moving into
Patient A’s home as his de facto fell significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a nurse with her level of training and experience and
invited his strong criticism. In
support of that opinion, he quoted The ANMC: A
Nurses Guide to Professional Boundaries, the paragraph numbered 5 on page 7
Nurses understand the complexities if personal
relationships develop once professional relationships end as the person may need
care and services; making it difficult to determine when the
professional relationship is truly terminated.
Tribunal notes that numbered paragraphs 6 and 7 state that nurses examine every
boundary crossing and avoid repeated crossings
and further that they seek
support and guidance from professional leaders when they have concerns relating
to boundaries in therapeutic
relationships.
was Mr Whitby’s opinion that Ms Twomey had severely breached the
principles cited in the ANMC: A Nurses Guide to Professional
Boundaries. He
could not find any reference to her acknowledgement of their existence in the
documentation the HCCC had provided
to him to assist him in writing of his
report. He stated that this was of particular concern as any Enrolled Nurse
should have enough
insight to at least question the type of extremely unethical
behaviour he had just dealt with and take steps either to cease the
relationship
that should never have started in the first place, or seek advice from a manager
or professional body. Mr Whitby noted
that in her 2012 statement Ms Twomey had
stated that she had contacted the NSW Nurses’ Association (NSWNA) on the 5
for advice on this matter.
He also noted that this
was three days after Ms Twomey had ended her relationship with Patient A and
that the NSWNA is a trade union,
not a professional body.
final matter that Mr Whitby commented on was Ms Twomey’s conduct, that was
reduced in the admitted allegations to being
that on or around 16 June 2011,
that she signed paperwork at Centrelink declaring [herself] to be Patient
A’s de facto partner.
peer reviewer, Mr Whitby relied on what he described as Ms Twomey’s
admission that she signed and had witnessed documents
in which she declared that
she was Patient A’s de facto and did so as part of his compensation claim
with the Dust Board.
It was Mr Whitby’s view that, by
doing so, Ms Twomey had “utterly breached” the ANMC: Code of
Professional Conduct
for Nurses in Australia, conduct statement (8) explanation
(1) which states:
An inherent power imbalance exists within
the relationship between people receiving care and nurses that may make the
persons in their
care vulnerable and open to exploitation. Nurses actively
preserve the dignity of people through practised kindness and respect for
vulnerability and powerlessness of people in their care. Significant
vulnerability and powerlessness can arise from the experience
of illness and the
need to engage with the health care system. The power relativities between a
person and a nurse can be significant,
particularly where the person has limited
knowledge; experiences pain and illness; needs assistance with personal care;
a marginalised group; or experiences an unfamiliar loss of
self-determination. This vulnerability creates a power differential in
relationship between nurses and persons in their care that must be recognised
and managed.
was Mr Whitby’s opinion that Patient A fitted the description of the
vulnerable patient in the above statement and that Ms
Twomey had failed to
recognise this significant power imbalance within her relationship with her
former patient, Patient A. In doing
so he relied on Ms Muscardin’s letter
dated 6 July 2011 to the Deputy Director of Nursing at the Hospital. In her oral
to the Tribunal, Ms Muscardin stated that her letter was based on the
notes she took on the occasions that Patient A rang her after
his relationship
with Ms Twomey had broken down.
that letter she noted that Patient A had told her that he felt indebted to Ms
Twomey and that he wanted to pay her his weekly “dust
dividend he acquired as compensation for his mesothelioma. He also indicated to
Ms Muscardin that this was his idea
not Ms Twomey’s. Patient A also told
Ms Muscardin that, “he felt obliged to do this in exchange for her being
him when he died”. Ms Muscardin’s letter continued;
“He [Patient A] said if she were his de facto, she would continue
receive financial benefits after he died”.
Whitby expressed the opinion that it was for this very reason the nursing
profession had codes of professional conduct and codes
of ethics to protect the
vulnerable patients “in our care”. He continued that Ms Twomey did
not consider any of these
statements that are set out or the questions he
referred to in his report found in the NSW Health Code of Conduct until her
relationship
with Patient A broke down.
Mr Whitby’s opinion, Ms Twomey’s conduct set out in particular 2(c)
and admitted by her fell significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of
a nurse with her level of training and experience. He reported that he had
considered Ms Twomey’s
claims that she was continually pressured by
Patient A to sign such documents and that she considered this behaviour on
Patient A’s
behalf to be “harassment” was of the opinion that
they were irrelevant. In support of his opinion, and as the basis
statement that he was strongly critical of this conduct, he quoted the ANMC: A
Nurses Guide to Professional Boundaries at
page 7 which
Nurses recognise that involvement in financial
transactions (other than in a contract for the provision of services) and the
of anything other than ‘token gifts’ within professional
relationships with persons in their care is likely to compromise
professional relationship.
questioning by Mrs Robertson, Mr Whitby confirmed that he had had experience
with the education of enrolled nurses in the TAFE
system. He also conceded that
around the time that Ms Twomey was in the TAFE system enrolled nurses
received a minimal amount of
Whitby was asked by a Tribunal member a question about the various documents
from the ANMC in relation to appropriate behaviour
of nurses, the various codes
of conduct and documents that are promulgated from time to time applied to every
nurse irrespective
of age, experience [and training]. The questioner noted that
those documents were generic and that there was no sense in which nurses
varying levels of expertise are assessed any differently. He was asked for his
opinion on the fact that the respondent in this
case had a vastly different
education and clinical experience from the one he had had. So did he factor
that in when making the
decisions “that came forward as [his]
Whitby answered that he did factor in the vast difference in the level of
education. However, he noted that the documents were
generic and they don't
specify the level of training and experience of nurses. Consequently, he
considered that the documents covered
registered and enrolled nurses as a group
of health professionals. As the documents did not differentiate between them,
that an enrolled nurse or a registered nurse reading these documents
should read them and perceive them in exactly the same way.
When pressed on the
issue, he said he found the documents quite clear and specific particularly,
around sexual relationships. He
could not see how an enrolled nurse or a
registered nurse could look at a particular paragraph like conduct statement 8,
5 [of the ANMC Code of Professional Conduct for Nurses in Australia],
when it talked about sexual relationships between nurses and
persons, and not
understand what it was saying.
The Tribunal’s
allegations in the particulars to the complaints in this matter were admitted by
Ms Twomey and amply demonstrated by both the
documentary and oral evidence
before the Tribunal. Further, as Ms Bennet reminded the Tribunal, Ms Twomey had
acknowledged in her
oral evidence to the Tribunal that the conduct set out in
the particulars demonstrated poor judgement, poor knowledge and skill
particularly
in relation to the relevant codes of conduct. Also, Ms Twomey
agreed that her conduct was improper and unethical and that it fell
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a nurse of her level of
training and experience. As a consequence, the Tribunal
had no difficulty in
being satisfied that the subject matter of the complaints was proved.
a result, the first issue for the Tribunal to determine was whether that conduct
amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct
or whether it was unsatisfactory
professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature as to justify the
suspension or cancellation
of Ms Twomey’s registration as an enrolled
nurse and thus professional misconduct. In her closing submissions, Mrs
advised the Tribunal that Ms Twomey admitted that the conduct set out
in the particulars to the complaints in this matter, all of
which she had
admitted to, amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
was Mrs Robertson’s submission that Kirby P’s statement in
v Messiter (No 2)
classic statement of what was required for professional misconduct. Kirby P
Departures from elementary and generally accepted
standards of which a medical practitioner could scarcely be heard to say that he
or she was ignorant could amount to such professional misconduct ... But the
statutory test is not met by mere professional incompetency
or by deficiencies
in the practice of the profession. Something more is required. It includes a
deliberate departure from accepted
standards or such serious negligence as,
although not deliberate, to portray indifference and an abuse of the privileges
which accompany
registration as a medical practitioner.
Robertson submitted that while not exactly deliberate what was required was
something more that elevates the conduct up from unsatisfactory
professional
conduct to professional misconduct. It was the thrust of her submissions that Ms
Twomey’s conduct was no more
than unsatisfactory professional conduct.
addition to the admissions made by Ms Twomey in her oral evidence about her
conduct demonstrating poor judgement, poor knowledge
and skill particularly in
relation to the relevant codes of conduct as well as being improper and
unethical and significantly below
the required standard, Ms Twomey also
acknowledged that her conduct was of a serious nature, that it wasn’t just
a single episode,
but extended from about 6 May to about 2 July and that she
didn’t seek help from colleagues until 3 July 2011.
Bennett submitted that Ms Twomey denied in her oral evidence that she was
aware of the seriousness of Patient A's condition and
that, if this was
accepted, it might minimise the seriousness of her conduct. Ms Twomey denied
that she knew that Patient A’s
condition was terminal. She also stated
that she didn’t know what mesothelioma was and didn’t know what
oncology was
when Patient A was in hospital.
It was Ms Bennett’s submission however that parts of Ms Twomey’s
oral evidence “clearly indicate” that she
was aware of Patient A's
seriously compromised condition and that such evidence supported a finding that
Ms Twomey’s conduct
was of a sufficiently serious nature to justify
suspension or cancellation of her registration. Ms Bennett drew the
attention to the following exchange during Ms Twomey’s
oral evidence to the Tribunal:
You stated here that you
discussed you becoming a carer for him and then you stated, "However, we had
then become close". Is what
you're suggesting in that sentence that initially
what was in your mind was a more formal role as a carer and then that changed
personally you became more involved and it was going to be as a
A. Yes, that's correct.
Q. Part of the point of you becoming a carer was your knowledge of his
medical condition, that would be right, wouldn't it?
A. Yes, because I knew he wasn't well and I was going to help care for him,
Q. That's right.
Q. Part of that was because you also knew him because you looked after him
in the hospital didn't you?
Q. You understood from that what his needs were going to be?
A. Not exactly like, his house, he was quite self caring the whole time I
knew him but his house was an absolute mess and his mother
cooked for him and I
was going to do all the cooking and cleaning and I wanted him to live in a
healthy environment of his home.
It was filthy and I didn't want him living
like that. I really did care for him and I wanted everything to be clean and
He was quite self caring, he really didn't need lots of caring, but like,
I did all his washing for him and things like that because
that was a lot of
Q. But a lot of the reason that you had an understanding of what his needs
would be and what his needs wouldn't be is because you
were aware of how much
care he either required or didn't require when he was on the ward?
Q. Can I ask you to now look at paragraph 4 of that same page and it
"Under no circumstances did I move into his home to benefit myself from his
money," et cetera.
A. Yeah, that's correct.
Q. Setting the money issue aside
Ms Twomey, there were some benefits to you of your personal relationship
with Patient A weren't
there in terms of a friendship?
Q. In terms of you state elsewhere that you were lonely and didn't have
friends at the time?
A. Yeah, that's correct.
Q. You also state and I will take you to these, that there were, you did
enjoy a friendship with him?
A. Yeah, I did.
Q. So you would agree it was a benefit to you in having a close relationship
with Patient A and moving in with him?
A. Well, yes. But I never thought of it like that. I never thought I'm
going to benefit from this or take advantage of him because,
to be a friend with
him to benefit myself, I never thought of it like that.
Bennett submitted that this interaction operated at two levels. First it
demonstrated that Ms Twomey was aware that Patient A was
seriously ill,
sick enough to require a carer at home. Second it was evidence of Ms
Twomey’s conflation of roles. She acquired
information about his
illnesses when she was caring for him specifically as a nurse and it provided
the foundation for her later
personal relationship with him.
Bennett also submitted that Ms Twomey was aware that Patient A had serious and
significant illnesses, because she knew that he
had HIV, Hep C and Hep B and he
having these life-limiting conditions provided Ms Twomey with the basis for her
explanation as to
why she did not have sexual intercourse with Patient A
Tribunal notes Mr Whitby’s opinion that the six of the seven particulars
that he deal with in his report involved conduct
that was significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a nurse of an equivalent level of training
and experience to that
of Ms Twomey and invited his strong criticism. The
Tribunal accepts Ms Whitby’s opinions about the seriousness of the conduct
of Ms Twomey that he was asked to report on.
also notes Ms Bennett’s submission that the admitted particulars reveal
that there was more than one instance of unsatisfactory
professional conduct
that was sufficiently serious, having regard to Ms Twomey's knowledge of
the seriousness of Patient A's condition,
to justify suspension or cancellation
of her registration as an enrolled nurse.
considered the evidence, the submissions of counsel and the opinions of Mr
Whitby, the Tribunal was satisfied that all of the
alleged and proven instances
of misconduct considered together, and possibly some of them standing alone,
amount to professional
misconduct on the part of Ms Twomey. In these
circumstances the Tribunal finds that the complaint of professional misconduct
against Ms Twomey by the HCCC is proved.
decided that the conduct that Ms Twomey has admitted to and is amply proved by
the evidence amounts to professional misconduct,
the next task the Tribunal must
attend to is what, if any, protective orders it should make in relation to Ms
Twomey. The Tribunal
notes that, because of its finding of professional
misconduct in relation to Ms Twomey, it has a discretion, after considering the
evidence of the proven allegations themselves, the circumstances in which they
occurred and relevant events or matters that have
arisen since, either make no
protective order at all or to make one or more of the array of possible
protective orders set out in
that is or are justified by the
proven facts or relevant
considerations.
81. The Tribunal also notes that in exercising its functions under the
, it must give paramount consideration to the protection of the health
and safety of the public.
so, the Tribunal acknowledges that the health and safety of the public can only
be protected if the Tribunal's decision
addresses current unfitness, rather than
limiting its consideration to whether or not the practitioner is permanently
unfit to practise
their profession.
was reconfirmed recently by the Medical Tribunal of NSW in the
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is protective rather than punitive and the
protection of the public is associated with the protection
profession.
The protection of the
health and safety of the public encompasses a range of considerations. These
First, there may be a need to protect the public against
further misconduct by a practitioner.
Second, there is a need for general deterrence.
Third, the high professional standards of the profession must be reinforced
and transgressions must be denounced.
Fourth, public confidence in the profession must be maintained.
Fifth, it may be desirable to make available to the public any special skills
possessed by a practitioner.
It may be that the circumstances of a particular matter require the Tribunal
to give greater weight to some of these considerations,
or to consider other
matters bearing on the health and safety of the
As suggested by Ms
Bennett, consideration five is not relevant in this case.
a number of ways this case is a clear example of why it is essential for nurses
and midwives to maintain the appropriate professional
boundaries between health
professional and patient while at the same time showing empathy and, where
relevant, compassion. It shows
how those boundaries can be transgressed by
allowing the attention and interest of current or recently discharged patients
allowed to fulfil some of the needs of a lonely nurse.
A had life-limiting illnesses when he was admitted to the Hospital, not for the
first time on 20 April 2011. On 28 April he
was advised that he had
mesothelioma, a terminal condition. During a visit by his friend, Mr B, Patient
A told him that he was interested
in Ms Twomey and intended to pursue that
interest vigorously. Perhaps it was part of his pursuit to seek to give Ms
Twomey a box
of chocolates, a matter that led Ms Twomey’s NUM to advise
her that it was inappropriate to accept gifts from patients. Ms
Twomey read this
as that she “was not supposed to receive chocolates from patients”.
Ms Twomey’s view of the matter
was that from the conversation she had, at
that time with the NUM, it was clear that she was confused about this issue. Ms
did nothing to overcome her confusion. Instead she placed some blame on
the NUM by stating that at no time did she [the NUM] explain
or inquire whether
she [Ms Twomey] had completed the compulsory Code of Conduct training. Around
the end of May, either before or
soon after his diagnosis of mesothelioma, Ms
Twomey gave Patient A her card relating to her pottery business.
soon after Patient A’s discharge on 5 May 2011, they meet ‘down the
street” of the town the Hospital is located
in. Ms Twomey gives Patient A
her personal phone number, she visits him at his house and he begins to ring her
very regularly. On
10 May, five days after his discharge, Patient A
“boasts” to Ms Twomey about his claim for compensation in relation
his mesothelioma. About that time Ms Twomey goes to Broken Hill and Patient
A’s phone calls continue. Soon after her return
from Broken Hill, Patient
A comes to Ms Twomey’s home bearing gifts, including food and drink. They
have sexual intercourse
that night and, within days, Ms Twomey begins the
process of moving in with Patient A.
accepts as gifts an expensive watch, from a bag of watches proffered by Patient
A’s sister and a ring from Patient A. Over
a very short space of time,
Patient A visits lawyers who, between them, acting on Patient A’s
instructions, create documents
appointing Ms Twomey his attorney under an
enduring power of attorney and his enduring guardian under an appointment of
guardian. In addition Patient A makes a new will under which Ms Twomey
is a beneficiary of some of his estate. Also at this time,
on 16 June, Ms Twomey
accompanies Patient A to the local Centrelink office where she signs witnessed
documentation to the effect
that she is Patient A’s de facto partner.
or about 28 June 2011, Patient A rings Ms Muscardin, his counsellor, and tells
her about his relationship with Ms Twomey which
he considered was about six
weeks old at this time. Ms Twomey speaks to Ms Muscardin during this phone call
and tells her that Patient
A “was wanting to give her anything for being
there with him when he died”. Ms Muscardin’s view was that this
conversation
included telling Ms Twomey of her the ethical, legal and moral
issues from nursing viewpoint and her suggesting to Ms Twomey that
she go to EAP
counselling via her supervisor for assistance. Ms Twomey’s view of this
part of the conversation was that Ms
Muscardin did not exactly tell her that the
relationship with Patient A was not proper because he was a patient but she [Ms
did tell [Ms Twomey] to contact the EAP.
after this the relationship unravels quickly. Patient A becomes angry when he
realises that as a result of Ms Twomey, who is
earning an income as an enrolled
nurse, becoming his de facto partner his Centrelink pension is substantially
reduced. They begin
arguing and in the eyes of Ms Twomey, Patient A’s
behaviour becomes irrational and she finds a bag of prescription drugs of
addiction in his room. Patient A continues to be very abusive to Ms Twomey and
she moves out of his house on 2 July. The relationship
comes to an end. Ms
Twomey tells her employers about it as her explanation for requiring some leave
from the Hospital.
A begins demanding that Ms Twomey give the ring he gave her back or pay $2000 in
lieu of doing so. From Ms Twomey’s
perspective, he was very aggressive at
this time. Patient A made a new will and revoked the appointments of Ms Twomey
as his attorney
and enduring guardian. Patient A sought admission to the
Hospital on 8 July 2011. That short admission was succeeded by two further
admissions before he died on 5 October 2011.
A’s vulnerability is apparent. He wants a relationship and Ms Twomey
responds, if not before, then immediately after
Patient A is discharged from the
Hospital. After his diagnosis of mesothelioma and after giving her gifts, making
her a beneficiary
in his will and empowering with the means of making most of
his personal and financial decisions for him, it becomes apparent
wants someone to be with him when he dies. Subsequently, the relationship
becomes untenable from Ms Twomey’s perspective
and, understandably, she
leaves Patient A’s house for safer accommodation and leaves the
relationship.
terms of the considerations set out above, Ms Bennett submitted that the core
reason for Ms Twomey’s inappropriate conduct
was her very fundamental and
serious error of judgment. An error of judgment that she did not recognise and
which had to be raised
by Ms Muscardin. Even though Ms Twomey had familiarised
herself with the Codes of Conduct, Ms Bennett submitted that while this new
familiarity with the codes may well protect the public from any future
transgressions which are listed in the codes as to be avoided,
the public would
not be protected from any potentially improper or unethical or otherwise
inappropriate conduct not listed in them.
Her reason for this was that Ms
Twomey had not provided any evidence to the Tribunal that her more fundamental
problem with judgment
had in any way changed.
Ms Bennett also submitted that because of Ms Twomey’s own admitted
vulnerabilities, she may not be able to identify when she
was getting into an
inappropriate situation as she did in this case. This was because not all
improper conduct is listed in the codes.
Ms Twomey sheeted home her
transgressions in a very concrete way to her lack of familiarity with the codes.
This, in Ms Bennett’s
submission, demonstrated a shallow understanding of
her obligations as a nurse and a lack of insight into her own difficulties with
judgment and responsibilities more generally.
Tribunal accepts these submissions and notes, as was pointed out by a unanimous
High Court led by Dixon CJ more than half a century
ago and regularly referred
to in cases involving professional misconduct by members of regulated
professions, that there are conventional
rules that are written about conduct in
professions and rules that are not merely conventional but also fundamental. The
Court continued:
They are, for the most part, not to be found
in writing. It is not necessary that they should be reduced to writing, because
rest essentially on nothing more and nothing less than a generally accepted
standard of common decency and common
Bennett also submitted that the evidence indicated that Ms Twomey still blamed
Patient A to some degree for many of her difficulties
and that in doing
this did not appear to have fully grasped the entirety of her responsibility for
her misconduct and need to change
her attitude to it.
It was because Ms Twomey had only partial insight and was only partially taking
of responsibility for her actions, that Ms Bennett
submitted that the public
remained at risk and needed to be protected.
Tribunal accepted her submissions as to these matters as a basis for being of
the opinion that first it needed to make a protective
order and second that that
order needed to protect the public, at least for a period, against further
misconduct by Ms Twomey and
other steps had been taken to ensure that she
developed a deeper and broader understanding of her ethical obligations as a
to the need for general deterrence, Ms Bennett submitted that, when considering
the facts of this matter it was important to send
a clear message to all nurses
and midwives that, regardless of their level of training and experience, there
is a certain class of
conduct that will be found to amount to professional
misconduct and may result in their registration being cancelled if they indulge
in it. The Tribunal wishes to make it clear that entering an intimate
relationship with a patient like Patient A, who because of
his life-limiting
conditions that Ms Twomey admitted that she knew of, was likely to need to
access the services of the Hospital
she worked at and in any event, because of
the state of his illnesses was likely to be vulnerable in a number of ways, is
those classes of conduct.
is clear from what it has already said in these reasons for decision that the
Tribunal denounces the professional misconduct found
against Ms Twomey as being
substantially below the standard reasonably expected of any registered or
enrolled nurse at any level
of training and experience.
relation to the fourth consideration, namely that public confidence in the
profession must be maintained, Ms Bennett submitted
that any response short of
cancellation of the registration of Ms Twomey would not instil confidence in the
public of the high standards
of the nursing profession. Ms Bennett submitted
that Ms Twomey’s conduct was simply not acceptable and not excusable on
basis of a lack of training or a lack of experience. Furthermore, that it
went to very fundamental and very serious errors of judgment.
It was as a
consequence of these considerations that she advised the Tribunal that the HCCC
was seeking an order cancelling Ms Twomey’s
registration and an order that
she may not make an application for reregistration for a period of
Tribunal did not accept that, when the particular circumstances of Ms Twomey are
considered, it was crucial for the maintenance
of public confidence in the
nursing profession that Ms Twomey’s registration as an enrolled nurse must
be cancelled.
Tribunal took into account Mrs Robertson’s submissions that Ms Twomey did
not deny her relationship with Patient A and provided
details of the context of
that relationship to those whose role it was to inquire into the matter. She
admitted to the particulars
alleged against her when they were settled and she
completed the compulsory training in relation to professional ethics required
her by her employers in November 2011. She has continued to work as an enrolled
nurse since the events that led to the Complaint
in this matter.
the Tribunal it was both sufficient and appropriate to give effect to the four
relevant considerations set out in the
and the submissions made
on behalf of the HCCC and Ms Twomey to order that Ms Twomey’s registration
as an enrolled nurse be
suspended for a period of six months from the date of
the order in this matter and further that Ms Twomey be required, as a condition
of her registration, to complete to the satisfaction of the Council, within one
year of the date of the order in this matter or within
such longer period
approved by the Council, a course on ethical boundaries or on ethics more
generally but with a substantial component
of the course dealing with the
question of ethical boundaries. The exact terms of these orders are set out in
the separate order
relating to these proceedings.
to costs, Ms Bennett noted that the Medical Tribunal traditionally made costs
orders on the basis that one party paid the other
party costs. She set out the
form of the order she proposed in her written submissions to the
the issue of the parties paying their own costs for the first day was raised, Ms
Bennett noted that the HCCC had done nothing
to disentitle it from costs for
every day of the hearing. Mrs Robertson submitted that a costs order providing
that each party pay
its own costs for the first day of the hearing was a
reasonable submission for her to make.
Tribunal considered that, given that circumstances prevented the giving of
evidence on that day, the parties bear their own costs
for that day but that in
relation to all other aspects of costs, Ms Twomey pay the costs of the HCCC in
this matter on the ordinary
basis as defined in
Procedure Act 2005
. The exact terms of the costs order are set
out in the formal orders in this matter.
Tribunal made its orders accordingly.
Dated: 19 June
_____________________
Nick O’Neill
Chairperson
_____________________
Jocalyn Lawler - Nurse
_____________________
Sheree Smiltnieks - Nurse Member
_____________________
James Lyon - Lay Member
Section 139E of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
Section 222 of the
For complaint one this conduct
was alleged to be contrary to s.139B of the
and for complaint two
contrary to s. 139E of the
(1989) 16 NSWLR
Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
, [67] and sections 149A and 149C of the
Section 3A of the
HCCC v King
[2013] NSWMT
[25]. For a discussion of the nature of the unfitness that has to be
demonstrated before an order cancelling the registration of
a practitioner see,
Stanoevski v Council of the Law Society of NSW
[2008] NSWCA 93
HCCC v King
[2013] NSWMT 3
Clyne v NSW Bar
Association
[1960] HCA 40
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Matter No: 016/2013
INQUIRY INTO A COMPLAINT AGAINST A NURSE
Complainant
Health Care Complaints Commission
Amanda Marie TWOMEY
O’Neill (Chairperson)
Jocalyn Lawler (Nurse Member)
Smiltnieks (Nurse Member)
James Lyon (Lay Member)
Date and Place of
21, 22 and 23 May and 4 June 2013, Sydney
Date of Order
and Reasons for Decision
19 June 2013
NON-PUBLICATION ORDER
The Tribunal orders that the names of Patient A, his sister and mother and Mr
B are not to be published in any medium other than in
those Reasons for Decision
and attached material that is sent to the parties in this
19 June 2013
Deputy Chairperson
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Matter No: 016/2013
INQUIRY INTO A COMPLAINT AGAINST A NURSE
Complainant
Health Care Complaints Commission
Amanda Marie TWOMEY
O’Neill (Chairperson)
Jocalyn Lawler (Nurse Member)
Smiltnieks (Nurse Member)
James Lyon (Lay Member)
Date and Place of
21, 22 and 23 May and 4 June 2013, Sydney
Date of Order
19 June 2013
The Tribunal was satisfied that the conduct alleged against Amanda Marie
Twomey was unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently
serious nature
as to justify the suspension or cancellation of Ms Twomey’s registration
as an Endorsed Enrolled Nurse and so
professional misconduct. As a consequence
of these findings, the Tribunal made the following orders:
Tribunal orders that Amanda Marie Twomey’s registration on the public
national register created under the provisions of
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
as an enrolled nurse (Division 2) be suspended
for a period of six months from the date of this order.
Tribunal also orders that a condition be imposed on Amanda Marie Twomey’s
registration requiring her, to complete to the
satisfaction of the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South Wales (the Council), within one year of the date
of this order or
within such longer period approved by the Council, a course on
ethical boundaries or a course on ethics more generally but which
substantial component of the course which deals with the question of ethical
boundaries. That condition is to remain on
her registration as an enrolled nurse
until the Council is satisfied that Ms Twomey has complied with this
Tribunal orders that Amanda Marie Twomey pay the costs of the Health Care
Complaints Commission (HCCC) in this matter on the ordinary
basis as defined in
Procedure Act 2005
, except for the costs incurred by the HCCC
relating to the first day of the hearing of this matter, namely 21 May 2013. In
to the costs relating to that day, the parties are to bear their own
19 June 2013
Deputy Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.66 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter