URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/150.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HJJ v Council of Law Society of New South Wales [2025] NSWCATOD 150; (7 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
HJJ v Council of Law Society of New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 150
Hearing Date(s):
31 July 2025
Date of Orders:
7 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Occupational Division
S Westgarth, Deputy President
M Sindler, Senior Member
(1) The Applicant has engaged in unsatisfactory professional
(2) The decision of the Respondent to issue a caution to the
Applicant by the resolution of the Professional Conduct Committee of
Respondent on 19 July 2024 is affirmed.
(3) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), the disclosure of the
names of the Applicant, the Applicant’s client as referred to in these
proceedings, or the client’s
family is prohibited.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW – conduct of a solicitor – whether the
Respondent’s decision to caution the Applicant should
be affirmed or set
aside – whether a letter issued by the Applicant to a costs assessor was
misleading or capable of misleading
– whether the issue of the letter and
its content constituted unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Review Act 1997
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
Guardianship Act 1987
Legal Profession
Uniform Law (NSW)
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
Cases Cited:
BRJ v Council of the New South Wales Bar Association
[2016] NSWSC 146
Cupac v APL Pty Ltd and t/as Adams and Partners [2019] NSWCATOD
Giovanni v Council of Law Society of New South Wales
[2024] NSWCATOD
Donaghy v The Council of Law Society of New South Wales
[2013] NSWCA
Dranichnikov v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
197 ALR 389
[2003] HCA 26
Law Society of New South Wales v Maharja [2017]
McDonald v Director-General of Social Security (1984) 1 FCR 354 at
[1984] FCA 57
Murad v Assistant Commissioner for Immigration and Bordon
[2017] FCAFC 73
(2017) 250F CR 510
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
(2008) 235 CLR 286
[2008] HCA 3
Smith v New South Wales Bar Association
[1992] HCA 36
(1992) 176 CLR 256
Youssef v New South Wales Legal and Services Commissioner
[2020] NSWCA 285
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales (1957) 97 CLR 270;
[1957] HCA 46.
Texts Cited:
Not applicable
Principal judgment
HJJ (Applicant)
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
(Respondent)
Representation:
M Izzo SC/O Jones (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
YPOL Lawyers (Applicant)
The Law Society
of NSW (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00302663
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
the disclosure of the names of the Applicant, the Applicant’s client as
referred to in these proceedings, or the client’s
prohibited.
REASONS FOR DECISION
an application lodged on 16 August 2024, the Applicant (a solicitor) seeks
administrative review pursuant to s 314(1)(b) of the
Legal Profession
Uniform Law
(NSW) (Uniform Law).
application arose out of a decision of the Respondent published on 19 July 2024
( the Decision) by which the Respondent found
that the Applicant had engaged in
unsatisfactory professional conduct that was to this effect: “[the
Applicant] attempted to
have a Costs Assessment stayed by suggesting to the
Costs Assessor that there was “no doubt” as to [the Client’s
capacity ] when this was not an accurate representation”.
Respondent determined that the Applicant be cautioned pursuant to s 299 of
the Uniform Law.
Respondent has submitted that the Tribunal ought to consider whether an
anonymisation order should be made. This issue arises
because the decision of
the Respondent in the form of a resolution of the Professional Conduct Committee
(PCC) of the Respondent
was a resolution pursuant to s 299(1)(a) of the
Uniform Law that the Applicant had engaged in unsatisfactory professional
and that the Applicant be issued with a caution. Where the PCC issues
only a caution, details of the complaint and its findings are
not made public.
Section 152
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act
(NSW) (“the Application Act”) requires a public register to be
maintained of disciplinary action against lawyers. Section
Application Act contains a definition of “disciplinary action” which
includes s 148(d). The definition includes
“the making of an order of
a court or tribunal or by another person or body, for or following a finding of
unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct by the lawyer,
other than an order cautioning the person”. In short, the register does
include orders for the issue of a caution. In the Respondent’s
submission the Applicant has a right of review and should not
be penalised by
way of publication of the Applicant’s name and identifying information for
seeking review of a PCC decision
to order a caution. We note that the Applicant
supports this submission in the event that we affirm the caution.
agree that the Applicant should not be “worse off” by virtue of
making this application to the Tribunal and that it
is appropriate to anonymise
the Applicant’s name and other identifying information.
64(1) of the
Civil and Administrative Act
2013 (NSW) (the NCAT Act)
grants the Tribunal power to make orders prohibiting or restricting disclosure
of information concerning
the name of any person (whether or not a party to the
proceedings) if the Tribunal is satisfied that it is desirable to do so
reason of the confidential nature of evidence or matter or for any
other reason”.
the principle of open justice must generally be applied, we are of the opinion
that this is a case where an order under s
64 should be made having regard to
the fact that the Applicant has only been issued with a caution by the PCC.
Accordingly,
we will make the appropriate order under s 64.
background facts leading to the Respondent’s determination are described
in the following paragraphs.
February 2018 and 20 December 2019, the Applicant was retained to act for a Ms X
(the Client) in various proceedings in the
Supreme Court of New South Wales and
the New South Wales Civil and Administrative Tribunal, and in respect of the
conveyance of the
Client’s property.
9 July 2018 the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal made orders appointing the
NSW Trustee and Guardian as the Client’s
financial manager for a period of
six months pursuant to the
Guardianship Act
11 July 2018 the Client commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court of New South
Wales by way of appeal from the decision of the
Tribunal on 9 July 2018 (the
Financial Management Proceedings).
19 March 2019, the NSW Trustee and Guardian filed an application against the
Applicant’s law firm for an assessment of costs
(Costs Assessment). Mr
John McGruther was appointed as the costs assessor in the Costs Assessment.
15 April 2019, the Financial Management Proceedings were listed for directions
before His Honour Justice Lindsay. The Client was
represented by senior and
junior counsel at the hearing, and the Applicant was also present in court. The
NSW Trustee and Guardian
appeared at the hearing and was represented by Mr
Gregory Mackey, a Senior Legal Officer of the NSW Trustee and Guardian.
3 May 2019 Mr McGruther requested written submissions from the Client or NSW
Trustee and Guardian in respect of the Costs Assessment.
15 May 2019 the Applicant caused a letter to be sent to Mr McGruther (the
Letter), copied to the legal representative of NSW Trustee
and Guardian (Zucker
Legal), the relevant parts of which stated as follows:
“As noted within the Application, the NSW Trustee and Guardian acts in a
capacity of Financial Manager for [the Client] with
Order appointing it made by
the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal (NCAT) on 9 July 2018.
An Appeal was filed from the decision of the NCAT to the Supreme Court of New
South Wales on 11 July 2018.
On 30 August 2018, His Honour Justice Geoff Lindsay in his protective
capacity. Accordingly, Professor John Watson, was briefed by the parties, by
Order of the Court.
On 12 March 2019, Professor Watson filed his report with the Court, with a
finding that Ms X has full capacity.
At the last Directions Hearing on 15 April 2019, His Honour noted that there is
no doubt that Ms X has capacity. The proceedings
were otherwise given a
timetable to progress towards final hearing, with a final hearing expected in
will become apparent the portion of the Letter, which is the subject of the
Respondent’s determination is the portion concerning
the directions
hearing on 15 April 2019, where the Letter states that “His Honour noted
that there is no doubt that [Ms X]
has capacity.”
Letter went on to say that the Application for Assessment made by the NSW
Trustee and Guardian is “made against knowledge
of the above circumstances
and made against the express instructions/wishes of [Ms X]”. The
Letter stated that the Applicant
was instructed that once the court determines
the proceedings and returns Ms X’s property to her that she will
discontinue
the Application for Assessment and will thereafter consider
initiation of proceedings against those who caused wastage of her property.
Letter requested that the Application for Assessment be held in abeyance for a
period of 12 weeks so that the present proceedings
before the court may be
determined.
letter dated 16 May 2019 Zucker Legal wrote to Mr McGruther stating that its
instructions from NSW Trustee and Guardian were to
oppose the suggestion by the
Applicant that the assessment proceedings be held in abeyance for a period of 12
weeks and to submit
that the assessment should proceed.
21 May 2019 Mr McGruther declined to order a stay of the costs assessment.
The Letter was subsequently tendered in court at a hearing
on 27 June 2019
before His Honour Justice Lindsay in respect of an application filed on behalf
of the Client seeking, inter-alia,
a stay of the costs assessment. On the same
day the Applicant sent another letter to McGruther. We will refer to parts of
this letter
later in these reasons.
20 November 2020 the Client’s brother made a complaint to the NSW Legal
Services Commissioner in relation to the Applicant.
The complaint was referred
to the Respondent for consideration under chapter 5 of the Uniform Law. The
complaint raised seven allegations
against the Applicant. The Respondent
dismissed six of the seven, the remaining one being the matter which is the
subject of this
application.
essence of the Respondent’s decision was that by the Letter the Applicant
was advocating the position favourable to him
that the costs assessment need not
go ahead as there was no doubt as to Ms X’s capacity and representing this
as the view of
the Court when that was not the case.
Tribunal’s review function
299 of the Uniform Law gives statutory power to the Respondent to make findings
that a lawyer has engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct and, if so, the
section sets out orders that the Respondent may make.
314 of the Uniform Law provides that a lawyer may apply to this Tribunal (NCAT)
to seek a review by NCAT of the determination
made by the Respondent. Such an
application for review is brought under the
Administrative Decisions Review
1997 (ADR Act): see s 126(2) of the Application Act.
Di Giovanni v Council of Law Society of New South Wales
NSWCATOD 66
the Tribunal at [24] set out features of the statutory scheme
relevant to applications for administrative review. In summary those
(1) The review in the Tribunal is conducted under the provisions of the ADR Act,
the Uniform Law and the Application Act.
(2) Section 63 of the ADR Act allows the Tribunal to exercise all of the
functions that are conferred or imposed on the original
decision maker to make
the correct and preferable decision. The Tribunal may determine to affirm, set
aside or vary the original
decision, or to remit the matter for further
consideration. In addition, the Tribunal may make any other order it considers
appropriate:
Uniform Law s 314(3).
(3) The Tribunal’s decision takes effect on the date it is made, or such
later date as may be specified in the decision. If
the Tribunal varies, or makes
a decision in substitution for, the administrator’s decision, the
Tribunal’s decision is
taken to be the decision of the administrator and
has effect as the decision of the administrator on and from the date of the
administrator’s
actual decision, unless the Tribunal orders otherwise: ADR
(4) There is no onus of proof of either party. Rather, the Tribunal’s task
is to determine the matter on the merits. The Tribunal
is not concerned with
examining whether there was a challengeable error in the process of reasoning by
the Council:
Donaghy v The Council of Law Society of New South Wales
[2013] NSWCA 154.
There is no presumption that the Council’s decision is
McDonald v Director-General of Social Security
(1984) 1 FCR 354
[1984] FCA 57.
(5) The Tribunal may consider the material before the original decision maker as
well as any relevant new material put before the
Shi v Migration
Agents Registration Authority
(2008) 235 CLR 286
[2008] HCA 3.
(6) The Tribunal is entitled to inform itself on any matter in the manner it
thinks fit, subject to the rules of natural justice.
The rules of evidence do
not apply to the proceedings unless it involves a question of professional
misconduct; NCAT Act, s 38(2)
and cl 20 of sch 5; Uniform Law,
s 301(3). A fundamental obligation is to make findings of fact based on
logically probative material
and regard may be had to the gravity of any
allegations made and to the gravity of the consequences that flow from making a
finding or decision.
(7) The Tribunal may determine its own procedure (unless the NCAT Act or
procedural rules otherwise provide).
(8) However, the inquisitorial role of the Tribunal does not mean that a party
can simply present what are said to be facts and leave
it to the Tribunal to
of providing the evidence in
support of their position to the Tribunal:
Dranichnikov v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
197 ALR 389
[2003] HCA 26
(9) The purpose of disciplinary proceedings conducted by the Council, and
therefore the Tribunal's review of the Decision, is not
to punish the
practitioner but to protect the public:
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales
(1957) 97 CLR 270;
[1957] HCA 46.
(10) The review involves a two-step process. The Tribunal must determine whether
the solicitor engaged in unsatisfactory professional
conduct and, if so, decide
what protective order or orders (if any) were correct and preferable.
(11) The Tribunal's first task is to identify the decision to be reviewed, and
the statutory question it answers needs to be identified
with some precision
“for it marks the boundaries of the review”:
[134]-[135].
(12) Natural justice requires that the solicitor be advised in clear and precise
terms, prior to the hearing, of the nature and the
particulars of the case to be
Smith v New South Wales Bar Association
[1992] HCA 36
(1992) 176 CLR 256
This requirement is also embodied in s 299(2)(a) of the Uniform Law.
(13) Each case must turn on its own facts and the application of the statutory
words, paying close regard to the specific context
of the conduct concerned:
BRJ v Council of the New South Wales Bar Association
[2016] NSWSC 146
(14) The test is an objective one, and the circumstances of the objective
conduct, rather than the professional culpability of the
practitioner, is of
prime, if not sole, relevance:
Reasons for Decision
the application, the Applicant has set out extracts of the reasons for the
Decision, the parts of which relevant to our review
are to the following
(1) The Committee does not accept the solicitor’s (ie. the
Applicant’s) submission that his statement was the product
misunderstanding of His Honour's comments in court. The Letter was not couched
in terms of the solicitor’s belief or opinion
during the directions hearing. Rather, the solicitor was advocating the position
favourable to him that
the costs assessment need not go ahead as there was no
doubt as to Ms X’s capacity and representing this as the view of the
court, when that was not the case: [186] and [187].
(2) The Committee does not accept the emphasis placed by the solicitor in
submissions on the fact that he used the word “noted”
rather than
stated. While those words may mean different things depending on the context the
Committee considers that the letter
from the solicitor, read as a whole,
conveyed that His Honour had himself stated that there was no doubt about Ms
X’s capacity,
rather than simply noting Professor Waston’s opinion
or Mr Ashurst SC’s submission [189].
(3) The Committee is satisfied that the solicitor’s impugned statements
did not provide a fair and accurate account of Lindsay
J’s observations
during the directions hearing of 15 April 2019, in circumstances where it should
have been apparent to the
solicitor that the statements had the capacity to
mislead the costs assessor. The Committee is comfortably satisfied that the
solicitor’s
letter was capable of leading a reasonable reader into error
and was therefore misleading [190].
(4) The Committee is satisfied that the conduct the subject of the allegation
involved the provision of a misleading account... of
the position that was only
recently expressed by a judicial officer regarding Ms X’s capacity. A
reasonable reader would be
left with the impression that the Court was of the
view that Ms X’s capacity was not in doubt when it was in dispute. The
further notes that the solicitor makes his representation while
pursuing his own interests. In the Committee’s opinion, it
solicitor’s interest that the fees charged by his firm to Ms X would not
be subjected to costs assessment (by reason
of Ms X’s incapacity to manage
her financial affairs). Ms X’s capacity in this connection was the central
controversy
in the financial management proceedings. The Committee is satisfied
that the solicitor’s letter of 15 May 2019 fell short of
the standard of
competence and diligence that a member of the public was entitled to expect of a
reasonably competent lawyer. The
Committee finds that the solicitor engaged in
unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of the Uniform Law [207]
Grounds of Review
Applicant seeks a review of the decision on the following grounds:
(1) The Respondent erroneously found that it should have been apparent to the
Applicant that the Letter had the capacity to mislead
the costs assessor. There
was a reasonable and proper basis for the Applicant to hold the view set out in
the Letter, namely it was
the Applicant’s recollection of the statements
made by His Honour Justice Lindsay at the hearing, a month earlier in
circumstances
where the Letter was written without the benefit of access to a
transcript.
(2) The Decision fails to pay proper regard to the following matters:
(a) The making of the statement was openly copied to the opposing party to the
costs assessment. No objections were raised by the
NSW Trustee and Guardian in
relation to the accuracy of the statement, including to the effect that it was
misleading.
(b) In any event the stay sought by the Client was not granted by the costs
(c) The Letter was tendered at a further hearing before His Honour Justice
Lindsay, at which the opposing parties to the proceedings
(including the
complainant) and NSW Trustee and Guardian also appeared. Again no objection was
raised by any party or His Honour
in relation to the accuracy of the statement,
nor were submissions made to the effect that the statement was misleading.
(3) The Respondent erroneously found that the Applicant made the statement while
pursuing his own interests. The statement was made
in support of an application
by the Client for a stay of the costs assessment. Contrary to the reasons set
out in the Decision, a
stay of the costs assessment was in the interest of the
Client (and not the Applicant) in circumstances where a stay of the costs
assessment would be deferring the Applicant’s ability to recover his
(4) The Respondent erroneously found that the statement in the Letter which
recorded that “His Honour noted” certain
matters conveyed that there
was no doubt about the question of capacity.
(5) The Respondent made no positive finding that the Applicant intended to
mislead the costs assessor. No such finding was or is
(6) The finding that the conduct fell short of the standard of competence and
diligence that a member of the public was entitled
to expect of a reasonably
competent lawyer, and therefore constituted unsatisfactory professional conduct
in the above circumstances
(7) The determination by the Respondent that the Applicant should be the subject
of a caution was also wrong.
Applicant seeks an order from the Tribunal that the Decision be set aside and
the complaint dismissed.
Material relied upon
material relied upon in support of the application consists of:
(1) A folder of documents lodged by the Respondent pursuant to the requirements
of s 58 of the ADR Act.
(2) The affidavit of the Applicant, dated 20 December 2024 (marked as Exhibit
B). There was no objection to the affidavit. The affidavit
was tendered and the
Applicant was cross-examined by counsel for the Respondent.
Further Facts
Exhibit B it is relevant to record the following:
(1) The Applicant was present at the directions hearing on 15 April 2019 before
Lindsay J. He did not take a note of the hearing
and it is his clear
recollection that during the hearing, Lindsay J stated, words to the effect:
“There is no doubt that Ms
X has capacity, what we don’t know is
whether she will continue to have capacity” ( paragraph 9 of Exhibit
(2) At the time the Letter was written (15 May 2019) the Applicant did not have
a copy of the transcript of the directions hearing
held on 15 April 2019 but the
Letter reflected the Applicant’s recollection of what His Honour had said
( paragraph 13 of Exhibit
(3) By letter of 21 May 2019 Mr McGruther wrote to the Applicant and to Zucker
Legal stating that in his view, the costs assessment
should proceed unless there
is an order or a direction of the Supreme Court directing that the assessment be
stayed or unless both
representatives inform him of their mutual agreement that
the assessment be stayed (paragraph 17 of Exhibit B).
(4) In July 2019 the Applicant caused a request for the transcript of the
hearing on 15 April 2019 to be obtained and that transcript
was received by
the Applicant on 23 July 2019 ( paragraphs 24 and 25 of Exhibit B).
(5) At paragraph 26 the Applicant states: “On or around 1st August
2024, and after having myself reviewed the Transcript, and
not locating within
it the precise statement I believed His Honour to have made on 15th April 2019,
I caused my solicitors, YPOL
Lawyers, to request the audio recording of the
directions hearing on 15th April 2015”. The affidavit also states that the
subsequently learnt that no audio recording remained available.
transcript of the directions hearing held on 15 April 2019 is exhibited to
Exhibit B. The transcript reveals that there was a
discussion about the report
of the court appointed expert, Professor Watson, who had provided an opinion
capacity. The following extracts from the transcript
are relevant :
(1) “His Honour: The difficulty I have with the report which I have
mentioned it is that on one reading it actually says there
is no problem with
capacity. But it is conditional. So on the last occasion the proceedings were
stood over so that Mr Condon’s
side at the very least could work out what
if anything they want to do with that” – P1 L44-49.
(2) His Honour later states his impressions of the report, including the
following concerning the Client: “The medical report
which I have not
looked at since last time seems to say well, she’s got that intellectual
capacity but whether she is able
to manage her affairs in the future depends
upon whether she can endure the pain and what the other medical considerations
it is a highly unusual case, but at the end of the day, we have to look
at all of it” – P2 L18-22.
(3) The transcript then states that Mr Ashurst SC (for the Client) states:
“We would say it is reasonably clear that she currently
has capacity.
There is a question as to what may occur in the future, but there is no doubt
that she currently has capacity”
– P2 L24-27.
(4) Then His Honour says in response: “The problem with that is that the
protective jurisdiction, when you look at questions
of capacity and the
protective jurisdiction, it is involved with not only the here and now but the
future and there is an element
of risk management. At the end of the day you
might be entirely right but it is that area that I think we need at least to
slowly with” P2 L29-34.
(5) The transcript then states that Mr Ashurst seeks a hearing date for the
hearing of the Notice of Motion. His Honour asks whether
that is to do with
capacity and Mr Ashurst answers in the affirmative.
his cross-examination the Applicant disputed the accuracy of one aspect of the
transcript. As quoted above the transcript attributes
to Mr Ashurst the
following sentence: “There is a question as to what may occur in the
future, but there is no doubt that she
currently has capacity” (P2
L26-27). The Applicant stated that his recollection was that those words were
the words of His
Honour and not the words of Mr Ashurst.
Applicant’s submissions
the following paragraphs we summarise the Applicant’s written and oral
submissions.
Applicant submitted that in making the request for a pause of the costs
assessment proceedings the Applicant set out his honest
understanding of what
Lindsay J had said about the Client’s capacity at the directions hearing
on 15 April 2019. It was reasonable
for the Applicant to focus on the
Client’s current capacity to manage her own affairs, not the future
position. Although the
Letter was written without the Applicant having the
benefit of the transcript, the transcript generally accords with the
Applicant’s
recollection. There was no doubt expressed that the Client had
capacity in the “here and now” (to adopt the language
of Lindsay J).
Rather, the question was whether the Client could maintain that capacity in the
future. The Applicant submitted that
there is no legitimate basis to criticise
him for understanding Lindsay J’s comments in the way that he did.
Letter was copied to the solicitors for the NSW Trustee and Guardian and they
did not suggest anything in the Letter was inaccurate.
the Letter came before Lindsay J subsequently in connection with an application
to the court to have the costs assessment
stayed. No one, including Lindsay J,
suggested that anything in the Letter was inaccurate.
Applicant submits that his conduct was appropriate and did not fall short of the
standard of competence and diligence that a member
of the public is entitled to
expect of a reasonably competent lawyer. The Decision should therefore be set
Applicant’s submissions state that the particulars of the complaint
against him are opaque as to whether it is alleged that
the Applicant
intentionally sought to mislead the costs assessor by making the statement
contained in the Letter. This would have
required the Respondent to be satisfied
that the Applicant knew that the statement was inaccurate but nevertheless made
that statement
to induce the costs assessor to stay the costs assessment.
Applicant’s submissions state that the reasons contained in the Decision
are also opaque as to whether intentional conduct
is alleged. The Decision
states in one place that the Applicant was aware that the Client’s
capacity was the subject of conflicting
medical opinion and in another place
states that it should have been apparent to him that his statements had the
capacity to mislead
the costs assessor. However, the allegation is put, it
cannot be made good for the following reasons.
the Applicant recalled that at the directions hearing on 15 April Lindsay J said
words to the effect: “There is no doubt
that [the Client] has capacity,
what we don’t know is whether she will continue to have capacity”.
the Applicant was not reporting a finding made in a published judgment or a
conclusion following argument. He was reporting
a comment – something
“noted” – at a directions hearing. His report was
self-evidently his own understanding
of the aspects of what the judge had said
that were relevant to the stay of the Costs Assessment.
it is necessary to have regard to the broader context in which the impugned
statement was made. The statement was one of several
propositions advanced in
the Letter in favour of the position that the costs assessment should be stayed.
None of the other statements
made in the Letter is criticised. In the same
Letter the Applicant stated that Professor Watson’s report included a
that the Client “has full capacity”. The Applicant submitted
that neither the complainant nor the Respondent has ever
suggested that this
statement was in any way inaccurate or misleading. That statement is entirely
consistent with what the Applicant
understood to be the material part of Lindsay
J’s comments.
the Applicant’s understanding of the position in relation to the
Client’s capacity was also consistent with the
views previously expressed
by other medical experts, and Professor Watson’s opinion, as the court
appointed expert, was in
line with what the various other experts had concluded
the reasons contained in the Decision found that the Applicant was aware that
the Client’s capacity was the subject of conflicting
medical opinion
– see [188] of the reasons.
the Applicant submits that what His Honour is recorded as saying is consistent
with the Applicant’s understanding. In
particular, His Honour stated that
it appears that the Client currently had capacity but that she may encounter
difficulties in enduring
pain in the future which may affect her capacity at
that stage.
the Letter was copied to the NSW Trustee and Guardian and tendered at a later
hearing before Lindsay J. No objections were
raised by any party or His Honour
in relation to the accuracy or completeness of the statement made in the Letter.
the Applicant refers to his letter to Mr McGruther on 21 May 2019 in which he
stated that the opinion of Professor Watson
was that the Client had capacity to
manage her own financial affairs and added “That is the very issue to be
tried in the proceedings.”
The Applicant states that he was
straightforward with Mr McGruther noting that the question of capacity had not
yet been finally
determined.
Applicant’s submissions go on to state that there is nothing in the Letter
which would suggest that there was any real possibility
of Mr McGruther being
Respondent’s Submissions
the following paragraphs we summarise the Respondent’s submissions.
Respondent submitted that it is clear from the portions of the transcript set
out earlier in this decision that Lindsay J was
of the view that any opinion
expressed by Professor Watson concerning capacity was conditional. His Honour
also stated that the case
concerning the Client was a “highly unusual
case”. Additionally, when Mr Ashurst SC expressed his view that the report
established that there was no doubt that the Client currently has capacity not
only did His Honour not endorse that view but disavowed
it by saying “the
problem with that... when you look at questions of capacity and the protective
with not only the here and now but the
Respondent submits that the only rational conclusion flowing from His
Honour’s comments was that in the court’s view
the question of
capacity was very much alive. Contrary to that, the Letter stated that His
Honour “noted that there was no
doubt that [the Client] has
Respondent further submitted that His Honour did not state or “note that
there was no doubt that Ms X has capacity”.
That impugned statement was
inaccurate on its face. The statement was not couched in terms of the
Applicant's belief or recollection
of what had transpired, but rather as a
positive assertion.
Respondent submitted that the Applicant’s impugned statement regarding
what His Honour purportedly “noted” concerning
Ms X’s capacity
did not provide a fair and accurate account of what had in fact transpired at
the directions hearing or of
the observations made by Lindsay J.
Respondent further submitted that it is unclear how the Applicant could have
reasonably formed the understanding that he had of
what His Honour had said
His Honour it could not sensibly
be suggested that His Honour considered there
to be “no doubt” that Ms X has capacity.
Respondent submits that the Applicant’s claim that he recorded his honest
memory of what His Honour had said needs to be
scrutinised more closely given
the professional circumstances in which the Letter was written. To the extent
that the Applicant contends
that it was reasonable to focus on Ms X’s
current capacity, not the future position, it is relevant that such a contention
was expressly disavowed by Lindsay J., yet this consideration was ignored in the
Respondent further submitted that even if the Tribunal were not satisfied that
the Applicant intentionally sought to mislead the
costs assessor, the Respondent
submits that in authoring the impugned statement, the Applicant was either
recklessly indifferent
as to the consequences of his actions, or, made a mistake
which fell short of the standard of competence and diligence that a member
the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent lawyer. That is to
say, on any view (being intention, recklessness
or a mistake) the Respondent
submits that the Tribunal would be satisfied that the conduct amounts to
unsatisfactory professional
conduct. This is because solicitors are rightly held
to a high standard of competence and diligence.
Respondent’s submissions then turn to a discussion of the meaning of the
term “unsatisfactory professional conduct”
which is defined in
s 296 of the Uniform Law as including “conduct of a lawyer occurring
in connection with the practice of
law that falls short of the standard of
competence and diligence that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a
competent lawyer”.
test for determining whether conduct is unsatisfactory professional conduct is
an objective one. The Respondent submits that taking
the Applicant’s case
at its highest, that being that he relayed to the costs assessor an honest
recollection of what was said
by Lindsay J it is submitted that the Tribunal
would find that such a recollection could not have been reasonably held by the
and that the conduct of authoring the impugned statement falls short
of the standard of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is
entitled to expect of a reasonably competent lawyer. As such, a finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct is the
correct and preferable decision.
Respondent’s submissions consider the nature of a protective order that
the Tribunal has power to make under s 314(2) of
the Uniform Law. The
that is likely to achieve the maintenance
of a high standard of conduct within
the legal profession which will continue its good reputation, and so protect not
only the future
of the profession, but also protect its clients from harm:
Youssef v New South Wales Legal and Services Commissioner
[2020] NSWCA
determining the appropriate protective orders to make, it is open to the
Tribunal to take into account a range of factors that
emerge from the material
before it. The principal (but not exclusive) considerations relevant to that
decision include the gravity
of the misconduct, the deterrent effect of any
protective order on the future conduct of the practitioner, the deterrent effect
any protective order on the conduct of other practitioners and the
enhancement of confidence in the public in the integrity of the
Law Society of New South Wales v Maharja
[2017] NSWCAOD 79 at [24]).
Respondent submitted that the decision of the PCC to impose a caution was, and
is, appropriate. More severe sanctions are not
appropriate primarily based on
the fact that the conduct was an isolated incident, and the result of
inadvertence on the Applicant’s
Respondent also submitted that the fact that the Applicant has sought to defend
his conduct – first before the PCC and now
before the Tribunal – by
raising the fact that no other party to the proceedings “objected”
to the impugned statement
demonstrates a lack of appreciation of why his conduct
is problematic from a professional standpoint and demonstrates a lack of
This reinforces the appropriateness of a caution.
the Respondent’s submissions state that the Respondent does not seek an
order with respect to costs. The Respondent’s
submission states that while
cl 23 of sch 5 to the NCAT Act and s 303 of the Uniform Law empower the
Tribunal to make costs orders
where findings of unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct have been made, those provisions do not apply
these proceedings:
Cupac v APL Pty Ltd t
Adams and Partners
[2019] NSWCATOD at [48] and
Youssef v NSW Legal Services Commissioner
[2020] NSWCATOD 115
Applicant’s
Submissions in Reply
Applicant’s submissions in reply may be summarised as follows:
(1) The Applicant submits that the question before the court was the
Client’s “capacity” as that concept is relevant
to a financial
management order under the
Guardianship Act
. That involves a
consideration of whether the client was “capable of managing her own
affairs” and that in turn involves
a present and a future component. The
Applicant submitted that it is an appropriate use of language to say that a
person may “have”
capacity (in the present tense), even if there is
some doubt about possible future matters. The Applicant submitted that it was
to have the understanding of what had been said at the hearing on
15 April involving Lindsay J, noting that the client had capacity
issue for further determination was whether that capacity might be maintained in
the future. His Honour did not suggest that
there was any basis on the present
state of the evidence to doubt the Client’s current capacity.
(2) The Applicant takes issue with the Respondent's submission that Lindsay J
“expressly disavowed” the contention of
Mr Ashurst SC that there was
“no doubt that Ms X has capacity”. The question of the
Client’s current capacity was
reasonably considered by the Applicant to be
relevant in seeking for the costs assessment to be paused, because such costs
was, at that time, contrary to the Client’s wishes despite it
purportedly being undertaken by the NSW Trustee and Guardian
on her behalf.
(3) It is clear that the Applicant was not suggesting to the costs assessor that
the court proceedings had been finally determined
in the Client’s favour
as at 15 May 2009. The Applicant was seeking a stay of the costs assessment
pending final determination
and expressly referred in his letter to the
timetable to progress the matter with the final hearing expected in 2019.
(4) The Applicant’s submission included the contention that the word
“noted” is commonly understood as a reference
to something which
does not constitute a definitive finding: see
Murad v Assistant Commissioner
for Immigration and Bordon Protection
[2017] FCAFC 73
(2017) 250 FCR 510
(5) A difficulty with the Respondent’s approach is that it asks the
Tribunal to make an assessment of the reasonableness of
the Applicant’s
recollection of the directions hearing on 15 April 2019 and the
Applicant’s consequent account in the
Letter by reference to what the
Respondent describes as a “plain reading” of the words uttered by
Lindsay J. However,
the Applicant did not have the transcript available to him
when he wrote the Letter.
(6) The Applicant contends that it is unsurprising that when he wrote the
Letter, he was left only with an impression of what was
said and it was not
unreasonable for him to express himself in the Letter in the way that he did,
but it is unreasonable to conclude
that his conduct was so patently unreasonable
as to constitute unsatisfactory professional conduct.
(7) The Applicant contests the submission of the Respondent that the Letter
could have had a serious impact. The Applicant submits
that a stay of the costs
assessment would simply have avoided significant costs being incurred on a
process that the Client objected
to where an appeal against the appointment of
the NSW Trustee and Guardian as the Client’s financial manager was on
the appeal failed, the Costs Assessment could resume.
(8) The Applicant further submissions concern the fact that the other parties to
the proceedings did not dispute the accuracy of
the Letter. Their silence
suggests either that the Applicant’s recollection was accurate or that any
inaccuracy was not obvious
or important to those parties
the Applicant seeks costs on the basis that his conduct was not sufficient to
justify the action taken against him. This
is, of course, in addition to the
order sought to have the Decision and the caution set
Consideration
task before us boils down to deciding whether the language contained in the
Letter constitutes conduct that falls short of the
standard of competence and
diligence that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably
competent lawyer. That is
the description of unsatisfactory professional conduct
contained in s 296, provided that the conduct occurs in connection with the
practice of law. That last consideration is not in dispute as the Letter was
written by the Applicant in connection with the practice
purpose of the Letter was to persuade the costs assessor that the application
for costs assessment be held in abeyance for a period
of 12 weeks “so that
the present proceedings before the Court may be determined”.
the purposes of persuading the costs assessor that it would be appropriate to
pause the costs assessment the Applicant stated
the following in the
(1) The Court had appointed an expert to determine the Client’s capacity,
namely Professor John Watson.
(2) On 12 March 2019 Professor Watson filed his report with the court
“with a finding that [the Client] has full capacity”.
(3) At the directions hearing on 15 April 2019, Lindsay J “noted that
there is no doubt” that the Client “has capacity”.
uncontradicted evidence is that the Applicant wrote the Letter based upon his
recollection of what had occurred on 15 April before
Lindsay J without the
benefit of any contemporaneous notes and without the benefit of a transcript of
the hearing.
our view, it is relevant that the Letter was written to a person performing an
important function, namely the adjudication of costs
to be paid by the Client as
a consequence of legal services provided and invoices for costs having been
rendered by the Applicant.
The facts referred to in the Letter (namely, what
occurred on 15 April 2025 before Lindsay J) were not within the knowledge of the
recipient of the Letter, namely the costs assessor. In our view such a Letter
required the Applicant to use language reflective of
his obligations to not only
be competent and diligent, but also to be accurate in the choice of language
used in the Letter.
one turns to an examination of the transcript of what occurred at the directions
hearing there is, in our view, a disparity between
the language used in the
Letter and the language of Lindsay J as recorded in the transcript. These
disparities are as follows:
(1) His Honour stated that Professor Watson’s report is conditional and
whether the Client is able to manage her own affairs
in the future depends upon
whether she can endure the pain and what the other medical considerations are.
It seems to us that the
Letter was not justified in stating that Lindsay J
“noted that there is no doubt” that the Client “has
There was clearly resistance by His Honour to the submissions
of Mr Ashurst SC who sought to persuade His Honour that because the
had present or current capacity “that really should be the end of the
issue” [Transcript p 29-34].
(2) It is clear that His Honour was of the opinion that the protective
capacity in the future. However, the Letter stated that His Honour “noted
that there is no doubt that the Client
has capacity”. There is a clear
disparity between that sentence in the Letter and what His Honour in fact said,
as evidenced
from the transcript.
Applicant’s submissions state that one should consider the Letter less
critically than might otherwise be the case in the
light of the fact that the
opposing party did not suggest that the Letter was inaccurate and nor did
Lindsay J make comment upon
the Letter at a subsequent occasion before the
first with the response of the solicitor for NSW Trustee and Guardian, the
evidence shows that on 16 May 2019 Zucker Legal
wrote to the costs assessor
noting receipt of the Letter from the Applicant and attaching a copy of the
record of proceedings as
published by the Associate to Lindsay J. Zucker Legal
put forward the submission that the notations and orders speak for themselves.
They further stated that the matter before the Court is whether [the Client] is
capable of managing her own affairs and that the
medical evidence is but one
element of the issues to be considered by the Court. Whilst this Letter does not
in terms assert that
the Letter was inaccurate, it does imply that the issues
before the Court were different to the issue identified in the Letter. Whilst
is true that the Applicant’s Letter is not the subject of criticism by
Zucker Legal it is also true that Zucker Legal disagreed
that the Letter
represented an accurate description of the issue before the Court.
do not place any weight on the fact that at subsequent Court proceedings Lindsay
J did not make any criticism of the Letter. We
do not have a submission that the
content of the Letter was put before him for consideration and/or comment or
whether, in the context
of the subsequent directions hearings, it would have
been relevant for His Honour to have made comment upon the terms of the Letter.
our opinion, the Letter did not record an accurate representation of what His
Honour Lindsay J had said at the directions hearing
and that the Letter had the
capacity to mislead the costs assessor.
the absence of a contemporaneous note, or of the transcript, it was not
reasonable, in our view, for the Applicant to have written
the Letter using
language recording what His Honour had said without appropriately expressed
qualifications as to the fact that the
Letter represented the Applicant’s
best recollection of what was said.
do we think it was reasonable for the Applicant to have formed the view that the
words attributed in the transcript to Mr Ashurst
(“there is no doubt that
she currently has capacity”) were recalled by the Applicant to have been
expressed by His Honour.
That recollection is inconsistent with the clear
concerns expressed elsewhere by His Honour as recorded in the transcript. His
states that there is more to be considered than whether Ms X currently
has capacity. In other words, we do not accept that the Applicant
reasonably have recalled that the words attributed to Mr Ashurst were words that
in fact came from His Honour.
short, it is our opinion that the Letter was inaccurate and contained language
which was likely to mislead the costs assessor.
Applicant referred to the letter that he wrote to the costs assessor on 21st May
2019 (in response to the letter from Zucker Legal
dated 16th May 2019) for the
purpose of submitting that he was clear in stating that capacity had not been
determined. We do not
agree with that submission. That letter states that the
other parties wish to put in issue evidence concerning “future matters
“and that the Applicant and the Client say that future matters are not
relevant. This letter does not undo the misleading nature
of the Letter which
implied that His Honour’s view aligned with the Applicant’s view
when in fact His Honour had stated
that future matters were relevant.
are not satisfied that the Applicant intended to mislead the costs assessor or
that he was dishonest. However, we are comfortably
satisfied that the Applicant
was reckless in the use of language contained in the Letter and that in the
circumstances, the issue
of the Letter by the Applicant constitutes conduct
occurring in connection with the practice of law that falls short of the
of competence and diligence that a member of the public is entitled to
expect of a reasonably competent lawyer.
determined that we are in agreement with the Respondent’s submissions that
the correct and preferable decision is to
affirm the resolution of the PCC that
the conduct of the Applicant constitutes unsatisfactory professional conduct, we
turn to the
question of what protective order should be made.
are of the opinion that the Applicant’s conduct could be fairly described
as careless or inadvertent and it involved a single
event (namely the issue of
the Letter), rather than conduct of a continuing nature. It is also relevant
that the costs assessor did
not acquiesce in the request made in the Letter but
rather determined that the costs assessment should continue. In the
circumstances
we are of the opinion that the appropriate protective order is a
caution and that the PCC was correct to make such an order. In coming
view, we are mindful of the fact that a member of the public is entitled to
expect that a reasonably competent lawyer would
be careful not to mislead in
correspondence and that therefore a caution would act not only as a deterrent to
the Applicant but also
act more generally to members of the profession to
exercise the appropriate level of care and diligence in the issue of
communications.
conclusion, it is our view that the correct and preferable conclusion is that
which was reached by the PCC in the Decision. It
follows that the Decision
should be affirmed. It also follows that the Applicant’s request for costs
is dismissed.
make the following declaration and orders:
(1) The Applicant has engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct.
(2) The decision of the Respondent to issue a caution to the Applicant by the
resolution of the Professional Conduct Committee of
the Respondent on 19 July
2024 is affirmed.
(3) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(NSW), the disclosure of the names of the Applicant, the
Applicant’s client as referred to in these proceedings, or the
family is prohibited.
************
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
Decision of the New South Wales Civil and Administrative
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (325 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter