URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/290.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Estasy v Challenger Property Nominees & anor [2013] NSWADT 290 (18 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Estasy v Challenger Property Nominees & anor
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 290
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Decision Date:
18 December 2013
Retail Leases Division
K Rickards, Judicial Member
1. The application for an order awarding interest is dismissed.
The parties are to bear their own costs of the proceedings.
Catchwords:
Interest, Costs
Legislation Cited:
Retail Leases Act 1994
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Cases Cited:
Dykes and Wildie v Heatherway Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWADT AP 26
Principal judgment
Ezzat Estasy and Carol Estasy (Applicants)
Challenger Property Nominees
Pty Limited (First Respondent)
Challenger Listed Investments Limited (Second
Respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
Emil Ford Lawyers (Applicant)
Henry Davis York (Respondents)
File Number(s):
REASONS FOR
Applicants are the lessees of a retail shop located within the Kings Langley
Shopping Centre in western Sydney, New South Wales
("the premises"). The
Respondents are the owners and lessors of the premises.
original Application filed in these proceedings sought:
(1) A declaration that the previous valuation of the "current market rent"
payable under the subject lease for the period 1 July
2009 to 30 June 2011
provided by the valuer Lydia Awad on15 February 2010 did not comply with
Retail Leases Act 1994
and was therefore
not binding upon the parties;
(2) An order that there be another retail valuer appointed by the Tribunal to
carry out another valuation of the "current market
rent" payable for the period
1 July 2009 to 30 June 2011;
(3) An order for payment by the Respondents of the "difference" between the rent
actually paid by the Applicants over that period
and the new market rent for
that period as now assessed;
(4) An order that the Respondents pay interest to the Applicant in respect of
any such "difference", and;
(5) An order that the Respondents pay the Applicant's costs of these
proceedings.
Application was subsequently amended to seek additional declaratory and
restraining orders to:
(1) permit the
Applicants to continue to have a St George Bank automatic teller machine ("the
ATM") within the premises, and;
(2) restrain the Respondents from terminating the lease by reason of the
presence of the ATM at the premises.
commencement of these proceedings, the Respondents agreed that the valuation
provided by Ms Awad should be set aside and
that a new valuer should be
appointed to again assess the "current market rent" for the premises for the
period 1 July 2009 to 30
June 2011 (referred to below within this decision as
"the relevant period"). The Tribunal then appointed Mr Lance Kenny to undertake
this valuation ("the Kenny valuation").
reason of the Kenny valuation, it transpired that the Applicants had paid a
total amount for rent far in excess of what they should
have paid over the
relevant period.
Kenny valuation was completed on 15 October 2013. On 7 November 2013, the
Respondents paid the sum of $81,884.15 to the Applicants
which was the amount
assessed by them, based upon the Kenny valuation, to be the due amount of
overpayment of rent which was repayable.
Respondents subsequently gave their consent to the presence of the ATM at the
7 November 2013 the parties advised the Tribunal that the only remaining issues
between them were the orders for costs and interest
sought by the Applicants.
Respondents contend that the parties should each bear their own respective costs
given the circumstances surrounding this matter,
and that there should be no
order for payment of interest.
Consideration
of the evidence and submissions establishes the following outline of facts and
Outline of Facts and Events
subject retail lease of the premises ("the lease") commenced on 1 July 2006 and
contained a 5 year term with a 5 year option period.
24 August 2007 the Applicants entered into a licence agreement with St George
Bank for the installation of the ATM. The licence
agreement, which was submitted
to the Applicants under cover of a letter dated 18 July 2007 from the solicitors
acting for St George
Bank, indicated that the bank did not require the
Applicants to obtain the Respondents' consent for the installation of the ATM
the standard reference to the need for such consent as set out within
clause 7 of the agreement was crossed out and deleted. There
is no evidence to
indicate that the Respondents' consent had previously been sought to this
arrangement or that formal notification
was made to them.
1 July 2009 a rent review was required under the terms of the lease, and this
was subsequently arranged to be undertaken by the
valuer Lydia Awad.
a letter to the Applicants dated 17 September 2009, the Respondents' agent CBRE
noted that a St George Bank ATM had been installed
within the premises but that
there were no records relating to such installation or to any approval by the
Respondents. This letter
asked the Applicants to provide "confirmation of
approval". There is no evidence of any response by the Applicants to this
15 February 2010 Ms Awad completed her valuation which, in general terms,
increased the rent payable as and from 1 July 2009 by
a factor of approximately
24%. The Applicants then commenced paying this higher rent.
of exercise of the option to renew the term of the lease from 1 July 2011 was
later given by the Applicants; this meant that
a further assessment of "current
market rent" was required to be undertaken in order to determine the new rent
payable for the new
term. The new rent valuation which was then undertaken
determined that the rent payable for the renewed term of the lease from 1
2011 was to be decreased by a factor of approximately 38%. A review of this
determination was subsequently obtained by the Respondents
through the Tribunal,
which confirmed the determination.
Applicants then commenced paying this new lower amount of rent as and from 1
July 2011. Over a year later on 23 August 2012, in
a letter sent to the
Respondents, they complained about the level of payment for outgoings which was
then being sought from them
by the Respondents. This letter also complained that
the 2010 rent valuation provided by Ms Awad had been incorrect, and stated that
the Applicants should therefore have been paying a much lower rent than that
assessed by Ms Awad during the relevant period.
12 February 2013 the solicitors who now represent the Applicants wrote to the
Respondents' agents CBRE and asserted that the Awad
valuation had not complied
with the requirements of the
, in particular the factors set out
within section 19(1) (a)
It was also stated that this non-compliance had
been identified within the reports containing the subsequent valuations which
been undertaken in July 2011 upon renewal of the lease. Within this letter,
agreement was sought from the Respondents that the Awad
valuation be set aside,
that another valuation be undertaken of "current market rent" payable for the
subject period, and that the
Respondents repay to the Applicants any difference
between the amount paid by the Applicants and the "current market rent" assessed
as payable.
Notwithstanding
the nature and scope of the concessions which were being sought from the
Respondents within the above letter, it was
also indicated that, in the absence
of agreement by the Respondents, proceedings would be commenced in the following
2 to 3 days.
present Application was then filed on 14 February 2013.
letter dated 25 February 2013 the Respondents' solicitors sought particulars of
the alleged non-compliance of the Awad valuation
with section 19(1)(a) of the
. In response to this request, a communication was sent by the
Applicant's solicitors on the same day stating simply that:
"With respect, a plain reading of the legislation, in light of relevant
cases, will provide the answers you are looking for.
It may be of assistance for you to look at the Decision of the Tribunal in
Hunt v Cassaran
[2012] NSWADT 193.
In particular paragraphs 28 and
following may provide the assistance you require..."
28 February 2013 these proceedings were listed for directions. Orders were made
by consent of the parties that the Applicants were
to file and serve submissions
on or before 28 March 2013, the Respondents were to file and serve submissions
on or before 11 April
2013, and the Application was to thereafter be determined
"upon the papers" without any hearing.
15 March 2013 the Respondents' solicitors wrote to the Applicant's solicitors
and asked for evidence of consent to the installation
of the ATM at the
Premises. In reply, the Applicant's solicitor advised in a letter dated 19 March
"We propose to respond formally to the request for details relating to the
ATM by Friday, 22 March 2013 and we will assume that no
steps will be taken to
terminate the lease."
Notwithstanding
the above advice, the Applicants did not in fact provide any further response to
the Respondents' enquiry about the
ATM but instead filed the Amended Application
seeking the additional orders set out above in paragraph 3.
26 March 2013, following the filing of the Amended Application, it was
determined by me in chambers that the previous orders for
filing and service of
submissions should remain on foot and that a decision as to whether or not
determination of the proceedings
should still proceed "on the papers", be
deferred until after 11 April 2013.
28 March 2013 the Respondents' solicitors advised of their instructions to
consent to the setting aside of the Awad valuation and
to have a new valuation
undertaken for the relevant period.
16 May 2013 the Tribunal appointed Mr Lance Kenny as valuer to undertake
valuation of the "current market rent" payable for the
relevant period. It
appears that Mr Kenny suffered a degree of ill health over the ensuing weeks and
his valuation report was not
published until 15 October 2013.
23 July 2013 the Respondents' solicitor wrote to the Applicant's solicitor
advising that the Respondents would provide formal consent
to the ATM licence
upon the basis that the Amended Application was withdrawn and each party bear
its own costs in relation to the
ATM issue. Another letter was later sent on 5
November 2013 by the Respondents' solicitors indicating the formal consent of
the Respondents
to the ATM.
outlined above in paragraphs 5 and 6, the Kenny valuation determined that the
market rent properly payable for the relevant period
was significantly less than
the amount which had in fact been paid by the Applicants. The total amount of
such overpayment was calculated
by the Respondents to be $81,884.15 and this sum
was accordingly paid by them to the Applicants on 7 November 2013.
Claim for Additional Repayment of Rent
paragraph 64 of the Applicant's submissions, a complaint is made that: "the
amount to be repaid to the Applicants can be accurately
identified. The amount
is $82,804.11. It should be noted that on 7 November 2013 the amount of
$81,884.15 was paid by the Respondents
to the Applicants. It is unclear what
this amount represents."
Respondents' schedule of calculation of the rent repayable to the Applicants has
been provided as an attachment to their submissions.
The calculations appear
accurate and clearly set out the manner in which the amount repaid to the
Applicants was calculated. The
set of calculations provided by the Applicants
are comparatively unclear; despite their repeated insistence that an additional
of approximately $920 is still due to be repaid, it is difficult to
discern how this has been arrived at or why the calculations
of the Respondents
should also be noted that these proceedings were referred for a decision "on the
papers" upon the basis that the only issues remaining
in dispute were interest
and costs. It is inappropriate for the Applicants to now "at the heel of the
hunt" seek to agitate the issue
of whether the Respondents have repaid the
correct amount of rent. The amount in issue is in any event modest and, as set
the calculations of the Respondents are preferred over those of the
Applicants.
Tribunal may, in its discretion, award interest pursuant to the powers conferred
upon it by section 72A of the
72A Power of Tribunal to award interest
(1) When the Tribunal orders on a retail tenancy claim or an unconscionable
conduct claim that a person pay money to another person,
the Tribunal may order
that there is to be included, in the amount ordered to be paid, interest at a
specified rate on the whole
or any part of that amount for the whole or any part
of the period between when the cause of action arose and when the order takes
(2) If the whole or part of an amount claimed under a retail tenancy claim or
an unconscionable conduct claim is paid during proceedings
in the Tribunal on
the claim, prior to or without an order for payment being made in respect of the
claim, the Tribunal may order
that interest be paid at a specified rate on the
whole or any part of the money paid for the whole or any part of the period
when the cause of action arose and the date of the payment.
(3) The rate of interest specified by the Tribunal under this section must
not exceed the rate at which interest is payable on a judgment
debt of the
District Court.
(4) This section does not:
(a) authorise the giving of interest on interest, or
(b) apply in relation to any debt on which interest is payable as of right
whether by virtue of any agreement or otherwise, or
(c) affect the damages recoverable for the dishonour of a bill of exchange.
(5) On a claim for the payment of money, the Tribunal may not order the
payment of interest under subsection (1) in respect of the
period after the date
on which an appropriate settlement sum (or the first appropriate settlement sum)
has been offered unless the
special circumstances of the case warrant the making
of such an order.
(6) For the purposes of subsection (5),
"appropriate settlement sum"
is a sum offered by a party in settlement
of a claim for the payment of money where the amount ordered to be paid
(including interest
accrued up to and including the date of the offer) does not
exceed the sum offered by more than 10 per cent. Subsection (5) does
not prevent
an award of interest for the period before the settlement offer is made.
paragraphs 23 of the Respondents' written submissions and following, only
section 72A(1) is recited in support of their submission
that, because there has
been no Tribunal order for payment of money, the Tribunal cannot now make an
award of interest. The provisions
of section 72A(2) (see above) defeat this
contention. Although a precise amount of money was not claimed in these
proceedings, it
was claimed that the previous Awad valuation was defective, that
a new alternative valuation should be ordered, and that any amount
identified as overpaid rent by reason of the new valuation should then be repaid
by the Respondents. Within a short period
of time after publication of the Kenny
valuation, an amount of money identified as overpaid rent was repaid by the
Respondents and
the provisions of section 72A(2) were therefore
Determination
as to whether interest should be paid by the Respondents and, if so the amount
of interest to be paid, fundamentally
rests upon consideration of the form and
nature of the Applicants' cause of action for repayment of overpaid rent, when
of action actually arose, and the steps taken to advance the
Applicants' claim.
fundamental purposes of an award of interest must first be considered, which
are: to protect the true value of any amount owing
to a party; to provide an
element of profit to the party to whom money is owed so as to compensate for
foregone notional income,
and to deter delay in payment of a debt. In addition
to these considerations, account should also be had of any unreasonable or
unexplained
delay by a party in seeking recovery of any amount claimed to be
above approach was also approved by the Appeal Panel in
Dykes and Wildie v
Heatherway Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWADT AP 26:
The primary function of compensation by way of interest, whether deriving from
the contract or by way of judgment interest, is to
protect the creditor against
the erosion in value of the amount owing. Insofar as the rate is set above the
inflation rate, it builds
in a profit element to the creditor; and acts as a
deterrent against slow payment. In ordinary circumstances the creditor should
entitled to interest for the whole period between the time of first default and
the time of the order.
55 The Tribunal appears to have taken the approach that it ought to enforce
the provisions of the lease up until 9 January 2004, but
after that the question
of awarding any further interest became discretionary. In our view the grant of
relief under either s 72(1)(a)
or s 72A is discretionary.
56 It is most undesirable that a creditor move against a debtor long after
the default has ended (in this instance on 1 July 2000).
We endorse the view to
which Mr Zipser drew our attention expressed in
Metro Meat Ltd v Werlick
Aust Torts Reports 81-242 (South
Australian Supreme Court (Full Court)) per
'There have been a number of pronouncements of judges of this court bearing
upon the approach proper to be adopted towards the allowance
of interest in
situations in which there has been delay on the part of a plaintiff in
prosecuting proceedings ... It seems to me
that a clear balance of authority
does favour the disallowance of interest in respect of any significant period of
time during which
there has been inexplicable tardiness on the part of the
plaintiff in prosecuting his claim'."
Applicants had a cause of action to seek to set aside the Awad valuation from
the date of its publication. The Applicants later
contended through their
solicitor's letter sent to CBRE on 12 February 2013 that the valuation reports
undertaken in early 2011 had
identified fault or statutory non-compliance within
the Awad valuation. Their dissatisfaction with the Awad valuation was also
in their own letter sent to the Respondents on 23 August 2012.
However, until such time as the Kenny valuation was published on 15
2013, the Applicants had no cause of action for repayment of overpaid rent
because, although it had been claimed that the
Awad valuation was non-compliant
and in error, there had been no new determination that the market rent payable
for the relevant
period was lower than the amount actually paid by the
Applicants, and accordingly there was no cause for repayment of any overpaid
rent, until that time.
if a cause of action for recovery of overpaid rent had arisen before publication
of the Kenny valuation, the absence of any fault
or liability on the part of the
Respondents for the overpayment of rent, coupled with the unexplained delay on
the part of the Applicants
in taking any steps to obtain advice or undertake
action despite their long-standing disquiet about the amount of rent they were
paying, gravitate against the order for interest sought by the
Applicants.
of overpaid rent was effected by the Respondents on 7 November 2013, which was
23 days after publication of the Kenny valuation.
This is well within the usual
28 day period which is afforded to parties who are required to make payment
pursuant to court or tribunal
orders. The Tribunal accordingly finds that no
interest should be awarded in these proceedings.
principles which govern costs orders by the Tribunal are set out at
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
(1) Each party to proceedings before the Tribunal
is to bear the party's own costs
in the proceedings, except as provided by this
(1A) Subject to the rules
of the Tribunal and any other Act or law, the Tribunal
may award costs
in relation to proceedings before
it, but only if it is satisfied that it is
fair to do so having regard to the following:
(a) whether a party has conducted the proceedings in a way that unnecessarily
disadvantaged another party to the proceedings by conduct
(i) failing to comply with an order or direction of the Tribunal
without reasonable excuse, or
(ii) failing to comply with this Act, the regulations, the rules
of the Tribunal or any relevant provision of the enactment
which the Tribunal
has jurisdiction in relation to the proceedings, or
(iii) asking for an adjournment as a result of a failure referred to in
subparagraph (i) or (ii), or
(iv) causing an adjournment, or
(v) attempting to deceive another party or the Tribunal,
(vi) vexatiously conducting the proceedings,
(b) whether a party has been responsible for prolonging unreasonably the time
taken to complete the proceedings,
(c) the relative strengths of the claims made by each of the parties,
including whether a party has made a claim that has no tenable
basis in fact or
(d) the nature and complexity of the proceedings,
(e) any other matter that the Tribunal
considers relevant.
(2) The Tribunal
(a) determine by whom and to what extent costs
are to be paid, and
(b) order costs
to be assessed on a basis set out in Division
Profession Act
or on any other basis.
(3) However, the Tribunal
may not award costs
in relation to proceedings for an original
decision unless the enactment
under which
the Tribunal
has jurisdiction to make the decision
provides for the awarding of costs.
(4) In this section,
of or incidental to proceedings in the Tribunal,
(b) the costs
of or incidental to the proceedings giving rise to the application,
as well as the costs
of or incidental to the application.
considering whether it is fair to make a costs order in accordance with the
provisions of
, the starting point is that there is to be no order for
costs unless the Tribunal is persuaded that it is fair to do so. In considering
whether this statutory presumption should be displaced in these proceedings, a
number of factors have been taken into account and
are set out
associated factors which should be considered are that these proceedings were
commenced after only very short notice had been
given to the Respondents, but
after a significantly long period of time had passed after the Awad valuation
and also after the relevant
period which was the subject of the proceedings.
relevant matter to take into account is that, within a relatively short period
after the time that these proceedings were
commenced, the Respondents agreed to
the Awad valuation being set aside and a new valuation being undertaken. A
considerable amount
of potentially wasted time, delay and expense for each of
the parties and the Tribunal was avoided by this step being taken at an
relevant factor is the decision of the Applicants to amend the Application
without warning to seek declaratory and injunctive
orders in respect of the ATM
when the Respondents were still awaiting a promised reply by the Applicants to
their enquiry about the
ATM and in circumstances where the Respondents had
evinced no intention to take any action in relation to the ATM adverse to the
interests of the Applicants. The Tribunal considers that the filing of the
Amended Application was premature and unnecessary.
offer which was made on behalf of the Applicants is, given the
decision not to award interest, ineffective and cannot displace the
presumption that each party bears its own costs of these proceedings.
is also nothing, in the Tribunal's view, about the behaviour of the Respondents
prior to or during these proceedings which would
justify departure from the
principle that the parties bear their own costs of the proceedings. Accordingly,
the Applicant's application
for a costs order is refused.
1. The application for an order awarding interest is dismissed.
2. The parties are to bear their own costs of the proceedings.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (188 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter