URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1332.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Shahrouk v Lawcover Insurance Pty Limited [2025] NSWSC 1332 (12 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Shahrouk v Lawcover Insurance Pty Limited
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1332
Hearing Date(s):
5 November 2025
Date of Orders:
12 November 2025
Decision Date:
12 November 2025
Equity - Commercial List
(1) The notice of motion filed on 18 September 2025 is
dismissed with costs;
(2) The matter be stood over
for directions on 21 November 2025.
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE – summary judgment – interpretation of
insurance contract – where multiple interpretations of relevant
reasonably arguable – issue not suitable for summary judgment –
motion dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW) 2014, ss 138, 246
Cases Cited:
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
HNOE Limited v Angus & Julia Stone Pty Ltd
Texts Cited:
Practice Note SC Eq 3
Principal judgment
Jihad Shahrouk (Plaintiff)
Lawcover Insurance Pty Limited
(Defendant)
Representation:
J Hewitt SC with H Fielder (Plaintiff)
A Horvath SC with ME
Hall (Defendant)
Solicitors:
Bartier Perry (Plaintiff)
Helmore Lawyers (Defendant)
File Number(s):
2025/338561
Publication Restriction:
a notice of motion filed on 18 September 2025, the defendant, Lawcover Insurance
Pty Limited (
), seeks summary dismissal of the proceedings
on the basis that they do not disclose an arguable claim. In doing so, Lawcover
persuade the Court that the claim is “so obviously untenable that it
cannot possibly succeed” (to use one of the formulations
by Barwick CJ in
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways
[1964] HCA 69
112 CLR 125
[1964] HCA 69
the reasons that follow, the current application does not meet that
requirement.
plaintiff, Mr Jihad Shahrouk, is the sole principal of an incorporated legal
practice, BLG (NSW) Pty Ltd trading as Berala Law
Peter Wilson was a law clerk employed by BLG. Between December 2022 and March
2024, he misappropriated clients’ funds
held in BLG’s trust account.
He told Mr Shahrouk of the misappropriations in April 2024, who reported
the matter to the police
and the Law Society of NSW. The affected clients made
claims on the fidelity fund which has paid out a total amount of $3,007,370.83
in respect of Mr Wilson’s misappropriations and is likely to pay out a
further $594,753.14.
24 January 2025, the Law Society, exercising rights of subrogation conferred on
it by s 246 of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
), issued a letter of demand to Mr Shahrouk seeking payment
of the sum of $3,007,370.83 from him personally. The basis of the Law
Society’s claim is unclear. It asserts that Mr Shahrouk failed to take
steps to ensure that Mr Wilson complied with his obligations
under the law
and specifically his obligations under s 138 of LPUL in respect of trust
accounts. However, no cause of action is identified.
Presumably, what is
asserted is that Mr Shahrouk personally owed clients of BLG a statutory duty or
possibly a duty to take reasonable
care to avoid the risk of harm that
eventuated. Precisely how those duties are formulated and how Mr Shahrouk is
said to have breached
them remains to be seen since the Law Society has yet to
commence proceedings.
Shahrouk gave notice of the claim against him to Lawcover, which provided BLG
with compulsory professional indemnity insurance.
There is a question whether
the claim falls within the 2023-24 or the 2024-25 policy year. Nothing turns on
the answer to that question
for present purposes and it will be convenient to
focus on the terms of the 2023-24 policy.
4 of the policy provides:
What We Insure
4. We agree to indemnify the
against civil
liability for a
(a) arises from the provision of
legal services
law practice
in Australia or elsewhere; and
(b) is first made against the
during the period
of insurance or that is deemed under clause 9 to have been first made during the
period of insurance.” [emphasis
in original]
and “claim” are defined in cl 45 of the policy in the following
“45. In this Policy, unless the context otherwise
(i) a demand for, or an assertion of a right to, compensation
or damages; or
(ii) an intimation of an intention to seek compensation or
damages; or
(iii) an order for costs made against an
proceedings to which that
is not a party, an application for such
an order or an intimation of an intention to seek such an order;
law practice
and the other
parties referred to in clause 2 or where the context requires any one or more of
law practice
and the other parties referred to in clause 2;
2 of the policy provides:
“We also insure:
(a) a person who is or was a
law practice
who is or was a shareholder of the
(c) a body corporate related to the
law practice
provides or provided clerical, administrative or management services to the
law practice
(d) the estate of each person referred to in clauses 2(a) and
2(b).” [emphasis in original]
10 relevantly provides:
“What We Exclude From The Insurance
10. We will not indemnify the
under this Policy
arises from:
(v) failure to pay trust money or deliver trust property, or a
fraudulent dealing with trust property, where the
law practice
the money or property on trust in the course of providing
legal services
and where the failure or fraudulent dealing arises from a dishonest act of an
associate of the
law practice
(as defined in the
Legal Profession
Uniform Law
(NSW) section 6(1));
18 of the policy provides:
We Have Conduct Of The Claim
agree that:
(a) we have the conduct of a
against the
, including its investigation, defence, avoidance, reduction, or,
subject to clauses 22 to 25, settlement or any appeal;
(b) we have the right to appoint
to act in the
conduct of the
(c) we have the right to refer a
to any dispute
resolution process and, subject to clause 22, to settle it as part of that
process; and
(d) we have the right to conduct the
in the name
.” [emphasis in original]
27 March 2025, Lawcover denied liability for the claim relying on cl 10(a)(v) of
the policy.
7 August 2025, the Law Society commenced proceedings in the Common Law division
against BLG and Mr Shahrouk (
the Common Law Proceedings
the appointment of receivers to BLG and freezing orders against Mr Shahrouk
apparently in aid of its claim against him personally.
3 September 2025, Mr Shahrouk commenced these proceedings seeking relevantly the
following declaration:
“A declaration that the Plaintiff is entitled to be indemnified by the
Defendant under the contract of insurance entitled
‘Professional
Indemnity Insurance (PII) Policy 2023/24’
and/or the contract of
insurance entitled ‘
Professional Indemnity Insurance (PII) Policy
a. in respect of the ‘Fidelity Fund Claims’ (as
defined in the List Statement) made against him by the Council of the
Society of New South Wales exercising its right of subrogation on behalf of
clients or former clients of Berala Law Group; and
b. in respect of any costs, expenses and liabilities incurred
by the Plaintiff in relation to Supreme Court of NSW proceedings
2025/301994.”
submits that this is an appropriate case for summary judgment because if granted
it would dispose of the whole case, making
it unnecessary to determine detailed
factual questions, including whether Mr Shahrouk had any knowledge of Mr
Wilson’s conduct.
also submits that Mr Shahrouk’s claim has no prospects of success for two
reasons. First, insofar as Mr Shahrouk seeks
to recover the costs of the Common
Law Proceedings, it submits that those proceedings could not result in civil
liability for a claim
that arises in the circumstances described in cl 4 of the
policy. Second, and in any event, it contends that Mr Shahrouk’s
indemnity has no prospects of success because of the application of the
exclusion contained in cl 10(a)(v).
Consideration
unfortunate feature of the current application is the way in which the issue has
arisen. In these proceedings, Mr Shahrouk seeks
a declaration in circumstances
where no proceedings have been commenced let alone liability established. There
must be a real question
whether in those circumstances the application for a
declaration is premature. Those difficulties are compounded by the approach
taken by the Law Society. In the normal course of events, it might have been
expected that, where the Law Society proposes to commence
proceedings in this
proceedings, it would have commenced
those proceedings and at the same time
filed a notice of motion in those proceedings seeking those orders. Instead, it
freezing orders in proceedings which, although connected in a broad
sense to the proceedings the Law Society proposes to commence,
raise different
issues against a different defendant.
first of these points was not raised by the parties and can be put to one side
for present purposes. The second is relevant to
Lawcover’s argument that
the costs of the Common Law proceedings are clearly not covered by the
far as that issue is concerned, there is a question whether the expression
“civil liability for a claim” in cl 4 of
the policy covers defence
costs, which was not addressed by the parties. Even if it does not, cl 18 of the
policy appears to place
an obligation on Lawcover to take over conduct of a
against the insured”. Although cl 18 does not
specifically say so, presumably that is a claim which would, if it succeeded,
give rise to a liability in respect of which Lawcover was required to indemnify
the insured. If that is correct, if Lawcover refuses
to take over the conduct of
a claim and the claim against it succeeds, it will be in breach of cl 18 and
liable to pay damages, which
presumably will be calculated by reference to the
reasonable costs incurred in defending the claim.
is at least reasonably arguable that if an application were made for freezing
orders against the insured in respect of a claim
that Lawcover had wrongly
refused to take over the conduct of, the costs incurred in defending that
application would be recoverable
as damages, either because they were costs that
Lawcover would have borne if it had conducted the defence or because they were
flowing from Lawcover’s (wrongful) denial of the claim, since absent
the denial, the application for a freezing order would
not have been made. It is
difficult to see why it matters whether the application for a freezing order is
made in the proceedings
in which the claim was made (which, as I have explained,
would be the normal position) or in other proceedings. For those reasons
it could not be said that the claim for those costs is so obviously untenable
that it cannot possibly succeed, although again
it may be premature.
to the principal issue raised by Lawcover concerning the application of the
exclusion, Lawcover placed some emphasis on the following
passage from the
judgment of Barwick CJ in
General Steel
at 130 (adopted by the Court of
HNOE Limited v Angus & Julia Stone Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 271
(Bell CJ, Leeming and Payne JJA agreeing)):
“Although I can agree... that the defendant should be saved from the
vexation of the continuance of useless and futile proceedings,
in my opinion
great care must be exercised to ensure that under the guise of achieving
expeditious finality a plaintiff is not improperly
deprived of his opportunity
for the trial of his case by the appointed tribunal. On the other hand,
not think that the exercise of the jurisdiction should be reserved for those
cases where argument is unnecessary to evoke the
futility of the plaintiff's
claim. Argument, perhaps even of an extensive kind, may be necessary to
demonstrate that the case of
the plaintiff is so clearly untenable that it
cannot possibly succeed
.” [Lawcover’s emphasis]
passage, however, does not undermine the point that it is not appropriate to
determine debateable questions of contractual construction,
particularly those
that raise factual questions, on an application for summary judgment, which is
the position in this case.
this case, the relevant claim has not been properly formulated by the Law
Society. That itself makes an application for summary
judgment inappropriate.
Until the claim is properly formulated, it is not possible to say what the claim
arises from.
submits that necessarily the claim will have as one of its ingredients the
failure to pay trust money where the failure arises
from dishonest acts by Mr
Wilson. That much may be accepted. But that does not mean that the claim
necessarily “arises from”
those matters when the gravamen of the
claim against Mr Shahrouk appears likely to be that he owed a personal duty to
BLG to properly supervise Mr Wilson and as a consequence of his
failure to do so, Mr Wilson misappropriated trust funds.
answer to the question whether the exclusion applies will depend on the nature
of the connection required between the claim that
is made and the circumstances
described in cl 10(a)(v) by the words “arising from”. That answer is
not obvious. It depends
on a clear identification of the claim, which until
proceedings are commenced is not possible. It also depends on the meaning of
words “arising from”. Those words do not have a clear and precise
meaning. The nature of the connection they require
will depend on the context in
which they appear. The fact that they appear in an exclusion clause, the fact
that the claims covered
by the exclusion could extend to claims in negligence
against a person not involved in the misappropriation, and the fact that other
clauses of the policy express the required connection using the phrase
“arises, whether directly or indirectly, from”
are all matters that
suggest that the words require a direct connection between the claim and the
circumstances described in cl 10(a)(v).
There may be others. And if that is what
is required, it is reasonably arguable that the claim “arises from”
giving rise to the liability and not the facts that simply give rise
to the loss. These are contestable issues that are not suitable
determination on an application for summary judgment.
follows that the notice of motion must be dismissed.
submitted that costs should be costs in the cause because the costs of the
motion will not be wasted. Perhaps they will not
be entirely wasted. However, Mr
Shahrouk has been successful. Any work that has been done for the motion is
likely to be of marginal
benefit at the final hearing. In those circumstances,
Mr Shahrouk should have his costs of the motion.
Accordingly,
the orders of the Court are:
(1) The notice of motion filed on 18 September 2025 is dismissed with costs;
(2) The matter be stood over for directions on 21 November 2025.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (256 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter