URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/130.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gao v The Owners Strata Plan No 100946; Jiang v Gao [2025] NSWCATCD 130; (25 September 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Gao v The Owners Strata Plan No 100946; Jiang v Gao
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 130
Hearing Date(s):
26 June 2025
Date of Orders:
25 September 2025
Decision Date:
25 September 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
D Bluth, Senior Member
(1) The Respondent being the Owners-Strata Plan No 100946 is to
within 14 days of the date of these orders
(a) Permanently remove ‘703’ marking
from the designated parking space of lot 7 in Basement 2,
(b) Immediately reinstate the original
‘103’ marking:
(i) Using durable
materials matching the strata scheme’s standard
(ii) In identical font, size and colour
to adjacent numbered spaces, and;
(2) Proceedings no
2025/0009632 is otherwise dismissed.
(3) Proceedings no
2025/00063345 is dismissed.
(4) No orders as to
(5) In the event that a party contends a costs
order should be made in its favour then the following order and directions are
(a) The applicant is to file any application for costs
(limited to 4 pages) within 21 days from the date of publication of these
orders, including submissions about whether an order can be made dispensing with
a hearing pursuant to section 50(2) of the Civil
and Administrative Tribunal
Act, 2013 (the NCAT Act).
(b) The respondents to the
cost’s application are to file any submissions in reply (limited to 4
pages) within 35 days from
the. date of these orders, including submissions
50(2) of the NCAT Act.
(c) The applicant cost is to
file and serve any submissions (limited to 2 pages) in reply within 42 days from
the date of these
(d) If a cost application is
made within the time prescribed by this order then order no 4 will cease to have
Catchwords:
Land Law-Easements-
Real Property Act 1900
Conveyancing Act 1919
Schemes Management Act 2015
, Indefeasibility of title
Legislation Cited:
Conveyancing Act 1919
Real Property Act 1900
Schemes Management Act 2015
Cases Cited:
Bahr v Nicolay (No 2)
[1988] HCA 16
(1988) 164 CLR 604
Walsh v The Owners- Strata Plan
[2017] NSWCATAP 230
Principal judgment
Mexia (Leah) Gao (Applicant/Respondent)
The Owners Strata Plan No 100946
( Respondent)
Ruilang Jiang and Huijun Yan ( Respondent/ Applicant)
Representation:
Solicitors: Applicant- Self
The Owners Strata Plan No 100946 -Mr C
Prestipino Chambers Russell
Ruilang Jiang and Huijun Yan Ms C Fan Yingke Law
File Number(s):
2025/0009632 and 2025/00063345
REASONS FOR DECISION
is a strata schemes application with respect to a dispute regarding the
occupation of a car space in a strata scheme in Chatswood.
Applicant is the registered proprietor of lot 7 in the strata scheme.
first Respondent is the Owners Corporation the registered proprietor of the
common property of the strata scheme (the OC).
second and third Respondents are the registered proprietors of lot 32 in the
strata scheme.
dispute concerns the use by the second and third Respondents of the car space
owned by the Applicant.
strata and community scheme application was filed on 8 January 2025 seeking
orders against the strata manager of the OC and the
second and third Respondents
(file no 2025/00009632).
orders made on 29 April 2025 the Tribunal removed the strata manager as a party
to these proceedings.
second and third Respondents have filed a cross-claim file no 2025/00063345 on
14 February 2025 against the Applicant.
Applicant in submissions filed on 28 May 2025 updated the relief being sought.
That relief is as follows:
Pursuant to
Sections 136
Strata Schemes Management Act 2015
(NSW), ( the SSMA) the Applicant seeks the
following orders:
(1) A declaration that the by-law purporting to grant the
easement over privately owned property is invalid and unenforceable.
(2) An order pursuant to Strata Scheme Management Act 2015 that
the Respondent:
(a) Permanently remove ‘703’ marking from the
designated parking space of lot 7 in Basement 2, and;
(b) Immediately reinstate the original ‘103’
(i) Using durable materials matching the strata scheme’s
standard markings;
(ii) In identical font, size and colour to adjacent numbered
spaces, and;
(iii) Provide dated photographic evidence of compliance to both
the Applicant and Tribunal within 3 business days of service
of the order.
(c) An order pursuant the Compensation to the Applicant
(i) The First Respondent - The Owner Corporation, Strata plan
No 100946, and;
(ii) The Second Respondent — The Strata Committee
Chairperson, to jointly and severally reimburse the Applicant sum of $46,650,
comprising:
1. Act in Trespassing and Malicious Property Damage:
2. Loss caused by unauthorised encroachment on Lot 103:
3. Act in bad faith, and cause Ms Gao’s prolonged loss of
quiet enjoyment of the property: $5,000;
4. Financial and legal expenses incurred in the amount of
$1,650, and;
(4) An order pursuant to SSMA s.232 and the equitable doctrine
of unjust enrichment requiring a total sum of rental payment $11,726,
(a) The Second and Third Respondents (Mr. Jiang and Ms. Yan,
act as Chairpersons and Lot Owner of Lot 703), to reimburse:
(b) Parking space rental payments of $286 per month for 41
months (31 July 2020 - 31 December 2023); and
(c) Pre-judgment interest at the rate prescribed under
Civil Procedure Act 2005
second and third Respondents by the cross-claim seek the following
(1) That the cross-defendant’s application 2025/9632 be
(2) A declaration that the Registered Easement AQ225571W for
the exclusive use of Car Parking Space “X” by the Cross-Applicants
is valid and enforceable.
(c) A declaration that the parking of the vehicle by the
Cross-defendant prevented the Cross-applicant’s use and enjoyment
Car Parking space “x” and was in breach of the Registered Easement
(d) The Cross-defendant and/or her agents be restrained from
parking any vehicle or otherwise interfering with or obstructing the
Cross-applicants’ rights to use the Car Parking Space “X”
pursuant to the Registered easement AQ225571W.
(e) Damages
can be seen from the strata application and the cross-claim the issues are
significant and the monetary claims substantial.
Applicant filed her submissions and material on 28 May 2025 and was
self-represented at the hearing on 26 June 2025.
OC filed submissions in Response and material on 9 May 2025. and represented at
the hearing by Mr C Prestipino, solicitor
second and third Respondents filed their submissions and material on 25 June
2025 and were represented by Ms Fan, solicitor at
plan 100946 was registered on 14 April 2020
strata plan indicates (at sheet 4 of the administration sheet) that the original
owner of the strata scheme was Castle 88 Pty
for present purposes, lot 7 and lot 32 each have one parking space on title,
located in “Basement 2” shown
at sheet 2 of the strata plan next to
each other.
THE EASEMENT
22 July 2020, a Transfer Granting Easement was registered on the titles of lots
7 and 32 in the strata scheme, as registered dealing
AQ22571 (the Easement)
Relevantly:
(a) A title search for lot 7, shows that dealing AQ22571 is registered on
(b) A title search for lot 32, shows that dealing AQ22571 is registered on
(c) The title search for the common property
shows that dealing
is not registered on the common property certificate of title.
terms of the Easement relevantly provide that:
(a) The servient tenement is lot 7.
(b) The dominant tenement is lot 32.
(c) The Easement burdens part of lot 7, described as the Car Parking Space of
lot 7, located on level Basement 2 and marked “
X” in the plan
annexed to the Easement.
(d) The owner of lot 32 (being the “Lot Benefited”) is granted a
right to pass across and parka vehicle in the Car Parking
Space of lot 7 and do
“anything reasonably necessary” for that purpose.
(e) The owner of lot 7 “must not use the Car Parking Space and must not do
anything that could, in any way, hinder the full,
free, and unfettered rights of
the Owner of the Lot Benefitted” (clause 1 .3 of the Easement).
Easement was executed by Castle 88 Pty Ltd, as the owner of both lots 7 and 32
as at 22 July 2020.
Relevantly,
the easement does not impact the common property in any way. It burdens part of
lot 7 for the benefit of lot 32. It is
registered on the titles of both of those
lots but is not registered on the common property certificate of
THE APPLICANT’S PURCHASE OF LOT 7
Applicant acquired lot 7 from Castle 88 Pty Ltd on 6 October 2020 pursuant to a
contract for sale of lot 7. The
contract is dated 25 August 2020 with a
settlement date of 6 October 2020 (being 42 days from the date of the contract).
contract includes a title search for lot 7 from 25 August 2020, showing the
Easement registered on title and includes a copy of
the registered
Transfer, being dealing AQ455300 registered on 8 October 2020 Castle 88 Pty Ltd
transferred lot 7 to the Applicant.
review of the sales campaign material for lot 7 shows that it was marketed as
having one bedroom, one bathroom and no parking space.
second and third Respondents on 25 May 2020 entered into a contract to purchase
lot 32 from Castle 88 Pty Limited. Clause 50.1
of that contract provided that
the vendor Castle 88 Pty Limited would facilitate the registration on or before
settlement of the
purchase of lot 32, of a transfer granting easement over lot 7
car space in favour of the registered proprietor of lot 32 to use
that car space
A copy of the proposed easement was annexed to the contract.
Easement was registered on 22 July 2020 in substantially the same form as the
draft annexed to the contract with only minor amendments
to facilitate its
registration.
31 July 2020 the second and third Respondents completed the purchase of lot 32
with the registered Easement in place.
EVENTS POST REGISTRATIO OF
THE EASEMENT
Second Respondent in his affidavit dated 23 April 2025 stated that:
10. From the date of settlement until about September 2023, the Car Parking
Space X was consistently marked as “703”,
which corresponds to the
lot 32 Property. During that period my family owned only one vehicle and
ordinarily used the rightmost spot
of the two designated spaces, rather that the
Car Parking Space X, which is situated adjacent to the wall.
11. In or about September 2023, I saw the marking on the Car Parking space X had
been altered to read “ 103”, corresponding
to Unit 103..(lot7) .
This change was made without any prior notice or consent. At the time, I did not
pay much attention to the
change, as it did not affect my ability to use the
space for parking and I had always understood that two car spaces were allocated
to lot 32 owners.
Subsequently
the second Respondent contacted the then strata manager to write to then
Applicant to assert the rights of the second
and third Respondents to utilize
the car space. The strata manager correctly informed the Respondents that it was
not the role of
the strata manager to be engaged in what was a dispute between
two lot owners and that the Respondents should contact the Applicant
no interference by the strata manager in this dispute changed when the new
strata manger was appointed, who took a more hands
on approach and arrange for
the marking of “103” to be changed to “ 703” and to
issue a formal notice to
the Applicant directing the Applicant to cease using
the Car Parking space.
Relationship
between the parties deteriorated to the extent that it became quite acrimonious.
While both the Applicant and the second
and third Respondents have detailed the
unpleasant interactions between the parties including involvement of the police,
them and commenting upon does not resolve this
APPLICANT’S SUBMISSIONS
central issue in this matter concerns a coordinated act by the OC, certain
members of the Strata Committee and the Strata Manager
who collectively exceeded
their authorized roles and breached legal boundaries.
is alleged that this conduct constitutes unlawful trespass and vandalism upon
the Applicant’s privately owned parking lot
including the unauthorized
alteration of its designated lot number, thereby violating multiple fundamental
provisions under the SSMA.
Specifically,
the Strata Committee Chairperson, in collusion with the OC and the Strata
Manager unlawfully encroached upon the Car
Parking Space of the Applicant and
painted it with the Chairman’s (the second Respondent) unit number 703 on
or about 27 November
Respondents have refused to restore the lot number to the Car Parking Space to
its original, legally recognized designation thereby
perpetuating the ongoing
second and third Respondents have relied on an improperly registered easement as
a pretext to exceed his authority as Chairman
of the Strata Scheme.
misuse of his position under the by-laws and purported easement rights
constitutes a serious violation of both the strata scheme
and Development
Applicant refers to correspondence between the second and third Respondents and
the strata manager regarding the use of the Car
Parking Space which best
indicates a misunderstanding by the parties as to easement registered on title
and by-laws.
Applicant also draws on correspondence with Willoughby Council in support of her
assertions as to unlawful trespass by the Respondents.
The Applicant relies on
the Development Approval by the Council for the construction of the unit
building with 32 units and 32 car
parking spaces.
Applicant contacted the Council enquiring about the reallocation of the Car
Parking space and received a letter from the Development
Enforcement Officer
dated 13 December 2024 which stated:
I have reviewed this matter and provide the following advice:
DA-2017/203
1.Development Consent DA-2017/203 (as amended) was granted by Willoughby Local
Planning Panel ( WLPP) on august 2018 for demolition
of existing buildings and
construction of residential flat building consisting of 32 apartments,
car-parking and associated works.
2. A review of the approved plans show the layout of the car-parking spaces in
the basement level but not allocated to a specific
3. There are no conditions of consent under DA-2017/203 specifically requiring
car parking spaces be all allocated to each apartment.
However, the approved
plans indicate 32 car spaces for 32 apartments plus 8 visitor parking spaces. A
total of 40 spaces.
4. Strata Plan 100946 was registered on 14 April 2020. Council is not aware of
any strat5a plans registered after this date.
5. A review of the registered strata plan indicates the subject car space is
part of lot 7 ( unit 103) and lot 32 ( unit 703) is
allocated the adjoining car
Based on the above review, Council advises the following:
1. The reallocation of the car space by the strata manger is not a breach of
DA2017/203.
2.Strata Plan 100946 shows the car space is part of lot 7 ( unit 103), not lot 2
( unit 703).
3. The reallocation of the car space from lot 7 to lot 32 by line marking is
inconsistent with Strata Plan 100946. Please note Council
has no powers to
enforce Strata Plans. This mis considered a civil ( private) matter between you,
the OC, the Strata Manager and
the owner of lot 32. It is recommended that you
seek legal advice.
Applicant submitted that this letter supported the Applicant’s claim that
the Respondents possess no legal right to interfere
with the Car Parking Space
and lacked any statutory power to unilaterally violate the registered Strata
Plan. It was further alleged
that the auctions of the Respondents constituted
trespass, vandalism and fraudulent misrepresentation deliberate false claims to
ownership, substantiated by documentary evidence.
have set out the Applicant’s submissions and claims to indicate that
extreme language used in this dispute. The Applicant
is convinced of her legal
rights as was evidence during the hearing.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE
issue in dispute does not involve common property, the Easement is registered on
the titles of lots 7 and 32 and not registered
on the title for the common
relief sought is not against the OC and in so far as the application relates to
the OC it must be dismissed.
application is misguided in its entirety based on a misunderstanding of how the
law of easements operates. The Easement is an
encumbrance on the title to lot 7
preventing the registered proprietor of lot 7 from using the Car Parking Space
and permitting the
registered proprietor of lot 32 to use it.
Applicant can point to no breach of the state planning laws or to the
development consent.
does not have the powers to extinguish an easement, declare that the registered
proprietor of lot 7 can use the Car Parking
Space, compensate for harassment and
stress allegedly caused by the registered proprietors of lot 32.
24 April 2025 the lawyers for the OC wrote tot eh Applicant pointing out the
fundamental flaws in her application and inviting
her to withdraw. The Applicant
has willfully ignored the advice and pressed on with her application, failing to
engage in meaningful
discussions with the OC and caused the OC to incur costs.
Accordingly, the OC seeks to be heard on the question of costs either under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) or under Rule 38 of the
Tribunal Rules.
SUBMISSIONS FROM SECOND AND THIRD
RESPONDENTS
submissions are in line with the above submission from the OC that the
Respondents are entitled to use the Car Parking space pursuant
to the grant of
Respondents seek the orders the cross-claim application because:
(a) the Respondents are lawfully entitled to the exclusive use of the Car
Parking Space pursuant to the Easement,
(b) The Applicant’s continued unauthorized occupation of the Car Parking
space undermines their proprietorial rights and interferes
with the Easement,
(c) The ongoing occupation compromises the Respondents’ ability as the
registered proprietors of lot 32 to use and enjoy the
Car Parking space as
intended by the terms of the Easement.
THE LAW OF EASEMENTS
submitted by the OC and the Respondents the Applicant has completely
misunderstood the law of Easements.
easement may be defined as a right annexed to land to utilise other land of
different ownership in a particular manner (not involving
the taking of any part
of the natural produce of that land or any part of its soil) or to prevent the
owner of the other land from
utilizing his land in a particular manner (see
Halsbury’s Law of England (4th Ed), Vol 14, p4.)
more simply, it is a right enjoyed by the owner of one parcel of land to carry
out some limited activity (short of taking
possession) on a parcel of land owned
by another person. An example is a right of way: it gives rights to cross one
parcel of land
to provide access to another parcel of land ( eg a battle axe
block of land at the rear) (see Butt Land Law 5th Ed )
the English law (from which Australia derives its law) in relation to Easements
drew its inspiration from Roman Law foundations,
many of the important features
were not defined until the mid-19th century.
system of tile to land in Australia (NSW) is Torrens title. Strata Title is a
form of Torrens tile which is ownership of land
by registration. The single
title would evidence ownership of the land, and any encumbrances registered on
Consequently,
each registered owner’s title would be indefeasible. The conclusiveness of
the Register confers on the registered
proprietor of an interest in Torrens
title land an “indefeasible title” to that interest (which can be
the benefit of
an easement). By an “indefeasible title” to an
interest is meant a title that cannot be set aside on the ground of a
existing in the title before the interest was registered. Indefeasibility is the
“foundation of the Torrens system”
Bahr v Nicolay (No 2) (
[1988] HCA 16
164 CLR 604
at 613; Butt [2015])
Real Property Act 1900
(NSW) provides for the creation of
easements by executing and by registering an approved form of transfer granting
an easement. By
where easement burdens land the Registrar General must
record particulars of the dealing creating the easement in the folios of the
Register for the burdened and benefitted land. Once registered on the tile to
the burdened land, the easement is indefeasible (see
Parramore v Duggan
[1995] HCA 21
183 CLR 633
; Chiu v Healey
[2003] NSWSC 857
may be created by registration of a plan under
Conveyancing Act
NSW). In fact prior to registration of the Strata Plan 10946 a
Deposited Plan No 1261080 together with a
section 88B
Instrument created a
number of easements which then became registered on the title to the common
property folio CP/SP 100946 such
as number 4, a right of carriageway of variable
width , number 5, an easement to drain water and number 7 an easement for
all burdening the common property in favour of other neighbours.
the owners in the Strata Scheme are bound to comply with the terms of each of
these easements registered on the title of the common
property, although they
were created before any lot owner bought into the strata scheme. Each lot owner,
as did the Applicant and
the Respondents purchased their lot subject to the
existing encumbrances on the common property title.
same principles apply to the purchase of lot 7 by the applicant. The Easement
was registered on the title and the Applicant bought
the apartment subject to
that encumbrance. It is not for the Applicant having so bought, then to turn
around and disavow the effects
of the Easement. Any challenge to the validity of
an easement is to be brought in the Supreme Court under
Conveyancing
Easement was registered on title prior to the Applicant purchasing lot 7 and
consequently as it was fully disclosed in the contract
she is deemed to be aware
of its existence. The apartment was promoted and advertised without a car
parking space. If the Applicant
says that she was not aware that her purchase
did not include the use of the Car Parking Space as it was encumbered by the
she should look to the quality of the advice she received at the time
of purchase.
Tribunal, even if it were minded to so and it is not, cannot make a declaration
regarding the rights of the parties in relation
to the use of the Car Parking
Space. In Walsh
v The Owners- Strata Plan No 10349
[2017] NSWCATAP 230
[60] the Appeal Panel held:
the Tribunal was correct to conclude that, unlike the general power to give
injunctive relief, the Tribunal does not have a general
power to give
declaratory relief. If a finding needs to be made or a Tribunal needs to
‘declare’ that it is satisfied
of a particular matter, it expresses
those views in the body of the decision, rather than in a separate order. For
example, in a
particular case the Tribunal may conclude that the owners
corporation has breached the duty in
to maintain and repair common
property. That conclusion is expressed in the reasons for decision rather than
as a separate order.
If the Tribunal decides to make an order for damages as a
consequence of that breach, that conclusion would be expressed as an order.
OC has made submissions that it has no case to answer. However, whilst the
Applicant’s claim is for the overturing of the
Easement and restoration of
her right to utilise the Car Parking Space and compensation for the alleged
loss, the Applicant also
has complaints against the OC for changing the
numbering of the Car Parking Space.
Prestipino when pressed on this specific issue submitted that the strata manager
was endeavouring to regulate parking in the strata
scheme and harmony among its
members. However, any markings on the private property of a lot owner whether
well intentioned or not
is beyond the role of the strata manager and the
observed by the prior strata manager this is a dispute between lot owners and
does not, nor should it, involve the OC. The numbering
on the floor of the Car
Parking Space does not create any entitlement for anyone to park there, it is
only a number on the floor
which identifies that the space pertains to lot 103.
The right to park can be created in a number of different ways, from ownership
of the lot, to being the lessee of the apartment and car parking space or just
being a lessee of the car parking space under a lease
or licence or by casual
oral agreement which is revocable.
fact that the number 103 should be restored to the floor of the Car Parking
Space does not in any way suggest that the Applicant
is entitled to use that
space, for the Applicant is proscribed not to use it by the terms of the
Tribunal will make the orders sought by the Applicant to have the OC reinstate
the number 103 on the floor of the Car Parking
Space. Otherwise, as the Easement
is registered on title there can be no claim for trespass or compensation. The
second and third
Respondents have the benefit of the easement and are entitled
to park a car on the Car Parking Space.
second and third Respondents also seek declaratory orders that that they are
entitled to use the Car Parking Space. For the reasons
expressed as stated in
Walsh v The Owners- Strata Plan No 10349
[2017] NSWCATAP 230
Tribunal does not have the power to make such orders.
second and third Respondents also seek that the Tribunal make an order
restraining the Applicant from utilizing the Car Parking
Tribunal’s powers to make order found in of the SSMA the section for
Orders to settle disputes or rectify complaints. However,
these must be either
involving the OC or a breach of the by-laws.
reviewing the Consolidated By-Laws I could find no relevant by-law relating to
this dispute between two lot owners. Nor for that
matter is the Easement created
pursuant to the SSMA, it is pursuant to the
Real Property Act 1900
232 (7) of the SSMA provides that:
Excluded complaints and disputes
This section does not apply to a
complaint or dispute relating to an agreement that is not an agreement entered
into under this Act,
or the exercise of, or failure to exercise, a function
conferred or imposed by or under any other Act, if another Act confers
on another court or tribunal with respect to the subject-matter of
the complaint or dispute and the Tribunal has no jurisdiction
under a law (other
than this Act) with respect to that subject-matter.
Tribunal has no power to make any orders in this dispute. If the respondents
wish to enforce their rights under the Easement,
then they must go to the
Supreme Court.
Accordingly,
the Application in proceedings 2025/0009632, other than an order against the OC
to restore the number onto the floor
of the Car Parking Space, is dismissed.
the crossclaim in proceedings 2025/00063345 is dismissed.
parties seek to make submissions on costs. I will make the usual direction
allowing for submissions and responses.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (280 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter