URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dumas v Covenant Players Incorporated [2003] NSWCC 18 (23 July 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Dumas v Covenant Players
Incorporated [2003] NSWCC 18
Jennifer Marie
Covenant Players Incorporated
CASE NUMBER: 11418 of 2002
CATCH WORDS: Statutes & Delegated
Legislation
LEGISLATION CITED:
CORAM: Armitage
DATES OF HEARING: 23/07/03
EX TEMPORE DATE:
LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT:Ms S Walsh
instructed by Kells the Lawyers.
FOR RESPONDENT: Mr C Callaway instructed by
PricewaterhouseCoopers Legal.
1. This is an application by Jennifer Marie Dumas against Covenant Players
Incorporated in which she claims injury to her back, left
and right legs on 26
July 2000 when in transit from the United States of America to Australia, as
part of what is said in the Application
for Determination to be the duties of
her employment with the respondent, she was sitting for extended periods for
work-related continual
travel by bus and aeroplane. In consequence she claims
the appropriate s 66 lump sums for 18 per cent permanent impairment of the
and 4.5 per cent permanent loss of use the left leg at or above the knee,
together with a lump sum under s 67 for pain and suffering
in a maximum of
$15,000 representing 30 per cent of a most extreme case. She abandoned, through
her counsel, any claim to weekly
payments of compensation or to a s 66 lump sum
in respect of permanent loss of use of the right leg. S 60 expenses are also
but no evidence was led that any such remain outstanding. It seems
appropriate, if the applicant succeeds, to reserve liberty to
apply in that
1. The issues were indicated kindly by Mr Callaway for the respondent at the
commencement of proceedings as being injury, worker,
incapacity, impairment or
loss, nexus between injury and incapacity, impairment or loss, s 68A and s 9A,
but of course the incapacity
issue does not arise in view of the abandonment of
any claim to weekly payments.
2. The principal though by no means the only issue in the case is whether or
not the applicant is a
within the meaning of the definition
contained in the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers’ Compensation Act
, which for reasons it is unnecessary to trace, applies to the
Workers’ Compensation Act 1987
3. The applicant impressed me as a witness of truth, and indeed Mr Callaway
for the respondent did not dispute this, as opposed to
the proper interpretation
to be placed on her evidence. I accept it on all relevant issues.
4. The applicant was born on 2 December 1969 and is therefore 33 years of age
and is married. After a short period of temporary work
in a supermarket she
worked as a nursing sister until she joined the respondent. I use the term
neutrally in view of the issue in this case.
5. In 1991 it seems that the applicant attended a performance by a group
known as the Covenant Players at a church of which she was
a member, the
Apostolic Church, and developed an interest in joining the company she saw
performing. She spoke there to two people
named Paul and Michelle Grant as well
as to a Tony Blomstein. In consequence she had a conversation with Paul and
Michelle Grant
at her home and then wrote, apparently at their suggestion, to
the respondent's head office and said that she was interested, as
she put it, in
applying for employment with them. I take the expression
"employment"
there neutrally, in view of the applicant's lack of legal
6. The respondent's head office was in the Sydney area, in Penrith. The
applicant applied in writing. She said she understood that
she was applying for
a position of a full-time nature with the respondent, touring around Australia
performing at churches, schools
and other groups. She said there was a
discussion concerning payment with Paul and Michelle Grant. She did not
identify the positions
they held with the respondent, but it is uncontroversial
that in fact she received payments to which I shall refer later.
7. The applicant could not recall which of Paul and Michelle Grant spoke to
her on the subject of payment, but she said that she was
told by one or other of
them that she would receive food and accommodation together with a stipend,
varying according to the amount
earned by the company each week. She said her
application was accepted and that she worked initially in Sydney, commencing in
1992. She was there for two weeks and received training in drama and
other matters. After her initial training in Sydney she was
placed in a troupe
touring the North Island of New Zealand.
8. In New Zealand the applicant performed office duties, including filing and
typing, as well as, after a time, public relations work,
approaching various
persons and organisations who may have wished to engage the respondent for
performances, in addition to the actual
acting work which she was primarily
engaged to perform. She said that there were well over 100 performances over a
four and half
month tour in New Zealand. She received a stipend whilst there.
She was not informed as to exactly how it was calculated, but she
was told by
the team leader, a Lee Twaddle, before the troupe left for New Zealand, that
because the company had quite a lot of bookings,
its members should receive a
full stipend. As I have indicated, she received a stipend in New Zealand but,
according to the evidence,
not every week.
9. After New Zealand the applicant was on continuous tours for the remainder
of 1996 in Western Australia and Victoria. Generally,
without going into
agonising detail about the performance of her work, it is fair to say that until
the subject tour of the USA she
received stipend whenever she performed touring
and acting work for the respondent, as well as food and accommodation.
10. There was, however, a brief period during which the applicant ceased to
receive a stipend and worked voluntarily for the respondent.
This was while she
was working concurrently at Nepean Hospital in Sydney as a nursing sister.
During that time, which immediately
preceded her trip to the USA, during her
return from which she alleges she received the subject injuries, she had
flexible hours
with the respondent while performing full-time concurrent
employment as a nursing sister and did not receive any stipend. I do not
for that period of time that she was performing work for the respondent pursuant
to a contract of employment, because for that
short period when she performed
office duties and the like, rather than acting work on the tour, she was not
paid by the respondent.
11. The applicant’s evidence was then that she was engaged to go to the
United States of America on tour with the respondent,
to use again a neutral
expression. She left for the USA in January 1998. She was based in Toledo,
Ohio, the head office of the
respondent, but in fact she seems to have been
associated initially with its training arm in Los Angeles and then with the
part of its organisation in New York. She was in the USA for 18 months.
She went to Canada after 18 months and remained there until
12. While in the USA the applicant saw a chiropractor because her back was a
little stiff. Also during her period in Canada she
saw a chiropractor, but she
said this occurred on this occasion because the family with whom she was staying
had a family chiropractor
with discount rates and she therefore went to that
chiropractor, apparently for more abundant caution, because she said she had no
particular back problem at that time. During her time in Canada and the USA she
received a stipend from the respondent, as well
having her food and
accommodation provided by it.
13. On 26 July 2000 the applicant returned to Australia. Her plane tickets
had been booked earlier and she had to wait until her
husband, whom she had
married in Canada, obtained a visa before making arrangements to return to
Australia, he not being apparently
an Australian citizen.
14. Exhibit D in the applicant's case was a letter from the respondent to the
applicant's solicitors dated 1 December 2000. Omitting
formal parts, it being
"Mike Floyd for Mike and Fiona Floyd, Australasian Directors,
Covenant Players",
This is to certify that the airline ticket to fly Jen (De Haan) Dumas to
Australia on July 21 was purchased under an agreement between
Covenant Players
Australasia in Australia and Covenant Players World Headquarters in the United
Prior to Ms Dumas' flight to Australasia, the Covenant Players office in
Windsor, in Australia, contributed funds to the Covenant
Players office in
Oxnard, California that were used to purchase Mrs Dumas' ticket for her return
flight to Australia.
Covenant Players Australasia understands that the purchase of the ticket
was part of our arrangement to have Mrs Dumas return to Australia
to serve with
our organisation.
15. The last paragraph of that letter was objected to by Mr Callaway for the
respondent when the letter was tendered and he asked
that it be struck out. I
declined this application because it seemed to me that this was a statement
which fell within
Evidence Act 1995
, in that it appeared to fall
within the apparent scope of Mr Floyd's employment as described by him at the
end of the letter to make
such a statement. Be that as it may, the preceding
two paragraphs in any event establish that the applicant's airline ticket to
according to her evidence, to work for the respondent
for another year in
Australia in return for their sending her to the USA (I again use the expression
neutrally).
16. In any event, it has not been submitted that if the applicant were a
within the meaning of the
, she did not receive injury
arising out of or in the course of her employment with the respondent, although
is raised as a defence, but only in relation to the medical
connection between the applicant's current back problem and the alleged
as I understood Mr Callaway's argument in addresses.
17. On the flight between America and Australia, which took about 14 hours,
the applicant gradually developed back stiffness, which
increased, and which was
considerable at the time she disembarked from the plane. She had luggage. She
did not experience back
pain, she said, at the time she disembarked from the
plane but only back stiffness, actual back pain only occurring the following
morning. She said during the flight she was particularly cramped because her
husband, who is 6 foot 7 inches tall, was beside her,
and although she had an
aisle seat she was sitting in economy class and had comparatively little room
in which to move because she
is fairly tall, as indeed she appeared to be in the
witness box, she being by no means of petite build. She said that she attempted
to move about during the flight to alleviate her back stiffness but to little
18. The applicant said that she went to a Dr Sheehan in Windsor for
treatment, primarily for referral to a chiropractor, and indeed
that doctor's
report was tendered by the respondent and I shall come to it later.
19. The applicant did not cease working for the respondent (again I use the
"working for"
neutrally) after she returned to Australia, and
indeed continued with it in much the same capacity in which she had worked in
United States of America until on or about 12 June 2001, at which time she
resigned, intending to return to her former occupation
as a nurse. This she did
20. Initially she claimed weekly payments of compensation for this period,
though after she frankly admitted to me in a question I
asked that during this
period she could have done work as a nurse in an intensive care unit, such as
she is now performing in Hobart,
during that period, her counsel obtained
instructions to abandon any claim for weekly payments of compensation, and it
seems to me
rightly so.
21. The applicant is, as I have said, engaged in her usual profession as a
nurse and indeed has performed it successfully, apart from
a few days off this
year, ever since she left the respondent after the short period of unemployment
referred to above. It is intensive
care work and it means that she does not
perform as much physical work as she would if she were on a ward where she would
for example, to lift patients in and out of bed. She receives help
with lifting and other heavy work, and her main job is to monitor
patients and
take observations at regular intervals in the usual way these things are done in
an intensive care unit.
22. The applicant still has back pain and episodic leg pain, much more rarely
in the right leg than the left. She did not, I think,
give convincing evidence
indicating that the use of either leg was deleteriously affected by her
injuries. As I have said, she abandoned
any claim to a
lump sum for the
right leg, but even in relation to the left leg, in which she has more frequent
episodic pain than in the right,
I was not convinced on her evidence that she is
able to advance any particular respect in which the use of her left leg is
by her pain. I do not therefore think that her claim to
compensation for the permanent loss of use of the left leg succeeds, despite
some support for it in the medical evidence.
23. The applicant had been treated by a chiropractor, a Ms Lyell, who
practices with her husband, with manipulation of her back together
application of a hot pack, as well as by prescription of analgesics by Dr
Sheehan, referred to above. It does not seem
that she has received specialist
treatment. She has seen a number of general practitioners in different places
where she has performed,
as well as in Hobart from time to time, for back
24. I hope I will be excused if I do not refer to every aspect of Mr
Callaway's able cross-examination for the respondent, but only
to those parts
which particularly concern my determination of the applicant's rights.
25. The first part of Mr Callaway's cross-examination related to the
applicant's condition. She readily conceded that her leg pain
was episodic,
although she said that her back pain was more consistently present but by no
means always there. It was my impression
from this cross-examination that her
back pain was of moderate degree and that her leg pain was, as I have indicated
above, distinctly
episodic in nature.
26. The applicant was then cross-examined as to the circumstances of her
engagement, if I may so put it, by the respondent. It was
put to her that her
stipend was very low compared to what she could earn as a nurse and indeed
generally, and she agreed that this
was so. It was put to her that she worked
for the love of it and because she had a religious commitment and she agreed
also. She was shown a document which subsequently became Exhibit 2,
which was her original application form for engagement, if I
may so put it, by
the respondent and specifically admitted that when she was asked why she wanted
to join Covenant Players, she wrote
in the document:
I believe it is the Lord's will and I find the idea of ' faith in action'
while on a mission very exciting - depending on God for
all my needs. I also
will love reaching people with the gospel message.
27. I am satisfied that the applicant's main motivation in undertaking work
with the respondent, if again I may so put it, was to
serve God rather than to
earn money. The question is that whether that means of itself that she has not
engaged in a contract of
service with it. I shall deal with that question
shortly, after considering the remainder of the evidence on the subject and the
authorities.
28. A statement taken over the telephone from the applicant by a woman
investigator was also tendered without objection and became
Exhibit 3. The
applicant conceded that in the statement, Exhibit 3, she said in par (4) on the
first page that:
As my work is voluntary I do not receive a set weekly wage. I receive a
small living allowance when it is available. When touring
I reside with other
families or church groups which do not incur any living expenses.
29. The applicant said that she meant in saying this that the payments were
very small. I took her to concede here that the main
motivation for performing
her work was not monetary gain. In various ways this same proposition was put
to the applicant repeatedly,
and she conceded whenever it was put to her that
her main motivation for performing the work was not monetary gain, and indeed I
do not think that she thought much about the subject at all when she performed
the work, nor indeed when she proposed to engage in
it by signing the
application form referred to above, and its terms are consistent with that
30. Various payments to the applicant were put to her from records in the
respondent's possession relating to her stipend and she
agreed with them.
Exhibit B, a list of the applicant's stipend payments by the respondent, was
tendered and it shows the weekly
stipend received by the applicant on different
occasions. Counsel did not average these payments for me and I have not myself
that exercise, but it is sufficient to say that in not one single
week did the applicant receive what to my mind could reasonably
be described as
a living wage. The highest payment I can see in the schedule of payments in
respect of any one week is $160 in
respect of the week from 17 to 24 September
1994. A payment of $240 is recorded on 12 November, but the preceding payment
15 October and I take that payment of $240 most likely to represent three
weeks’ rather than one week’s work. There
are payments of $180 in
November 1995 on three separate occasions and likewise in October 1995, though I
do not know precisely how
they were calculated.
31. Group certificates were produced for the applicant by the respondent and
submitted for taxation purposes, I gather both in the
United States of America
and in this country, and those certificates became Exhibit C. They disclose
"gross salary, wages, bonus et cetera"
in an Australian group
certificate in the 1991/1992 financial year as $346.25; likewise for the
1994/1995 financial year as $3250;
likewise for the 1995/1996 financial year as
$2578; likewise for the 1996/1997 financial year as $1835; likewise for the
financial year as $2196.23 (that being a US group certificate);
likewise for the 1998/1999 financial year as $2994.76 (again a US
certificate), and likewise for the 2000/2001 financial year as $2762 (this being
an Australian group certificate, as were those
mentioned above except where
otherwise indicated).
32. As I have already said there is no doubt that these payments do not
constitute what I would describe as a living wage, such as
one would expect to
be provided by an industrial award or agreement or such like. It does not,
however, end the question of whether
the applicant worked pursuant to a contract
of service for the respondent or not. I should add that it was no part of Mr
case to suggest that the applicant's contract with the respondent was
other than a contract of service, for example a contract for
services or a
contract of some other kind. He simply urged that there was no contract at all.
The basis on which Mr Callaway said
this is set out in a number of authorities
he cited to me.
33. The first is
Teen Ranch Pty Ltd v Brown
(1995) 11 NSWCCR 197.
That was a case where the alleged worker was injured while working as a
volunteer with an employer, a non-profit Christian organisation
which conducted
camps for teenagers, and he received accommodation, meals and the use of camp
facilities but no wages. His cross-examination
was referred to by Handley JA at
201. There his Honour referred to the fact that the alleged worker in
cross-examination conceded
that there was a moral but not a legal obligation to
attend once he had told the camp that he was coming for a particular week or
weekend, and that when he volunteered for a particular week or weekend there was
no intention in his mind to enter legal relations.
His Honour pointed out that
these answers were clearly admissible, though of mixed fact and law, and
although not conclusive, were
entitled to considerable weight,
(1991) 23 NSWLR 142
being referred to.
34. What was said to the contrary by Gleeson CJ in
Connelley v Wells
(1994) 10 NSWCCR 396
at 399 is not to be forgotten in this regard, but there is
no doubt that the questions put to the applicant by Mr Callaway in
cross-examination
regarding her intention to enter legal relations and the
spirit in which she performed the work were admissible and entitled to some
35. At one stage the applicant, when I asked her during Mr Callaway's
cross-examination what she would have done if her stipend in
the United States
of America ceased, no reason being given to suggest that the respondent could
not afford to pay it any more, said
that she would have reconsidered the matter
and very likely gone to Canada with her fiance and then returned to Australia,
than continuing her work with the respondent. Mr Callaway then asked her
what she would have done if the respondent
indicated that it could no
longer afford the stipend, and she still said that she did not think that she
would have kept working,
but then said that she regarded it as a theoretical
consideration because it would not have stopped the stipend.
36. These answers seem to me to contrast somewhat with the answers to which
Handley JA referred in
. Be that as it may, the result in
was that the appeal against the trial judge's decision that
the alleged worker was not working with the respondent pursuant to a contract
service at the time of injury was dismissed.
37. Mr Callaway relied also on some English decisions referred to by Handley
Rogers v Booth
(1937) 2 All ER
Davies v Presbyterian Church of Wales
(1986) 1 WLR 323
President of the Methodist Conference v Parfitt
(1984) 1 QB 368.
the evidence was that the alleged worker, who was
claiming under the United Kingdom Workman's Compensation
for an injury in
the course of his alleged employment with the Salvation Army, had signed a
questionnaire administered by the Army
at the time of commencement of the
alleged employment in which an affirmative answer was given to this question
appearing at 754
of the report:
Do you understand and agree that, as an intending officer, you are giving
yourself to the work of the Salvation Army, that you are
not 'employed', that
you have no right to any 'wages', that there is no contract of service and that
whatever your future rank or
service may be, your position, so long as you
remain in the Army, will be that of a voluntary co-operator in the Army's work
God, without claim to any other reward than the approval of God and the
doing of the work itself will bring to you?
39. This, in the opinion of Greene MR at 755, disposed of any doubt as to the
nature of the relationship between the parties in that
there was a series of promises set out at 326 in the
speech of Lord Templeman, which I shall not set out for reasons of space, but
which were of an exclusively religious kind. This was held to mean (see Lord
Templeman at 329) that the duties owed by the alleged
worker, a Presbyterian
minister, were religious in nature, as a servant of God, not of his church. In
consequence he was not able
to rely on the Employment Protection (Consolidation)
Act 1978 of the United Kingdom to seek relief from his dismissal from his
41. The same decision was made in
case and again it is
apparent from the reasons of Dillon LJ at 376 that the position of the alleged
worker, again in holy orders,
this time as a Methodist minister, was of a
spiritual kind, so that again he could not seek relief under the Employment
(Consolidation) Act 1978 against dismissal by his church.
42. As both parties conceded, the way to approach this case and determine
whether there was a contract or not is to balance the indicia
said to constitute
a contract of employment, according to Ms Walsh's argument for the applicant, in
the manner prescribed in
Stevens v Brodribb Sawmilling Co Pty Ltd (
[1986] HCA 1
, often regarded as the
locus classicus
in this regard. There
the indicia listed by Mason J (as he then was) at 24 were the mode of
remuneration, the provision and maintenance
of equipment, the obligation to
work, the hours of work and the provision for holidays, the deduction of income
tax and delegation
of work by the putative employee.
43. Wilson J and Dawson J at 37 referred to similar matters, including
payment of remuneration without deduction of income tax as
indicating a contract
for services and not of employment. In that case of course no contract of
service was found, but rather a
contract for services. Nevertheless the
statements in it are of great assistance in determining the present case.
44. The indicia I find in the evidence in this case favouring the existence
of a contract of service are firstly the fact that the
applicant was, according
to her evidence, subject to direction as to where she performed, and that in the
case of the allied clerical
public relations work she did while in the United
States of America, she received specific directions as to how she was to perform
45. Secondly, she was paid a stipend which varied according to the amount of
money earned by the company, and therefore indirectly
according to the amount of
work she and other persons did.
46. Thirdly she had, it seems to me, an obligation to work for the
respondent, no suggestion being made that she was free not to perform
her own way on any particular day while in the United States of America or
Canada, subject of course to breaks for ordinary
recreation, which I assume took
place although they were not mentioned.
47. Fourthly, she was provided by the respondent per medium of its
arrangements with others with the premises which she was to perform
48. Fifthly, she was provided with group certificates both before and during
her trip to the United States of America and Canada by
the respondent, the
originals of which were submitted to the taxation authorities. That is not
conclusive of course, because it
may have been done for more abundant caution by
the respondent, but it reflects I think a view on the part of the respondent
there was at least an available argument that the applicant was an employee
within the meaning of the relevant taxation legislation,
and even if this was
not the case, it is one of the usual indicia of a contract of service.
49. Finally, her hours at work were set, as it seems to me, in the sense that
performances were put on at particular times and she
was required to attend and
perform in them. I do not know whether the hours of her performance of public
relations and clerical
work were set in the same way because the evidence does
not reveal it.
50. The matters which Mr Callaway would have me place in the balance against
those indicia firstly relate to the applicant's answers
in cross-examination
whereby she admitted that, as indeed she represented in her original
application, she did the work primarily
because of her love of God and her
desire to spread His gospel and do His work rather than because of any stipend
she may have been
paid. Secondly, he suggested that the stipend was so low that
it was simply reimbursement for minor living expenses, rather than
51. Mr Callaway says that for that reason the applicant's employment is
exactly analogous to that referred to in the English cases
referred to above. I
think there are ways in which those cases can be distinguished, as I have
already suggested. They all relate
not to lay persons working for a church but
to clergy to whom ecclesiastical law has traditionally attached the label of
holding a spiritual rather than a temporal office, even in churches
outside the main Anglican and Catholic denominations in which
sacrament of ordination, and indeed in
a contract of service was
specifically excluded in the document signed by the appellant.
52. The applicant here was a lay person working for a stipend, admittedly a
name often given to clerical remuneration, but her evidence,
the veracity of
which was not attacked in any way by Mr Callaway in addresses and sensibly so,
was that had the stipend been discontinued,
she would have reconsidered her
position and more than likely left the respondent. This seems to me to suggest
that she herself
intended to enter into legal relations with the respondent.
When a question asking that very thing was directly put to her, she
said she did
not know what it meant. I am not surprised, but I think it should be inferred
from what she did say that she intended
to enter into a legal relationship with
the respondent, and that this relationship was that of master and servant or, to
more modern language, worker and employer, the circumstances of her
engagement and the regular payment of a stipend suggesting an
intention also on
the respondent’s part to enter such a relationship, to my mind. For these
reasons she was in my view a
within the meaning of the Act when
she suffered the subject injuries, and she is entitled to succeed in her
application if she demonstrates
an entitlement to s 66 compensation.
53. The evidence on that subject can be summarised briefly. In the
applicant's medical reports there is some evidence as to her treatment
Hobbs, chiropractor, in a short note from him, together with some notes from
Hawkesbury Chiropractic Centre which simply
corroborate the applicant's evidence
in that respect, and then a CT report from Dr Philippa Taplin, dated 22 October
2002, which
reveals moderate central canal stenosis at L4/5 and L5-S1, together
with other findings which are said to be due to a combination
of generalised
disc bulge and facet hypertrophy with ligamentous thickening.
54. On the strength of that CT scan, which apparently he examined, together
with the applicant's history, Dr Max Wearne, orthopaedic
surgeon, wrote a report
to the applicant's solicitors dated 19 March 2003, in which he said that the
applicant suffered from an aggravation
of pre-existing degenerative changes in
her lumbar spine caused by the conditions she experienced during her prolonged
26 July 2000, as set out above in her evidence. In an annexure to
that report, Dr Wearne expressed the view that there was permanent
loss of use
of the left leg at or above the knee of 5 per cent, of which half was
attributable to the incident of 26 July 2000 and
half to pre-existing
degenerative changes. He thought likewise that there was a 5 per cent
permanent impairment of the back, divided
in the same manner between the
incident referred to and pre-existing degenerative changes.
55. Dr Mario Benanzio in a report of 14 May 2003 with annexures, written on a
qualified basis, had a somewhat more generous view,
again considering that the
applicant suffered an aggravation of pre-existing degenerative changes on her
flight, but opining that
she had a 20 per cent permanent impairment of the back
and 5 per cent permanent loss of both legs at or above the knee. The 20 per
cent permanent back impairment was divided between the effects of the flight
referred to and pre-existing asymptomatic pathology
by attributing 18 per cent
to the aggravation on the flight and 2 per cent to the pre-existing pathology.
Division of the 5 per
cent permanent loss of use of each leg at or above the
knee between the aggravation and the pre-existing pathology also occurred,
do not propose to examine that, in view of my decision made for reasons set out
above that the applicant had not proved a permanent
loss of use of the left leg
at or above the knee, she having abandoned any claim for s 66 compensation for
permanent loss of use
of the right leg at or above the knee.
56. Exhibits E, F and G are the subpoenaed records of various doctors
indicating that the applicant was treated by them at times referred
evidence, and they do not otherwise assist.
57. Exhibit 1 is the respondent's medical evidence, and the first documents
in it are a report and annexure of Dr Michael Long, general
surgeon, dated 2
December 2002 prepared on a qualified basis. Dr Long did not think in his
longer report that the applicant had
any ongoing impairment of her back as a
result of the subject injury, considering that any ongoing problem was the
result purely
and simply of pre-existing degenerative change, but in his
annexure he estimated a total body impairment, which need not concern
present purposes, but which he divided between pre-existing disease and the
injury as to 50 per cent each, rather contradicting
what he said in his report
applicant's condition.
58. Dr Robert Sheehan, general practitioner of North Richmond, wrote a report
of 26 September 2000 which was also part of the exhibit.
He thought the
applicant may return to normal, but was otherwise prepared to say that the most
likely cause of the applicant's back
pain was the plane flight from the USA to
Australia on the way to her employment here with the respondent, which he said
been caused by luggage carrying or awkward positioning during the
flight. I am inclined to accept his opinion, coming as it does
treating general practitioner, although it was tendered in the respondent's
case. It was agreed in by Dr Benanzio and Dr
Wearne, who were qualified by the
applicant’s solicitors, and it seems a sensible explanation of the
applicant's problems in
view of the fact that she was essentially, though not
entirely, asymptomatic (as witness the visits to chiropractors in the United
States and Canada on two occasions) before the subject flight. It disposes also
of Mr Callaway’s s 9A point, because it means
that the flight was a
substantial contributing factor, indeed
contributing factor, to the
applicant’s injury, which was an aggravation of pre-existing degenerative
changes in her lumbar
59. I think Dr Long's opinion is inconsistent in the way to which I have
pointed, and I am more convinced by what would appear to
be the opinion in the
annexure to his report that the applicant's problems are to some extent caused
by the subject injury as well
as by pre-existing degenerative change. I do not
think his and Dr Wearne's apportionments are correct, however, from the point
view of s 68A of the Act because the applicant, as I have said, was essentially,
though not absolutely, asymptomatic before her
pain erupted following the
aggravation of degenerative changes in the lumbar spine on the subject flight,
which as I have said I
regard as being her injury within the meaning of the
60. I think that comparing it with the applicant’s evidence which I
accept, the appropriate assessment in respect of back impairment
is in fact that
of Dr Benanzio, and I think his deduction of 2 per cent from his 20 per cent
assessment of permanent back impairment
is appropriate under s 68A in the
circumstances in respect of pre-existing degenerative change disclosed on the CT
scan to which
I have referred and said by Dr Benanzio, as well as the other
doctors, to contribute to the impairment. In consequence, the applicant
entitled to a s 66 award in respect of 18 per cent permanent impairment of the
back in proportion to a most extreme case.
61. In consequence, she narrowly passes the s 67 threshold. Counsel did not
assist me as to quantum in this regard, but I think the
applicant's pain and
suffering is very moderate in view of the fact that she is well able to engage
in her current employment as
a nursing sister which, while it is not in the
heaviest class of nursing work and does not involve heavy lifting, nevertheless
my opinion places some strain on her back, and in view of the medical
evidence generally, and her own. In my opinion her pain and
suffering in
proportion to a most extreme case, taking into account her evidence as well as
all the medical evidence, lies at a
proportion of 3:20 or 15 per cent of a most
extreme case and there will be an award under s 67 accordingly.
62. I make the following findings:-
1. Injury to applicant arising out of and in the course of employment of the
respondent on 26 July 2000.
2. Applicant at the time of the above injury was a worker within the meaning
of the Act, employed by the respondent pursuant to a
contract of employment.
3. Resulting from such injury applicant has permanent impairment of her back
of a proportion of 1:5 or 20 per cent of a most extreme
case of which one-tenth
or 2 per cent is the result of pre-existing non work-related degenerative change
in the lumbar spine.
4. Resulting from net impairment after deduction as above, applicant has
experienced and does and will experience pain and suffering
of a proportion of
3:20 or 15 per cent of a most extreme case.
63. I make the following award in the applicant's favour:-
1. $10,800 for permanent impairment of the back under s 66.
under s 67 for pain and suffering.
3. Liberty to apply as to s 60
4. Respondent to pay applicant's costs. I recommend applicant's costs
include travel expenses from Hobart to Sydney and accommodation
expenses for
today and for 13 May 2003 when matter not reached.
Ms S Walsh instructed by
Kells the Lawyers appeared for the applicant.
Mr C Callaway instructed by
PricewaterhouseCoopers Legal appeared for the respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (45.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter