URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPYT/2013/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v Shashank VERMA [2013] NSWPYT 2 (23 December 2013)
IN THE PHYSIOTHERAPISTS TRIBUNAL OF NSW
Citation: HCCC v Shashank VERMA
[2013] NSWPYT 2
Complainant: Health
Care Complaints Commission
Respondent: Shashank Verma
Tribunal: Mr Mark Lynch (Deputy Chairperson)
Ms Ruth Perrott
(Physiotherapist Member)
Ms Brenda Elliot (Physiotherapist Member)
Ms Babette Smith (Lay
Date & place of hearing: 9-13 September 2013 at Sydney
Decision: 23 December 2013
Representation:
Complainant: Mr Anthony Britt instructed by Ms R Lewis
For the Respondent: Mr Gary Gregg instructed by Ms K Mark
Catchwords: Boundary violations; unsatisfactory professional conduct;
treatment as a physiotherapist; NSW Health Code of Conduct;
Physiotherapists’ Registration Board Policy on Professional Conduct.
Legislation cited:
Health Practitioners Regulation National Law
Family Provision Act 1982
Authorities cited:
HCCC v Horwood
[2009] NSWNMT 6
[2011] NSWMT 28
HCCC v Sunjic
[2008] NSWNMT 12
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) HCA 34
HCCC v Perroux
HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
(1989)16 NSWLR 197
is a case where acts of kindness by a health practitioner’s family
towards an elderly, patient living in a nursing home
can amount to a breach
of proper professional boundaries.
speaking, in its complaint, the Health Care Complaints Commission
alleges that Shashank Verma, the respondent
(“the practitioner”),
who was a registered physiotherapist,
at all material times, failed to maintain proper professional boundaries with a
(“Patient A”)
in the way he fulfilled
his professional duties as the patient's physiotherapist and in his
simultaneous development of a personal
and financial relationship with the
patient transferred significant sums of money to the respondent for safekeeping
in circumstances where, in the Tribunal’s
view, it was inappropriate for
the practitioner to agree to receive. On one view, that could have amounted to a
serious exploitation
of the respondent’s professional responsibilities to
his patient which would amount to very serious misconduct. However, in
case, the Tribunal considers that the respondent's breaches of proper
professional boundaries was a demonstration of his and
his family's acts
of kindness to the patient rather than a case where the health
practitioner was deliberately exploiting his professional
relationship with the
patient for the purpose of securing financial or other advantage for
himself or his family. His conduct was
such that the potential for exploitation
in the ultimate result, upon the patient’s death, the practitioner did
obtain a significant financial benefit, the
Tribunal does not find that occurred
as a result of any deliberate exploitation on his part. Rather it considers that
he showed a
significant lack of judgement in the way in which he allowed the
personal relationship and friendship which gradually developed between
patient and his family, including himself, to confuse his understanding and
recognition of proper professional boundaries.
result in this case is that the Tribunal considers the respondent to having
engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct. It
does not, in all the
circumstances, find his conduct amounts to professional misconduct.
are our reasons.
BACKGROUND TO COMPLAINTS
practitioner is a registered physiotherapist. He qualified in the profession in
1993. From about 1995 he ran a private physiotherapy
clinic out of his home
where he saw private patients. From 1999, in addition to his private practice,
he worked as an employee of
the Hunter New England Area Health Service
(“HNEAHS”),
working at the Toronto Polyclinic Rehabilitation
Unit, one of the facilities operated by the HNEAHS. While he was working at
HNEAHS the practitioner continued to operated his private practice after 5
PM on weekdays, and on weekends from his home. He disclosed
that fact to the
HNEAHS. The practitioner continued in employment with the HNEAHS until 19
October 2011. He continued to treat the
patient as her physiotherapist out of
the Toronto Polyclinic until Sept 2004. After that time, he provided some
physiotherapy exercise
programs for patients, including Patient A, of Fig Tree
Point Aged Care Facility
("Fig Tree")
under an arrangement between his
private physiotherapy services delivery company and Fig Tree. Whether the
provision of those services
amounted to him providing physiotherapy treatment to
the patient, as from Sept 2004, was the subject of dispute.
first met patient A
("the patient")
in about 2001 following surgical
revision of her total hip replacement. He provided assessment and treatment as
a physiotherapist
to the patient from the Toronto Polyclinic when she was still
residing at her home in Silverwater on the Central Coast and prior
to her moving
to Fig Tree in Toronto in May 2003.
was still living at her home at that time. The patient
developed from that time
and as we find on her own initiative, a friendship with Mrs Urmila Verma, the
practitioner’s spouse.
That friendship extended into a friendship with
both the adolescent children of the practitioner as well as his wife and to a
extent, the practitioner himself.
patient was a widow since the late 1980s. She had no children herself. Her
family was limited to a niece, the niece’s husband,
Mr George Mattatal,
who lived in Sydney, and a nephew who lived in Adelaide. Sometime following her
admission to Fig Tree, the patient
sold her house, paid a bond to reside at Fig
Tree and had a balance of funds deposited with the Greater Building Society. In
2003, Mr Mattatal was granted power of attorney over the patient's
affairs by the patient with the assistance of her solicitor, Mr.
THE COMPLAINT
complaints include numerous particulars alleging factual matters. They also sets
out under the heading
"Background to Complaint 1”
, eight factual
recitals - a number of which are admitted. The particulars of Complaint 1, a
complaint of unsatisfactory professional
conduct, are effectively repeated in
Complaint 2, a complaint of professional misconduct. They comprise 10 discrete
particulars but
in total, the allegations raised are in the order of 90
allegations, when the multitude of sub-particulars are all taken into account.
Many of the so-called particulars of complaint merely recite evidence rather
than set out allegations of unsatisfactory professional
conduct. Some are
repetitive and there is substantial overlap between a number of the particulars.
The effect of the prolix and
imprecise terms of the Complaint, left the Tribunal
unclear initially as to what were merely matters of evidence as distinct from
what were substantial particulars of complaint.
Tribunal invited the complainant to identify which matters were particulars of
complaint as opposed to merely factual assertions.
As a consequence, the
complainant produced a document which distinguished between the factual
allegations on the one hand and the
allegations of complaint on the other. It
became MFI 8. It is annexed to these reasons and marked annexure A .The Tribunal
to treat that document as the basis of complaint upon which it needs to
adjudicate. It was nevertheless necessary for the Tribunal
to determine many of
the 90 separate allegations of fact and/or complaint in considering whether
alleged conduct was proved and if
so, whether it met the statutory definitions
under the Health Practitioners Regulation National Law
(“the National
“unsatisfactory professional conduct”
“professional misconduct”
the course of his opening, Mr Britt who appeared as counsel for the HCCC,
revealed that there was quite a large amount of material
in the eight volumes of
documents that had been filed, which did not deal directly with the matters
before the Tribunal. Prior to
the opening, all of the Tribunal members had spent
some considerable time reading through the eight volumes of material which had
been filed by the HCCC and foreshadowed to be tendered. Volumes 4 and 6 of that
material appeared to have no relevance to any of
the matters particularised in
the complaint. The filing of the documentary material by the parties, leads in
the normal course and
subject to objection, to it being read prior to the
commencement of the hearing by Tribunal members. That practice enables a more
efficient mode of hearing to commence so that the Tribunal members are already
acquainted with the documentary evidence to be led
and the issues in the case.
It is a burdensome and unnecessary exercise if Tribunal members are forced to
expend time and resources
reading material which has no relevance to the matters
in issue. The additional costs burden on the parties themselves by having
look at such material is self-evidently undesirable. The Tribunal hopes in the
future that such a waste of valuable resources
will be avoided.
Britt identified further material apart from volumes 4 and 6 which had been
filed but which was not to be relied upon. The Tribunal
Chairperson considered a
number of objections raised by Mr Gregg , counsel for the practitioner. Further
material was not pressed
by the complainant in light of a number of those
objections. A number were disallowed. It is regrettable that those objections to
material, which had earlier been foreshadowed in correspondence, were not
conceded earlier. A number of the objections led to some
material not being
pressed only at the outset of the hearing. The course adopted by the HCCC, had a
consequence that all of the Tribunal
members had read material which was
ultimately not tendered in evidence. The Chairperson directed the other members
of the Tribunal
to disregard such evidence unless it was included in the
material ultimately admitted into evidence.
his response to the notice of complaint prior to its final amendment, the
respondent served a document which became Exhibit 6.
It identified the matters
in the complaint to which he admitted and those to which he did not admit or
denied. The Tribunal finds
that the matters admitted by the practitioner are
supported by other evidence and the admissions are all appropriate. As to the
listed under the sub-heading
“Background”
complaint 1, the practitioner admitted recitals A, B, E, F, and G but only up to
1 September 2004. As to recital C, the practitioner
admits he provided
physiotherapy treatment on identified dates through HNEAHS from 6 August 2000
until February 2002. He also admits
that he provided physiotherapy assessment or
treatment to the patient on 117 occasions through the Toronto Polyclinic when
the patient
was resident at Fig Tree. His response asserts that he
“last assessed and/or provided treatment to Patient A on 3 September
2004 when she attended Toronto Polyclinic”.
of the central issues between the parties is whether or not the services
provided for the benefit of the patient between September
2004 and November
2008, amounted to the provision by him of physiotherapy assessment or treatment
to patient A. The resolution of
that issue was of critical importance because a
number of the later allegations particularised, stand or fall on the resolution
that issue.
to the further allegations in the Further Amended Complaint, filed on 9
September 2013, the practitioner makes the following admissions
admissions in Exhibit 6. Particular 1(c) is admitted in part. The practitioner
concedes that Patient A visited him and
his family at his home for the patient's
birthday and for Christmas, after she was admitted to Fig Tree at the end of May
not before that time.
practitioner admits particulars 1(d) and 1(e). His response asserts that his
“wife would attend Fig Tree if Patient A telephoned her to assist with
shopping or transportation to a medical appointment”.
His response
states that between May 2003 and 2005 his children saw Patient A only once and
that from around 2005 they were studying
in Sydney and would visit the patient
practitioner admits particular 1(f) – viz that Patient A had a photo of
herself with the practitioner's wife and children
practitioner admits particular 1(h) - that his children called Patient A
which means
"grandmother".
practitioner admits particular 1(i) - that his wife used to take Patient A out
of Fig Tree for appointments and some social
activities.
practitioner admits particular 1(k) - that he knew that his wife and children
visited the patient at Fig Tree and he knew that
his wife took the patient out
of Fig Tree for appointments and some social activities.
practitioner admits particular 1(l) in part. He says he held Patient A’s
hand on some occasions. He says - it is customary
in Indian culture to hold
hands with elderly people; that he would sometimes put his hand on Patient
A’s hand to explain something
to her; but does not admit that he
held hands with the Patient A.
practitioner admits particular 1(m). He says that on one occasion in June 2008
it was a cold day when he arrived at Fig Tree
and the patient was in bed. He
shook her hand observing it was cold. He placed his hand between her two hands
and Patient A then
placed the respondent’s hand under the blanket where it
remained covered by the patient's 2 hands and did not touch her body.
practitioner admits particular 1(o) in part. He says that Patient A gave a watch
to each of his two children on their 21st birthdays
but otherwise does not admit
that the patient gave them presents.
practitioner admits particular 1(p) in part. He says Patient A gave him a bottle
of alcohol on one occasion for his birthday but
does not admit she otherwise
gave him presents .
practitioner admits particular 1(q). He says that Patient A was in hospital for
90 days on one occasion for treatment of a stomach
tumour and as she was very
ill, his wife provided assistance by doing her washing.
practitioner admits particular1(r) - that his wife gave the patient a ruby ring
to wear until her death.
his written submissions, Mr Britt for the HCCC clarified at [21] that
gravamen of the complaint (is) found in Complaint 1 is found at paragraphs 8, 9
PARTICULAR 8 OF COMPLAINT
practitioner's response to particular 8 of the complaint is as follows:
practitioner admits partly particular 8(a). He concedes he allowed a personal
relationship to develop with Patient A but did not
encourage same.
practitioner admits particular 8(b) in part. He says he allowed a personal
relationship to develop from 3 September 2004 between
his family and the patient
but did not encourage same.
practitioner admits particular 8(c) in parts. He says from 3 September 2004 he
allowed a personal relationship to develop with
Patient A but denies that she
was vulnerable.
Particulars
8(d) and 8(e) were not admitted and denied respectively.
THE EVIDENCE IN SUPPORT OF PARTICULAR 8
substance of the complaint particularised at 8(a) that the practitioner
"allowed and/or encouraged a personal relationship to develop with patient
relies upon a number of the factual assertions particularised as
sub-particulars 1(a), (c), (d), (f), (g), (k), (l), (m), (n), (p)
and particular
2 .The practitioner concedes that he allowed a personal relationship to develop.
That admission is sufficient to prove
the particular in light of all of the
evidence and regardless of whether or not he encouraged the development of the
personal relationship.
It is an issue we do not need to resolve as the
allegation is pleaded in the alternative. We note however that there was no
evidence that the practitioner
“encouraged”
development of a professional relationship.
to the factual matters relied on, we find as follows – sub-particular 1(a)
is proved, namely that the practitioner gave the
patient his home phone number
in approximately 2002. The practitioner conceded as much in a record of
interview with HCCC officers
on 8 September 2010. It appears behind 66 of volume
7. In answer to the question
"How did Mrs Moore get your telephone
- the practitioner said
"I gave it to her"
after she had
asked for it. He also said he would normally give a physiotherapy patient his
for it. The time referred to was in about
2002. We note also that the practitioner’s private practice
‘Yellow Pages’
advertisement appears in the HCCC evidence at
Tab 108. It publishes the practitioner’s home and mobile phone numbers to
who may care to read it.
we find the factual allegation set out in sub-particular 1(a) is proven, we do
not consider it is untoward or unusual for
a physiotherapist to provide patients
with his telephone numbers. It does not in our view evidence a
“personal relationship”
, nor does it amount to a boundary
Sub-particular
1(b) is not relied upon in support of the allegation raised in particular 8(a).
That is unsurprising. The fact that
the practitioner's wife and children visited
the patient at her home 2002 and 2003 does not in our view bear upon whether or
the practitioner failed to maintain proper professional boundaries. It
appears to us common, particularly in rural and regional communities,
health practitioners’ family members will likely form personal
relationships with patients of respective practitioners..
The maintenance of
proper professional boundaries applies to the practitioner, not to members of
his or her family.
SUB-PARTICULAR 1(c)
1(c) is admitted as from May 2003. The practitioner concedes that the patient
did visit him and his family at their home
on certain occasions from 2003
including on the patient's birthday and at Christmas.
Tribunal heard expert evidence from an expert physiotherapist witness called by
the HCCC, Ms Tracy Powell.
her report, she opined –
"The initial social relationship that Mr Verma describes forming
with Mrs Moore is not unusual. Most practitioners who treat a patient
extended period of time, as in this case, form a bond with the patient. A
physiotherapist often has to ask questions regarding
a patient's home situation,
occupation, recreational activities etc. Often, there is the expectation that
there will be an exchange
of this type of information with the physiotherapist
also offering some personal details. This assists with assessment and treatment,
and often just helping to form trust between the parties. Therefore it is my
opinion that this conduct is consistent with what would
be reasonably expected
of a practitioner with the same training and experience as Mr Verma"
Ms. Powell goes on to say:-
"It is not unusual for a patient to become familiar with aspects of
practitioner’s social and family life. It is also not unusual
practitioner and their family to have some interaction with the patient although
to involve the practitioner’s family
occurs less frequently. Therefore, it
is my opinion that this conduct is consistent with what would be reasonably
expected of a practitioner
with the same training and experience as Mr
cross-examination, Ms Powell agreed that it was not unusual for practitioners to
develop social relationships with patients from
time to time. She agreed that
she was not critical of the practitioner and his family taking the patient out
of the nursing home
on her birthday or at Christmas. She agreed it might be
thought to be a compassionate act. She was not critical of the practitioner's
wife picking up the patient and taking her to appointments. Likewise she was not
critical of the practitioner’s family visiting
the patient. Nor was it in
her view unreasonable for the practitioner to accompany them.
Tribunal accepts that the development of a personal relationship between the
patient and the practitioner in the circumstances
proved in sub-particular
1(c), do not amount to a failure on his part to maintain proper professional
boundaries as alleged.
SUB-PARTICULARS 1(d), 1(e), 1(f), 1(g), 1(h), 1(i), 1(j), 1(k)
possession by the patient of photos of either herself with the practitioner and
his family or a photo of the practitioner himself;
the use of affectionate terms
translating to
“grandmother”
by the practitioner's children
in their communications with the patient; the fact that the practitioner’s
wife accompanied
the patient to appointments and some social activities; the
fact that the practitioner's wife was identified by the patient as her
"accompanying person”
; the fact that occasional social visits were
made by the practitioner to the patient at Fig Tree; and social visits were also
by the practitioner’s wife and children to the patient and when the
practitioner knew each of these matters - similarly fall
short of amounting to
failures on the part of the practitioner to maintain proper professional
boundaries. Conduct of the practitioner’s
family in forging a personal
relationship or providing friendship or welfare assistance to a patient under
the practitioner’s
care, is not in the Tribunal's view a boundary
violation for a physiotherapist as opposed to say treating psychiatrist. That
appears from Ms Powell’s cross-examination to be substantially shared
by the HCCC's own expert. Of these factual allegations
not admitted by the
practitioner, the Tribunal finds it is unnecessary to resolve them as they do
not in our view, either separately
or cumulatively amount to a failure to
maintain proper professional boundaries.
SUB-PARTICULAR 1(l)
allegation at particular 1(l) –
"the practitioner often held hands with
the patient A"
- is somewhat vague because of use of the term
There is no dispute that the practitioner sometimes held hands
with the patient but denies it
occurred. The evidence
falls short of proving that he did so
In any event, the manner
in which the practitioner describes himself holding the patient's hands, which
evidence we accept, does
not , in the Tribunal’s view amount to a
boundary violation as alleged.
SUB-PARTICULAR 1(m)
allegation at particular 1(m) –
"The practitioner was observed on 3
June 2008 with his hand under Patient A's blanket, in circumstances where there
was no professional
assessment or treatment being provided to Patient A on that
- is conceded by the practitioner. The Tribunal accepts his account
that his hand was placed under the blankets by the patient. The
Tribunal draws
no inference that there was any impropriety in allowing his hand to be placed by
the patient under the blanket.
SUB-PARTICULAR 1(n)(i)-(iv)
allegations at sub- particular 1(n) relating to the practitioner identifying
himself as a contact person at 1(n)(i) and 1(n)(iv)
are not proved in the
Tribunal’s view when one considers the records relied upon by the
complainant. The first allegation 1(n)(i)
relating to the September 2004 appears
at Tab 41, page 2. It simply records in some unidentified person’s
handwriting the words
"friend – Shashank Verma"
and a mobile phone
number. It does not support the allegation that the practitioner
“identified himself”
as such. However at page 45 of the same
clinical notes, an entry appears under the hand of a clinical nurse consultant
"physiotherapist from Toronto Polyclinic Rehab... Informed me
that Mrs Moore is DVA patient and would need to go to Toronto Private
if family in Sydney are unable to be contacted. He can be contacted mobile phone
number on front sheet he and his wife
are friends "
. That entry satisfies
the Tribunal that the practitioner did then “identify himself” as
alleged. In circumstances where
the practitioner or his wife had established a
relationship with the patient, part of which involved them transporting the
to or from her medical appointments, the Tribunal does not find this
proven fact amounts to a failure to maintain proper professional
boundaries.
second entry referred to at 1(n)(ii) during the Toronto Private Hospital
admission in April 2007 is identified at tab 55 page
“multidisciplinary patient assessment”
practitioner's name appears as
“next of kin”
relationship as
The Tribunal infers that that
information forms part of the history provided by the patient herself. There is
no evidence to support
the contention that the practitioner identified himself
in that way. The allegation at particular 1(n) (ii) is not proven in the
Tribunal’s view.
third allegation concerns the patient's admission to John Hunter Hospital in May
2008. The HCCC relies on tab 42 page 3. It appears
to record the practitioner's
name and address as the person to contact but that is scratched out and replaced
with the particulars
of the patient’s niece’s husband, George
Mattatal. At page 38 of the same clinical notes there appears a nurse's entry
which reads
"patient’s physio has visited patient and requested
personal information. Same stated that he is next of kin and has a right
know. He was informed that the next of kin has already been in and is aware of
all medical care being given to patient "
. The Tribunal finds this
particular is proven as a fact in light of the latter entry but again does not
consider in the circumstances
of the relationship that had established between
the patient and the practitioner’s family by that time, that by so
identifying
himself, he failed to maintain proper professional boundaries.
Accordingly
the Tribunal is not satisfied that the complainant has proven the allegations at
sub-particular 8(a) of the Complaint
in so far as they rely on the factual
matters particularised other than particular 2 which we address below. Some of
the deposits
by the practitioner into his joint account of sums totalling
$103,000 which are admitted and we find proved, do show a failure by
practitioner to maintain proper professional boundaries. That failure amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct for the
reasons set out below. Accordingly,
we do find that particular 8(a) is proved and that it amounts to unsatisfactory
professional
conduct but only in respect of those deposits identified at
particular 2(a), 2(b) and 2(d).
SUB-PARTICULAR 8(b)
This allegation asserts that the practitioner
"allowed and/or encouraged a
personal relationship to develop between his family and patient A"
relies only on the factual allegations at sub-particulars 1(a), (b), (c), (d),
(f), (h), (i), (j), (k), (o), (q) and (r). Of
them, particulars 1(a), 1(c), 1(f)
and 1(k) have already been considered above in the contact of the allegation at
to sub-particular 1(a), the Tribunal considers that the provision by the
practitioner of his home and/or mobile phone numbers to
the patient was not a
significant departure from the standards expected of a physiotherapist. His
phone numbers were published in
the Yellow Pages and were readily available to
anyone in the community who sought out the practitioner’s services and
the phone book. Making available mobile phone numbers or home phone
numbers to patients or prospective patients, particularly where
practitioner’s private practice is conducted from his home, appears to us
to be an innocuous matter. Although we have found
that the practitioner made it
available to the patient, we do not think it could reasonably be frowned
to sub-particular 1(b), visits by the practitioner's wife and children in 2002
and 2003 are not prohibited as far as the evidence
shows, by any written or
unwritten code of conduct that applies to physiotherapists. The conduct of the
practitioner's wife is not
the subject of complaint nor could it be. Although
she was providing volunteer services as the practitioner’s practice
from time to time in his private practice, the activities, friendships
and associations with persons which she developed, were what
appeared to the
Tribunal to be reasonably characterised as welfare services or gestures of
friendship to the patient who had limited
own family from whom she appeared to be somewhat isolated. Mrs Verma’s
activities, which
the Tribunal considers were acts of kindness towards the
patient, do not reasonably attract disapproval of the practitioner.
Sub-particular
1(c) has been dealt with above. As to the proven fact that the patient visited
the practitioner and his family at their
again at Christmas, we find it does not amount to unsatisfactory professional
conduct. We infer
that the patient had no other invitations to celebrate those
occasions apart from the option of remaining at the nursing home.
to sub-particular 1(e) - the fact that the practitioner's wife and children
visited the patient at Fig Tree on certain occasions
for non- professional
purposes, falls into the same category. We do not find it amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct on
the practitioner's part. Health
practitioners such as a physiotherapists are not bound to regulate the social
activities of their
spouses or adult children insofar as determining who they
may or may not visit. The fact that the practitioner had a professional
relationship with the patient from time to time does not preclude the
development of a social or personal relationship between members
of his family
and the patient should they so choose.
Sub-particular
1(f) alleges that the patient had a photo of herself with the practitioner and
his family. The Tribunal fails to understand
how that matter could possibly be
thought to demonstrate unsatisfactory professional conduct on the part of the
practitioner.
Sub-particular
1(h) likewise fails to reflect any unsatisfactory professional conduct. The fact
that the practitioner's adolescent
and later, adult children apparently
affectionately referred to the patient by using terms that equate to
"grandmother"
is a matter which the Tribunal regards as innocuous.
Sub-particular
1(i) relies on the fact that the practitioner's wife used to take the patient
out of Fig Tree for appointments and
some social activities. That she did so, as
we find, cannot sensibly give rise to any unprofessional conduct by the
practitioner.
Sub-particular
1(j) alleges conduct on the part of the patient herself, namely that she
identified the practitioner's wife as her
“accompanying person
transport home from hospital”.
The practitioner's wife fulfilled
that role. Again, we consider it could not reasonably attract reprobation of the
practitioner.
Sub-particular
1(k) alleges that the practitioner was aware of the fact that his wife and
children visited the patient at Fig Tree
and that he knew his wife took the
patient out for appointments and some social activities. We find as a fact that
he was so aware
however that awareness does not in our view mean he became
guilty of a boundary violation or unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Sub-particular
1(o) alleges
“patient A gave the practitioner’s children presents
including watches on each of the 21st birthdays"
. The evidence does disclose
that the patient gave a watch to each of the two children on the occasions of
their 21st birthdays. There
is no other evidence to show that she gave them any
other presents. The two gifts appear not to have been motivated by any
exploitative
conduct on the part of the practitioner. We are not satisfied that
this matter on its own or in conjunction with any of the other
proven factual
matters relied upon amounts to a failure by the practitioner to maintain proper
professional boundaries or shows unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Sub-particular
1(q) relies on the fact, which we find proved, that the practitioner's wife did
the patient's personal laundry for
her when she was in hospital in April 2007.
That hospital admission extended for some months. The Tribunal fails to see how
voluntary act of apparent kindness by the practitioner's wife to perform
the patient’s laundry whilst she was hospitalised,
can attract disapproval
or criticism of the practitioner.
Sub-particular
1(r) alleges the fact that the practitioner's wife gave the patient a ruby ring
to wear until the patient's death.
It is clear from the evidence and in
particular that of the practitioner's wife, that the patient commented upon the
ring and Mrs
Verma offered to lend it to the patient at her request. The
evidence also reveals that it was known to the staff of the nursing home
the ring always belonged to the practitioner's wife and it was expected to be
eventually returned to Mrs Verma. The Tribunal
is not satisfied that the loan of
a ring by the practitioner’s wife to the patient amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct
on the part of the practitioner.
Accordingly,
we are not satisfied that the practitioner failed to maintain proper
professional boundaries as alleged in particular
8(b) by allowing or encouraging
a personal relationship to develop between his family and the patient.
PARTICULAR 8(c)
complaint alleges that the practitioner allowed a personal relationship to
develop with the patient at the time that he knew
or ought to have known of her
vulnerability. In support of this allegation, the complaint relies upon the
factual assertions that
are set out in support of both particulars 8(a) and
particular 8(b), that is all of the sub-particulars set out at in particulars
and 2. In addition, the factual allegations that are set out in particulars 3
and 4 are further relied upon.
3 asserts that from around 2007 until her death the patient's mental capacity
was in decline and lists eight matters referring
to the patient's confusion at
various times from 2007. Of the eight matters particularised, seven of them
refer to the period from
2 May 2008. We need to deal with each of those matters
identified in particulars 3 and 4. The other grounds have been dealt with
doing so, it is important to acknowledge that elderly patients living in aged
care facilities, particularly those with limited
will commonly develop a vulnerability to exploitation and abuse by those
responsible for their care.
The Tribunal in this case does not find that the
practitioner engaged in deliberate exploitation or abuse of the patient insofar
as he or his family allowed a personal relationship between them and the patient
to develop. We agree that the patient was vulnerable.
It is also clear from the
evidence that from time to time she developed, for example, urinary tract
infections sometimes associated
with acute delirium, amongst other conditions,
which required her hospitalisation. She also suffered some degree of Parkinson's
From time to time, she was sick and confusion was a recurring symptom
when she was ill. Nevertheless, it appears to the Tribunal
that the overall
health picture of the patient was that, except for periods when she was
suffering some acute illness, at least up
until the time when the patient
transferred her power of attorney from her niece's husband, Mr Mattatal, to the
practitioner, her
mental health was not such as to demonstrate that she was
incapable of making significant decisions independently and with adequate
knowledge of their consequences. The contemporary evidence at the time from the
Fig Tree Director of Nursing and Ms Golvers, a psychologist
with some expertise
in the cognitive functioning of the elderly, led the patient’s own
solicitor to that view. It was a view
which was reasonably open at the time in
August 2008. It is apparent that after that time, there was a deterioration of
the patient’s
cognitive capacity in the months prior to her death.
all the circumstances, the allegation that the patient's
"mental capacity was
in decline"
from around 2007 until her death is open on all of the evidence.
It is perhaps trite to acknowledge that a decline in mental capacity
ageing is notorious. The degree of decline is crucial. The real issue is whether
it had declined to such a degree as to deprive
her of the capacity to make
informed decisions about her affairs with adequate appreciation of the
consequences. The Tribunal finds
as a fact that from time to time confusion was
noted by Fig Tree staff from 2007. It also finds that during a hospital
to John Hunter Hospital from 2 to 27 May 2008 she was suffering from
confusion on an almost daily basis. Confusion was also noted
upon discharge from
John Hunter Hospital during the 10 day admission to Toronto Private Hospital
until she was discharged back to
Fig Tree. In that period particularly, it is
clear that the condition of confusion suffered by the patient was significant
duration of those two admissions. From some stage, the date of which is
unclear, the patient had the idea, it seems because of her
growing disaffection
with the manner in which her affairs were being managed by Mr Mattatal, that she
wished to grant the practitioner
her power of attorney. We later find that by
accepting the grant of power of attorney for the patient, the practitioner was
of unsatisfactory professional conduct as particularised at [10] of the
Complaint. The circumstances leading up to the granting
of that power warrant
close consideration.
patient had a long-standing professional relationship with a solicitor, Mr Kim
MacDougall. He was the witness to a general power
of attorney granted on 7
November 2003 to Mr Mattatal. The subsequent power of attorney granted to the
practitioner issued on 25
August 2008. Mr McDougall took appropriate steps to
satisfy himself that the patient had sufficient capacity to grant the power of
attorney in 2008. He obtained a report from a general practitioner, Dr Jennifer
Briggs, who had treated the patient on several occasions
in 2005, 2006 and in
2007. She observed a deterioration in the patient's cognitive function in
December 2007 compared with her capacity
in 2006. She noted
"the patient has
become quite confused when suffering from intercurrent illness ( e.g. urinary
tract infection) which is consistent
with delirium imposed on an underlying
dementing illness"
. She had recorded the results of a Mini Mental State
Examination during a recent admission to Toronto Private Hospital of 22/30
a subsequent one of 26/30. She felt that the patient was
"more suggestible
than in the past"
. She also wrote the following –
"she states that
she loves her physiotherapist, Shashank Verma and that she wishes him to be
designated as her next of kin. Whilst
she does appear to understand the nature
and immediate effect of the appointment of an attorney and guardian, I am in
she has been able to consider all the possible long-term consequences
of such an appointment. I am also uncertain that her reasons
for the appointment
are rational and well thought out. This would also apply to decisions made in
August 2007. A neuropsychological
assessment by a qualified psychologist would
provide more detailed information as to any cognitive functioning and deficit
would recommend this. The patient agrees to this course of
on Dr Brigg’s advice, the solicitor arranged for the patient to be
cognitively assessed by a psychologist from the Hunter
Dementia and Memory
Resources Centre, Diana Golvers. That assessment occurred on 31 July 2008. In
her report dated 14 August 2008,
Ms Golvers observed –
"This report has
been requested to determine whether Ms Moore has capacity for decision-making in
regards to legal issues....."
After conducting a series of psychometric tests, the psychologist
“In summary, Ms Moore's performance in regards to anterior grade
memory and learning ability indicates that there is mild cognitive
impairment.
However, there appeared to be no impairment with executive function, which
includes insight, organisation, problem-solving,
decision-making and judgement.
The remainder of intellectual functions assessed also appeared intact. She was
able to comprehend
the information put to her and was able to manipulate this
information rationally with insight and judgement. She was able to articulate
and communicate her choice and appears to have very good understanding of the
present legal situation. She also appears to have used
logical processes to
reach decision-making and appreciates the consequences of her actions."
Golvers expressed her concluding opinion as follows:
"Based on this interview and assessment results, although Ms
Moore has mild cognitive impairment, I believe that her executive function
remains intact and that she has the necessary level of insight and capacity in
order to be able to make informed decisions regarding
legal issues and her
choice to appoint a power of attorney and the beneficiaries of her
the HCCC’s evidence, was a file note of the solicitor, Mr McDougall, who
communicated with Ms Janine Cole, a nurse.
Ms Cole was the Director of Nursing
at Fig Tree. In Mr McDougall's file note he records as follows:
"23 July 2008 spoke with Janine Cole of Fig Tree Nursing Home.
She had been told by Mrs Moore that Mrs Moore had appointed Shashank
her guardian and Janine wanted to verify that appointment. I explained that I
had prepared an enduring guardian appointment
but that I had not had it executed
pending receipt of medical opinion from her treating doctor Jennifer Briggs.
Mrs Moore has instructed
Fig Tree that Shashank is to be regarded as her "next
of kin ". Janine was aware of the letters dated 21 July 2008 received by us
Mrs Moore. Janine discussed the letters with Mrs Moore and is quite satisfied
that despite suffering episodes of confusion Mrs
Moore is mentally capable.
Figtree have been keeping records of their own in regard to Mrs Moore's
association with Shashank and
their own observations of Mrs Moore's mental
competence"
The letters in question were in evidence. The first dated 21 July 2008 addressed
to Mr K MacDougall solicitor states –
"Dear Mr McDougall I instruct you
to please send this letter to George Mattatal and arrange a meeting with George
yourself and Shashank
in my room. I want to resolve the problem created by
George immediately. Please send copies of these letters to Shashank’s
solicitor and George’s solicitor”.
The second letter is
addressed to Ms Janine Cole reads:
“I would like to inform you that my
friend Shashank is my next of kin. He and his family have and will help looking
Please organise my medical certificate from my GP with regards to my
mental capacity to make my... and other matters as soon as possible"
third letter addressed to Mr Mattatal reads:
"George come and talk to me
immediately. I want to discuss the problems you have created for my friend
Shashank. Your allegations
against him are not true. Also I want you to return
all of my belongings you took from my room without my permission as soon as
I can still look after myself."
reasons behind the patient's dissatisfaction with Mr Mattatal appear to have
arisen from the fact that he withdrew a sum of $20,000
and a further sum of
$9000 from the patient's bank account without obtaining her permission and
without informing her of the withdrawals.
When asked in evidence why he did not
so inform her, he said in his view she was not capable of understanding what was
going on at
the time. He also redirected all her mail to himself and took her
bank documents from her room without her knowledge. He said that
the patient was
never hostile towards him. Other evidence seems to suggest to the contrary.
view the personal relationship that the practitioner
allowed to develop
commenced and continued from about 2002. In the period up until at least 2007
there appears little in the evidence
to suggest that the patient was
particularly vulnerable, other than in the sense of her probably being lonely,
isolated and with
only limited family contact. The particular vulnerability that
is said to have arisen as particularised in particulars 3 and 4,
commences in
2007 and focuses particularly on illnesses occurring from May 2008.
to the development of the relationship that occurred in the period 2002 to 2006,
as we have indicated above in consideration of
particulars 8(a) and 8(b), we do
not consider the personal relationship which the practitioner allowed to develop
with the patient,
apart from the receipt by the practitioner over time of the
$103,000, amounts to unsatisfactorily professional conduct for the reasons
out above. Because of the overlapping way in which the complaint is drawn, and
further particularised, the receipt of the said
monies arguably falls within all
of particulars 8(a), 8(c) and 8(e) because each rest in part on the financial
transactions set out
at particular 2. We intend to deal with them only once and
do so below.
PARTICULAR 8(d)
allegation asserts that the practitioner behaved in a manner which adversely
affected the relationship between the patient and
her family. It relies on the
factual assertions set out at particulars 1(n), 2, 5 and 6. As to sub-
particular 1(n), we have dealt
with it above. In any event we do not find that
the evidence supports a finding that the behaviour adversely affected the
relationship
between the patient and her family. The complainant's submissions
referred to the statement of Karen Clugston, an enrolled nurse
at Fig Tree who
made a telephone call to Mr Mattatal in June 2008 after overhearing part of a
conversation between the practitioner's
wife and the patient. Although the
practitioner was said to be present during this conversation, overheard from
outside the patient's
room, it does not establish in any sense that the
practitioner behaved in a manner which adversely affected the relationship
the patient and her own family.
other two factual particulars 5 and 6 are relied upon in support of this
allegation. They assert firstly that in August 2007,
the patient changed her
will and appointed the practitioner as executor and sole beneficiary of her
estate. The evidence before
the Tribunal from the practitioner was that he did
not learn about the contents of the patient’s will until some days prior
to her death. We accept that evidence. In any event we do not understand how
conduct by the patient in changing her will or appointing
the practitioner as
her attorney and enduring Guardian, could amount to behaviour by the
practitioner which adversely affected the
relationship between the patient and
family. Conduct of the patient in changing a will and appointing a new attorney,
cannot be understood
as behaviour on the part of the practitioner. In contrast
as we find below, the acceptance by the practitioner of these appointments
boundary violation by him.
complaint also rests upon the transfer of various sums of money by the patient
to the practitioner unrelated to his provision
of physiotherapy services to her.
Although the Tribunal finds below that the conduct set out in particular 2,
insofar as it has been
established, does amount to unsatisfactory professional
conduct on the practitioner's part, the Tribunal does not consider that the
receipt by him of such monies was conduct which
"adversely affected the
relationship"
between the patient and her family. The evidence did not
establish any such adverse effect. Accordingly the Tribunal is not satisfied
that complaint at 8(d) is established.
PARTICULAR 8(e)
allegation alleges in terms that the practitioner
"failed to maintain proper
professional boundaries with patient A in that (he) took no steps to maintain
proper professional boundaries"
. It then relies upon the factual allegations
particularised at 1, 2, 5 and 6. We have already dealt with one, five and six
and need say no more in respect of them. The Tribunal does think that the
receipt of those monies proved to have been received by
the practitioner as
alleged in particular 2, does amount to a failure on the practitioner’s
part to maintain proper professional
boundaries. The terms of this allegation
however, amount to such a non sequitur, that the Tribunal thinks it more
appropriate to
deal with this allegation in the context of particulars 9 and 10,
which duplicate the substance of this allegation in more meaningful
PARTICULAR 9
complaint alleges that between
“August 2004 and 27 November 2008, the
practitioner failed to maintain proper professional boundaries in that he
assisted patient
A with her personal and financial affairs whilst continuing to
engage in a professional relationship with patient A .............
particular then lists 12 sub-particulars which are said to violate either the
New South Wales Health Code of Conduct, or two
New South Wales Health Circulars
or, in one instance, the
New South Wales Physiotherapists Registration Board
Policy on Professional Conduct
he was working as an employee of the Hunter New England Area Health Service and
providing physiotherapy services to the patient
in that role, we find that the
practitioner was bound to comply with the NSW Health Code of Conduct. It applied
to all HNEAHS employees
such as the practitioner whilst the patient was under
his care in the guise of a HNEAHS employee. On the evidence, we find that
delivery of physiotherapy services to the patient by the practitioner in that
role continued until September 2004. Up until
then, he was providing
physiotherapy services to the patient through the Toronto Polyclinic when the
patient was a resident at Fig
Tree. Recital C to the Further Amended Complaint
"the practitioner provided regular physiotherapy assessment
and treatment the patient a through the HNEAHS between August 2001 and
2004. This included assessment and/or treatment on at least 145 occasions."
In response to that recital, the practitioner in Exhibit 6 relevantly responded
at C(iii) -
"The respondent assessed and/or provided treatment to Patient A
on further 117 occasions through the Toronto Polyclinic when she
was a resident
at Fig Tree Point Aged Care Facility. The respondent last assessed and/or
provided a treatment to Patient A on 3 September
2004 when she attended the
Toronto Polyclinic."
partly upon that admission by the practitioner, the Tribunal is satisfied that
at the time the patient gave the cheque for
$50,000 to the practitioner's wife,
as we find the patient did, it was deposited to the joint St George Bank account
of the practitioner
and his wife on 24 August 2004. That was at a time when he
was treating the patient as her physiotherapist and as an employee of
HNEAHS. We also find that the practitioner either deposited the cheque to the
joint account or knew of its source.
Tribunal would have found that the
New South Wales Health Code of Conduct
applied to the practitioner at the time of that deposit. Although it was not
brought to our attention during the hearing, we now
observe that the
in evidence at tab 72 was apparently first published in October
2005, more than a year after the deposit on 24 August 2004. We do
not have any
evidence as to the version of the
Code of Conduct
which did apply at that
time. The Tribunal is not inclined to speculate that the terms applicable from
October 2005 substantially
reflect the version in operation as at August
the course of the hearing, the issue was identified as to the extent of
application of the
New South Wales Health Code of Conduct
possible application to the practitioner’s treatment of the patient in the
course of his private practice as opposed
to in the course of his employment by
the HNEAHS at Toronto Polyclinic. The evidence seems clear and the
complainant’s counsel
conceded that after September 2004 the practitioner
was not treating the patient as an employee of the Area Health Service. If he
was treating the patient at all and we find that he was, it was in his capacity
as a private physiotherapist. The complainant relied
upon several factors in
support of its argument that the
New South Wales Health Code of Conduct
did apply in the period after September 2004 notwithstanding that any treatment
provided to the patient was as a private physiotherapist
and not as an employee
of the Area Health Service. Firstly Mr Britt submitted that the professional
relationship extended because
the genesis arose when the practitioner was an
employee. Secondly, Mr Britt submitted that at various stages after cessation of
physiotherapy
treatment as an employee, the patient resumed being a patient of
the Area Health Service on each occasion when she was admitted to
hospitals. We think that was merely fortuitous and not a sufficient reason to
NSW Health Code
to be applicable. He referred to the decision
HCCC v Horwood
[2009] NSWNMT 6.
The decision at [155] quotes
submissions from the HCCC in that case which referred to an expert report from
Prof Spence, a nursing
expert regarding her understanding of the application of
NSW Health Code of Conduct
and the appropriate boundaries of the
therapeutic relationship post- discharge of the patient. She considered that was
“grey area”.
It appears to this Tribunal, that whilst those
submissions were quoted in the judgement, the Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal
not to have made a finding in relation to the application of the
South Wales Health Code
after a patient's discharge from a
practitioner’s care. We find the decision of no assistance in resolving
this question.
another decision of the Nurses and Midwifery Tribunal,
HCCC v Scully
[2011] NSWMT 28
, the Tribunal was considering a sexual relationship between a
mental health nurse and a psychiatric patient which had started and
after the therapeutic relationship had ended. At [85], the Tribunal noted
"The Tribunal accepts that New South Wales Health Code appears to
apply to current patients and does not define patient nor does it
professional relationship"
. Rather than rely upon the New South Wales
Health Code, the ethical position in that case was determined by reference to
ANMC Code of Professional Conduct for Nurses
which dealt with sexual
relationships between nurses and patients more specifically. That Tribunal also
quoted at [86] from
HCCC v Sunjic
[2008] NSWNMT 12
and after noting that
the relationship between a healthcare provider and the a patient does not
dissolve when the patient is no
longer regularly consulting a healthcare
provider, the question of whether a non-professional relationship may be
appropriate
"will depend upon the individual circumstances of each
. The circumstances here are somewhat different to those presenting
in that case. The treatment from the practitioner to the patient
after September
2004 had nothing to do with the HNEAHS. It had no role in its provision. The
reasons suggested by Mr Britt as to
why the NSW Health Code was said to continue
to apply after September 2004 are not persuasive. It was coincidental to the
physiotherapy services received by the patient from the practitioner
that his other job continued with the HNEAHS. We find the NSW
Health Code had no
application to the private treatment provided after September 2004.
this Tribunal's view, the cessation of provision of physiotherapy services to
the patient from the Toronto Polyclinic occurred
in September 2004. Thereafter,
according to recital G of the complaint, the practitioner provided physiotherapy
assessment and/or
treatment to the patient at Fig Tree on 30 December 2004, 26
March 2005, 15 June 2005, 16 March 2006, 27 April 2006, 27 July 2006,
2006, 22 January 2007, 23 April 2007, 23 July 2007, 19 October 2007, 20 January
2008 and 27 November 2008. The nature
“treatment”
appears to have been limited to designing exercise programs for the patient. The
implementation of those programs was left to a physiotherapy
assistant who
worked under the supervision of the practitioner. This assistant was not
qualified or authorised to determine treatment
on her own account.
the evidence of Ms Powell, the expert physiotherapist, physiotherapy assistants
do not usually design exercise programs for residents
in aged care facilities
although it was quite variable. She was firmly of the view that the design of
exercise programs was not part
of the role of the physiotherapy assistant. She
also confirmed that a physiotherapist could perform physiotherapy services
the laying on of hands on a patient. Her views were accepted as falling
in line with the views of the expert physiotherapist members
of the Tribunal. We
find that the design of an exercise program forms part of the conventional role
of a physiotherapist, whether
or not the delivery of those exercises comes from
the assistant or the physiotherapist.
practitioner argued that the fact that the contractual relationship for payment
of the physiotherapist services was with the aged
are facility and not the
patient herself, distinguished the circumstances of the practitioner here. The
Tribunal does not agree with
that submission. The payment source does not
detract from the fact, as the Tribunal finds, that the physiotherapist designing
exercise programs for this patient was providing care as a physiotherapist.
The Tribunal is firmly of the view that the exercise
design program which he was
carrying out at the request of Fig Tree for the patient's benefit amounts to the
practitioner continuing
to engage in a professional relationship with patient
as a physiotherapist in the period between September 2004 and November 2008.
those circumstances, the pre-requisite for the allegations at particular 9 viz,
that the practitioner was continuing to engage
in a professional relationship
with patient, is established on all of the evidence.
PARTICULARS 9(a)-9(f)
of the view the Tribunal takes as to the
NSW Health Code of Conduct
September 2004, none of these particulars 9(a)-9(f) inclusive is established.
Self-evidently, if the Code did not apply in
respect of the practitioner’s
treatment of the patient as a private physiotherapist who was providing services
to Fig Tree
for the benefit of the patient, then the
could not be
violated. In those circumstances it is unnecessary for the Tribunal to decide
the other ingredients particularised at
9(a) to 9(f).
PARTICULAR 9(g)
particular alleges – that the practitioner failed to maintain proper
professional boundaries by becoming involved in the
preparation of Patient A's
will, in violation of
NSW Health Circular 94/79
. It has not been
established. There was no evidence led to support the assertion that the
practitioner was
“involved in the preparation of Patient A’s
In the course of final submissions (at transcript 287) Mr Britt
quite properly withdrew that allegation on behalf of the complainant,
acknowledging that there was no evidence to sustain it.
PARTICULAR 9(h)
is an allegation of a failure by the practitioner to maintain proper
professional boundaries by failing to decline appointment
as the executor of the
patient’s will, once becoming aware of that appointment in violation of
New South Wales Health Circular 94/79
Circular issued on 5 September 1994 became Exhibit 10. In its first paragraph,
under the subheading introduction, it states:
"This document provides
guidelines for staff in public health facilities where patients wish to make a
will. The policy has been developed
in consultation with the office of the
Protective Commissioner"
. It refers repeatedly to it applying to staff in
public health facilities and to patients in public health facilities. At the
the will was prepared, the patient was not in a public health facility. On
the evidence, which we accept, from the practitioner,
he did not become aware
that the patient had a will featuring him as executor and beneficiary, until
shortly before her death.
In any event there was no evidence to support any
alleged violation of the terms of the circular. There is no basis to suggest the
practitioner
“attempted to exert influence in regard to the terms of
the patients will"
and as mentioned above, the other prohibition against a
staff member being involved in the preparation of the patient’s will,
withdrawn. This particular is not established. We note however that by accepting
the appointments as Enduring Guardian and Power
of Attorney, the practitioner
was guilty pf boundary violations and we do find in dealing with Particulars
10(d) and 10(e) below.
PARTICULAR 9(i)
allegation is that the practitioner failed to maintain proper professional
boundaries in dealing with patient A's cash, bank
accounts or property in
violation of
New South Wales Health Circular 2000/19
. It relies upon
factual particulars 2 and 5.
circular was issued on 22 February 2000 . It provides:-
"A NSW health system employee as a general rule should not
become formally or informally involved in any transaction for or with a
patient/client of the health system which involves dealing with cash, bank
accounts, credit cards or property on behalf of a patient/client."
It also provides –
"In no circumstances should an employee –
2. obtain or accept a power of attorney for a patient/client.
3. ..........
4. accept cash from a patient/client in order to undertake any
transaction on the client's behalf without the presence of an appropriate
witness to the transaction/ request. The witness should normally formally verify
transactions by signing."
Circular is said to apply to Area Health Services and we infer, their staff. It
does not suggest that it applies to residents
of private aged care facilities or
health practitioners working in a private practice.
is evident from the first paragraph of the Circular it imposes
"as a general
a guideline that New South Wales health system employees should not
involve themselves in any transaction which involves dealing
with bank accounts
on behalf of a patient/client. No guidance is offered as to what exceptions
might fall outside the
"general rule"
. The only possible transaction
which might have offended the terms of this Circular, assuming its application
to the practitioner
whilst he was treating the patient as an employee of the
HNEAHS, was the deposit to the joint bank account of the practitioner and
wife of the sum of $50,000 on 24 August 2004.
Tribunal accepts that the practitioner's wife's written evidence that she
received the cheque for $50,000 from the patient
along with the patient's
request that she wanted the money put away in the practitioners wife's account
"so that the vultures won't get it".
We also have found that the
likelihood is that the practitioner banked the cheque according to his wife's
evidence into their
joint bank account on 24 August 2004 or at least knew of
its source. The practitioner's wife also states that the patient had said
in broaching this subject, words to the effect of –
“Mila please
come and see me as soon as you can. I have something serious to discuss with
you. I know your husband does not
want to talk about my personal matters."
We also accept Mrs Verma's evidence that she apprehended that her husband
would not be happy to deposit the money into their joint
account. Mrs Verma
suggested she would take the patient to a bank so that she could start another
account or alternatively she would
take the patient to a solicitor and the money
could be put in the trust account. We accept that the patient said to Mrs Verma
to the effect of –
“I don't want anyone else to know
otherwise the vultures will know and they'll take it ".
Verma's evidence was led by the HCCC. She was not called by the complainant to
amplify her evidence nor to challenge it. She
was not required for
cross-examination. The Tribunal in those circumstances accepts the evidence
from Mrs Verma as to the genesis
of the first transfer of money to the
practitioner’s joint account with his wife.
find there was no attempt by the practitioner or his wife to try and disguise
the transfer of the $50,000. It later became readily
apparent to Mr Mattatal
from a perusal of the patient's bank account statements that that withdrawal had
been made and deposited
to the joint account of the practitioner and his
all of the circumstances, we are not satisfied that our factual finding that the
practitioner probably arranged to deposit the
cheque to the joint account on 24
August 2004, was a
“violation of
New South Wales Health Circular
. The terms of the Circular are not sufficiently unambiguous
so as to enable a finding that the transaction which occurred on 24 August
was prohibited by its terms. None of the later transactions occurring after
September 2004 are caught by the terms of the Circular.
Accordingly we are not
satisfied that particular 9(i) is established.
PARTICULAR 9(j)
allegation alleges that
Health Circular 2000/19
was violated by the
practitioner obtaining or accepting a power of attorney for patient A. The
practitioner was aware of and accepted
the power of attorney in August 2008
following the investigations conducted by the patient's solicitor to confirm her
to execute the document. On our reading of the Circular in question,
it is to be understood as referring to New South Wales Health
System employees
in their roles as such, from accepting a power of attorney for a patient. Where
the patient is no longer receiving
health services from the employee in his
public employment role, as here, it seems to the Tribunal that it does not cover
the situation
where the continual treatment of the patient by the practitioner
was not in his guise as a New South Wales Health Service employee.
It had ended
in September 2004. The transaction which occurred in July 2008 is not caught by
the clear prohibition in the Circular
which was not applicable in the
circumstances at the time. Accordingly we find particular 9(j) has not been
PARTICULAR 9(k)
we are not satisfied that the practitioner’s failure to make enquiries
with the GuardianshipTribunal in relation
to the patient's capacity to conduct
her own financial affairs, was a violation of the
NSW Health Circular
. It is apparent from the terms of the Circular that there is no
obligation for a New South Wales Health employee to contact the
Guardianship
Tribunal. The provisions in the Circular state –
"enquiries should be
made with the Guardianship Tribunals if a person's financial affairs appear to
need formal management ."
Here, the enquiries undertaken by the patient's
own solicitor established to his satisfaction that the patient’s affairs
not need formal management. In those circumstances, the Tribunal does not
find that the terms of the Circular were violated. In
any event, the relevant
application of this Circular had ceased as from September 2004 so far as it
applied to the practitioner and
this patient. We find this particular is not
established.
PARTICULAR 9(l)
particular when recited in its full terms is that the practitioner
maintain proper professional boundaries in that he assisted patient A with her
personal and financial affairs whilst
continuing to engage in a professional
relationship with patient A – by developing a personal relationship with
, where such relationship could result in some exploitation or
perceived obligation by patient A in violation of the New South Wales
Physiotherapist Registration Board policy on Professional Conduct Policy No. 4,
It then refers to sub-particulars 8(a) and (b). The sub-particulars
8(a) and (b) refer indirectly back to the factual particulars
1(a) to 1(r)
inclusive and particular 2. Apart from particular 2, they have all been dealt
with above.
only new ingredient in this particular, insofar as it is coherent, is the
reference to the
Physiotherapist Registration Board Code of Conduct
relevantly provides at 2.3 -
"Physiotherapists shall promote positive
outcomes for client care and conduct themselves in a manner consistent with
professional
and ethical standards of behaviour. In so doing, they must not :
develop personal relationships with clients,
where such a relationship could
result in some form of exploitation
of, or some perceived obligation by, the
(Emphasis added). By reference to sub- particulars 8 (a) and (b)
and by further reference to particular 2, there can be seen some
reliance upon
the financial transactions, the gravamen of particular 9(l) is the
development of a personal relationship that could
potentially result in some
breach of the Board’s code. It applied at all relevant times to all
registered physiotherapists,
whether working in the public health system or
convoluted, this particular insofar as it relates to the financial transactions
set out at particular 2 of the Complaint,
does sufficiently capture the
receipt by the practitioner of the patient's monies into his joint bank
account , albeit for the
purpose of safekeeping.
was inappropriate in the Tribunal's view for the practitioner to acquiesce in
the patient’s requests that he take care of
her money. The provision of
the Code quoted above, prohibits the development of personal relationships which
could, not necessarily
would, result in some form of exploitation of the client.
In the Tribunal's view, the receipt of those funds, only some of which
were received by the practitioner, had the potential to exploit the patient.
We note that on our findings, it was never
the practitioner's intention to
exploit the patient. We do find that the potential for such exploitation existed
in all the circumstances.
Rather than deposit the funds into a separate account
in the name of the patient or in a separate account in the name of the
practitioner’s
wife in trust for the patient, or to simply refuse the
patient's request made to avoid access to the funds by others, amongst other
possible alternatives, the practitioner acquiesced in allowing the funds to be
deposited into his joint account. That potential for
exploitation included the
possibilities, among others, that, with the passage of time, the patient would
not seek recovery of the
funds; or might forget about them; or might feel
embarrassed or touched by gratitude to the practitioner’s family and
and reach out to seek recovery of them. A variety of other scenarios
as well as these could have left the patient financially disadvantaged.
Tribunal also notes that the patient became disentitled to the interest which
she might otherwise have earned on the monies transferred,
had they remained in
her account. This lost benefit to the patient should have been considered by the
practitioner amongst other
things but was not. He also derived the financial
advantage by having the funds in his joint account. It had the effect of
the level of credit that would otherwise have been available to him
from his bank. His evidence was to the effect that, had the patient
ever sought
recovery of any of the funds, he would and could have made arrangements to
return them to her. The Tribunal accepts his
evidence. Although at times the
amount available in his joint account fell below the amount that was held on
behalf of the patient,
he was confident that he would have been able to
reimburse the monies to the patient had that ever been sought by the patient.
evidence was to the effect that the practitioner had substantial assets,
several credit cards and the capacity to refund the patient’s
that ever been sought.
evidence demonstrated that the practitioner invited Mr Mattatal to attend a
meeting to discuss the matter following his complaint.
His invitation was not
accepted. In the application for probate filed on or about 9 July 2009, the
practitioner, as executor of
the patient’s estate, acknowledged that he
held the sum of $103,000 for safekeeping being property owned solely by the
events unfolded, on the patient's death, the practitioner learnt that he had
become the sole beneficiary under the patient’s
will and ultimately took
the benefit of those funds already transferred to his joint account for
safekeeping as well as the balance
of her estate once probate was granted. No
Family Provision Act
application to contest her will was made by anyone.
No complaint is brought against the practitioner that he became the beneficiary
of the patient's estate. It appears that he was not aware that he had been
named the beneficiary in the patient’s will until
a time near her death.
prohibition in the said Code against merging professional obligations with
personal relationships, exists in order to protect
patients of physiotherapists
against the possibility that the merging of professional and personal areas of
life might result in
some exploitation of the patient's interests. It is not
necessary to show exploitation was intended or did eventuate. The potential
it is sufficient. All physiotherapists in 2004-2008 should have appreciated
classic development of the notion of transference can emerge where patients of
health practitioners become infatuated with or
overwhelmed by admiration or
respect for their treating health practitioner . The patient’s capacity
for objectivity
may be diminished as a result of the gratitude or affection,
inter alia, which some patients may feel towards their health practitioners
It is apparent to the Tribunal that such emotions may well have been felt by the
patient towards the practitioner and his family.
this case, we find the boundary was clearly crossed by the practitioner in
agreeing to accept the significant sums of money which
the patient wished him to
to the 10 separate amounts set out in particular 2, the Tribunal is satisfied
that only the amounts set out in the sub-particulars
2(a), (b) and (d) are
proved to have been received by the practitioner from the patient. The amounts
we find were received total
$103,000, a large sum of money. The other 6 amounts
totalling $17,100 have not been proven as having been received by the
practitioner
to the Tribunal's satisfaction applying the civil standard of proof
and having regard to
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34.
$2,000 allegedly paid on 14 December 2007 and pleaded at sub-particular 2(c) was
withdrawn after it was conceded that
it duplicated the claim at sub-particular
The practitioner denied receiving the amounts other than the $103,000. Against
that, there were in evidence some of the patient’s
cheque butts which
contained suggestions at a prima facie level that the practitioner was the
recipient or at least the beneficiary
of those monies. There was no evidence led
apart from the cheque butts to demonstrate those amounts were paid to the
practitioner’s
account or for his benefit. It was suggested that an amount
of $2,500 which was shown to have been deposited to the practitioners
14 December 2007 may have comprised 2 cheques, one of $500 and a further cheque
of $2,000 said to have been written on
or about 12 December 2007 and 14 December
2007 respectively. Whilst that arose as a possibility, the Tribunal was not
to the necessary standard that it was the fact. The claim for the
amount of $600 referred to at sub-particular 2(j) was not accompanied
admitted evidence. The Tribunal accepts the practitioner's denials to the effect
that he received no more than the total sum
of $103,000. He acknowledged that
amount in his Probate application lodged with the Supreme Court on 9 January
2009. Accordingly,
only the allegations of fact set out at sub-particulars 2(a),
(b) and (d) are proved.
the circumstances, the Tribunal finds that to the extent found above, the
practitioner failed to maintain proper professional boundaries
by allowing the
development of a personal and financial relationship in a way which is contrary
New South Wales Physiotherapist Registration Board Code
applicable at the relevant times when the financial transactions were
conducted. That failure could have been associated with
a purpose to exploit
the patient but the Tribunal does not consider that was the purpose of the
practitioner. The practitioner should
have appreciated the potential for
exploitation. He should have also been acutely aware of the Board’s
Code of Conduct
, if he was not. That illustrates a significant deficiency
in the practitioner’s recognition and acceptance of the professional
standards which all physiotherapists are bound to uphold.
PARTICULAR 10
particular alleges in terms –
"Between April 2007 and 3 May 2009, the
practitioner failed to maintain proper professional boundaries in that he
exploited Patient
A’s declining mental capacity and vulnerability for
personal benefit or the benefit of his family "
including by – (a)
"requesting of hospital and nursing home staff that he be made next of kin or
complainant’s counsel's written submissions referred to tab 28 at [20] in
support of this allegation. That paragraph in
the statement of Mr Mattatal was
ultimately not pressed and so was not admitted into evidence. The submissions
also refer to a
form at tab 49, pages 10 and
17. Page 10
is entitled
"Assessment of Clinical Death"
. It identifies
"next of kin"
Diane Mattatal and under the subheading
"next of kin name"
“Shashank Verma".
At page 7 in the same tab, in a form
letter from Fig Tree addressed to
“Dear resident”
“persons for contact”
are listed as Shashank Verma and Urmila
Verma. The form is dated 5 January 2009. There is no evidence as to who
completed the form.
The sub-particular 10(a) is not proved in our view to the
required standard of proof.
(b) asserts a second failure to maintain boundaries/exploitation in the
following terms – (b)
" requesting of hospital and nursing home staff
that he be provided with a power of attorney over Patient A".
Evidence in
support of that allegation is said to be the note of Ms Johansson at tab 32. The
“He informed me that Shirley now wants him to be her
guardian. I informed both Shashank and Mrs Moore that according to our
documentation nephew George Mattatal has power of attorney and guardianship.
Shashank said no he was the person to be notified.
Shirley was insistent that
she wants Shashank to be next of kin, I replied unfortunately surely we are
unable to go through with
this procedure here at your request as I have to take
into account that Shirley is unable to make a decision like this so she has
poor mini mental 22/30......"
. The particular is not established. It
refers to the practitioner requesting he be provided with a power of attorney
whereas the
note refers to him telling the nurse that Shirley now wants him to
be her guardian. The reference to power of attorney, according
to the note,
emanates from Ms Johansson rather than the practitioner. In any event, the
substance of the note is clear in that the
patient was insistent that she wanted
the practitioner to be regarded or nominated as her next of kin. The Tribunal is
not satisfied
that this particular has been proved.
(c) alleges a boundary violation/exploitation in that the practitioner was
"deriving financial benefit as a result of depositing money given to him by
Patient A into his portfolio offset account".
This factual allegation is
admitted by the practitioner. He concedes in Exhibit 6 that he derived
financial benefit as referred to
above. The issue is whether the financial
benefit which the practitioner admits and which the Tribunal finds, amounts to a
to maintain proper professional boundaries and was exploitation of the
patient’s declining mental capacity and the ability
"for personal
benefit or the benefit of his family".
it is somewhat ambiguous, the allegation suggests that the alleged exploitation
was for the purpose of securing personal
benefit or benefit to his family. The
Tribunal does not accept that that was the purpose. In 2004 when the first
financial transaction
took place, from which the practitioner derived potential
benefit, the Tribunal has found that the deposit was made to the
practitioner’s
joint account on the initiative of the patient for the
purpose of safekeeping. The Tribunal finds there was no intention on the
of the practitioner to derive a financial benefit from that or any of the
subsequent financial transactions notwithstanding
that such a benefit did flow.
The subsequent transactions occurred at times when the patient was not suffering
any acute illness
and was concerned to insulate her funds from access by Mr
Mattatal. Those 3 times were 24 August 2004, 25 November 2005 and 12 April
Tribunal would have found, as indicated above, that the depositing of each of
the three sums in 2004, 2005 and 2007 by the practitioner
does amount to a
failure to maintain proper professional boundaries. The Tribunal does not find
that, in receiving those funds, the
practitioner was exploiting the
patient’s declining mental capacity and vulnerability for the purpose of
his own personal
benefit or the benefit of his family. Rather we find that he
received the money for the purpose of safekeeping and securing it against
possible access by Mr Mattatal.
allegations in particular 10 are limited in time to the period between April
2007 and 3 May 2009. The single transfer of monies
that occurred in that period
was the sum of $45,000 on 12 April 2007. The earlier transfers of money in 2004
and 2005 have been excluded
by the HCCC from the allegations in particular
Tribunal does therefore find that part of this particular is established, namely
that by receiving the deposit of $45,000 on 12
April 2007 from which he
incidentally derived a financial benefit, the practitioner failed to maintain
proper professional boundaries.
That finding is in the Tribunal’s view
clear evidence of unsatisfactory professional conduct on his part. The other
ingredients
of the introductory words in particular 10 are not established in
Particulars
10(d) and 10(e) allege boundary violations/exploitations by the practitioner in
accepting appointments as Patient A's
Enduring Guardian and Power of Attorney on
25 August 2008. Again the Tribunal finds that acceptance by the practitioner of
two appointments did amount to a failure by the practitioner to maintain
proper professional boundaries. It does not find that he
"exploited the
patient’s declining mental capacity and vulnerability for personal benefit
or the benefit of his family"
. The Tribunal does find that these 2 boundary
violations, amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct. The practitioner
not have agreed to accept these significant roles whilst he continued
providing services to the patient as her physiotherapist, even
services were limited to the design of exercise programs for her.
10(f), alleges that the practitioner has failed to maintain proper professional
boundaries by not seeking advice from the
appropriate authority or reporting
that he had become the executor and beneficiary of the patient’s will
once he became aware
of it. Whilst a failure to seek advice or disclose the fact
to someone might have been a prudent course in view of the dispute that
arisen between Mr Mattatal and the practitioner, the Tribunal does not see that
as a failure to maintain proper professional
boundaries. The expert, Ms Powell,
expressed a contrary view but appeared to be relying in part on the
Wales Health Code of Conduct
which we have found did not apply at the time
the practitioner learned about the will. She also appears to rely upon the
Physiotherapist Registration Board's Policy on Unprofessional Conduct
its prohibition of any form of exploitation as her foundation for suggesting
that the practitioner needed to notify appropriate
persons in authority and seek
legal advice when he discovered he had been appointed as executor and the
beneficiary under the will.
The evidence demonstrates that the practitioner did
in fact seek legal advice from his own solicitors at some stage. The
solicitor was well aware of the terms of the will and Mr
Mattatal and presumably the remaining members of the patient's family became
aware of them upon the patient's death. We are not satisfied that particular
10(f) is proven.
Particulars
10 (g) and 10(h) allege boundary violations by the practitioner for not seeking
advice from or reporting to the appropriate
authority upon his appointments as
Enduring Guardian and as power of attorney in 25 August 2008. The Tribunal is
not satisfied that
a failure to seek advice upon these appointments amounts to a
boundary violation. The boundary violations were agreeing to accept
appointments rather than failing to seek advice after having done so.
Particulars 10(g) and 10(h) are not proven.
As a result, the Tribunal finds each of the following particulars has been
proved and amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct-
- 8(a) but only
insofar as it relies upon the factual matters found at particulars 2(a), 2(b)
- 8(c) but only
insofar as it relies upon the factual matters found at particulars 2(a), 2(b)
- 8(e) but only
insofar as it relies upon the factual matters found at particulars 2(a), 2(b)
- 9(l) but only
insofar as it relies upon the factual matters found at particulars 2(a), 2(b)
- 10(c) but
only insofar as it amounts to a failure to maintain proper professional
boundaries and only in respect of the factual
matter found at particular
- 10(d) but
only insofar as it amounts to a failure to maintain proper professional
boundaries.
- 10(e) but
only insofar as it amounts to a failure to maintain proper professional
boundaries.
find the other sub-particulars at 8, 9 and 10 of Complaint 1 have not been
proved to the required standard.
COMPLAINT 2
of unsatisfactory professional conduct may also amount to professional
misconduct in certain circumstances.
the definition in section 139E(a) of the National Law, a person is guilty of
professional misconduct if he has engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct
of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
practitioners registration.
Alternatively,
pursuant to s. 139E(b), professional misconduct may be established from more
than one instance of unsatisfactory professional
conduct that, when the
instances considered together, amount to conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension
or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration.
The complainant submitted at [59] –
"The Tribunal should properly
characterise the conduct complained of as constituting boundary violations of
the most serious kind
and exploitation of a vulnerable, elderly, ill patient. It
breaches all relevant codes of conduct in relation to the maintenance
and confidence in the physiotherapist/patient relationship. The respondent has
consistently displayed a concerning lack
of insight into the seriousness of his
The Tribunal agrees that the boundary violations by the
practitioner were of a serious, but not the most serious, kind. The Tribunal
not found that the practitioner deliberately exploited a vulnerable, elderly,
ill patient. The Tribunal characterises the respondent’s
unsatisfactory
professional conduct as demonstrating a significant lack of judgement and a
significant failure on his part to appreciate
the necessary professional
boundaries that need to be maintained in a proper physiotherapeutic
relationship.
practitioner expressed the view through his counsel and by virtue of his
non-admissions and denials, that from September 2004,
he did not regard himself
as in a professional relationship as a physiotherapist with the patient. Rather
he thought that because
he was only designing exercise programs at the request
of Fig Tree and not the patient, that his professional relationship with the
patient had ceased, even though that the exercise programs he was designing were
for the benefit of the patient. The Tribunal rejected
that distinction
following the expert evidence of Ms Powell and having regard to the views of the
physiotherapist members of the
Tribunal. Nevertheless, the practitioner's
willingness to receive monies from the patient, to agree to act as her
Enduring Guardian
and to accept the power of attorney, were as the Tribunal
infers, partly as a consequence of the practitioners misguided view
true nature of the professional services he was providing for the benefit of the
patient. Those services were limited in
nature and appear to have been provided
without any direct personal contact between the patient and the practitioner.
Their personal
in the course of their friendship rather than the delivery of professional
other significant consideration to which the Tribunal has had regard is the fact
that, having developed a personal relationship
with the patient from about 2004,
it became more difficult for the practitioner to resist the patient's entreaties
to his wife to
safeguard the monies about which the patient was concerned. As
we have indicated, we do not find that the practitioner set out to
exploit the
patient. We do accept that had he been asked to return the funds held in his
account on behalf of the patient, he would
have done so without hesitation. He
took no steps to exercise the power of attorney once granted. Although the
boundary violations
occurred on 4 occasions between 2004 and 2008, we regard
them as showing a significant lack of judgment in the practice of physiotherapy
which is capable of being redressed by further education.
HCCC v Perroux
[2011] NSWDC 99
, the Medical Tribunal held:
"The issue is whether, when the respondent's contraventions are considered as
a whole, they are of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or
deregistration....Characterisation is not to be determined by backward
reasoning, first determining the appropriate
outcome and then characterising the
conduct based on the outcome. The definition of professional misconduct is
focused on the nature
of the conduct, which must have the capacity to justify
such an order, whether or not such an order should be made in a particular
- HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267.
Whereas the characterisation of conduct
depends upon the "seriousness" of the conduct, additional considerations are
relevant to
determining outcome, principally the need to protect the health and
safety of the public s 2A(3) of the Act"
We think that the practitioner became enveloped in what became a history over
primarily by his wife
and to a lesser extent by his children towards the patient without the object
of advantaging themselves
and for altruistic motives . Such a motive
appears to the Tribunal to be consistent with the evidence about the
practitioner's
and his family's other benevolent activities both here and in
Fiji, where he has largely resided since 2011 when he ceased practising
physiotherapist. They included organising events to raise funds for John Hunter
Hospital, providing disaster relief in the form
of money and food to flood
victims in Fiji and other charitable work for the benefit of underprivileged
Pillai v Messiter
(1989)16 NSWLR 197 at 200 the Court held -
statutory test is not met by mere professional incompetence or by deficiencies
in the practice of the profession. Something
more is required. It includes a
deliberate departure from accepted standards or such serious negligence as,
although not deliberate,
to portray indifference and an abuse of the privileges
which accompany registration as a medical practitioner."
this case, the departure from accepted standards was not deliberate in the
Tribunal’s view. It did not portray indifference
nor did it amount to an
abuse of the privileges which accompany registration as a physiotherapist.
Tribunal is satisfied that in the particular circumstances of this case, the
boundary violations fell short, either on their
own or when viewed
cumulatively, of conduct sufficiently serious to justify suspension or
deregistration. Accordingly we find
that Complaint 2 has not been proved.
PROTECTIVE ORDERS
the outset of the hearing, the complainant sought an order that the
practitioner’s registration the cancelled. Such an order
is not possible
under the National Law in circumstances where a finding of professional
misconduct has not been reached.
Gregg for the practitioner submitted the following matters should be taken into
account in the practitioner's favour in the Tribunal's
consideration of
protective orders. Firstly there was no suggestion of any history of prior
unsatisfactory professional conduct
on the part of the practitioner. Secondly,
the unchallenged evidence before the Tribunal was that the practitioner was a
of good character. The evidence of Mr Dan, solicitor was to the effect
that he had always found the family to be of the highest
calibre and found the
practitioner to be honest and open in all his dealings with him. Character
references from Mr Chand and Mr
Lali referred to substantial charitable works
by the practitioner and his wife including providing goods and money for the
underprivileged.
Their charity work had also operated for the benefit of the
John Hunter Hospital in 2008 when the Verma family were raising money
benefit of the Hospital . The Tribunal finds the practitioner is a person of
good character.
Gregg conceded in the course of oral submissions that there was poor judgement
on the practitioner's part in that an inadvertent
financial benefit had been
derived from the deposits but there was no conscious element of exploitation by
the practitioner in the
sense of taking advantage of someone unable to protect
themselves. Mr Gregg conceded that it was an error of judgement not to insist
that the monies from the patient should have been deposited into a separate bank
account. He argued that that was a demonstration
of insight on the
practitioner's part .
Gregg made a further concession, based on the assumption, which remained
contested, that if the therapeutic relationship had
continued with the patient
after September 2004, then the practitioner agreed it too was an error of
Britt had earlier submitted that the practitioner's credit was less than worthy
and identified a number of inconsistencies in
some of his accounts about
details concerning, inter alia, the nature of his bank account, his
recollections about a variety of
matters and the instructions apparently
relayed to the practitioner's solicitor and conveyed to others. The Tribunal
acknowledges
that there were some inconsistencies in some of the accounts by the
practitioner. It also accepts that he appeared somewhat defensive
when giving
some of his evidence. Nevertheless on the issues of significance, the Tribunal
found him to be a reliable and creditworthy
all of the circumstances, having regard to all of the parties' submissions and
all of the evidence, the Tribunal makes the following
The practitioner is reprimanded
practitioner’s practice is subject to the practice conditions set out in
Annexure B hereto.
Tribunal has adopted, with some modifications, the proposed conditions suggested
by the HCCC in the event its submissions for
deregistration or suspension found
no favour. Of particular significance amongst them is the requirement that the
practitioner undertake
a suitable course in ethics and that he be assisted in
coming to better appreciate the proper nature of professional boundaries by
having a professional mentor with whom he will need to meet monthly for at least
complainant has been successful in establishing that the practitioner engaged in
unsatisfactory professional conduct as set out
above. A number of the factual
particulars which were disputed have been found either not to have been proved
or not justified. Of
the 25 sub-particulars constituting particulars 8, 9 and
“gravamen of the complaint”
, only a minority of them
have been found proven. In those circumstances, the Tribunal considers that the
fair and reasonable outcome
is that it should make no costs order such that each
party should bear its and his own costs.
M. LYNCH ..................................
R. PERROTT ..................................
B. ELLIOTT ..................................
B. SMITH ..................................
DATED: 23 December 2013
HCCC v SHASHANK VERMA
Physiotherapy Tribunal
PRACTICE CONDITIONS
practitioner is not to assess, examine, consult or treat any persons over the
age of 70 years, whether in his rooms, the patient’s
aged care facility, retirement or nursing home until after he has completed the
Ethics Course referred to at [4]
below to the satisfaction of the Physiotherapy
Council of NSW
(“the Council”)
and until after his mentorship
as set out in [3] below been operating for 12 months.
practitioner is to notify the Council prior to the changing the nature or place
of practice.
28 days of receipt of the decision the practitioner is to notify the Council of
the name and professional address of a registered
physiotherapist who has agreed
to act as his professional mentor. The practitioner is to provide his mentor
with a copy of this Decision.
The practitioner is to be responsible for all
costs associated with the mentoring arrangement. The practitioner is to ensure
practitioner and his mentor meet at least monthly for a minimum of 1 hour.
(b) At each
meeting, the practitioner and his mentor are to address the concerns raised by
the Tribunal in the Decision and/or discuss
boundary issues and the maintenance
of the proper professional boundaries. At each meeting, the mentor is to
complete a record of
matters discussed at the meeting in a format prescribed or
approved by the Council.
practitioner is to meet with the mentor for an initial period of 18 months from
the date of the first consultation and thereafter
for a period as the Council
determines is necessary.
practitioner is to authorise the mentor to report in writing to the Council
every three months about the fact of contact with
the practitioner, and to
inform the Council if there is any concern about the practitioner’s
professional conduct.
practitioner is to authorise the mentor to report to the Council any failure by
the practitioner to attend a meeting with
the mentor, any termination of the
mentoring relationship, or any other matter the mentor considers appropriate
having regard to
the subject matter of the Decision and nature of these
conditions.
event that the approved mentor is no longer willing or able to continue as
mentor, he is to nominate another mentor for
approval by the Council within 28
days of the cessation of the previous mentor relationship.
(a) To complete
within 12 months of the date of this Decision and at the
practitioner’s expense an Ethics course offered
by the St James Ethics
Centreor such other Ethics Course as may be approved by the Council.
(b) Within 14
days of the date of enrolment, the practitioner must provide evidence to the
Council of enrolment in the Ethics course.
(c) Within 14
days of completing the Ethics course, the practitioner is to provide documentary
evidence to the Council that he has
satisfactorily completed the course.
before entering into any contract, arrangement or understanding with any person
for his employment as a physiotherapist or by
way of partnership or
co-shareholder or other joint venture in practice any hospital and/or locum
engagement, the practitioner shall
provide that person a copy of these
Conditions. The practitioner is to send to the Council within 7 days of the
commencement of any
employment so described, written confirmation that
notification has been made to such person (the employer) or, if he is engaged
any other practice, any subsequent employer.
Council may notify any employer/s of any issues arising in relation to
compliance with these conditions.
conditions may be varied, amended or removed at the discretion of the Council
and the Council is the appropriate review body
for the purposes of Division 8 of
Part 8 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law.
the practitioner seeks to change or remove any of the conditions imposed as a
result of the Tribunal’s orders when his principal
practice is anywhere in
Australia other than in New South Wales, section 125 to 127 inclusive of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
are to apply, so that a
review of these conditions can be conducted by the Physiotherapy Board of
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (485 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter