URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/182.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Breen v R [2025] NSWCCA 182 (7 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 182
Hearing Date(s):
22 October 2025
Date of Orders:
7 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Stern JA at [1];
N Adams J at [104];
Chen J at [105]
(1) An extension of time and leave to appeal is granted.
(2) The appeal
is allowed.
(3) The sentences imposed by Mathews AJ on 25 November 2015
are quashed. In lieu thereof the applicant is sentenced to an aggregate
of imprisonment of 42 years to commence on 29 March 2013 and to expire on
28 March 2055 with a non-parole period of 31 years
and 6 months to commence
on 29 March 2013 and to expire on 28 September 2044.
Catchwords:
CRIME — appeals — appeal against sentence — where Crown
accepted that Court should proceed to resentence the applicant
extension of time and leave to appeal granted — where appeal allowed
— where Court proceeded to resentence
the applicant
Legislation Cited:
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
(Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
ss 21A(2)(d)
Crimes Act 1900
ss 18(1)(a)
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Cases Cited:
Abbas v The Queen; Bodiotis v The Queen; Taleb v The Queen; Amoun v The
[2013] NSWCCA 115
231 A Crim R 413
Adanguidi v R
[2006] NSWCCA 404
167 A Crim R 295
Ghalbouni v R
[2020] NSWCCA 21
Kentwell v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
[2020] NSWCCA 131
[2014] NSWCCA 29
Munda v Western Australia
(2013) 249 CLR 600
[2013] HCA 38
R v Tadrosse (2005) 65 NSWLR 740;
[2005] NSWCCA 145
Thomson; R v Houlton (2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
[2019] NSWCCA 183
Turnbull v R
[2019] NSWCCA 97
Principal judgment
Corey Breen (Applicant)
Rex (Respondent)
Representation:
S Pararajasingham SC with R Thampapillai (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Bannisters Lawyers (Applicant)
for Public Prosecutions (NSW) (Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
publication of the names of, or any matter which could identify any witnesses
who were children at the time of the offences
is prohibited.
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Supreme Court
[2015] NSWSC 1757
Date of Decision:
25 November 2015
File Number(s):
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
The applicant sought an extension of time and leave (neither of which were
opposed) to appeal against two sentences imposed on him
on 25 November
2015, following pleas of guilty to two offences of murder. Both offences
occurred on 29 March 2013. The victims were
the applicant’s father,
Paul Breen (count one), and the applicant’s father’s partner,
Felicia Crawford (count two).
In sentencing the applicant for count two, the sentencing judge was to take
into account nine further offences on a Form 1 (all also
committed on
29 March 2013). In respect of count one, the sentencing judge imposed a
sentence of 37 years with a non-parole period
of 28 years, and in respect of
count two, her Honour imposed a sentence of 34 years with a non-parole period of
26 years. The sentencing
judge did not give any discount for the
applicant’s guilty plea. The sentence for count one was ordered to
commence five years
after that of count two, resulting in a total effective
sentence of 42 years with a non-parole period of 33 years.
The Crown accepted that it would be open to this Court to find three of the
applicant’s four grounds of appeal were made out,
and that it was open to
this Court to find that these errors had the capacity to affect the sentencing
judge’s exercise of
the sentencing discretion, such that this Court should
therefore proceed to resentence. In light of that concession, it was unnecessary
for this Court to consider the remaining ground of appeal.
On resentence, the applicant accepted the sentencing judge’s findings
of fact and her Honour’s assessment of objective
seriousness. The
Crown’s key contention on resentence was that no lesser sentence was
warranted. The Crown also contended that
no discount should be given for the
applicant’s guilty plea, that the applicant’s moral culpability was
high, and that
the Form 1 offences warranted a greater sentence for count two
than otherwise would have been imposed.
(Stern JA, N Adams J and Chen J agreeing)
granting an extension of time and leave to appeal, allowing the
appeal, quashing the sentences imposed by the sentencing judge and
resentencing
the applicant
to an aggregate sentence of imprisonment of 42 years
with a non-parole period of 31 years and 6 months:
(i) The offences were not carried out pursuant to a
deliberately-formed plan of action that had been hatched well in advance,
there was something of a trajectory which culminated in the offending,
and an element of planning and deliberate action involved
applicant’s actions: [92]-[93] (Stern JA); [104] (N Adams J); [105] (Chen
(ii) Two statutory aggravating factors were applicable,
namely that the offences were committed in the presence of children under
age of 18, and in the victims’ home: [94] (Stern JA); [104] (N Adams J);
[105] (Chen J).
(iii) The nine Form 1 offences showed that materially
greater weight had to be given when sentencing the applicant for count two,
to the need for general deterrence and the community’s entitlement to
exact retribution. Those offences were themselves
serious, with the maximum
penalties totalling 147 years’ imprisonment: [95] (Stern JA); [104]
(N Adams J); [105] (Chen J).
Abbas v The Queen; Bodiotis v The Queen; Taleb v The Queen; Amoun v The
[2013] NSWCCA 115
231 A Crim R 413
, referred to.
(iv) The Court adopted the sentencing judge’s findings
as to the applicant’s remorse and prospects of rehabilitation,
noted that during the applicant’s time in prison he has continued to have
outbursts and use language, or have thoughts,
of harming people, standing
against the conclusion that his prospects of rehabilitation have improved since
he was sentenced: [97]-[98]
(Stern JA); [104] (N Adams J); [105] (Chen J).
(v) The nature of the offending was such that the Court did
not give a discount for the applicant’s guilty plea. This was
offending of
great heinousness, so offending the public interest that the full sentence
should be imposed: [99] (Stern JA); [104]
(N Adams J); [105] (Chen J).
R v Thomson; R v Houlton
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
Milat v R; Klein v R
[2014] NSWCCA 29
, referred to.
(vi) There was no reason to depart from the standard
statutory non-parole period of 75%: [100] (Stern JA); [104] (N Adams J); [105]
(vii) In its instinctive synthesis, the Court would have
imposed a slightly higher head sentence than the sentencing judge, but
analogy with the Court’s usual practice, did not do so: [101]
(Stern JA); [104] (N Adams J); [105] (Chen J).
Kentwell v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
[2019] NSWCCA 183
, referred to.
: The applicant seeks an extension of time and leave under
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW) to appeal against two sentences
imposed on him on 25 November 2015, following a plea of guilty to two
offences of murder contrary
Crimes Act 1900
[2015] NSWSC 1757.
Both offences occurred on
29 March 2013. The victims were the applicant’s father, Paul Breen
(count one), and the applicant’s
father’s partner, Felicia Crawford
(count two). The applicant was born on 15 August 1986 and was aged 26 at
the time of the
sentencing the applicant, pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) (CSPA), the Court was to take into account nine
further offences on a Form 1 (all also committed on 29 March 2013) for the
of the principal offences. The sentencing judge imposed discrete
sentences for each of the two offences which were partially accumulated.
respect of count one, the sentencing judge imposed a sentence of 37 years with a
non-parole period of 28 years, and in respect
of count two, her Honour imposed a
sentence of 34 years with a non-parole period of 26 years. The sentencing judge
did not give any
discount for the applicant’s guilty plea. The sentence
for count one was ordered to commence five years after that of count
resulting in a total effective sentence of 42 years with a non-parole
period of 33 years. The applicant will first be eligible
for parole on
28 March 2046.
Crown does not oppose either an extension of time or leave to appeal and I am
satisfied, in the circumstances set out below, that
both should be granted. The
Crown also accepts that it would be open to this Court to find grounds two to
four of the four grounds
of appeal raised by the applicant are made out, and
that it is open to this Court to find that these errors had the capacity to
the sentencing judge’s exercise of the sentencing discretion. Thus,
the Crown submits, this Court should proceed to resentence.
For the reasons
briefly set out below, that concession is soundly based. In these circumstances
it is unnecessary to consider the
applicant’s first ground of appeal.
Rather, this Court should resentence the applicant afresh, consistent with the
Kentwell v The Queen
(2014) 252 CLR 601;
[2014] HCA 37
(French CJ, Hayne, Bell and Keane JJ).
Crown’s key contention on appeal is that no lesser sentence than that
imposed by the sentencing judge is warranted and that
this Court should dismiss
the appeal under
Criminal Appeal Act
. On resentence,
the Crown relies upon an affidavit of Adam Wilczek sworn 13 October 2025,
attaching a number of Department of Corrective
Services case note reports and
other documents produced by the Department of Communities and Justice.
his part, the applicant relies on resentence upon an affidavit which he swore on
3 October 2025 and upon an affidavit of Serae
Kopra sworn on
21 October 2025 which included a letter of 27 July 2015 from the
Chaplain at the Long Bay Correctional Centre which
was omitted from the Appeal
Book but which was before the sentencing judge.
applicant accepts that the statement of agreed facts dated 23 July 2015,
and the facts on which he was sentenced, are both accurate.
He also accepts that
both offences are of an extremely high order of seriousness.
the reasons set out below the appeal should be allowed and the applicant
resentenced. I would impose the sentence set out at [
The grounds of appeal on which the Crown has made
concessions
I have already observed, the Crown concedes that it is open to this Court to
uphold grounds two to four as advanced by the applicant.
ground two, the applicant contends that the sentencing judge erred in finding,
as an aggravating factor pursuant to
s 21A(2)(m)
of the CSPA, that the
offences involved multiple victims and a series of criminal acts.
the heading “Aggravating and Mitigating Factors Under
the sentencing judge said at [41] that “[t]he aggravating factors which
apply in this case, and are not inherent in
the offence of murder, are as
follows: ...”. The matters her Honour then identified included that (at
[P]ursuant to paragraph (2)(m), the offences involved multiple victims and a
series of criminal acts. I will also be saying more
with the judgment of this Court in
R v Tadrosse
(2005) 65 NSWLR 740;
[2005] NSWCCA 145
(Howie J, Grove and Hall JJ agreeing),
and as was more recently explained by Hamill J in
s 21A(2)(m)
applies when the offence is constituted by
a series of criminal acts, not on account of an offender being sentenced for
ground three, the applicant contends that the sentencing judge erred in taking
into account the applicant’s Children’s
Court criminal history
(ground 3(a)) and in finding, as an aggravating factor pursuant to
s 21A(2)(d)
of the CSPA, that the applicant had a record of previous
convictions (ground 3(b)).
applicant’s criminal history disclosed a sentence imposed in the
Children’s Court for maliciously inflicting grievous
bodily harm in 2002
when the applicant was 16 years old (the Children’s Court offence)
and a sentence imposed in the Local
Court for assault occasioning actual bodily
harm in 2009 when the applicant was 23 years old. No conviction was entered for
the Children’s
Court offence. The sentencing judge found that both of
these offences constituted an aggravating factor under
s 21A(2)(d)
CSPA. Under
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
(NSW), however, the Children’s Court offence should not have been
admitted in evidence on sentencing in circumstances where
the applicant had not
been subject to any other judicially-imposed punishment within the period of
2 years prior to the commencement
of proceedings for the index offence.
Because ground 3(a) was conceded by the Crown, there is no need to consider
ground 3(b).
ground four, the applicant contends that the sentencing judge erred in taking
into account the Form 1 offences on the wrong principal
offence. As noted
], the list
of additional charges under
of the CSPA on the Form 1 signed by
the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions specified nine offences to be
taken into account
in sentencing the applicant for the offence at count two on
the indictment, being the murder of Ms Crawford. However, in her remarks
sentence at [91] and [96] the sentencing judge made it clear that it was the
sentence for the murder of Paul Breen that was increased
by reason of the
Form 1 offences. It is well-established that this is an error:
[2020] NSWCCA 21
(Hidden AJ, Macfarlan JA and
Davies J agreeing), as the effect given to a Form 1 matter might vary
depending on the nature of the
principal offence.
is clear, the Crown’s concessions are well-founded and this Court should
resentence the applicant. For this purpose, given
that they are not impugned,
the sentencing judge’s findings of fact and her assessments of objective
gravity and remorse can
be adopted:
Turnbull v R
[2019] NSWCCA 97
(Simpson AJA, Ierace J agreeing, Wilson J not deciding). The
applicant submitted that this Court may also adopt the sentencing judge’s
assessment that he has very reasonable prospects of rehabilitation, particularly
if he can abstain from alcohol and drugs on release,
and that the Court should,
against that background, place significance on the further evidence tendered on
resentence.
Background to the offending
applicant’s parents separated in around 1994. In 2001 Paul Breen had a
child, DB, with Ms Crawford. Ms Crawford also had
a second child, RC, born
in 2005 (during a period of separation from Paul Breen) to a different
father. Paul Breen and Ms Crawford
were living together, with DB and
RC, at the time of the index offences.
July 2009, the applicant was working as a security guard in Terrigal and, whilst
at work, assaulted a man (the July 2009 assault).
He was convicted of assault
occasioning actual bodily harm. As a result of this he lost his security licence
and suffered financial
hardship. At around this time he made threats to kill
various members of his family, including his paternal grandfather and his
11 August 2009, the applicant wrote a letter to his mother which included the
This is a true account of the mind of Corey Alan Breen ... It[’]s gone on
to[o] long to remain unsaid ... I’m the kinda
guy you love to be around.
I’m happy, fun and would do anything for my friends. But this changes when
I’m alone. I get
very angry and plot out murders of people I hate. I do it
all in my head. I run over it again and again, refining every detail. They
always extremely horrific and extremely brutal ... I’m scared someday soon
the monster that I’ve kept locked away
for so long will finally reach the
surface. This can’t happen. Everything will change. People will die and
people will suffer
... I’m not stupid though. They are evil. I know this
but I don’t care ... I do know these violent fantasy’s [sic]
wrong but that’s not why I haven’t committed them. The honest answer
is this. Because at the moment nothing has pushed
me quite that far yet. But I
do feel it is close ...
(Emphasis in original.)
applicant’s mother then encouraged him to get some psychological help.
June 2010 the applicant met Cassandra Fenech, with whom he commenced a
relationship soon after. During his relationship with Ms
applicant frequently told her that he would kill his father and stepmother. The
applicant sometimes threatened to smash
his father with a baseball bat or shoot
or stab him to death. He became estranged from all members of his family and
told Ms Fenech
that he blamed his father for everything that had gone wrong
in his life.
some time prior to 2011 the applicant was living with Paul Breen and
Ms Crawford, and frequently threatened to shoot them or “blow
away”. These threats were common knowledge to the targets of the threats
and within his family.
February 2012, the applicant was angry at Ms Fenech’s mother and took
his baseball bat and got into his car and drove away.
Ms Fenech rang the
applicant continually and was eventually able to speak to him, when he said to
her (before hanging up):
This is it Cassie. I’m done. I can’t live like this anymore.
I’ve got to do what I’ve got to do.
then drove the applicant to Wyong Hospital where he was assessed. No acute
mental health issues, psychosis or depression
were diagnosed, but a long history
of problems relating to his temper or violent outbursts was recorded, which the
applicant related
to dysfunction in his upbringing. The applicant’s
unresolved feelings of hate towards his parents were also recorded. Upon
discharge the applicant told Ms Fenech that he could not tell the medical
staff what he was thinking and that if he told them everything
he would not be
allowed to live with Ms Fenech and her children. In March and April 2012 he
was diagnosed as suffering from depression
and anger management issues.
a number of other occasions, following disagreements with Ms Fenech, the
applicant would arm himself and drive away. Ms Fenech
feared that the
applicant would kill his father or other family members so she would call him
and calm him down.
around August 2012 the applicant sent a text message to his mother as follows,
with the understanding of his family being that
the reference to
“[P]aul” was to Paul Breen:
Please tell [P]aul that if he tries to contact me again [I] will murder his
whole fucking family. Having said that [I] just want
to be left alone till [I]
decide w[h]at comes next.
14 February 2013, the applicant sent a text message to Ms Fenech which
included the following:
I can feel a massive fucking skitz out coming soon and I don[’]t know if I
will be able to stop myself this time. I hate our
life now we can[’]t do
anything or go anywhere and it[’]s depressing me so much ...
29 March 2013
of the conduct set out below was charged and was to be treated as a series of
related offences under
s 166(1)(b)
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) (CPA) (the related offences). To the applicant’s benefit, the
sentencing judge, at [94], erroneously dismissed these as
back-up offences under
of the CPA. Whilst below I indicate the conduct that constituted the
various related offences, I have not taken these into account
resentencing.
29 March 2013, the applicant and Ms Fenech had a number of friends
over to their home in Gorokan where most people, including the
applicant and
Ms Fenech, were drinking alcohol. At around 6 pm, the applicant and
Ms Fenech had a disagreement, and Ms Fenech asked
the applicant to
come into their bedroom. When Ms Fenech tried to then walk out of the room,
the applicant held her shoulders and
threw her onto the bed, then laid on top of
her and held her wrists down and did not let her get up. This assault on
Ms Fenech was
one of the related offences.
friend entered the room and told the applicant to stop. Ms Fenech then
walked out into the front yard, where the applicant followed
her and took hold
of her wrists again. Ms Fenech said, “Stop it Corey, I will call for
Vaughan [Nunn, a male guest present
at the house], stop it”. The applicant
said to her, “Do it then cunt. Do it cunt”. Ms Fenech then
yelled out for
Mr Nunn while the applicant held her harder. Mr Nunn
came to the door and the applicant let go of Ms Fenech and walked away. At
time the applicant was armed with a large hunting knife with a blade length
of 19 cm and 4.7 cm wide at the base.
during the party, the applicant rang Ms Fenech’s mother and said,
“Come and get your daughter before I stab her”.
applicant did not hold a firearms licence but had obtained an unregistered .22
calibre “Sportco” brand rifle which
he had been keeping disassembled
in an unlocked plastic case at the premises. He assembled the gun. This conduct
constitutes two
of the related offences, possessing an unauthorised firearm
without being licensed and possessing an unregistered firearm.
applicant then walked to his car and subsequently returned inside, realising he
did not have any ammunition. While the applicant
was inside, Ms Fenech
removed two spark plug leads from the vehicle and one of the women present at
the house took the rifle from
the applicant and hid it. Ms Fenech then
walked into the kitchen, where the applicant took hold of the back of her hair
her over the kitchen sink. Ms Fenech said, “I’m
done. You’ve done this for the last time”. The applicant
Ms Fenech, “You’re done... Your mum’s gone”.
applicant left the house on foot carrying the knife. He approached an unattended
parked vehicle and struck the driver’s
side window with the back of his
knife, twice, leaving marks in the glass, though the window did not smash. This
was another of the
related offences, intentionally or recklessly damaging
applicant wanted to obtain a motor vehicle so that he could drive to the homes
of his family members to murder them. Just after
7 pm, he was walking on
the roadway, holding the knife, when Gabriala Virgona, who was in her car
driving alone on the same road,
saw that he was walking on her side of the road
in front of her. Ms Virgona drove up behind the applicant and stopped a few
from him. The applicant then turned around and ran at Ms Virgona,
holding the knife up over his shoulder. This conduct constitutes
the first of
the Form 1 offences, assault with intent to steal a vehicle whilst armed
with a hunting knife:
, which are to be
taken into account when sentencing the applicant for count two.
then reversed at speed to get away from the applicant. As she continued to
reverse, she collided with another car driven
by Keith Bowden who was driving
his vehicle. He then saw
the applicant with a knife and began to drive forward
but was not able to speed up quickly enough. The applicant ran up to
and stabbed the right side of his face through the open car door
window. This caused a significant facial laceration. Mr Bowden thought
had been punched and kept driving but soon felt blood flowing down his neck onto
his shirt and realised he was beginning to lose
consciousness. Mr Bowden
then turned around and drove back to the Coles Select service station where he
worked. He ultimately had
to be taken to John Hunter Hospital where he had to be
urgently intubated in theatre to relieve his compromised airway. This conduct
constitutes the second of the Form 1 offences, namely assault of
Mr Bowden with intent to rob him while armed with a hunting knife
wounding him:
were called to the Coles Select service station and took a report and started to
applicant took a bicycle from an unknown location and rode to the Lucky 7
convenience store in Gorokan, arriving at around 7:10
pm, hoping to obtain
a motor vehicle. Mr Nunn, Ms Fenech and another female guest drove to
look for the applicant so that Ms Fenech
could calm him down. They found
the applicant at the Lucky 7.
Romanos was sitting outside the Lucky 7. The applicant stopped outside the door,
breathing heavily. Mr Romanos said to the applicant,
“Been on a bit
of a mission mate?”. The applicant pulled the knife from behind his back
and lunged at Mr Romanos’
stomach. Mr Romanos stepped backwards
to avoid being stabbed. The applicant then again lunged at Mr Romanos with
the knife towards
his thigh. The knife cut through Mr Romanos’
shorts, creating a 10 cm-long cut, but did not touch his skin. The
applicant then
ran into the store, yelling at Mr Romanos, “Give me
your keys”. This conduct constitutes the third Form 1 offence,
assault of Mr Romanos with intent to rob him while armed with a
hunting knife:
were four other customers inside the store including a pregnant woman.
Ms Fenech then entered the store yelling, “Stop”.
The applicant
hit Ms Fenech in her right forearm, causing her to fall against a brick
wall near the front entrance. This conduct
constitutes another of the related
offences, a second common assault of Ms Fenech.
Duncan, who lived nearby and came into Lucky 7 to see what the noise was about,
saw the applicant throwing Ms Fenech against
the wall. Ms Duncan said to
the applicant, “Is that necessary?”. The applicant said to her,
“Who are you and what
do you want? Fucking slut”. Ms Duncan
walked to exit the store, when the applicant punched her head behind her ear,
her to stumble forwards, to which she said, “What was that
for?”. The applicant then said, “Do you want [a] fucking
me? Do you, ya slut?”. He then held the knife above his head and swung it
at her, which she avoided and ran away.
Ms Duncan’s young daughter,
who was standing on her front lawn, witnessed this and screamed to her mother to
run. Ms Duncan
sustained a lump to the head and headaches for several days.
This conduct constitutes a further related offence, assault occasioning
bodily harm.
applicant then chased Mr Romanos, yelling, “Give me your fucking
keys. Give me your fucking keys”. Mr Romanos said
he did not have any
keys and was pushing large shelves of food stock towards the applicant to try to
stop him, while also calling
out for someone to call the police. The applicant
was also pushing shelves over, trying to get to Mr Romanos. Ms Fenech
calling out to the applicant to tell him to stop, but her friend came
and took her away.
running around the store for a time, Mr Romanos exited through the staff
door and held it shut as it did not have a locking
mechanism. The applicant
tried to open it and said, “Open the door”. He was yelling,
screaming and banging on the door
and stabbed it a number of times, while
yelling out, “You fat weak cunt”. He also caused other damage to the
store including
stabbing an electrical box and breaking the lever off the
slushie machine, causing around $2,000.00 of damage. This conduct constitutes
another of the related offences, intentionally or recklessly damaging
7:20 pm the applicant sent Ms Fenech’s mother a text message
saying, “Ur dead u filthy cunt”. A short time later,
Ms Fenech’s mother received a call from Ms Fenech, who by now
was with police. Ms Fenech told her mother not to go to her home
Gorokan. Ms Fenech’s mother instead went to a nearby McDonald’s
restaurant and waited until it was safe for her to
return home.
applicant then rode the bicycle he had obtained earlier, turned into another
street in Gorokan, and started banging on the front
door of a house. Alicia
Lyons was home alone and stood at the front door, calling out, “Who is
it?”. The applicant said,
“It’s the Red Cross”.
Ms Lyons said she was not interested, and the applicant said,
“Don’t you care
if someone bleeds to death?”. Ms Lyons
immediately rang her husband, asking him to come home, as well as her
brother-in-law,
Ben Greenland, who lived in a nearby street, and asked him to
come over, too. Ms Lyons walked into the hallway so that she could
seen through any of the house windows and waited there. Mr Greenland drove
to Ms Lyons’ home and noticed the bicycle
lying in the gutter nearby.
He got out of his car and began to walk down the driveway, calling out to
applicant approached within about two metres of Mr Greenland with his knife
raised and pointed at Mr Greenland. Mr Greenland noticed
blood on the
applicant’s hand. The applicant said, “Give me your keys”.
Ms Lyons was standing at her front door.
Mr Greenland gave the
applicant his keys and the applicant told him to get inside the house. This
conduct constitutes the fourth
Form 1 offence, namely robbery of keys and a
motor vehicle while armed with a hunting knife:
Ms Lyons and Mr Greenland called the police. A police car that was
patrolling the area trying to locate the applicant also stopped
by and spoke to
Ms Lyons and Mr Greenland at their house while they were still on the
applicant then drove Mr Greenland’s car to the home of his paternal
grandparents, Colin Breen and Norma Breen, in Long Jetty.
He walked into their
backyard and could see both of them inside the house when suddenly the rear
sensor light came on. The applicant
thought that his father, Paul Breen (who
lived at another address) may have arrived. The applicant went to the front of
thinking that he would kill his father first and then his
grandparents. This conduct (in relation to each of his paternal grandparents)
constitutes the fifth and sixth Form 1 offences, namely possessing a
hunting knife with the intent to murder Norma and Colin Breen:
s 33B(1)(a).
Nathan Anderson and Bree Upton. The applicant was holding
the knife handle in
both of his hands, pointing outward from his chest towards Mr Anderson, who
was about a metre away. The applicant
said, “I am swapping your car. I
have a Holden Colorado out the front”. The applicant handed
Mr Anderson the car keys
for Mr Greenland’s car and told
Mr Anderson to hand over his keys, saying, “Nothing to do with you,
my grandparents live
next door, just a matter of wrong place, wrong time”.
Mr Anderson asked if he could get some things out of the boot of his
and the applicant obliged. As Mr Anderson was reaching over the back seat
Ms Upton saw the applicant was holding the knife in
both hands, standing on
his feet and rocking, and she feared he would stab Mr Anderson.
Ms Upton said, “Don’t hurt him”,
to which the applicant
laughed under his breath and said, “I am not going to hurt him”. The
applicant then got into the
driver’s side of Mr Anderson’s car,
a Holden Commodore, which still had the keys in the ignition, directed
Ms Upton and
Mr Anderson to the back of the garage and had them turn
around as he drove off. This conduct constitutes the seventh Form 1
namely robbing Mr Anderson of a motor vehicle while armed with a
hunting knife:
Mr Anderson
rang police who attended within minutes. Shortly after this Colin Breen realised
that it may have been the applicant who
had taken his neighbour’s car.
Colin and Norma Breen asked the police to check on their son, Paul Breen,
cognisant of the long
history of the applicant’s threats to kill him.
Norma Breen tried to ring Paul Breen but nobody picked up.
applicant then drove the car to the home of his friends Martyn Watts and Kirrily
Shelton. He knew that Mr Watts and Ms Shelton
were recreational
shooters and he had previously been into a “gun room” in their home,
which contained 36 firearms, including
rifles and shotguns. The room had a
combination lock on the door and four locked safes within it, with all the
firearms registered
and properly secured. The applicant wanted to take a shotgun
to use it to kill his family. The applicant told Ms Shelton to open
front door, holding the knife at his waist at this point. They went to the
kitchen where the applicant told her to open the safe.
Ms Shelton refused,
to which he said, “Just open it”. The applicant held the knife up
and shook it but did not hold it
in Ms Shelton’s direction. This
conduct constitutes the eighth Form 1 offence, namely possessing a hunting
knife with the intent
to intimidate:
s 33B(1)(a).
opened the gun room with a coded keypad, opening the cupboard doors and
unlocking one of the safes where she thought the
applicant could put the knife
to store it safely. She said to the applicant, “Put it in”, to which
he said, “Get
me the shotgun”. The applicant held the knife above
her head, resting it on the cupboard. Ms Shelton did not think he would
hurt her, and said, “If you’re going to be stupid I am going to shut
it then”. Ms Shelton then locked the top box
in the safe, putting the
keys in the safe door to lock it, when the applicant took hold of her hand,
squeezing it tightly with the
keys in it. Ms Shelton said,
“You’re hurting me. Let go,” and threatened to call
Mr Watts. The applicant said,
“Go on. Call him. I didn’t
realise anyone would be home. I was just going to break in”.
Ms Shelton threatened to
call the police to which the applicant said,
“Just give me a 30 second head start. That’s all I need”.
Ms Shelton’s house the applicant: asked for
Ms Shelton’s phone which she gave him; pulled Ms Shelton’s
the door while she was still holding the keys; held the knife above
her head again while resting his hand on the wall; smashed the
knife against the
glass panel at the front door causing it to crack; then told her to open the
door to let him out, which she did;
and returned her phone and left at about
the meantime, Ms Fenech told the police that “[the applicant] has a
list of people he is going to get”, and mentioned
Paul Breen as one of the
people on that list.
applicant drove directly to Paul Breen’s house. Paul Breen was sleeping on
the lounge in front of the television. Ms Crawford
was in her bedroom
watching television. DB (then 12 years old) and RC (then 7 years old) were in
RC’s bedroom playing. The
applicant used the butt of the knife to smash
through the two glass panels in the unlocked front door. It is an agreed fact
he did this for effect.
Breen screamed, “Oh my God! Corey!”. The applicant then kicked the
front door open. Hearing the commotion, DB went
to the hallway of the house
where he could see into the lounge room. The applicant entered the house and
stabbed Paul Breen 15 times.
Ms Crawford then entered the hallway and was
screaming, “Corey! Corey!”. DB witnessed his father being repeatedly
in the torso area and later described the noise that his father was
making and the movements of his body as he was stabbed. Paul
Breen received six
stab wounds to the chest, with four of them entering his heart and one entering
his left lung. There was also
a stab wound to the right side of his forehead,
penetrating the skull, and superficial incised wounds to the nose, right upper
and left face, as well as a wound to the right shoulder and upper right
lower leg and a defensive wound to his left-hand thumb and
third finger. Paul
Breen died immediately from his wounds and the resultant blood loss. The doctor
who conducted the postmortem concluded
that severe force was used to inflict
these injuries.
ran out of the hallway through Ms Crawford’s bedroom into the rear
yard where he tried to get RC to safety, but she would
not come with him, so he
ran to the neighbour’s house and told them what was happening and asked
them to call police.
Ms Crawford
told RC to run. Ms Crawford then ran out of the house into the attached
garage, which had been converted into a bedroom.
The applicant opened a door,
finding Ms Crawford behind it, and pinned her with it. He stabbed her with
severe force, twice to the
left lateral posterior chest area, penetrating her
left lung, twice to her back, penetrating tissue and chest muscles, once to the
back of her neck causing an incised wound, once to the back of the left index
finger causing an incised wound, and twice to the left
side of the head.
was present at the start of the attack on her mother. At 8:03 pm, Brooke
Champley, Ms Crawford’s eldest daughter, received
a call from
Ms Crawford’s mobile phone. It recorded RC letting out a single
scream, and then it was silent with the exception
of a dog barking loudly in a
distressed manner for two and a half minutes. A man’s voice could be heard
faintly in the background
at some points. At the end there were some footsteps
near the phone and the phone was then turned off.
seeing the beginning of the attack on her mother, RC ran around a corner until
she thought the applicant was gone. Ms Crawford
staggered back to the main
bedroom. She lay on her bed, unlocked her mobile phone and handed it to RC,
telling her to ring 000. Blood
was coming from Ms Crawford’s wounds
and out of her mouth. RC tried to use the phone but there was no reception.
Shortly thereafter
Ms Crawford fell off the bed and died in the presence of
her daughter.
and a number of neighbours were standing in front of the neighbours’
houses. They saw the applicant calmly walk to the Holden
Commodore, look at
them, and drive off.
RC was still inside the house and thought that the
applicant was also there and was going to kill her. She then ran out through the
attached garage onto the street where the neighbours were.
and RC had to spend the night at Gosford Hospital.
interview of the applicant
around 8:05 pm police were driving to Paul Breen’s house when they
saw the Holden Commodore stopped near an intersection.
The applicant put his
right arm up to cover his face. Police saw that it was covered in blood. They
pursued the applicant who drove
at speeds of up to 120 km/h in a
70 km/h zone and narrowly missed colliding with other vehicles. After the
police pursuit, the applicant
stopped the car and ran into an industrial/retail
area, past a number of businesses.
Police chased him for about
100 metres. He ran up an elevated footpath in front of some shops and then
ran into a dead end, while
still armed with the hunting knife. The police called
on him to drop the knife which he did, throwing it to the ground. He then
to his stomach allowing police to handcuff him. Police then arrested
applicant was talking about the murders, calling his victims “cunts”
I achieved my mission.
applicant was then conveyed to Wyong Police Station where he was interviewed by
police. I have watched the video recording of
the applicant’s interview.
It is an agreed fact that the applicant’s account of what he did was given
in a calm, casual
and factual way. He said he surrendered easily because he did
not want to be shot by the police.
relation to the stabbing of Mr Bowden, the applicant said:
I’m pretty sure drove off [sic] and I stabbed him in the head ... or the
neck or somewhere ... I don’t know but I remember
stabbing someone ... He
was going past me slow so I took a swing at him. I don’t know whether I
got him in the head or throat
or in the chest or what not but yeah I definitely,
I definitely had a stab at him but and I definitely connected too.
applicant said to the police that he drove to Long Jetty because he was planning
on murdering his grandparents, saying:
I was going to butcher them ... Really don’t know what happened with that
... Had my knife in my hand ready to roll.
said that a security light came on and after five to ten seconds he heard a car
pull up and thought it was probably his father,
And I thought sweet, cool, you know, kill a couple of birds with one stone.
he said that when he went around the front, it was his grandparents’
neighbours.
relation to the break-in at Ms Shelton’s house, the applicant said he
was asking himself, “What am I doing scaring
one of my good mates?”.
He said that while the knife was by his side, he was not trying to threaten
Ms Shelton with it, but
that she could clearly see he had it. He said he
took her phone so he could get a head start. He also said that he intended to
a firearm to shoot “Paul, Felicia and more”.
relation to smashing the glass panels on his father’s door, the applicant
noted that the door was not locked and also said:
I don’t really know why I smashed through the glass, ah, just probably
just a scare tactic just to give him the fucken spooks
before I killed the cunt.
relation to the murder of Paul Breen, the applicant said:
Went over, stabbed him to death. I’m pretty sure I hit him around the
torso a few times, ah, I’m pretty sure I stabbed
him in the head a few
times. Hopefully I did. Hopefully the cunt’s fucken dead.
relation to the murder of Ms Crawford, the applicant said:
I stabbed that fucken slut to death. Ah, I got her a few times in the torso and
that and hopefully I got her in the neck and the
fucken head. Hopefully
she’s fucken dead ... stabbed the fuck out of her, I think I got her in
the head a few times too so
that fucken diseased cunt’s dead. I
can’t fucken stand that cunt.
applicant said he had “absolute pure hatred” for his father and
stepmother as his father had beaten him while he was
a kid and his mother, Debra
Breen, would not do anything about it. He said of the July 2009 assault referred
to above at [
his father “just wouldn’t support me [through it]”.
the interview the applicant also said:
You got me right in the middle of it all, um, if the clutch didn’t burn
out I was on my way up my mother’s house, she
lives a fair way out. Um, I
probably would have knifed her and her fucken boyfriend and my brother and my
sister and whoever else
was up there... But it would have went on much longer
had the fucken clutch not burnt out.
relation to the applicant’s mother, this constitutes the ninth Form 1
offence: possessing a hunting knife with the intent
to murder Debra Breen:
s 33B(1)(a).
applicant went on to say:
It's always sort of been like... it’s like a time bomb sitting in my head.
I knew sooner or later I was going to go and fucken
get my old man and the rest
of the cunts. Um, and just tonight was the night.
Objective seriousness
sentencing judge made a number of findings going to the objective seriousness of
the offending which are not impugned by the applicant:
(1) that each of the offences were committed in the presence of a child under 18
years of age: CSPA,
s 21A(2)(ea): at [41];
(2) that the emotional harm caused to the two children and other family members
was substantial, as indicated by the victim impact
statements: CSPA,
s 21A(2)(g): at [41];
(3) that the offences were committed in the home of both of the victims: CSPA,
s 21A(2)(eb): at [42];
(4) that, whilst there was an element of spontaneity, once the applicant had
decided he was going to kill family members he set out
in a determined way to
achieve this aim, such that the offences were premeditated in the sense that
they were not spontaneous actions,
but the applicant’s actions that
evening were not “pursuant to a deliberately formed plan of action which
had been hatched
well in advance”: at [52];
(5) that the applicant “must have been affected by some form of drug at
the time of the [police] interview: at least by the
Venlaxafine [sic] which he
had reportedly taken earlier that day, and possibly also by some form of illegal
drug”: at [57];
(6) that, in the case of both of the victims, “their last moments must
have been filled with unimaginable fear and horror”,
being “a highly
significant matter when considering the objective seriousness of the
offences”: at [63];
(7) that each of the offences were not committed in isolation and were part of
the one episode of criminal conduct: at [64], referring
Adanguidi v R
[2006] NSWCCA 404
167 A Crim R 295
where this Court (Hislop J,
Spigelman CJ and Sully J agreeing) said that “the three murders
occurred at essentially the same
time and place and were all part of the one
episode of criminal conduct ... In these circumstances the Court may have regard
whole of the conduct in determining the level of culpability involved in
the commission of each offence”; and
(8) that the harm done to the family members is an aspect of the harm done to
the community as a result of the offences and, having
regard to the victim
impact statements of DB, RC, Brooke Champley (Ms Crawford’s eldest
daughter), Debra Breen (the applicant’s
mother), Colin Breen (Paul
Breen’s father), and the applicant’s sister, was very substantial,
going well beyond what
might be considered a “normal” consequence of
murder if indeed there is such a thing: at [74]. In this regard, the sentencing
judge noted in particular that the victim impact statement of DB indicates that
his life has been “irretrievably damaged”
by the events on the
evening of the offending and that RC similarly was suffering from the effects of
severe stress: at [66]. The
sentencing judge found that the devastating
consequences for these two children was a foreseeable consequence of the
offending and
was a “very significant aggravating factor”: at
Ultimately,
the sentencing judge found that the offences “are of the utmost
seriousness ... almost to the top of the range of
objective seriousness for
murder” but not so high as to require a mandatory life sentence under
of the CSPA: at [77].
Subjective factors
Nielssen, forensic psychiatrist, was instructed by the applicant to prepare a
report dated 23 July 2015 and he also gave oral
evidence. Perhaps
unusually, Dr Nielssen did not identify any aspect of the applicant’s
upbringing or mental health as having
contributed to him having perpetrated the
offences. He diagnosed a substance use disorder on the basis of his history of
use of drugs and alcohol but he said nothing about this contributing
to the offending. Consistent with this, the applicant did not
submit to this
Court that there were any subjective factors reducing his moral culpability.
Dr Nielssen
prepared his report on the basis of having seen transcripts of the
applicant’s police interview on 29 March 2013,
but without having
watched the video of the interview. He said that the applicant’s answers
to the police were “animated
and uninhibited, in a way that seemed
consistent with intoxication”. The sentencing judge watched the video of
the applicant’s
police interview and said at [56]:
The delight he expressed in having murdered the two victims is quite chilling.
Honour said that the applicant did not appear to be under the influence of
alcohol during the interview, but said further at [56]
On the other hand, the offender’s lack of judg[e]ment and inhibitions
during the interview is surprising, to say the least,
from an otherwise
intelligent person.
Honour found at [57] that:
In all the circumstances, I cannot escape the conclusion that the offender must
have been affected by some form of drug at the time
of the interview: at least
by the Venlaxafine [sic] which he had reportedly taken earlier that day, and
possibly also by some form
of illegal drug. It is also possible that his
extraordinary frankness during the interview was prompted by some form of
unconscious
relief that the “
” inside him had finally
emerged, so he was no longer going to have to wrestle with his internal
(Emphasis in original.)
Honour also found at [77] that the trigger during the afternoon of 29 March
2013 for the events that followed was probably connected
with the alcohol and
drugs that he had earlier consumed, but made no finding that alcohol or drugs
contributed to the offending itself.
to this, Dr Nielssen’s evidence was that the applicant had told him
that he believed he had had a handful of Venlafaxine
tablets during the day (he
was prescribed Venlafaxine as an antidepressant at the time). Dr Nielssen
gave evidence in cross-examination
that this may have contributed to the
applicant being uninhibited during the police interview.
evidence is not said to go to the applicant’s moral culpability or to the
seriousness of the offending. Rather, the applicant
submits it is relevant to
his prospects of rehabilitation.
to these prospects, Dr Nielssen’s opinion was that the applicant had
good prospects for eventual rehabilitation to the community,
but that the main
issue to be addressed was his substance use disorder as his abuse of stimulant
drugs was likely to have contributed
to his unstable mood and state of mind at
the time of the offending. In his oral evidence Dr Nielssen said that the
applicant had
“quite a scope for personal development” and
“the IQ to take full advantage of anything that’s put to him”.
He reiterated that the key to the applicant’s rehabilitation was his
ability to deal with his use of drugs and alcohol upon
release from prison.
Dr Nielssen agreed that many people who indicate their intention to refrain
from substance abuse do not live
up to their expectations when they are released
from custody. However, he said that “the long period of abstinence [in
seems to help maintain abstinence”.
Yvonne Skinner, forensic psychiatrist who was instructed by the Crown, in her
report dated 7 August 2015 diagnosed the applicant
as suffering from both a
“[s]ubstance abuse disorder” and a “[p]ersonality disorder
characterised by anger, impulsivity
and affective instability”.
(Dr Nielssen said in his oral evidence that diagnoses such as the latter
lack scientific validity
and are unreliable.) Dr Skinner disagreed with
Dr Nielssen that the applicant was unlikely to pose a threat to other
family members
on release, but agreed that the main issue to be addressed was
the applicant’s substance use disorder and that, if he could
abstinence, the risk of reoffending was greatly reduced. She said that his
“prospects for rehabilitation must be considered
sentencing judge accepted that the “deep remorse” which the
applicant had expressed was genuine: at [85]-[86], and
also accepted
Dr Nielssen’s opinion as to the applicant’s prospects of
rehabilitation: at [77].
Submissions
already observed, the applicant accepts the sentencing judge’s findings of
fact and assessment of objective seriousness.
He contends that this Court may
find that the offences involved limited planning. He further contends that his
prospects of rehabilitation
and the protection of the community are of
particular relevance on resentence. He contends that this Court could adopt the
judge’s assessment of his prospects of rehabilitation and her
Honour’s finding as to his genuine deep remorse.
contends that this Court may find that the index offences were an
uncharacteristic aberration. He submits that the additional material
before this Court on resentence shows that he: has availed himself of
opportunities to engage in regular work in custody;
has completed available
programs in custody; has demonstrated a capacity to eventually become a
contributing member of society; has
not been involved in acts of physical
violence although he has, on occasion, expressed verbal threats to staff; and
that, where possible,
has sought to engage with mental health professionals and
has generally participated in a meaningful way. The applicant also submits
it would be open to this Court to reduce his sentences for his guilty plea,
of the CSPA, noting that the sentencing judge did not do so, and
that this Court should apply the statutory ratio of 75% between
the overall
non-parole period and the total effective sentence.
Crown’s key contention, as already noted, is that no lesser sentence is
warranted. The Crown contends that no discount should
be given for the
applicant’s guilty plea, and relies upon
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
Court (Spigelman CJ, Wood CJ at CL, Foster AJA, Grove and
James JJ agreeing) held that “[t]here are crimes that
so offend the
public interest that the maximum sentence, without any discount for any purpose,
is appropriate”. The Crown says
that the applicant’s moral
culpability is high, referring to the sentencing judge’s finding that the
applicant intended
to kill both victims after “nursing violent fantasies
for a considerable time”: at [45]. The Crown also notes that the
Form 1 offences here warrant a greater sentence for count two than
otherwise would have been imposed. The Crown further contends
that no lesser
non-parole period is warranted. The Crown also relies upon the extracts from the
applicant’s custodial records,
which I discuss further below at [
Consideration
where impugned, the applicant is to be resentenced on the basis of the agreed
facts and findings of the sentencing judge which
I have set out above.
can be no doubt that, as the sentencing judge found at [77] and as the applicant
accepts, the applicant’s offending went
“almost to the top of the
range of objective seriousness for murder”. The facts that I have
summarised make this abundantly
clear and show the horrific nature and
devastating impact of his offending. As the sentencing judge observed at [63],
tactic” of breaking the window in the front door of his
victims’ home which the applicant said in his interview was “just
give him the fucken spooks before I killed the cunt” must have meant that
the victims’ last moments “must have
been filled with unimaginable
horror”. The impact of the offending upon the families of the victims, and
upon those who were
forced to witness such horrors, including DB and RC who were
children at the time, is difficult to fathom.
with the sentencing judge’s finding, the applicant must be sentenced on
the basis that the offences were not pursuant
to a deliberately-formed plan of
action that had been hatched well in advance. However, there is no doubt on the
evidence that the
applicant, in the period between August 2009 and the evening
of the offending, had thoughts and made threats of killing family members
including Paul Breen and Ms Crawford, sometimes describing how he would
kill his father, including by stabbing. In that sense, there
was something of a
trajectory which culminated in the offending.
is also no doubt that there was an element of planning and deliberate action
involved in the applicant arming himself and taking
somewhat elaborate steps,
including theft and assaults and attempts to obtain a firearm, to carry out what
he described as his “mission”
to kill Paul Breen and
Ms Crawford. Whilst this occurred only over a relatively short period of
time, this was far from a spur of
the moment display of violent offending. As Dr
Nielssen put it, the applicant’s behaviour was
“purposeful”.
aggravating factors that apply are that the offences were committed in the
presence of children under the age of 18: CSPA, s 21A(2)(ea),
victims’ home: CSPA, s 21A(2)(eb).
to the nine Form 1 offences, which are to be taken into account when
sentencing the applicant on count two, these show that materially
greater weight
should be given when sentencing the applicant for that count, due to the need
for general deterrence and the community’s
entitlement to exact
retribution:
Abbas v The Queen; Bodiotis v The Queen; Taleb v The Queen;
Amoun v The Queen
[2013] NSWCCA 115
231 A Crim R 413
(Bathurst CJ). As is clear from what I have already set out, those offences
were themselves serious, including multiple assaults,
one of which involved the
stabbing of Mr Bowden in the face. Mr Bowden required emergency
surgery on account of his injuries. The
maximum penalty for the offence
pertaining to him was 25 years’ imprisonment:
. Of the remaining eight offences on the Form 1, three offences had
maximum penalties of 20 years’ imprisonment:
, four offences had maximum penalties of 12 years’ imprisonment:
, and one offence had a maximum penalty of
fourteen years’ imprisonment:
the maximum penalties of the Form 1 offences totalled 147 years
imprisonment. Moreover, one of the Form 1 offences arises
applicant’s expressed intention to “knife[]” his mother, and
his explanation that this would have occurred
if the clutch had not burned out
after he left Paul Breen’s house.
of the matters set out above make this a case in which this Court must impose a
sentence that vindicates the dignity of the victims,
the community’s
consideration of the offending, and provides protection to the vulnerable
against the repetition of violence:
Munda v Western Australia
[2013] HCA 38
(French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Gageler
and Keane JJ).
the position taken by both the applicant and the Crown on this appeal, I adopt
the sentencing judge’s findings as to the
applicant’s genuine deep
remorse (noting that it was a generous finding on the evidence before
her Honour) and that he had
very reasonable prospects of rehabilitation,
particularly if he can abstain from drugs and alcohol on release. The events
by the applicant’s affidavit of 3 October 2025 show that he
has participated appropriately in both employment and therapeutic
initiatives
during his time in prison. These are all positive developments. The case notes
attached to Mr Wilczek’s affidavit
sworn 13 October 2025 also
attest to this. They do also, however, disclose that the applicant has continued
to have outbursts and
to use the language, or have thoughts, of harming people.
In particular, and without detracting from other positive comments in the
notes about the applicant during his incarceration:
(1) On 4 April 2017 a psychology case note recorded him saying that he was
“still able to identify when a blackout rage was
likely to happen”
albeit that he said that he would inform staff when he felt he was required to
be locked in his cell.
(2) On 21 July 2017 he was recorded to be aggressive and abusive.
(3) On 20 March 2019 it was recorded that he became angry and disrespectful
to a staff member.
(4) On 24 May 2021 a psychology case note recorded him saying that he
reported elevated stress levels, increased frustration and
that minor things
were resulting in displays of anger including kicking a door. He also disclosed
some fleeting thoughts of harming
others but no intent to act on those thoughts.
It was noted that whilst he was presenting as elevated, his tolerance for
emotion was reduced. On the same day another case note recorded that he
was agitated and had had altercations with staff in the Café
previous weeks.
(5) Later in 2021 there were a number of reports of the applicant speaking
aggressively to correctional staff, and becoming irate,
and on 11 October
2021 his attitude and behaviour was said to have changed and to be worrying.
(6) On 8 July 2022 an incident was recorded where the applicant was yelling
and becoming abusive towards a staff member, and on 3
August 2022 he was
noted to be “particularly elevated”. That day he was recorded as
saying to another inmate, “what
do I have to do start stabbing cunts to be
left alone?”. The next day he was recorded as saying, of his medication,
was like putting a band aid on a shark bite”.
(7) On 12 January 2023 it was said in a psychology case note that there was
a chronic risk of harm to others which “may be
easily triggered”.
The most significant trigger whilst in custody was said to be “negative
interaction with staff, exacerbated
by distrust of staff in general”. In a
further psychology case note dated the following day, some “paranoid like
were noted.
(8) On 3 February 2023 in a psychology case note it was noted that he
“appear[ed] to have made some indirect comments around
harm to staff
recently”. He was also recorded as saying, after a negative interaction,
that “it doesn’t feel good
that he didn’t physically harm the
staff yesterday”.
(9) On 22 February 2023, when the applicant was asking to be moved from a
remand prison, he was reported as saying that he felt that
he was “almost
at exploding point and [was] primed to ‘go off’”.
(10) On 4 October 2023 the applicant was reported to have said,
“I’m getting my one out back if I don’t you will
need to bring
a body bag”. He was reported to have made a similar comment on
29 March 2024, to which he added, “I’ll
knock them and the
officer that brings him. I’m doing 32 years I don’t give a
(11) On 30 September 2024 the applicant was reported as saying that if a
painting of his that had been taken down was “not
found asap [he was]
going to kick off”.
of these incidents involved any physical violence to anyone, and they also have
to be considered in the context of the positive
aspects of the steps the
applicant has taken during his incarceration. They do, however, stand against
the conclusion that his prospects
of rehabilitation should be assessed as having
improved when compared with the sentencing judge’s assessment. This is
particularly
so given the verbal threats and thoughts of harming people that
were described over the period from August 2009 up until the index
consistent with the principles set out above, the nature of the offending is
such that I would not give a discount for the applicant’s
guilty plea as
the community interest in retribution, punishment, community protection and
deterrence can be met only by imposition
of a penalty with no allowance for, or
a reduction of, that discount: CSPA,
This was offending of great
heinousness, so offending the public interest that the full sentence should be
imposed without any discount
for the applicant’s plea:
[158] (Spigelman CJ);
Milat v R; Klein v R
[2014] NSWCCA 29
(RA Hulme J, Bathurst CJ and Hall J agreeing).
my part, I see no reason to depart from the standard statutory non-parole period
of 75% of the sentence: CSPA,
my instinctive synthesis, I would have imposed a sentence slightly
higher than the sentencing judge. However, by analogy with the
usual practice as explained by N Adams J in
, I would not impose a greater sentence. Under
s 53A of the CSPA I would impose an aggregate sentence of 42 years,
with a non-parole
period of 31 years and 6 months. Whilst this is no
lesser head sentence than that imposed by the sentencing judge, it is overall
lesser sentence (for the purposes of
Criminal Appeal
) by reason of my imposition of the statutory ratio. The indicative
sentences that I would have imposed are:
(1) 35 years with a non-parole period of 26 years and 3 months
for count one; and
(2) 37 years with a non-parole period of 27 years and 9 months
for count two.
sentence commences on 29 March 2013. The non-parole period expires on
28 September 2044. The sentence expires on 28 March
orders I propose are:
(1) An extension of time and leave to appeal is granted.
(2) The appeal is allowed.
(3) The sentences imposed by Mathews AJ on 25 November 2015 are
quashed. In lieu thereof the applicant is sentenced to an aggregate
sentence of
imprisonment of 42 years to commence on 29 March 2013 and to expire on
28 March 2055 with a non-parole period of 31 years
and 6 months
to commence on 29 March 2013 and to expire on 28 September 2044.
: I agree with Stern JA.
: I agree with Stern JA.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (356 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter