URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWFTT/2000/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Austin Customs Agents Pty Ltd v Breakfast Bytes Pty Ltd [2000] NSWFTT 8 (2 May 2000)
Fair Trading Tribunal
New South Wales
Consumer Claims Division
AUSTIN CUSTOMS AGENTS PTY LTD
BREAKFAST BYTES PTY LTD
[2000] NSWFTT 8
Austin Customs Agents Pty Ltd
Respondent:
Breakfast Bytes Pty Ltd
File Number:
CO 1999/5599
Catch Words:
Consumer claim – provision of a domain name hosting service –
description of Internet – description of domain names
– definition
and use of a server – authority to act as an agent – ACCC and
principles of Consumer Protection principles
in electronic commerce –
Internet industry draft code of practice – OECD guidelines for consumer
protection in the context
of the Internet – unsolicited goods and
Primary Legislation:
Electronic Commerce Act
Fair Trading Act
Matter for Decision:
Consumer claim
Cases Cited:
Freeman and Lockyer v Buckwurst Park Properties Ltd
Crabtree Vickers Pty Ltd v Australian Direct Mail Advertising and Addressing
[1975] HCA 49
(1975) 133 CLR 72
Pavey and Mathews Pty Ltd v Paul, Deane J
Christian and Nielsen Pty Ltd v Goliath Portland Cement Company Ltd (Full
Court – SCT of Tasmania)
P H Molony, Senior Member
Hearing dates:
14 February 2000
Submissions closed:
Date of Decision:
REPRESENTATION
Mr Smith, director of Applicant
Respondent:
Mr Todd, director of Respondent
I declare that the Applicant Austin Customs Brokers Pty Ltd is not indebted
to and does not owe the Respondent Breakfast Bytes Pty
Ltd any monies for the
provision of domain name hosting services, and for time or debt default charges
associated with the provision
of domain name hosting services by the Respondent,
for the domain names customsagent.net, customsagents.net and customsbrokers.net,
in the period November 1998 to 30 June 2000.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1) This application was filed on 1 October 1999. In it, the
Applicant Austin Customs Brokers Pty Ltd (Austins) seeks an order that
not have to pay any of the money demanded of it by the Respondent Breakfast
Bytes Pty Ltd (Breakfast Bytes) for domain name
hosting services provided by the
Respondent. The application was initially listed before another Member of the
Tribunal on 13 January
2000, who disqualified herself from the hearing. As a
result the application was re-listed for hearing before me on 14 February
At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision because of the novelty
of the issues raised.
2) The application is factually and technically complex, and
raises interesting issues of law in relation to the provision of digital
services over the Internet. During the course of the hearing sworn evidence was
taken from the Austin's representative Mr Smith,
Mr Lloyd Austin, a director of
the Austin's, and Breakfast Bytes' representative, Mr Todd. Ms Brook, another
director of Breakfast
Bytes also attended the hearing and was sworn in, but did
not give evidence. In reality there was little dispute between the parties
to the factual background to the application, their dispute was as to the legal
consequences which flowed from those facts. In
order to properly understand the
nature of the dispute and the legal issues raised, it is first necessary to
traverse some of the
technical issues and terms raised by the application. I do
so as simply as possible.
The Domain Name System and
Domain Name Servers
3) The Internet is a vast array of computers, be they single
computers, part of a local area network (LAN) or a wide area network
operated by individuals, governments, educational institutions or industry,
which are able to communicate with each other
by means of a series of overlayed
communication protocols called Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol
TCP/IP breaks data into packets or
datagrams which are transmitted across the networks to their destination. Each
packet does not
necessarily follow the same path to its destination, but the
transmitting computer must know the destination in order for data to
successfully transmitted.
Each computer
interfacing with the Internet therefore is allocated an IP address, which is a
unique 32 bit number, so that data
can be transmitted to it. Computers that
dial in to an Internet Service Provider (ISP) using a modem to gain access to
the Internet,
usually do not have a permanent IP address, but are allocated an
IP address each time they log onto their ISP, which corresponds
address of each modem supported by the
4) IP addresses are long and difficult to remember: consisting of
four octets between 1 and 255. A full TCP/IP address includes a
communications
port number.
In order to make the Internet
easier for people to navigate the Domain Name System (DNS) was created. Put
simply, the DNS allocates
unique, more user friendly domain names to each IP
. Thus the domain name
www.howstuffworks.com
refers to - or
is mapped to - the IP address 216.27.61.127.
The organisation and allocation of domain names has long been the subject of
tension and debate, and has recently undergone significant
5) A domain name is made up of a number of components. These
a) the host name (www)
b) the domain name (howstuffworks), and
c) the top-level domain name (com).
Top-level domain names may be com, net, edu, org or gov, each of
which is indicative of a certain type of user
Com or net is indicative of a commercial organisation. Org commonly indicates a
non-commercial organisation, edu an educational
institution, and gov an arm of
government. In addition there are national domains which indicate the country
in which a domain is
registered, though not necessarily located. The national
domain name "au" represents Australia, "uk" the United Kingdom, and "fr"
Thus the name
www.nsw.gov.au
is the domain
name of the New South Wales government. In the top level domains there is no
national country identifier.
6) Domain names are registered to their users. It is said that
there is no ownership of domain names although commercial experience
to the contrary
. Registration systems have
been established in the top-level and country level domains to ensure that each
domain name remains unique.
In the top-level domain the Registry is now run by
Network Solutions a company established for that
. In the ".au" domain the Registry is
now run by Melbourne IT
, a recently floated
company which took over the Registry role from the University of Melbourne. The
registration of domain names
is a matter governed by international protocols and
agreements, necessary to ensure the operation of the domain name system, and
orderly integration of, as well as navigation of the world wide web (the
7) A domain name must have an IP address to which it refers or is
mapped. It is possible for there to be a number of domain names
mapped to the
same IP address. To enable this to occur there are a multiplicity of domain
name servers, which serve the purpose
of translating domain names to IP
addresses, thereby enabling navigation of the
. Thus, when an individual is
using browser software, such as Netscape Navigator or Internet Explorer, to view
materials on the Internet,
he or she will follow a link to or enter the
universal resource locater (URL) of the site they wish to visit , such
http://www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au/ftt/ftt.nsf/pages/index
8) The "http" indicates the protocol they wish to use: in this
case hyper-text transfer protocol one of the suite of protocols contained
TCP/IP. It is sometimes easier to think of protocols as systems for delivery of
Internet services. Thus http refers to the
world wide web service which provides
access to documents, graphics and text using hyper-text mark-up language
. FTP refers to file transfer
protocol which is the mechanism for transferring data files across the Internet.
Other services include
telnet, news, e-mail and chat. The domain name above
indicates the lawlink site maintained by the New South Wales government. The
balance of the address indicates which hyper-text page, in which directory, at
the site is being sought. In this example it is the
Trading Tribunal. When the browser user enters this address in the browser
location bar (or presses a link
to that page), the browser communicates with one
or a series of domain name servers to translate the name
www.lawlink.nsw.gov.au
address. The browser then forms a connection with the server at the IP address,
sends a GET request for the relevant
page, and the server then transfers the
html text for the page back to the browser which reads the html document and
displays it
properly formatted on the
. In reality the system is often
more complicated than that, involving the name server requesting further
information from other
DNS servers (often referred to as root
9) Frequently, but by no means always, the domain name server will
be managed and configured by the ISP which hosts the web site of
the domain in
question. Larger companies and government departments may have their own domain
name servers, dealing with domains
within their domain, and have all their web
pages and sites on their own servers. In other cases the web-site may be hosted
ISP on a server in one location, but the domain name server which refers to
it may be separately operated and located. Domain name
servers in effect run an
inter-related database of domain names and equivalent IP addresses, which point
to the IP addresses of a
multiplicity of domains. For the purpose of these
reasons the provision of a DNS server configured for an IP address will be
to as DNS hosting, which needs to be contrasted with the provision of
hard disk space on a server with a permanent connection to
the Internet for the
purpose of displaying information on the world wide web, and disseminating
information over the Internet. The
latter will be referred to as Website
hosting. When a website is created or moved, the DNS system requires that the
domain name
Registry and the DNS hosting service - if separate from the Website
hosting service - be notified of the change so that the DNS server's
configuration can be changed: this is known as a change of
delegation.
10) In order to avoid confusion, it is worth diverting to consider
the meaning of the word server. As the name implies a server provides
users of the Internet. Those users are using computers, which the same
terminology refers to as clients: they receive rather
than supply data. It is
possible for a single computer to be both a client and a server. Servers, by
their nature can serve different
purposes and are differently configured
depending upon the use to which they are being put; eg, web servers, domain name
and ftp servers. One thing they all share in common is the fact that
they have a permanent connection to the Internet. A single
server may be
configured to serve a number of purposes, in which case the service which it is
supplying is accessed by specifying
the port address of that service as part of
the TCP/IP address. Name servers are commonly found at port 42, while world
servers are commonly found at port 80. These are used as the default
port addresses for Internet communications
11) With that technical background in mind I turn to the issues
raised by this application.
The Evidence
12) In October 1997 Austins commenced negotiations with an
Internet web-site builder called Net Rezults Pty Ltd (Net Rezults), with
to securing the registration of a number of domain names for use in conjunction
with a web-site which the applicant was considering
having Net Rezults build for
it. In due course Net Results procured for Austins the registration of three
domain names at a cost
of $595.00 each. These were:
a) customsbrokers.net
b) customsagent.net
c) customsagents.net
Each of these domain names are what is termed top level domain
names and were registered through Network Solutions, the Registrar
of top level
domain names in the United States, on 18 January 1998. The Registration details
for each domain name are the same.
They show the Registrant to be Austin
Customs Agents, the administrative contact to be Mr Smith, and the technical and
billing contact
to be Mr Jackson-Gross of Net Rezults.
13) In a letter from Net Rezults to Austins dated 24 October 1997
Net Rezults wrote, among other things:
charge $595 per domain name. This is negotiable if you purchase a quantity of
domain names. This covers the registration fee,
hosting of the name for an
unlimited period until you wish to activate your site. It includes the cost of
hyperlinking to any other
web address. For example your company
14) Mr Todd gave evidence that on the same day as Net Rezults
registered the domain names with Network Solutions, 18 January 1998,
Bytes configured the domain names on its DNS servers, in accordance with
e-mailed instructions received from Network Solutions.
They could tell they were
referred by Net Rezults because of the billing and technical contacts. He
explained that Breakfast Bytes
had a standing arrangement with Net Rezults, to
configure DNS servers on behalf of Net Rezults' clients, and to issue regular,
bulk bills to Net Rezults for those services provided to its customers.
Mr Todd was anxious to make it clear that the DNS services
provided by Breakfast
Bytes are separate and distinct from the domain name registry services provided
by Network Solutions.
15) Following discussions between the Austins and Net Rezults, on
12 February 1998 Net Rezults wrote to Mr Smith as follows:
Further to our conversation
today, I have drawn up the details of the construction of your
Included in the cost of each of your domain names are registration
with all 21 search engines, both in Australia and Internationally.
The cost of your website will include 3 web pages including all
frames, simple animation and your e-mail addresses, and free hosting
maintenance for 12 months, all for just $1,500.00.
Keith may I also ask you to complete the questionnaire, so I can
hand the information to our graphic designers to enable us to make
biggest custom agents/brokers on the world wide web.
16) In response Mr Smith completed the Internet questionnaire and
faxed it to Net Rezults on 16 February 1998. On the same day Net
Rezults faxed
an invoice to the Applicant which was paid. Subsequently, Net Rezults proceeded
to develop a small website for the
Applicant and advised the Applicant of how to
access the proposed pages over the Internet. The address given was
http://www.thepla.net/~rezults/austin/
This address indicates that - at that time - Net Rezults had not established a
separate Web site for Austins, and had developed
the Web pages for viewing on
www.thepla.net
. This is consistent with
Breakfast Bytes statement that none of Austin's various domains were ever Web
hosted, as Breakfast Bytes
never received a delegation for them. On 16 March
1998 the Applicant wrote to Net Rezults setting out the changes it wanted to the
text and design of the web pages.
17) In April 1998 Mr Smith became concerned when he was unable to
access the company website over the Internet at www.thepla.net.
He went to Net
Rezults offices in Sussex Street and was told that Net Rezults had gone 'down
the tube'. He subsequently verified
this with the Australian Securities
Industry Commission. Mr Smith explained that he thought this meant that Austins
had not only
lost its investment in the website, but had also lost its domain
18) Mr Todd said that in May 1998 he became aware that Net Rezults
was in liquidation. At that time Breakfast Bytes was providing
DNS hosting
services to approximately 2,500 of Net Rezults customers. Over the next six
months Mr Todd said Breakfast Bytes billed
Net Rezults care of the liquidator
for these services. He said that this was in accordance with Breakfast Bytes
policy of invoicing
the billing contact first. When this resulted in no
payments being forthcoming Breakfast Bytes decided to bill the clients directly.
They did so on the basis of advice that the individual clients were their
customers, not Net Rezults. Mr Todd explained that their
aim was to get
customers to ring Breakfast Bytes in the hope of sorting the situation
19) On 4 December 1998 Breakfast Bytes faxed an invoice to
Austins. The invoice was for $120.00, payable within 14 days, being $60.00
for Domain Name Hosting of customsagents.net and customsbrokers.net for the
period November 1998 to 30 June 1999. Mr Todd explained
that at that time
Breakfast Bytes had not associated the domain name customsagent.net with
Austin's. The invoice from Breakfast Bytes
showed a post office box address
only, and contained a number of warnings and conditions which I set out in
FEES INCLUDE ADMINISTRATION AND HOSTING UNTIL 30 JUNE 1999 WHEN A RENEWAL WILL
BE ISSUED FOR HOSTING SERVICES ONLY.
IF YOU HAVE CANCELLED THIS SERVICE YOU MUST NOTIFY BREAKFAST BYTES
IN WRITING. YOU ARE LIABLE FOR ALL FEES AND CHARGES UP TO THE
CANCELLATION OTICE IN WRTING. A SERVICE IS NOT CANCELLED AND WILL CONTINUE TO
ACCRUE DEBT UNTIL NOTICE IS PROVIDED IN WRITING.
1. Domain Authorities for Names hosted and not paid within 14 days
of this invoice will be notified to release the domain name.
2. Cleared payments must be made by the due date shown on this
3. If payment is made by cheque, a $30.00 cheque clearance fee must
be included if the cheque is sent less than seven days before
the due date.
Failure to include the $30.00 fee could deem your payment overdue if the funds
are not cleared by the due date.
4. You are liable for any cheque and banking fees charged to
Breakfast Bytes if the bank does not honour your cheque. A fee of $30.00
charged to you for each dishonour.
5. Overdue invoices will attract administration and collection fee
of $150 per hour or part thereof for each attempted collection.
6. If you incorrectly mark the cheque, you are liable for any costs
associated with resolving payment and clearance of the cheque
at the rate of
$150 per hour or part thereof.
7. Discounts are provided on the basis that payment is made by the
due date. This will ensure further invoices will also be
discounted.
8. Discounts are given at the discretion of the directors of
Breakfast Bytes Pty Ltd.
20) Mr Smith said that when he received this invoice he noticed a
number of things about it:
a) it was from a company he had never heard of, Breakfast
b) it did not disclose a street address for Breakfast Bytes; and
c) it related to only two domain names.
His initial reaction was that it was some sort of 'scam'. He
decided not to react or reply to it.
21) On 4 December 1998 Breakfast Bytes followed up the invoice
with a telephone call, leaving a message for Mr Smith who was out of
the office.
He returned that call on 14 December 1999 at 9:35am. After a discussion,
lasting 9 minutes according to Breakfast Bytes,
during which the situation was
reviewed, Mr Smith said he wanted to make further inquiries about Breakfast
Bytes. Mr Todd said it
was apparent from this discussion that Mr Smith did not
realise that the domain names were still registered to Austins.
22) On 15 December 1999 at 1:01pm Breakfast Bytes rang Austins and
spoke with Mr Smith for an hour. Mr Todd said that the nature
of the domain
name hosting services provided by Breakfast Bytes was explained to Mr Smith. He
was told that Net Rezults, as Austin's
agent, had arranged for Breakfast Bytes
to provide domain name hosting services for Austin's domain names in January
1998. He was
told that companies that did not have the facilities to offer
domain name hosting services, frequently arranged for Breakfast Bytes
those services to their clients. He was told that only Austins could deregister
the domain names or change the domain
name server with Network Solutions,
because Breakfast Bytes was prohibited from doing so under its agreement with
Network Solutions.
He was told about the other services offered by Breakfast
Bytes including Web site hosting. He requested a copy of Breakfast Bytes
standard agreement and a copy of the original invoice. These were faxed to him.
Mr Smith agreed with Mr Todd's summary of this conversation.
23) There was no further contact between Breakfast Bytes and
Austins until 2 February 1999 when Breakfast Bytes rang Mr Smith who
confused about the agreement. The agreement was explained to him and he was
asked when he would be paying the invoice. He said
he would call back soon.
This call lasted 10 minutes. On 19 February 1999 Mr Smith wrote to Mr Todd.
This was unsuccessfully faxed
to Breakfast Bytes and so was ultimately posted on
22 February 1999, and received on 24 February 2000. Mr Smith
have been making some enquires. Both of the domain names mentioned in your
invoice are registered to www.ah.net and
to Austin Customs, and there
is no connection to B/Bytes. I fail to see why we should agree to pay anything
in these circumstances.
apparently something to do with the AUX MEDIA GROUP, and not B/Bytes. If the
domain names are not registered to Austin Customs
and are not hosted in some
sort of beneficial and direct way by B/Bytes, then there is nothing to be paid
for. Even if those names
could be registered to us (which I doubt would
happen), we would get "zilch" from them in benefits to our company from B/Bytes.
but no thanks.
Keith Smith
24) On 25 February 1999 Breakfast Bytes called Austins and left a
message for Mr Smith. On the same day Breakfast Bytes conducted
a search of
the domain name registry database which showed that both customsagents.net and
customsbrokers.net had been registered
to Austins on 18 January 1998. Copies of
these searches were tendered during the hearing. On the same day Breakfast
Bytes spoke
with a Mr Sharp from Austins, who denied that Austins was liable for
Breakfast Bytes' fees. Mr Todd said that Mr Sharp was asked
to arrange for the
registration of customsagents.net and customsbrokers.net to be terminated if
Breakfast Bytes’ services were
not wanted. Mr Todd explained that the
registration with Network Solutions lasted for two years, and that Breakfast
Bytes had no
authority remove them from the server unless Network Solutions was
advised of a cancellation or transfer to a different DNS server.
25) On 14 March 1999 Breakfast Bytes discovered that it was also
providing domain name hosting for Austins in the name customsagent.net.
Austins on 18 January 1998, and that all three
names remained registered. On 13
April 1999 Breakfast Bytes sent Austins a new invoice this time for a total of
$646.00 comprised
a) the initial $120.00;
b) 94 minutes of time charges - relating to telephone calls with
Austins - charged at $4.00 a minute ($240.00 an hour); and
c) $140.00 being four separate debt collection charges of $35.00
each, relating to an allocated potion of four separate conversations
Austins, two of which were also the subject of the time charges mentioned above.
The charges made are best illustrated in a table.
Time Charged
Time Charge
Debt Collection Time
Debt Collection Charge
26) Mr Smith replied to this invoice by fax on 14 April 1999. In
summary he denied having any contract with Breakfast Bytes, and
refused to pay
for unsolicited and 'not needed' services. There then ensued a series of
increasingly hostile communications which
there is little value n repeating
here. Of note is that:
a) on 20 April 1999 Mr Todd wrote to Mr Smith advising, among
other things,
provided services to
Breakfast Bytes and that Breakfast Bytes had nothing to do with the AUX Media
b) on 25 July 1999 Breakfast Bytes faxed Austins an additional
invoice for $590.67 (making the total owing $1,327,71) comprised
i) an account keeping fee (time allocated 1 minute 26 seconds) of
ii) time based consultancy fees for the period 14 April 1999 to 20
April 1999 totalling 18 minutes and 10 seconds charged at $4.00
iii) domain name hosting fees for the 1999-2000 financial year of
$468.00; and
iv) interest due of $15.23.
Submissions
Made by the Parties
27) Austins' submissions in this case were simple. Austins say
that there is not and never was any contractual relationship between
Breakfast Bytes. Austins contract was with Net Rezults. Under the terms of
that contract Net Rezults were to provide them
with all relevant services
including domain name hosting. Austins deny that Net Rezults was ever
authorised to enter contractual
relationships on their behalf.
28) Breakfast Bytes says that Net Rezults at all times acted as
agent for Austins in its dealings with Breakfast Bytes. While the
arrangement between Net Rezults and Breakfast Bytes is not documented, Breakfast
Bytes implicitly argued that it is industry
practice for Website developers such
as Net Rezults to act as agent for their principals when arranging for domain
name hosting services.
In doing so Net Rezults relied on the nature of the
services it provides, and the fact that those services can only be terminated
the cancellation of the domain name registration, or a transfer of domain name
servers, which under Network Solutions domain name
policy and agreements can
only be occur at the request of the Registrants administrative contact. Mr Todd
referred to a copy of
Network Solutions standard contract at the time in support
of this. He also pointed to the fact that the standard Network Solutions
contract made it clear that a web site developer registering a domain name for a
client was doing so as agent for the client. He
argued that the same
relationship must exist when a web site developer engages a domain name hosting
provider to host a domain name,
because the web site developer had no ongoing
control with respect to the domain name.
29) Alternately, Mr Todd argued that Breakfast Bytes was entitled
to recover its fees from Austins pursuant to sections 58 of the
Fair Trading Act
30) In considering the evidence given in the course of the
hearing, I was impressed by the technological knowledge and the depth of
preparation displayed by Mr Todd. I was similarly persuaded that he has little
tolerance for those who do not grasp, and have little
understanding of, the
technicalities of cyberspace. I was left with the definite impression that he
does not tolerate those he considers
ignorant gladly, and has difficulty in
making himself understood by those who do not share his technical expertise.
This may, in
part, explain why this dispute has reached the stage it has.
Correspondingly, I was satisfied that Mr Smith from Austins had no
understanding
of the technology, systems or industry he was dealing with when he embarked on
the task of putting his company on the
Internet. While Mr Smith said in the
course of evidence that he had learned a lot during the course of the dispute,
what knowledge
he had gained was only minimal. He clearly had no understanding
of the technical matters I have sought to outline earlier in these
reasons, he
did not understand the domain name registration system, and displayed an
understandable suspicion of the unknown when
discussing these matters. That
also, I suspect, is a contributing factor to the escalation of this dispute.
Nonetheless I was satisfied
that both of them did their best to give the
Tribunal a full and complete picture of what had transpired.
31) Having considered the evidence I make the following findings
a) In early January 1998 Austins engaged Net Rezults to register
domain names on its behalf. Included in the fee Austins paid Net
Rezults was
provision for:
i) all registration fees;
ii) hosting of the name for an unlimited period;
iii) hyperlinking to any other web address.
b) On 18 January 1998 Net Rezults procured the registration of the
following domain names on Austins' behalf with Network Solutions:
i) customsbrokers.net
ii) customsagent.net
iii) customsagents.net
c) On 18 January 1999, pursuant to an arrangement in place between
Net Rezults and Breakfast Bytes, Breakfast Bytes commenced providing
DNS hosting
services for Austins' three domain names, and in accordance with the arrangement
in place, billed Net Rezults for those
d) In February 1998 Austins engaged Net Rezults to develop a web
site for it, which the domain names were intended to refer to.
e) Net Rezults commenced development of the Austins' web site, and
in March 1998 that development reached the stage whereby draft
viewable over the Internet at Net Rezults' development site.
f) In April 1998 Net Rezults ceased trading and was subsequently
placed in liquidation in May 1998.
g) Net Rezults did not complete the development of Austin's web
site, nor arrange for the hosting of that web site, nor for the domain
refer to such a web site.
h) Net Rezults ceased paying Breakfast Bytes for DNS hosting
services provided by Breakfast Bytes for Net Rezults' clients.
i) On 11 December 1998 Breakfast Bytes invoiced Austins for the
supply of DNS hosting services from November 1998 to 30 June 1999.
Its invoice
set out various conditions of trade, especially with respect to default in
j) Austins did not accept liability for Breakfast Bytes' invoice
and denied that Breakfast Bytes was providing it with any
k) Breakfast Bytes continued to provide DNS hosting services for
the three domain names registered to Austins, and requested Austins
the registrations if it was not going to pay for the DNS hosting services.
Breakfast Bytes advised Austins that it was
unable to unilaterally terminate the
services because of its agreement with Network Solutions.
l) In the period since December 1998:
i) Breakfast Bytes has continued to supply the DNS hosting
ii) Austins have refused to acknowledge that that service was
being provided;
iii) Breakfast Bytes have invoiced Austins for the delivery of the
DNS hosting services together with substantial time charges for
discussions with
Austins about the dispute and debt recovery charges.
Application
32) This case highlights difficulties which are being, and will
continue to be experienced, in adapting the law to modern technology.
in my view, highlights the tendency of those engaged in digital commerce to let
technological solutions overcome good business
practice, and presume a license
which the law has not readily granted to others. An example can be readily
found in Breakfast Bytes
failure to communicate at all with those it argues are
its clients, preferring instead the ease of digital communication with the
middlemen who introduce those clients. It is paradoxical that, at the same
time, technology enabled the first direct contact with
those clients to be the
dispatch, by fax, of invoices generated by an automated billing process capable
of time charging to the second.
I suspect a simple letter of explanation may
have been more successful with Austins. Some of these difficulties will be
by the introduction of the Electronic Commerce Act 1999
which seeks to treat digital and
written communications equally, adopting the principles of functional
equivalence and media neutrality.
33) A detailed examination of all communications between Austins
and Net Rezults makes it clear that at no time did Austins expressly
Net Rezults to act as its agent in procuring domain name or web hosting services
on its behalf. Rather it contracted with
Net Rezults to supply those services.
I think an argument can be advanced that Austins impliedly authorised Net
Rezults to act as
its agent in procuring the registration of the domain names
with Network Solutions, as it was clearly the understanding of both Austins
Net Rezults that the domain names had to be registered with a third party. In
those circumstances an agency might be implied
to give business efficacy to the
In any case, I have no doubt
from Mr Smith's evidence that Austins wish to ratify Net Rezults' conduct in
registering the domain
names. That, however, is not the issue here. With
respect to DNS hosting services Net Rezults told Austins that for payment of
fee Austins would receive, among other things, 'hosting of the name for an
unlimited period until you wish to activate your site'.
Those words are
indicative of a sale of services.
34) Breakfast Bytes argues that its arrangement with Net Rezults
and other web site developers is predicated on the web site developers
agent of their principals. The fact that the principals were not billed by
Breakfast Bytes militates against this. Why
bill the agent of a disclosed
principal, not the principal? The billing of the web developer is strong
evidence that the web developer
is the client, who with the knowledge and
consent of Breakfast Bytes, is reselling the DNS hosting services to its
clients. It is
a relationship analogous to that of a builder, who engages
various expert sub-contractors to work on the building site, and who is
responsible for the payment of those sub-contractors. The builder sells the
construction of the building to his or her client as
a package. I am reinforced
in this conclusion by the failure of Breakfast Bytes to produce any
documentation as to the arrangement
it had 'in place' with Net Rezults, and the
practice of Breakfast Bytes in not communicating with its alleged clients. It
be a simple matter for Breakfast Bytes to automate an e-mail notification
of its services to new clients introduced by web developers,
without the need to
resort to more mundane methods of communication. It could have done so with
Austins. Mr Smith’s e-mail
address was registered with Network Solutions.
That it did nothing at all, is confirmatory of the fact that its client was Net
rather than Austins. Further, it is clear that Net Rezults did not
pass Breakfast Bytes fees on to Austins for payment as one would
expect in the
case of an agency. Rather, it aggregated Breakfast Bytes services with those
purchased from others, into an overall
domain name registration package it
offered Austins, which clearly included an element of profit for Net Rezults.
This is redolent
of a relationship of a seller and purchaser, not that of agent
and principal.
35) Breakfast Bytes relies on the nature of Network Solutions
rules with respect to the cancellation of domain name registrations,
transfer of DNS hosting services as supporting its contention that Net Rezults
acted as Austins' agent. As I understand it
the reasoning underlying this is
that, as only Austins can terminate the registration or transfer the DNS hosting
service for the
domain names, under the terms of their registration with Network
Solutions, Net Rezults cannot be Breakfast Bytes' client as they
do not have the
authority to change the registration details. Only Austins' have that
authority, ipso facto, they must be Breakfast
Bytes' client. This reasoning is
syllogistic, requiring acceptance of the proposition that a client must have
authority to deal with
Network Solutions in order to contract with Breakfast
Bytes for DNS hosting services. Yet no such condition or warranty by the client
(or indeed by Net Rezults as putative agent), appears on any of the
documentation produced by Breakfast Bytes. To return to the
building analogy. A
builder is engaged to prepare the site and undertake the building works. The
owner requires and obtains an excavation
permit to prepare the site. The
builder in turn engages a specialist excavator to do the excavation. After
commencing work at the
site the excavator advises the builder that because of
rock it will be necessary to apply for a modification to the permit. As the
owner must apply for the permit, the Council will not recognise an application
in the Builder's name, does that change the legal
relationships between the
parties? Does the Builder become the agent of the owner with respect to the
excavator, because only the
owner can apply to change the permit? I think not.
Yet that is the logic underlying Breakfast Bytes' contention with respect to
only Austins being able to change the domain name registration details with
Network Solutions.
36) The only other means by which it can be argued that Net
Rezults acted as Austins agent with respect to Breakfast Bytes is by application
of the doctrine of ostensible authority. In Freeman & Lockyer v Buckwurst
Park Properties Ltd
in a frequently quoted
passage Lord Diplock said
An "apparent" or "ostensible" authority [as compared to actual authority] is a
legal relationship created between the principal and
the contractor, created by
a representation, made by the principal to the contractor, intended to be and in
fact acted upon by the
contractor, that the agent has authority to enter on
behalf of the principal into a contract of a kind within the scope of the
authority, so as to render the principal liable to perform any
obligations imposed upon him by the contract. To the relationship
so created the
agent is a stranger. He need not be (although he generally is) aware of the
representation, but he must not purport
to make the agreement as principal
himself. The representation, when acted upon by the contractor by entering into
a contract with
the agent, operates an estoppel, preventing the principal
asserting that he is not bound by the contract. It is irrelevant whether
agent has actual authority to enter the contract.
The doctrine of ostensible authority clearly has no application
here, as there is no evidence of Austins at any time making any representation
to Breakfast Bytes, let alone one with respect to Net Rezults having authority
to act on its behalf
. It is worth
repeating that Breakfast Bytes configured the DNS server for Austins' domain
names, upon receipt of e-mailed advice
from Network Solutions, in accordance
with an agreement in place with Net Rezults. At no time prior to the DNS
servers being configured
was there any contact between Austins and Breakfast
37) I therefore am not satisfied that Net Rezults acted as
Austins' agent. The contract for the provision of DNS hosting services
between Breakfast Bytes and Net Rezults. It can be understood as a sub-contract
entered into by Net Rezults in fulfilling
its contractual obligations to
38) In passing I note that the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission has published a set of principles called, Consumer Protection
Principles in Electronic-Commerce.
these principles are those that exhort on line businesses to:
Provide easily accessible, accurate information about your identity and physical
location, and about the goods and services you offer
Provide customers with accurate information related to the terms and
conditions of the transaction. ...
Allow your customers to indicate clearly that they intend to make a
purchase in a manner that allows them to both identify precisely
the goods or
services they wish to purchase and maintain a complete and accurate record of
the transaction.
Develop and implement mechanisms to provide consumers with a
multi-step confirmation process.
Have in place fair and effective policies and internal mechanisms to
address and respond to consumer complaints and difficulties within
a reasonable
time, without undue cost to the consumer, and without prejudice to judicial
While these principles do not have legislative status they reflect
a standard of probity and fairness in on-line business transactions
providers should aim to achieve. Similar principles can be found in the
Internet Industry Draft Code of Practice,
and in the OECD Guidelines for Consumer Protection in the Context of the
Internet. I observe that Breakfast Bytes breached each
and everyone of these
principles in its dealing with Austins, who it identified as its client. The
use it made of its charging and
default policy in attempting to intimidate
Austins into paying its account was clearly unfair. A glance at the table on
charges unilaterally levied against Austins, amply demonstrates the
use to which these policies were put. As I have found that there
is no contract
between Austins and Breakfast Bytes I do not need to explore those issues
39) Mr Todd for Breakfast Bytes argued that if there was no
contractual relationship between Breakfast Bytes and Austins, Breakfast
was nonetheless entitled to recover its charges pursuant to section 58 of the
Fair Trading Act 1987
which deals with the provision of unsolicited goods and
services. Relevantly it provides:
58 Assertion of right to payment for unsolicited
goods or services, or for making entry in directory (TPA
(2) A person shall not, in trade or commerce, assert a right to
payment from another person for unsolicited services unless the person
the right has reasonable cause to believe that there is a right to
(5) For the purposes of this section, a person shall be taken to
assert a right to payment from another person for unsolicited goods
unsolicited services, or of a charge for the making of an entry in a directory,
if the first-mentioned person:
(a) makes a demand for the payment or asserts a present or
prospective right to the payment,
(b) threatens to bring any legal proceedings with a view to
obtaining the payment,
(c) places or causes to be placed the name of the other person on a
list of defaulters or debtors, or threatens to do so, with a
view to obtaining
the payment,
(d) invokes or causes to be invoked any other collection procedure,
or threatens to do so, with a view to obtaining the payment,
(e) sends any invoice or other document stating the amount of the
payment or setting out the price of the goods or services or the
charge for the
making of the entry and not stating as prominently (or more prominently) that no
claim is made to the payment, or
to payment of the price or charge, as the case
(7) For the purposes of this section, an invoice or other document
purporting to have been sent by or on behalf of a person shall
be deemed to have
been sent by that person unless the contrary is established.
(8) In a proceeding against a person in respect of a contravention
of this section:
(a) in the case of a contravention constituted by asserting a right
to payment from another person for unsolicited goods or unsolicited
services the
burden lies on the defendant of proving that the defendant had reasonable cause
to believe that there was a right to
payment, or
40) Section 58 is a provision which, among other things, seeks to
prevent people demanding payment for the provision of unsolicited
unless they have reasonable cause for believing there is a right to payment. It
does not provide that a person who has
reasonable cause for believing there is a
right to payment, is entitled to payment. In order to recover payment that
person must
establish that right to payment. In other words, section 58 deals
with the circumstances in which a person may demand payment for
unsolicited
services, but does not give a right to recover payment for unsolicited services.
The section therefore can be of no assistance
to Breakfast Bytes in attempting
to recover from Austins, as it does not confer a right of action. Accordingly,
I do not intend
to further consider the applicability of the section to this
case. There was an issue as to whether Breakfast Bytes could recover
unsolicited services under section 59 of the
Fair Trading Act
, but that deals
with the liability of recipients of unsolicited goods, not
41) One further issue arises from the way Mr Todd presented
Breakfast Bytes' case: whether Breakfast Bytes is entitled to recover
of the services it provided to Austins by application of the doctrine of
restitution for unjust enrichment. A constant
theme of his argument was that
Austins were receiving DNS hosting at the cost of Breakfast Bytes, but at no
cost to Austins. In
Pavey & Matthews Pty Ltd v
Deane J said of the concept of unjust
It constitutes a unifying legal concept which explains why the law recognizes,
in a variety of distinct categories of case, an obligation
on the part of a
defendant to make fair and just restitution for a benefit derived at the expense
of a plaintiff and which assists
in the determination, by the ordinary processes
of legal reasoning, of the question whether the law should, in justice,
such an obligation in a new or developing category of case (see
Muschinski v. Dodds
(1985) 60 ALJR 52, at p 67;
[1985] HCA 78
, at p 455;
Goff & Jones, op. cit., at pp 11ff.). In a category of case where the law
recognizes an obligation to pay a reasonable
remuneration or compensation for a
benefit actually or constructively accepted, the general concept of restitution
or unjust enrichment
is, as is pointed out subsequently in this judgment, also
relevant, in a more direct sense, to the identification of the proper basis
which the quantum of remuneration or compensation should be ascertained in that
particular category of case.
42) Earlier,
His Honour said
when discussing cases in which parties had been able to reclaim moneys wrongly
paid on the basis of an implied (or
quasi) contract:
In that ... category of case, the tendency of common lawyers to speak in terms
of implied contract rather than in terms of an obligation
imposed by law (see,
e.g., per Salter J
., Scott v. Pattison
(1923) 2 KB 723
, at pp 727-728)
should be recognized as but a reflection of the influence of discarded fictions,
buried forms of action and the conventional
conviction that, if a common law
claim could not properly be framed in tort, it must necessarily be dressed in
the language of contract.
That tendency should not be allowed to conceal the
fact that, in that category of case, the action was not based upon a genuine
agreement at all. Indeed, if there was a valid and enforceable agreement
governing the claimant's right to compensation, there would
be neither occasion
nor legal justification for the law to superimpose or impute an obligation or
promise to pay a reasonable remuneration.
The quasi-contractual obligation to
pay fair and just compensation for a benefit which has been accepted will only
arise in a case
where there is no applicable genuine agreement or where such an
agreement is frustrated, avoided or unenforceable. In such a case,
very fact that there is no genuine agreement or that the genuine agreement is
frustrated, avoided or unenforceable that
provides the occasion for (and part of
the circumstances giving rise to) the imposition by the law of the obligation to
make restitution.
Mason and Wilson JJ said of the application of the doctrine to
cases in which there was a subsisting
Where work is done by a plaintiff under a contract which expressly or impliedly
provides for the plaintiff's remuneration, there
is no ground in restitution or
unjust enrichment for imposing an obligation to pay remuneration different from
the agreed remuneration.
43) In this case there was no contract between Breakfast Bytes and
Austins. There was, however, a contract between Breakfast Bytes
and Net Rezults.
In Christiani & Nielsen Pty Ltd v Goliath Portland Cement Company
the Full Court of the Supreme Court
of Tasmania considered an appeal against an order striking out a claim for
restitution for unjust
enrichment. In that case Christiani had been engaged as
a sub-contractor by a Builder with the knowledge and at the request of the
Goliath. Subsequently, after Christiani had undertaken various works, the
Builder was placed in liquidation and Christiani
was unpaid. In the complex
litigation which ensued, Christiani, among other things, claimed restitution for
unjust enrichment from
Goliath. Zeeman J (with whom Crawford J concurred)
Whilst it may be arguable that there is nothing in
Pavey and Matthews Pty Ltd
(supra) which prevents recovery by Christiani, nothing that was said
in that case is capable of forming the foundation for the claim
by Christiani on
a quantum meruit. By its pleadings, as I have construed them, Christiani sought
to claim an entitlement to be paid
what it claims is owing to it by the first
defendant pursuant to the subcontract merely because Goliath requested that it
work whereupon Christiani entered into the subcontract with the first
defendant pursuant to which it was to do the work. One needs
only to state the
claim in those stark terms to immediately recognise that is one which is not
maintainable. Whilst it may be that
Deane J did not have the present type of
situation in mind when he referred to the concurrent existence of a valid and
enforceable
agreement, it may yet be said that the circumstances of the present
case cannot possibly give rise to any "occasion or legal justification
law to superimpose or impute an obligation or promise to pay a reasonable
remuneration" on the part of Goliath.
By entering into the subcontract Christiani made a commercial
decision that it was prepared to perform the subject matter of the subcontract
and look to the first defendant for payment. That may have been a commercial
decision which was wise or foolish. Regardless of
the wisdom of that decision
there is no occasion for the law to relieve Christiani of the consequences of
the first defendant's inability
to perform its side of the contract, if indeed
it is unable to do so, by imposing upon Goliath the obligation to pay for work
materials for which the first defendant has failed to pay. Had Christiani
wished to protect itself against the risk that it would
not be paid by the first
defendant then it could have sought to protect itself by asking that Goliath
join in the subcontract in
some appropriate way. Goliath might or might not
have been prepared to accede to such a request. If it had done so then
could have sought relief from Goliath on the contract. If it had
declined to do so then Christiani would have had to decide whether
enter into the subcontract without such protection or not enter into the
subcontract at all
44) In my view Zeeman J's words can be applied with equal force
and effect to the situation here. If Breakfast Bytes had desired
protection of contracting directly with Austins, rather than with Net Rezults as
a web developer, it was open to Net Rezults
to so arrange its business affairs,
so that its contracts were directly with the Registrants of the domain names for
whom it provided
DNS hosting services. Instead, Breakfast Bytes operated in a
manner which kept the Registrants, including Austins, entirely out
of the loop.
Breakfast Bytes contract was with Net Rezults. If Breakfast Bytes is unable to
recover from Net Rezults that is a
consequence of the commercial risk Breakfast
Bytes assumed when it chose to contract with Net Rezults, and not to require
Registrants
to contract with it for the supply of DNS hosting services. From
Austins' point of view it has already purchased the service which
Bytes supplies from Net Rezults. The arrangements between Net Rezults and
Breakfast Bytes in respect to that service are
a matter for them, and not a
concern of Austins.
45) The conclusion I reach, therefore, is that Austins do not owe
Breakfast Bytes anything. There will be a declaration to that effect.
back over these reasons, I am left with the impression that this is a situation
in which Breakfast Bytes has allowed easy
technological solutions to drive it
business systems, rather than the proper commercial needs of the business
driving its technology:
the cart before the horse. The results are
predictable.
P. H. Molony
Senior Member
HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THIS IS A TRUE AND ACCURATE RECORD OF THE REASONS FOR
DECISION OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS TRIBUNAL.
Ian F. Fletcher
(Ed) 'Centrepoint '[1996]
Journal of Business Law
416, at 417 - 418.
www.howstuffworks.com/webserver2.htm
Ian F. Fletcher (Ed) 'Centrepoint '[1996]
Journal of Business Law
www.howstuffworks.com/webserver4.htm
Ian F. Fletcher (Ed) 'Centrepoint '[1996]
Journal of Business Law
Your Website: Legal issues relating to the Allocation of Internet Doman Names',
University of NSW Law Journal
http://www.networksolotions.com
http://www.melbourneit.com.au
www.howstuffworks.com/webserver5.htm
Ian F. Fletcher (Ed) 'Centrepoint '[1996]
Journal of Business Law
at 417 - 418.
www.howstuffworks.com/webserver.htm
www.howstuffworks.com/webserver.htm
This will come into effect with respect to most Commonwealth laws on 1 January
2001. see the discussion in "A national framework
for electronic commerce"
Internet Law Bulletin
Bank Ltd v Ateliers de Construcions Electirques de Charleroi
(1999) 39 ALJR
Weiner v Harris
[1910] 1 KB 285
Bosanquet v Mofflin
SR (NSW) 617.
Bowstead and Reynolds on Agency
[1964] 2 QB 480
Crabtree Vickers Pty Ltd v Australian Direct Mail Advertising and Addressing
[1975] HCA 49
(1975) 133 CLR
These can be accessed at
http://www.accc.gov.au/ecomm/principles.htm
industry draft code of Practice -
Internet Law
Liability of recipient of unsolicited goods (TPA
(1) A person to
whom unsolicited goods are supplied by another person, in trade or commerce, is
not liable to make any payment for
the goods and is not liable for the loss of
or damage to the goods other than loss or damage resulting from the doing of a
and unlawful act in relation to the goods during the period specified in
subsection (4).
(2) Subject to subsection (3), where a person sends, in trade
or commerce, unsolicited goods to another person:
(a) neither the person who
sent the goods nor any person claiming under that person is entitled after the
expiration of the period
specified in subsection (4) to take action for the
recovery of the goods from the person to whom the goods were sent, and
(b) upon the expiration of that period the goods become, by force of this
section, the property of the person to whom the goods
were sent freed and
discharged from all liens and charges of any description
(3) Subsection (2)
does not apply to or in relation to unsolicited goods sent to a person if:
(a) the person has at any time during the period specified in subsection (4)
unreasonably refused to permit the sender or the
owner of the goods to take
possession of the goods,
(b) the sender or the owner of the goods has
within that period taken possession of the goods, or
(c) the goods were
received by the person in circumstances in which the person knew, or might
reasonably be expected to have known,
that the goods were not intended for the
(4) The period referred to in subsections (1), (2) and (3) is:
(a) if the person who receives the unsolicited goods gives notice with respect
to the goods to the sender in accordance with subsection
(i) the period
of 1 month next following the day on which the notice is given, or
period of 3 months next following the day on which the person received the
goods, whichever first expires, and
(b) in any other case the period of 3
months next following the day on which the person received the goods.
notice referred to in subsection (4) shall be in writing and shall:
state the name and address of the person who received the goods,
the address at which possession may be taken of the goods if it is an address
other than that of the person, and (c) contain
a statement to the effect that
the goods are unsolicited
[1987] HCA 5
162 CLR 221
at para 26 -27
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (117 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter