URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2018/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Powers [2018] NSWMHRT 5; (24 May 2018)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO POWERS AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
TRIBUNAL ON
21 DECEMBER 2018
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2018] NSWMHRT 5
s 46(1) Review of forensic patient
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Ms Maria Bisogni
Deputy President
Dr Uldis Bardulis
Psychiatrist
Ms Diana Bell
Other Member
DATE OF HEARING:
24 May 2018
APPLICATION:
Further involuntary patient order
1. The Tribunal was satisfied on the entirety of evidence that the
requirements under
section 38(4)
Mental Health Act 2007
(“the Act”) had been satisfied. Mr Powers is a mentally ill person
and there is no other care of a less restrictive kind,
that is consistent with
safe and effective care which is appropriate and reasonably available to him.
Accordingly, he is to remain
detained as an involuntary patient at X Hospital
for further observation and treatment. He is to be next reviewed on or before 6
December 2018.
2. On 6 September 2018, Mr Powers, an involuntary patient detained at X
Hospital, was brought before the Tribunal under
of the Act for a
determination as to whether he was a mentally ill person under
section 38(4)
3. According to the information before the Tribunal, Mr Powers was admitted
to the X Hospital on after having been scheduled under
the Act at another
4. Prior to his scheduling, Mr Powers was a forensic patient who had served a
limiting term for a charge of recklessly causing grievous
bodily harm.
5. Mr Powers had also been charged a number of counts of sexual assault.
6. As is required under the
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act
, Mr Powers’ fitness to be tried was periodically considered by
the Tribunal. Twice in 2016, the Tribunal determined that he
was unfit to be
tried. Subsequently, Mr Powers was found fit to be tried following Court reports
by two psychiatrists. The Director
of Public Prosecutions decided not to retry
Mr Powers in respect of the charge, thus ending his limiting term and status as
7. Mr Powers, during the period of his incarceration,
was detained at a number of correctional centres. This was interspersed with
treatment at a Hospital under
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act
and treatment in the Mental Health Screening
Unit, at a Correctional Centre. In December 2016, the Tribunal made an order for
Powers’ transfer to a correctional centre when a bed became available.
He was discharged from Y Hospital and transferred to
the W Correctional
8. Mr Powers’ mental health inquiry was held on 7 June 2018 and the
Tribunal determined that he was mentally ill, and an involuntary
patient order
was made until 6 September 2018.
EVIDENCE FROM WRITTEN REPORTS
AND ORAL EVIDENCE AT THE
The Tribunal documented detailed written and oral evidence from Mr
Powers, his treating team and brother about his diagnoses, criminal
record, drug
and alcohol use. It also considered the limited mental health and community
services and supports that had been offered
for his mental illness and substance
use issues both in the community and custody.
QUESTIONS BY MR POWERS’ LAWYER
10. Mr Powers’ lawyer, Mr Davis, asked Dr A when was the last
occasion that he had seen symptoms with respect to Mr Powers as
described under
of the Act. Dr A said that he thought it was “a few months
back”. Dr A said that there had not been any overt positive
schizophrenia recently, but there were still symptoms more consistent with the
damaging impact of negative thought processes.
Dr A described Mr Powers’
as having had experiences of delusional content.
11. Asked by Mr Powers’ lawyer if there was any indication of symptoms
coming to the fore in more recent times, Dr A stated
that being in a high
security facility itself had an antipsychotic effect and that what was hoped was
that Mr Powers could maintain
his stability in a less secure environment.
However, if there were signs of those concerns coming through which have
historically
led to serious sexual and physical violence, then the situation
required that those concerns be addressed “quite expeditiously”.
12. Dr A was asked by Mr Powers’ lawyer if there was a nexus between
those symptoms and offending or if Mr Powers posed a “different
risk”. Dr A’s response was that he understood from the medical
reports and police reports that ‘there was some
relationship between
alcohol and a disruptive mental state’. It was hard to say to exactly what
extent his behaviour was formed
from his historical schizophrenia. Dr A stated
that it was clear that when Mr Powers came off his depot in prison, he had
quite unwell and those similar themes had come out again.
13. The lawyer of Mr Powers asked Dr A if it was Mr Powers’ continuing
condition that posed a risk of serious harm to himself
or others if he was not
detained at the Hospital. Dr A replied that schizophrenia was a relapsing and
chronic condition and that
Mr Powers “in this high secure setting”,
was being watched quite vigilantly. Mr Powers was doing very well and while
team had not seen signs of overt schizophrenia recently, if he were suddenly
discharged without the right supports he could relapse
and that could dispose
him to ‘risk of violence.’ The risk of violence was directly linked
to the symptoms that would
flow from his deterioration.
QUESTIONS FROM THE TRIBUNAL
14. In response to a question from the Tribunal, Dr A said that Mr
Powers’ remaining in hospital was the less restrictive option
with safe and effective care.
15. Asked by the Tribunal to elaborate on the negative symptoms of
schizophrenia, Dr A said that these can be constituted by “difficulties
thought processes which relate to insight”, including awareness of early
warning signs for a relapse of schizophrenia. Issues
of ambivalence and lack of
engagement on the part of Mr Powers’ meant that he required a structured
program and staff to help
check in on him and make sure things were going well,
to make sure he is attending to his medication and to provide him with daily
structure. Historically for Mr Powers, a lack of structure has led to boredom
which has led to drug and alcohol use and relapse into
his illness. Dr A stated
that it was a confluence of factors which may come together which could cause a
relapse, particularly with
the stresses of change. This confluence could lead to
relapse and more pronounced symptoms and the more positive signs of
schizophrenia.
THE SUBMISSIONS OF MR POWERS’ LAWYER
16. Mr Powers’ lawyer, Mr Davis made several oral submissions at the
hearing. These were supplemented by written submissions
sent the day after the
hearing. The thrust of the oral submissions was that the ‘continuing
condition’ had to be linked
to the symptoms of mental illness under
of the Act and that there must be a manifestation of symptoms in
the recent past. Mr Powers’ lawyer submitted that Mr Powers
manifested symptoms for a number of months and there was no indication that they
would necessarily occur again.
17. Mr Davis provided a written submission the day after the heading with a
cover note stating that one reference he had quoted was
not correct. In order to
ensure accuracy and assist the Tribunal the document referred to the references
made by the lawyer of Mr
Powers at the hearing. The lawyer stated that
assistance in interpreting the “continuing condition” could be
from the wording of
section 9(2)
the 1990 Act, when the term was first
introduced in the following terms: “in considering whether a person in
mentally ill,
the continuing condition of the person is to be taken into
account”. Furthermore, in 1997 the term was widened as follows:
“in considering whether a person is a mentally ill person, the
continuing condition of the person, including any likely deterioration
person’s condition and the likely effects of any such deterioration, are
to be taken into account.”
18. My Davis also referred to the decision in
Presland v Hunter Area
Health Service and Anor
[2003] NSWSC 754
in which Adams J stated that
where a continuing condition is to be considered when assessing the question of
mental illness:
“the whole relevant clinical condition should be considered,
including the distinct possibility that symptoms might only be
episodically
evident to a greater or lesser degree. Neither s 9 nor s 10 prescribes any
artificial chronological limits on what a
doctor might or should think is
appropriate to take into account.”
19. Mr Davis stated that in the absence of further authority and clear
understanding as to the meaning and application of section
14(2), reference was
made to the following passage from the Second Reading Speech of the Mental
Health Bill in 1990:
“Mr Speaker, the third requirement, that is, the continuing
condition of the person, needs some explanation. It is not just
person’s condition at the moment of any examination that has to be taken
into account in deciding if he is or remains,
mentally ill. Fluctuations in the
mental state to the person are to be taken into account. Should, at the specific
time of examination,
the person not manifest one or more of the required
symptoms of mental illness, but has done so in the recent past, he may meet the
requirements of the definition. This applies at the initial examination at a
mental hospital or any subsequent examination.”
LEGISLATION
20. The relevant legislative provisions are set out as follows:
“Mentally ill person” is defined for the purposes of the Act as
“14 Mentally ill persons (cf 1990 Act, s 9) (1)
(1) A person is a mentally ill person if the person is suffering from
mental illness and, owing to that illness, there are reasonable
grounds for
believing that care, treatment or control of the person is necessary:
(a) for the person’s own protection from serious harm, or
(b) for the protection of others from serious harm.
(2) In considering whether a person is a mentally ill person, the
continuing condition of the person, including any likely deterioration
person's condition and the likely effects of any such deterioration, are to be
taken into account.”
21. The words “mental illness” referred to in section 14 are
defined under section 4 of the Act as follows:
“mental illness means a condition that seriously impairs, either
temporarily or permanently, the mental functioning of a person
characterised by the presence in the person of any one or more of the following
(a) delusions,
(b) hallucinations,
(c) serious disorder of thought form,
(d) a severe disturbance of mood,
(e) sustained or repeated irrational behaviour indicating the presence of
any one or more of the symptoms referred to in paragraphs
22. Section 38 concerns reviews of involuntary patients, with section 38(1)
as follows:
“38 Purpose and findings of reviews of involuntary patients
(1) The Tribunal is, on a review of an involuntary patient, to determine
whether the patient is a mentally ill person for whom no
other care (other than
care in a mental health facility) is appropriate and reasonably
available.”
Section 38 (4) provides:
“(4) If the Tribunal determines that the patient is a mentally ill
person and that no other care of a less restrictive kind
is appropriate and
reasonably available to the patient, the Tribunal must make an order that the
patient continue to be detained
as an involuntary patient in a mental health
facility for further observation or treatment, or both.”
23. There are two related key questions for determination. The first is
Mr Powers was a mentally ill person under the Act. If this
question is answered in the affirmative, then it is necessary to consider
second key question of whether there is a less restrictive option consistent
with safe and effective care, which is reasonably
WAS MR POWERS A MENTALLY ILL PERSON UNDER THE ACT?
24. The Tribunal was satisfied that Mr Powers met the definition of a
mentally ill person under the Act.
25. It was not disputed at the hearing that Mr Powers has a mental illness,
namely, schizophrenia characterised by persecutory delusions
witchcraft. Nor was it disputed that his condition was likely complicated by
cognitive impairment, alcohol and drug
misuse and anti-social vulnerability. The
Tribunal found that Mr Powers has a condition of schizophrenia that seriously
impairs his
mental functioning. His medical history and his history of
offending support this finding of a mental illness present as required
section 14 of the Act and these histories also provide ample evidence to satisfy
the definition of ‘mental illness’
under section 4.
26. However, Mr Powers’ case is made more complex because his treating
team conceded that he had not manifested delusional symptoms
for a number of
months and it could not be said that he was manifesting positive symptoms of a
mental illness at the time of the
hearing. The Tribunal accepted that Mr
Powers’ condition had improved with anti-psychotic medication. In recent
months there
was no evidence of his experiencing persecutory delusions relating
to women and witchcraft.
27. The treating team relied upon Mr Powers’ “continuing
condition” as the basis for his ongoing detention.
28. As pointed out by the lawyer of Mr Powers, the term “continuing
condition” under section 14(2) has received little
judicial consideration.
In construing the term’s meaning it is relevant to consider the
legislative history of its inclusion
in section 9 the 1990 Act, and its
amendment in 1997, when the term was expanded to its present wording under the
29. The term “continuing condition” was introduced for the first
time in the 1990 MHA. The 1990 Act was the final outcome
of a 1988 Steering
Committee on Mental Health (chaired by Ms Anne Deveson) whose task was to
review the 1983 MHA. The review was
broad ranging and looked at the definition
of mental illness, with the final outcome being a broad-based definition of
mental illness
reliant on symptoms of major psychiatric disorders with psychotic
and/or major affective syndromes (see Dr Peter Shea, “Continuing
Condition” (1999)
Defining Madness
, Sydney, Hawkins Press).
30. The inclusion of the term was not a recommendation of the Committee (Dr
Peter Shea, op cit.) and it was thought that it was introduced
with” lawyers making submissions at a hearing before a magistrate for a
person’s discharge based on the
lack of symptoms demonstrated on day of
the hearing. The inclusion of the term “continuing condition”
allowed a doctor
to consider the person’s retrospective condition in
determining if they were a mentally ill person (Dr Peter Shea, op cit).
31. The term was amended and expanded in the 1997 iteration of the Act as
referred to by Mr Davis. Minister Refshauge, speaking in
the Legislative
Assembly on behalf of the then Government, stated that the term was amended to
clarify that in assessing a person’s
continuing condition “regard
can be had to the possibility of deterioration, thus allowing preventative
action to be taken.”
32. This expanded meaning makes it clear that a person’s prospective
condition is a relevant consideration and is to be taken
into account in
considering whether they meet the definition of mentally ill. Notably, there is
no time frame attached to the re-emergence
of symptoms, but the deterioration
must be likely (that is, predictable) and the consequences significant. The
major mischief to
be avoided is the automatic discharge of patients who no
longer manifest symptoms under section 4 but who do need further care, treatment
and control to prevent deterioration in their mental state.
33. The only relevant judicial consideration of the term occurred in in
Presland v Hunter Area Health Service and Anor
where Adams J
considered the term in reference to section 9(2) of the 1990 Act. His Honour did
not narrowly construe the term to
apply only to cases where there was a recent
manifestation of symptoms. Instead, His Honour considered that the entire
clinical picture
was relevant. His Honour’s formulation accommodates the
often unpredictable and nonlinear nature of mental illness and the
assess each person’s individual history and circumstances. His
Honour’s comments support the proposition that
the term ‘continuing
condition’ is not circumscribed by requiring some particular temporal
nexus to the person’s
condition and manifestation of symptoms at the time
of the hearing.
34. As the lawyer of Mr Powers correctly conceded in his written submission,
the decision in
established that no arbitrary time limits
could be imposed, and each matter would turn on its own facts.
35. The Tribunal is of the clear view that very little, if any, weight can
now be attached to the 1988 Second Reading Speech which
appeared to suggest that
there might be a requirement of a “recent history” of required
symptoms in interpreting “continuing
condition”.
36. One reason for the Second Reading Speech’s diminished significance
in this context is that the Minister himself in the preceding
sentence stated
that “fluctuations in the mental state to the person are to be taken into
account”. This general, unqualified
statement appears at odds with the
next comment in the Speech that appears to restrict the ambit of taking into
account “fluctuations”.
This incongruence supports the view that the
term was not in fact intended by the Legislature to be limited only to cases
where there
was a recent history of manifesting symptoms.
37. In addition, the application of the accepted principles of statutory
interpretation mean that the Tribunal should prefer Adams
J’s judicial
characterisation of the term over the suggested interpretation from the earlier
Second Reading Speech, the latter
being only a secondary and extrinsic,
interpretive source. Second Reading Speeches may be useful aids to statutory
interpretation
to assist to identify the purpose or object of a
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Channel
Seven Brisbane Pty Ltd
(2009) 239 CLR 305
Re Warumungu Land Claim; Ex parte A-G (NT)
However, they have subordinate, interpretive value when compared to the
intrinsic rules of statutory interpretation used by courts,
such as discerning
the natural and ordinary meaning of the words.
38. Moreover, any interpretive influence of that earlier Second Reading
Speech is necessarily significantly diminished by the fact
that the relevant
provision was substantially amended in 1997 to give a clearly expanded scope to
39. Finally, it should be noted that the Tribunal is by operation of the
doctrine of precedent obligated to follow the reasoning of
the Supreme Court of
New South Wales and therefore bound to follow Adams J’s interpretation of
40. It follows from these findings that it was therefore not necessary for
the Tribunal in this case to establish some specific temporal
nexus between Mr
Powers’ last experience of symptoms and his current mental health state
and the likely re-emergence of such
41. The Tribunal therefore accepts that the continuing condition can be
relied upon to detain Mr Powers notwithstanding that he has
not, in recent
months, manifested any symptoms. What is required to come within the
“continuing condition” requirement
is not the presence of symptoms
at the time of the hearing, but the need for ongoing involuntary care and
treatment to prevent the
manifestation or re-emergence of symptoms for Mr
Powers’ protection and the protection of others from serious harm. Mr
extensive psychiatric and criminal history strongly point to a
prediction that if discharged without effective support and supervision
his wish, it would, on the balance of probabilities result in his symptoms
remerging and he would put himself or others at
risk of serious harm. Whilst it
was clear that Mr Powers’ delusional ideas had not been observed for some
time prior to the
hearing, his overall condition was still one of substantial
impairment, owing to his negative symptoms of mental illness, cognitive
impairment, low IQ and personality vulnerability.
42. The Tribunal was satisfied that Mr Powers’ condition is chronic and
relapsing and that he had achieved the remission in
symptoms because of his
hospitalisation in an intensive environment with considerable supports. Mr
Powers’ has a clear history
of relapse in the context of not taking
prescribed medication. The Tribunal accepted the evidence of Dr A and the
treating team that
Mr Powers’ still has negative symptoms of
schizophrenia that impact on his insight, mental stability and behaviour. He has
continued to experience negative symptoms including lack of motivation which
have affected his ability to participate meaningfully
in the rehabilitation
program. He has a significant drug and alcohol history and has only achieved
abstinence in custody. He has
ongoing cognitive impairment which may affect his
capacity to participate in the Hospital’s programs. His understanding of
his illness and treatment needs is superficial. He has a long and disturbing
record of physical and sexual violence. His past record
is a strong indicator of
potential, future conduct and this was evident from the HCR risk assessment.
43. The Tribunal accepted Dr A’s concern that any precipitous discharge
to an environment that was unsupported, was likely to
result in the re-
emergence of symptoms, violent conduct and a return to prison or hospital. The
Tribunal agreed with the view of
Dr A that the removal of Mr Powers from a high
secure facility should only be attempted with a very measured and comprehensive
plan in place that takes into account his mental illness,
comorbidities and vulnerabilities. A failure to ensure such planning is
would more likely than not result in a relapse of his symptoms. Given also his
history of physical and sexual assaults,
there is the real likelihood of his
posing a risk of serious harm to himself and/or others. The continuing condition
involves a prediction
on the likely result of a patient’s discharge. The
Tribunal was satisfied on the evidence available, and particularly from
that there was a significant link between Mr Powers’ psychotic experiences
and his past acts of physical and sexual violence.
NO LESS RESTRICTIVE OPTION CONSISTENT WITH SAFE AND EFFECTIVE CARE,
THAT WAS APPROPRIATE AND REASONABLY AVAILABLE.
44. Considering the events that led to the imposition of Mr Powers’
limiting term, his lengthy history of mental health treatment,
his history of
serious offending behaviour, and his array of mental health issues and
vulnerabilities (including his ongoing impaired
insight into his illness and his
previous longstanding sporadic compliance with treatment), the Tribunal was
satisfied that there
was no less restrictive option consistent with safe and
effective care, that was appropriate and reasonably available. Accordingly,
Tribunal was satisfied that at present, Mr Powers’ remains in the least
restrictive environment consistent with safe and
effective care. This
environment is currently necessary to prevent a significant risk of serious harm
to himself and others.
45. The Tribunal was satisfied that the treating team had begun the process
of carefully and comprehensively considering alternative
options and
46. Mr Powers’ complex presentation and history of sexual offending
were significant obstacles to acceptance by medium and low
secure units, and
there was no less restrictive alternative at this time other than ongoing care
and treatment at the X Hospital.
47. The Tribunal was satisfied on all the evidence available, that without
proper supervision and control, Mr Powers was likely to
relapse into positive
symptoms of schizophrenia, with potentially catastrophic consequences.
48. Whilst Mr Powers stated that he could reside with his mother if
discharged, it was clear that this was not a practical or safe
49. Moreover, Mr Powers’ brother was very much in support of ongoing
care and treatment and careful discharge planning for his
brother. His evidence
was that his brother had not had the kind of assessment and care opportunities
that had now been made available
at the Hospital. He welcomed the continuing
input of the treating team. The provisions allow for patients to have the
a “stepped”, incremental approach to discharge in order
to test their readiness for discharge and for patients such as
Mr Powers to be
the subject of comprehensive discharge planning to prevent deterioration in
their mental states.
50. It was also clear that Mr Powers’ cognitive impairment has reduced
his capacity to engage in rehabilitation at the Hospital
and was at least a
contributing factor as to why he had been rejected by one medium secure unit.
51. The Tribunal supported the treating team’s efforts to explore less
restrictive options, and it agreed with the treating
team’s emerging view
that the only viable option would be a community placement with “wrap
around” supports as
Mr Powers was unlikely to be accepted by medium or low
secure units because of his cognitive impairment and history of sexual violence.
The Tribunal also endorsed the view that the supports being considered would
need to be comprehensive and well thought out.
52. The Tribunal was satisfied that any discharge without the kind of support
described by Dr A and other members of the multidisciplinary
team, would result
in Mr Powers’ mental state deteriorating and as a consequence, he would
pose a likely risk of serious harm
to himself and/or others.
53. Mr Powers’ psychosocial needs are great and the Tribunal considers
that the treatment plan put in the alternative, that
is, for discharge to the
community with the support of the NDIS and a Community Treatment Order, would be
the very minimum required
to try to prevent a relapse of his illness.
54. Mr Powers faces many challenges due to his impairments arising from his
numerous mental health issues. He has achieved a level
of stability in a highly
regulated and contained environment. Any transition to less restrictive care,
whatever form that might ultimately
take, must be designed to prevent a relapse
of his illness and to prevent serious harm to himself and others and the
commission of
further offences.
Deputy President
Dated 24 May 2018
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (317 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter