URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/582.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Harper v TAFE NSW [2025] NSWPIC 582; (29 October 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION OF MEMBER
Harper v TAFE NSW [2025] NSWPIC 582
Samantha Harper
RESPONDENT:
State of NSW (TAFE NSW)
Kathryn Camp
DATE OF DECISION:
29 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workers Compensation Act 1987
claim for proposed surgery for accepted right shoulder injury; where applicant
has undertaken three previous surgical procedures
on the right shoulder paid for
by the respondent; acceptance that surgery results from injury; dispute as to
whether surgery is reasonably
necessary; difference between findings in
radiological report and those made by treating surgeon; fair climate for
acceptance of
expert medical opinion;
Rose v Health Commission
Diab v NRMA Limited
considered and applied;
applicant discharged onus of proof; findings in radiological reports
relevant but not determinative; respondent to pay the costs of
and incidental to
proposed right shoulder surgery pursuant to
section 60.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
The Personal Injury Commission (Commission) determines:
proposed right shoulder surgery recommended by Dr Pant is reasonably necessary
treatment as a result of injury to the applicant’s
right shoulder on 11
November 2019.
The Commission orders:
description of the respondent is amended to “State of NSW (TAFE
respondent is to pay the applicant’s reasonably necessary costs of, and
incidental to, proposed right shoulder surgery recommended
by Dr Pant, pursuant
Workers Compensation Act 1987
A brief statement is attached setting out the Commission’s reasons
for the determination.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
INTRODUCTION
matter concerns whether proposed right shoulder surgery is reasonably necessary
pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act), in
circumstances where it is not disputed that surgery results from an accepted
workplace injury. For the reasons
discussed below, the worker’s claim for
compensation is successful.
applicant, Samantha Harper, was a floristry teacher for the respondent, TAFE
NSW. In the course of her employment, on 11 November
2019, she injured her right
arm when receiving a delivery of equipment including boxes of flowers for her
floristry classes.
respondent accepted injury to the applicant’s right shoulder and paid
weekly payments of compensation and for extensive
medical treatment, including
over 70 physiotherapy sessions and three surgical procedures. The applicant
underwent a right shoulder
arthroscopy and rotator cuff repair on 17 March 2020,
at the hand of Professor Murrell. Professor Murrell then performed a further
right shoulder arthroscopy and rotator cuff repair on 17 May 2022 and then on or
shoulder surgery including a
large rotator cuff repair.
respondent’s insurer issued notices pursuant to
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
December 2024, 31 March 2025, 24 June 2025, and 29 July 2025,
declining the claim for medical expenses for the costs of proposed fourth
right shoulder surgery. The respondent’s insurer also
issued a decision on
29 October 2024, notifying the applicant of the cessation of weekly
payments of compensation from 10 March 2025
for reason of s 39 of the 1987 Act.
29 July 2025, the applicant lodged an Application to Resolve a Dispute in
respect of the claim for future medical expenses.
19 August 2025, the respondent lodged a Reply.
9 October 2025, the applicant lodged an Application to Lodge Additional
ISSUE FOR DETERMINATION
issue in dispute is:
(a) whether the proposed right shoulder surgery recommended by Dr Pant is
“reasonably necessary” as a result of the accepted
injury on 11
November 2019 pursuant to s 60 of the 1987 Act.
respondent concedes injury to the right shoulder and that the proposed surgery
is as a result of the accepted injury, but disputes
the reasonable necessity of
the surgery.
PROCEDURE BEFORE THE PERSONAL INJURY
2 September 2025, the parties attended a preliminary conference.
9 October 2025, the parties attended a conciliation conference and arbitration
hearing. Mr Tanner, of counsel, appeared for the
applicant instructed by
Carroll & O’Dea Lawyers. Mr Gaitanis, of counsel, appeared for
the respondent instructed by SMK
Lawyers. The parties were unable to reach a
resolution of the dispute and counsel provided oral submissions during the
recorded hearing.
the hearing, leave was granted, without objection, to the applicant to admit two
pages from Dr Rimmer’s website: myhipandknee.com.au.
At the conclusion of
the hearing I issued a Direction to the parties, directing the applicant lodge
the relevant pages from Dr Rimmer’s
website undercover of an Application
to Lodge Additional Documents.
am satisfied that the parties to the dispute understand the nature of the
application and the legal implications of any assertion
made in the information
supplied. I have used my best endeavours in attempting to bring the parties to
the dispute to a settlement
acceptable to all of them. I am satisfied that the
parties have had sufficient opportunity to explore settlement and that they have
been unable to reach an agreed resolution of the dispute.
Documentary evidence
following documents were in evidence before the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission) and considered in making this determination:
(a) Application to Resolve a Dispute, dated 29 July 2025, and attached
(b) Reply to Application to Resolve a Dispute, dated 19 August 2025, and
attached documents;
(c) Directions issued on 2 September 2025 and 9 October 2025, and
(d) Application to Lodge Additional Documents, and attachments, registered on
10 October 2025.
above documents have been admitted into the proceedings, without objection.
Applicant’s statement
evidence is a statement of the applicant dated 15 July 2025.
applicant notes the circumstances surrounding the accepted right shoulder
injury, where she received a heavy box of flowers and
felt sudden pain in her
right shoulder when she took the box from the delivery driver. She notes that
she underwent surgery in March
2020, after which she had a reasonable recovery
but continued to experience pain and discomfort.
review by her treating surgeon it was revealed that she had a bone growth in her
shoulder causing her pain. The pain did not resolve
with conservative treatment
and she underwent further surgery in May 2022 to remove the bone growth and
re-repair her right rotator
cuff. After the second surgery, the pain was worse
and movement in her shoulder was limited. She states that her surgeon recognised
complication with the previous surgery, and performed revision surgery in
September 2022.
the third surgery, she states that it appeared her shoulder was
“recovering well”. However, after a “few
months, it began to
deteriorate” and she now experiences “ongoing pain, discomfort,
reduced range of motion, stiffness,
a clicking/catching sensation, weakness and
difficulty lifting, pushing, pulling and reaching overhead.”
applicant states that she sought a second medical opinion and was referred to Dr
Pant. He recommended further surgery and she
wishes to proceed with the surgery
applicant also notes that she is in receipt of weekly benefits in relation to a
separate workplace psychological injury, for which
she remains totally unfit for
Medical evidence
evidence are a series of documents from the applicant’s treating medical
practitioners and from independent medico-legal
George A C Murrell, the applicant’s former treating orthopaedic surgeon,
provides a series of reports. Those reports
detail request for approval of
surgical procedures (now undertaken), treatment and outcomes post-operatively.
On 19 May 2021, Professor
Murrell acknowledged the applicant’s recovery
from the first surgical procedure had been complicated by new bone formation
the tendinous insertion and a frozen shoulder.
applicant continued to see Professor Murrell for ongoing review and treatment.
On 20 December 2021 he finds that the applicant
can work 33-35 hours per
week with two hours devoted to at least two physiotherapy sessions per week. He
also notes that the applicant
had a good range of motion, but had positive
impingement signs.
15 June 2022, Professor Murrell records that the applicant was unhappy with her
shoulder following the second surgery and was “experiencing
high levels of
pain”. Professor Murrell records ongoing pain and intermittent sharp pain
4 July 2022 and 3 August 2022.
8 September 2022, Professor Murrell records his findings two days post the third
surgery to the right shoulder. He described the
surgery to be a large rotator
cuff repair and revision surgery of the right shoulder.
20 March 2023, Professor Murrell records, six months post the third surgery,
that the applicant is “very happy with her progress”.
examination, Professor Murrell records good range of motion and strength. He
notes that the applicant’s “greater tuberosity
is a little bit
prominent with some mild clicking”. He also notes that X-rays and
ultrasound showed the repair to be intact.
3 July 2023, Professor Murrell records that the applicant is happy with her
shoulder and is back to many activities. On examination,
Professor Murrell
records slightly restricted range of motion but strong strength testing. He also
notes moderate mechanical impingement
and some residual stiffness.
16 October 2023, Professor Murrell records, 12 months post-surgery, that the
applicant’s shoulder is complicated by stiffness.
The applicant reports
some clicking and catching. Professor Murrell records an improved external
rotation range of motion but blocks
on abduction and he can palpate the
applicant’s greater tuberosity which seems to be catching underneath the
5 February 2024, Professor Murrell records that the applicant feels like she is
making good progress and that her stiffness is
resolving. She has very good
range of motion and strength is improving. He adds that the recent ultrasound
shows that the repair
is intact and the applicant’s elastography numbers
are good. He notes physical restrictions in lifting.
3 June 2024, Professor Murrell records the applicant is making steady progress.
On examination, Professor Murrell records that
the applicant has a good range of
motion and some mechanical impingement. He notes that the ultrasound shows the
repair is healing
nicely with good elastography readings.
20 October 2024, Mr Silcock, independent physiotherapy consultant qualified by
the respondent provides a report. Mr Silcock records
the applicant’s
medical history, noting that she had undertaken approximately 70 exercise
physiology treatment and physiotherapy
sessions from August 2023. In particular,
he notes that the applicant has undertaken “extensive post-surgical
physiotherapy
and pain management assistance”. He notes that treatment has
failed to “realise expected treatment outcomes”. Although,
he was not able to speak to Mr Ursino the applicant’s treating
physiotherapist.
Silcock considers that the exercise physiology treatment provided has been
reasonably necessary due to the accepted injury but
should conclude on
completion of the sessions already approved. He notes that this recommendation
should not be interpreted to infer
that the applicant’s pre-injury
functional capacity has been restored but that future exercise physiology
treatment will not
influence the applicant’s ongoing functional capacity.
21 October 2024, Dr Stephen Rimmer, orthopaedic surgeon qualified by the
respondent, provides a report. It is relevant to note
that Dr Rimmer, on his
public website records that he, is a specialist “Sydney Orthopaedic No Gap
Hip and Knee Surgeon”.
The website also records that Dr Rimmer
“specialises in surgery of the hip and knee”.
his report of October 2024, Dr Rimmer notes that there were no radiological
investigations present at the time of his examination
and assessment. He records
a history of the injury and related surgeries. He notes that when the applicant
was specifically asked
responded “it is going good.”
Rimmer records the applicant’s current symptoms of “[e]ssentially no
pain” but “residual stiffness”.
He notes that the applicant
does not require any oral analgesia or anti-inflammatories. He also notes that
the applicant continues
to attend an exercise physiologist weekly. Dr Rimmer
records his findings on examination of the right
“Symmetrical in position. Nontender to firm
palpation throughout.
She had the following active range of motion:
rotation: 80°
rotation: 60°
Power of supraspinatus 5/5 and
pain-free.”
Rimmer notes that the applicant had a “slight reduction in range of
motion”. He assesses a right upper extremity impairment
of 5% on the basis
of reduced range of motion of flexion, extension, abduction and internal
rotation, which converted to 3% whole
person impairment.
Rimmer finds that the applicant has “an incapacity resulting from the
claimed injury”, which is partial. As a result
of the workplace injury and
three right shoulder surgeries the applicant is to avoid repetitive heavy work
and above shoulder level
activities.
Rimmer considers exercise physiology should cease in place of a home-based
exercise program.
29 October 2024, the applicant’s treating general practitioner, Dr Thomas
Lu sent a referral letter to Dr Sushil Pant for
an opinion and management of the
applicant’s shoulder. He notes that there is “presence of a
tuberosity and this appears
to be impacting on her range of movement”.
5 November 2024, Dr Hazan provides an MRI right shoulder report. It records
clinical details of three previous surgeries, possible
tuberosity causing range
of movement dysfunction, report of decreased range of movement, “not able
to reach up” and symptoms
at the site of rotator cuff surgery. He notes
prior MRI imaging of 18 February 2021. The findings are recorded as
“There is extensive paramagnetic artefact in relation
to prior surgery at the greater tuberosity of the humerus.
The subscapularis tendon is well visualised for most of its course, apart
from its superior aspect, and delineates normally. The infraspinatus
partially visualised and unremarkable. Wide bandwidth imaging did not completely
overcome the artefact associated with
the metal. There is thinning of the
supraspinatus component of the rotator cuff. This is very similar in appearance
to the previous
study of 18/02/2021. There does not appear to be a significant
amount of fluid within the subacromial bursa.
There appears to have been a prior acromioplasty. There is no bony
impingement upon the supraspinatus outlet. The AC joint demonstrates
hypertrophy.”
report provides a conclusion that there is “[n]o significant change in
appearance when compared to the previous examination.
Attenuated thinned
superior rotator cuff, for further clinical correlation.”
Relevantly,
the previous MRI of the right shoulder on 18 February 2021, records findings
“[s]uboptimal study due to hardware artefact from the
greater tuberosity surgical screw. Within these limits, no focal bony
identified. There is no evidence of a bony exostosis. The glenohumeral joint is
preserved. The rotator cuff and biceps
are intact. Mild subacromial
5 November 2024, the applicant attended on Dr Lu. Dr Lu records that the
applicant sought a second opinion for right shoulder greater
tuberosity and that
the MRI showed rotator cuff was slightly thinner which he thought was due to
6 November 2024, Dr Pant provides a report. It is relevant to note that Dr Pant
is an orthopedic shoulder surgeon, specialising
in shoulder stabilisation,
rotator cuff repair, Latarjet procedure, shoulder joint replacement, and
shoulder and clavicle fracture
his report of 6 November 2024, Dr Pant provides a diagnosis of right shoulder
pain on the background of previous rotator cuff surgeries
with ongoing symptoms
in AC joint, biceps and interval. He adds a possible re-tear. He records that
the plan is consideration of
revision right shoulder surgery.
Pant notes the recent imaging, the applicant’s American Shoulder and Elbow
(ASE) Score of 53.3 and Subjective Shoulder Value
(SSV) of about 40%. He further
notes his findings on examination of forward elevation of 125° and external
rotation of 45°.
The AC joint was tender accounting for 20% of the pain,
with symptoms in the posterior part of the joint. There was pain within the
biceps groove and interval accounting for 40% of pain. She also had weakness on
superior cuff loading.
Pant comments on the MRI and X-ray taken in November 2024. He notes that the
findings demonstrate:
“...metallic anchors within the
tuberosity and one more distal perhaps near the lateral cortex. The MRI
demonstrates significant
metal artefact but reasonably preserved anterior and
posterior cuff. There appears to have been a rotator cuff repair with possible
re-tear of the superior cuff. There are also changes around the biceps.
Most of [the applicant’s] symptoms are driven by the AC joint, rotator
interval and biceps...It seems as though the biceps tendon
may not have been
addressed [and sought the operation reports].”
on 6 November 2024, Dr Pant provides a letter to the respondent’s insurer
seeking approval for surgery in the nature of
“Right Shoulder Arthroscopy
+ Subacromial Decompression + Acromioplasty + Biceps Tenodesis
Supraspinatus/Infraspinatus Debridement + Capsular Release + Acromioclavicular
Joint Decompression + Distal
Clavicle Excision (Revision
Procedure)”. Dr Pant provides a quote for the cost of the surgery to total
$11,135, with itemisation
of the specific procedures.
letter header, amongst other things, includes a reference to “Sydney
Shoulder Unit Legal Team: Littles”. In the body
of the letter it notes
that the Sydney Unit legal team (Littles Lawyers, Head of NSW Claims) will
“handle all issues regarding
contested item numbers and
non-payment”. It also notes that payment is to be made “in
full” within 14 days of invoice
and delays are likely to incur additional
fees. It concludes by inviting the reader to contact the “Sydney Shoulder
office” for any questions.
12 November 2024, 3 December 2024, 10 December 2024, 13 December 2024, Dr Lu
records the applicant’s attendance for treatment
regarding ongoing
shoulder pain, workers compensation review and proposed surgery. On 24 December
2024, Dr Lu records that the applicant’s
shoulder is “going okay at
this moment”.
20 November 2024, Dr Pant provides a report noting that he had discussed the
issues with the right shoulder and need for surgery
with the applicant.
28 November 2024, Dr Pant provides a further report in response to Dr
Rimmer’s report. Dr Pant states that the applicant
continues to exhibit
progressive symptoms, including pain, reduced range of motion, and significant
limitations in daily activities
(presumably in relation to the right shoulder).
He states that these symptoms are “supported by clinical findings and
reports, which show ongoing pathology that requires surgical
intervention.”
Pant states that the applicant’s:
“current clinical and
imaging findings, including an [American Shoulder and Elbow Score] score of 53.3
and Subjective Shoulder
Value of 40%, indicate substantial functional impairment
that can be significantly improved through surgical intervention. Persistent
pain in her AC joint and rotator interval, alongside weakness on superior cuff
loading, shows that her condition is far from stable
or resolved.”
He states that the revision surgery is not only “[w]arranted but
essential” for the applicant’s recovery and ability
function in her right shoulder. He adds that the applicant’s ongoing
symptoms “driven primarily by the AC joint,
rotator interval, and biceps
pathology – are consistent with her clinical findings and imaging
results.” He notes that
conservative management, in the nature of exercise
physiology and home-based programs, has failed to provide significant relief.
further adds that without surgical intervention the applicant “faces the
risk of further degeneration, chronic pain, and
permanent loss of
Pant provides an analysis of the issues in specific regions of the right
“AC Joint Pain:
Tenderness and degenerative
changes in the AC joint account for approximately 20% of her pain. Decompression
of the AC joint is necessary
to address this ongoing source of discomfort and
dysfunction.
Rotator Interval and Biceps Pathology:
[The applicant] experiences
significant pain (40%) in the biceps groove and interval. These symptoms are
likely related to unresolved
biceps tendinitis and potential scarring or
adhesions in the interval. A biceps tenodesis and interval debridement are
critical to
alleviate these symptoms.
Rotator Cuff Re-Tear:
Imaging suggests a possible re-tear of the
superior cuff. Repairing this damage is essential for restoring shoulder
stability and
improving strength and range of motion.”
Pant states that surgical correction aims to restore the applicant’s pain,
improve her range of motion, and allow her to
daily activities. He refers to her symptoms:
Persistent pain localised in the AC joint (20%), biceps groove, and rotator
interval (40%). Night pain significantly disrupts her
sleep, which further
affects her overall well-being and recovery.
Reduced Range of Motion:
Forward elevation is limited to 125 degrees,
with external rotation to 45 degrees and internal rotation only to the sacrum.
limitations impact her ability to perform overhead tasks, lift objects, or
engage in normal physical activities.
Notable weakness
during superior cuff loading tests
compromises her ability to carry out tasks that require shoulder strength or
Functional impairments:
[The applicant] struggles with activities of
daily living, as evidenced by her low [American Shoulder and Elbow Score] and
Shoulder Value. Tasks such as putting on a coat, reaching high
shelves, and lifting weights above shoulder level are significantly
These symptoms are consistent with her clinical findings and imaging results,
emphasising the necessity of surgical intervention.
The continuation of these
issues highlights the failure of conservative management and the urgent need for
revision surgery.”
Pant states that Dr Rimmer’s conclusion that the applicant has no ongoing
pain symptoms and only residual stiffness is inconsistent
with the objective
findings from the clinical assessments and imaging studies. He then notes that
Dr Rimmer’s conclusion fails
to account for:
findings of metallic anchors, a potential rotator cuff re-tear, and significant
changes around the biceps and AC joint.
The patient’s reported symptoms and functional limitation, as
documented in her [American Shoulder and Elbow Score] and Subjective
The need for surgical intervention to address unresolved issues from her
previous surgeries, which are directly contributing to her
disability.”
Pant provides an opinion of post-operative treatment needed over a 12-week
period which he considered critical to the applicant’s
recovery and return
to work post-surgery.
Pant explains that the applicant’s clinical condition and imaging findings
strongly support the need for revision shoulder
surgery. He states that the
proposed surgery is medically justified and necessary to restore the
applicant’s functional capacity
and quality of life. He adds that any
delay risks further deterioration and prolonged disability, and the
applicant’s right
to effective treatment and recovery.
9 December 2024, Dr Rimmer provides a further report without a further
examination. Dr Rimmer highlights that at the time of the
applicant’s
assessment in October 2024 he noted, with respect to the right
“1. She had no pain, confirmed by the fact she was
not taking any forms of oral analgesics or anti-inflammatories.
2. She had a near normal examination of her right shoulder.
3. She already had had three surgical procedures to her right shoulder.
4. If not for another work-related claim ? stress-related, Mr Harper had been
approved to work 35 hours a week regarding her right
shoulder, indicating for
the main part she had made a complete recovery.
Therefore, I am at a loss why she sought a further opinion when, in my
opinion, this was not warranted.”
Rimmer comments on the 2024 MRI scan noting that he had the benefit of the
report and viewing of the images online. He states that
the scan “shows
the previous rotator cuff repair is intact. There is no surgical pathology at
all.” He does not agree
with Dr Pant’s diagnosis and again states
that there “is no surgical pathology present as confirmed by her MRI
He adds that the recommendation for surgery is “not
reasonable or necessary for the reasons [he had] highlighted above”
report. He further adds that the applicant does not require any alternative
treatment and that at the time of her assessment
she had basically “made a
complete recovery.” This he states was on the basis the applicant was
“previously cleared
to work her normal 35 hour week” but had
remained off work due to a work-related stress matter.
28 January 2025, Dr James Bodel, orthopedic surgeon qualified by the applicant,
provides a report. Dr Bodel provides a history
of the injury and treatment
undertaken. He states that overall “the surgical procedures were of
temporary benefit only and
then [the applicant] deteriorated needing the second
and the third surgery.” He notes that the applicant sought a second
by Dr Pant who offered a further surgical procedure. He adds that
the applicant has “not been given a guarantee of a better
outcome. She is
aware that she has had three unsuccessful surgeries but she is keen to
proceed”. He notes that the applicant
has given the proposed procedure
“great thought” and has a “different medical view of the
situation” to Dr
Rimmer. He further adds:
“In a medical
sense, the claimant and her treating doctor, Dr Pant, have made a determination
is keen to proceed although she is aware that
there is no guarantee that she will get any better and the insurer will not fund
The medical decision has been made between the patient and Dr Pant, and she
wants to proceed.”
Bodel records the applicant’s current complaints include “[p]ain and
stiffness in the region of the right shoulder.”
In particular, he notes
this is “most restricted in forward flexion movement and abduction where
there is a significant painful
arc of movement.” He also notes that the
applicant will wake from sleep if she rolls onto her shoulder. He also adds that
applicant cannot “push, pull or lift or use the arms overhead.”
He records that the applicant uses Panadol Osteo and
also Tramadol (rarely), is
undertaking home-based exercise, and under the care of an exercise physiologist.
Bodel records his findings on examination of the right
“There is tenderness over the rotator cuff anterior
in the front of the right shoulder. There is generalised wasting in the
girdle and there are the multiple scars from the various surgical procedures
performed under Professor Murrell on that right
shoulder. The range of movement
is as follows:
Shoulder Movement
Active ROM Measured RIGHT
Active ROM Measured LEFT
Internal rotation
External rotation
Bodel adds that there is “impingement in the right shoulder but no
instability”.
Bodel notes that there were no X-rays or other tests available for review.
Bodel also notes the detailed report of Dr Pant recommending surgery. Dr Bodel
states that the applicant and Dr Pant “have
come to a medical
determination of appropriate treatment” and the applicant is “keen
to proceed”.
Bodel provides a diagnosis of rotator cuff injury to the right shoulder. He
notes ongoing disability of pain and stiffness, loss
of function in the right
shoulder despite surgical intervention.
Bodel states that the treatment proposed by Dr Pant is reasonably necessary for
the “reasons outlined above” but does
not provide any further detail
regarding those reasons. Dr Bodel then states that the proposed surgery is
reasonably necessary because
it is injury related and appropriate for further
management. He states that Dr Pant has not given the applicant a guarantee that
it will make her better but the applicant “cannot stand the current level
of loss of function, and she is keen to proceed with
the further alternative
accepting that the resolution of symptoms may not be possible.” He adds
that the applicant has made
a determination on medical advice and that this is
appropriate. He further adds that it will hopefully be “cost effective to
take her to a better space”. He states that the surgery is acceptable
practice in the medical profession. He later states that
the applicant’s
prognosis is uncertain but hopefully she will improve, but there is a chance
that she “probably will
10 June 2025, Dr Rimmer provides a further report. He refers to Dr Bodel’s
report. He notes Dr Bodel’s comment that
the applicant took “Panadol
Osteo and Tramadol rarely” was in “marked contrast” to the
history the applicant
provided to him that she did not require any pain
medication. Dr Rimmer also states that Dr Bodel’s findings on examination
of range of motion of the applicant’s right shoulder were in “marked
contrast” to his findings on examination of
“[n]ear full pain-free
range of motion”.
Rimmer states that in view of his findings on examination and history recorded,
in conjunction with the fact that the applicant
had been “cleared for 35
hours a week for her right shoulder, the need for surgery is totally
inappropriate, i.e., unnecessary.”
He adds that the latest MRI scan
confirmed “no surgical pathology present warranting surgical
intervention”. Dr Rimmer
then responds to a series of questions
raised by the respondent and notes the applicant has been cleared from a
physical perspective
for pre-injury duties and does not require surgery.
11 July 2025, Dr Pant provides a further report. In response to a series of
questions, Dr Pant provides a further detailed explanation
reasonable necessity of the proposed surgery having regard to the factors set
Diab v NRMA Limited
respect of the appropriateness of the proposed treatment, Dr Pant states that it
is clinically appropriate and tailored to address
the specific pathoanatomical
abnormalities causing pain and dysfunction. He states that the
“constellation of symptoms (night
pain, overhead limitations, weakness)
correlates directly with MRI and examination findings, including suspected cuff
re-tear, biceps
pathology, and symptomatic AC joint arthropathy.” He adds
that revision rotator cuff surgeries yield demonstrable benefits
where primary
procedures have failed due to mechanical causes. He later adds that surgery is
appropriate as it targets the mechanical
and structural issues driving pain and
dysfunction, including biceps pathology, AC joint degeneration, and suspected
cuff failure.
It is designed to reduce pain, improve range of motion and enable
the applicant to return to work and normal daily activities. He
adds that it is
supported by functional scores (ASES 53.3, SSV 40%) and objective findings (MRI
evidence, pain localisation).
Pant also states that the proposed surgery targets each identifiable issue:
resection for arthropathy and capsular hypertrophy;
biceps tenodesis
for unresolved tendonitis, and
interval and
cuff debridement for functional impingement and weakness.
Pant also comments on Dr Rimmer’s opinion that the MRI showed no surgical
pathology. Dr Pant states that this opinion misinterprets
the MRI. Dr Pant
“Despite artefact, the scan confirms
Metallic anchors
in place (and possibly misplaced)
capsular hypertrophy
Thinning and
suspected re-tear of the supraspinatus
rotator interval changes”
Dr Pant states that these findings,
when correlated with the applicant’s symptoms of pain at the AC joint and
interval, weakness,
and night pain, clearly constitutes surgical pathology. He
adds that Dr Rimmer does not acknowledge these indicators.
respect of the availability of alternative treatment, Dr Pant states that the
applicant has fully exhausted conservative therapy
over a protracted period of
years and that there is “now demonstrable clinical failure of
non-operative management.”
He adds that “[n]o viable non-surgical
alternatives remain that are likely to produce a lasting improvement”.
respect of potential effectiveness, Dr Pant states the revision surgery is
reasonably likely to yield functional gains. He explains
no surgical outcome is
guaranteed. He adds that literature and clinical experience show patients with
mechanical sources of pain
such as “anchor migration, biceps pathology, AC
joint degeneration” often benefit from revision intervention. He adds
the applicant has a defined pathology, with a symptom profile of “20% of
pain from the AC joint and 40% from biceps/interval
directly matches treatable
respect of the cost of the treatment, Dr Pant states that the proposed surgery
is cost-effective when viewed against the alternative
of “long-term
disability, prolonged medication use, repeated imaging, and loss of work
participation.”
respect of acceptance of this treatment by medical experts, Dr Pant states that
the treatment is within the bounds of accepted
orthopaedic practice for revision
rotator cuff pathology.
evidence are a series of Certificates of Capacity. From 18 June 2024, the
applicant is recorded to have limited capacity for seven
hours/day, four
days/week with physical restrictions of lifting/carrying/pushing/pulling ability
of 5kg, driving ability of less
than 30 minutes, nil restrictions in
sitting/standing/bending/twisting/squatting. The hours of capacity slightly
increase over time
to 32 hours per week from August 2024 until July 2025 but the
restrictions remain the same, with respect to the physical injuries.
SUBMISSIONS
applicant and respondent provided extensive oral submissions during the hearing
which were recorded. Those submissions will not
be repeated in full but have
been considered and will be referred to where
Applicant’s submissions
applicant submits that the difficulties she experienced post the three surgical
procedures is unchallenged. In this regard, the
applicant notes the difficulties
in the wake of the third surgery include ongoing pain, discomfort, reduced range
of motion, stiffness,
a clicking/catching sensation, weakness and difficulty
lifting, pushing, pulling and reaching overhead. The applicant submits that
struggles with everyday tasks and that her sleep is disrupted by the pain in her
shoulder. The applicant further submits that
these symptoms are a proper
foundation on which she might seek medical treatment that would give her relief,
and that she is entitled
applicant submits that Dr Rimmer’s opinion is based on a misconceived
belief that the applicant has achieved a complete
recovery and she is fit for
pre-injury duties. Even if the applicant were fit for pre-injury duties, that
would not preclude her
from a right to medical treatment. All the applicant
needs to establish is relief from symptoms such as ongoing pain, discomfort,
reduced range of motion and a range of functional problems which affect her in
her activities of daily living. The applicant also
submits that Dr
Rimmer’s comment that there is no pain and she has recovered is
inconsistent with her statement evidence, examination
of Dr Pant on 6
November 2024, and his own examination in October 2024.
applicant refers to Dr Pant’s evidence. The applicant refers to the
letterhead of Dr Pant in his letter of 6 November 2024
to Dr Lu. The applicant
notes that Dr Pant’s area of professional specialisation is in treatment
of shoulder conditions. The
applicant refers to the history recorded by Dr Pant
and his observations on examination, which the applicant submits he makes with
the benefit of his specialisation. Dr Pant undertook a comprehensive examination
in which he established symptoms of tenderness and
pain, with an assessment of
the proportions to which the applicant’s various difficulties are
contributing to her pain. Dr
Pant also provides a comprehensive examination
of the radiology, and then provides conclusions that the applicant’s
are driven by the AC joint, rotator interval and biceps.
applicant submits that Dr Pant is the only shoulder surgeon who has given
evidence regarding the applicant’s current condition,
as distinct from
Professor Murrell’s previous treatment and when compared to Dr Rimmer who
specialisation focuses on the hips
and knees. The applicant submits that she is
not aware of Dr Bodel’s area of speciality.
applicant refers to the reduced range of motion findings on examination between
Dr Rimmer and Dr Bodel. The applicant submits
that even on Dr
Rimmer’s assessment there is a significant reduction in the range of
motion which would indicate that the applicant
has a relatively limited and
deficient range of motion in her right shoulder as compared to the left, and as
compared to what would
be expected in a normal shoulder.
applicant submits that Dr Rimmer does not explain how the applicant has reached
maximum medical improvement and why there is no
prospect of treatment which
would restore full range of motion or even a better range of motion.
applicant also refers to Dr Rimmer’s comments of her physical restrictions
which he says is related to the workplace injury.
He states that the applicant
is partially incapacitated, which the applicant submits confirms there has been
no recovery and the
shoulder has not healed.
applicant refers to her certificates of capacity, which provide a capacity for
eight hours per day, four days per week with several
functional deficits. In
this regard, the applicant submits that Dr Rimmer’s reference to the
applicant having made a complete
recovery is inconsistent with his earlier
report and the certification of the general practitioner.
applicant submits that Dr Rimmer’s responses are brief and do not engage
in any substantive manner with Dr Pant’s
analysis. At best, Dr Rimmer
maintains that the rotator cuff repair is intact and that there is no surgical
pathology but it is unclear
what he means by that phrase. There is no proper
analysis of the real problems identified by Dr Pant.
applicant contends that her application has been opposed on the basis of Dr
Rimmer who has demonstrated a misunderstanding of
the facts, who has sought to
change his opinion from that provided in October 2024, prior to the request for
surgery, to post that
request. Dr Rimmer has not had regard to the matters which
the proposed surgery is designed to address, namely, AC joint pain, biceps
pathology and a rotator cuff re-tear. Further, he does not address the risk the
applicant might be exposed to, as noted by Dr Pant,
of further degeneration,
chronic pain and loss of function, if the surgery is not undertaken.
applicant contends that the Commission should accept the evidence of the
applicant, Dr Bodel and Dr Pant regarding ongoing disabilities
of pain and
stiffness and loss of function in the right shoulder. The applicant concedes
that Dr Bodel cannot provide any assurance
that the surgery will take her to a
better space but there are prospects, and the applicant is entitled to the
prospect of being
taken to a better place.
applicant refers to Dr Pant’s observations. Dr Pant says the
applicant’s current clinical and imaging findings, including
ASE score and
SSV, indicates substantial impairment that can be significantly improved through
surgical intervention. He also notes
findings and pain in respect of the AC
joint, rotator cuff and biceps. That analysis, findings and relevant score is
not challenged;
and Dr Rimmer provides no basis to reject what Dr Pant observed.
applicant notes that the question of a re-tear does not address all of the
aspects of shoulder pathology which Dr Pant addresses.
Dr Pant says that the
surgical correction aims to reduce the applicant’s pain and improve her
range of motion, and allow her
to return to her occupational and daily
activities. The need for the shoulder intervention is also to address unresolved
issues from
previous surgeries which directly contribute to the
applicant’s pain and disability. The applicant submits that she does not
have full physical function for the purpose of her occupational duties and daily
activities.
Bodel provides range of motion studies confirming significant shortfalls on the
right shoulder. He also confirms that the proposed
surgery is accepted practice.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent notes the applicant underwent three surgical procedures by Professor
Murrell and now seeks to undergo a fourth procedure
by a new surgeon, Dr Pant.
respondent submits that Dr Rimmer is SIRA approved to assess whole person
impairment in relation to the upper limbs, in response
to the applicant’s
comment about weight to be attached to Dr Rimmer’s evidence as distinct
from Dr Pant.
respondent refers to Dr Pant’s evidence. The respondent submits that there
is a significant discrepancy between what Dr
Pant says is on the radiology and
what is recorded on the radiology report, and Dr Rimmer’s opinion of the
radiology. The respondent
submits that other than oblique reference to
“re-tearing” in the applicant’s submissions, there has been no
with the radiology. That is, what does the radiology show and how is
it permissible for Dr Pant to draw conclusions that are not
readily apparent on
the radiology.
respondent refers to Dr Pant’s findings that the imaging suggests a
possible re-tear of the superior cuff, and that repairing
this damage is
essential for restoring shoulder stability and improving strength and range of
motion. The respondent submits that
Dr Pant’s findings that the
constellation of symptoms, being night pain, overhead limitations, weakness, is
what causes the
need for surgery and that this correlates directly with the MRI
and examination findings. The respondent concedes that Dr Pant is
entitled to
make findings on examination. Dr Pant says that his findings correlate with
suspected cuff re-tear, biceps pathology
and symptomatic AC joint arthropathy.
The respondent then submits that Dr Pant’s findings are premised on the
mechanical sources
of pain, which are structural issues such as anchor
migration, biceps pathology and AC joint degeneration. The respondent submits
that these mechanical and structural issues “are not apparent on the MRI
reports”. The respondent submits that Dr Pant’s
conclusion is not
available on review of the evidence together.
Pant misinterprets the MRI. He states it confirms metallic anchors in place and
possibly misplaced, but this is not reported on
the MRI. The respondent concedes
that the MRI refers to paramagnetic artefacts but that is in relation to the MRI
itself, not organic
respondent refers to the itemised quote for surgery, including descriptions of
the surgical procedures one of which is a repair
of the rotator cuff. The
respondent submits that there “is some thinning of the supraspinatus
component of the rotator cuff”
but the radiology does not suggest rotator
respondent submits that Dr Pant needs to explain why the assertions he makes as
to his findings on the imaging is not reflected
in the imaging. The respondent
submits that Dr Pant does not say that the MRIs of 2021 and 2024 fail to have
regard to the findings
that he made and this is important.
respondent then notes each of the other “independent” procedures
itemised, but submits Dr Pant does not explain these
procedures and this is not
commensurate with what is on the radiology. It is an outlier, and not dealt with
by Dr Rimmer, Professor
Murell or Dr Bodel.
respondent submits that caution must be given to accepting Dr Pant’s
opinion, and refers to his report of 6 November 2024
that records he is part of
“some Sydney Shoulder Unit Legal Team from Littles Lawyers”.
respondent contends that the opinion of Dr Rimmer should be accepted, as
consistent with the radiology. The respondent also submits
that Professor
Murrell’s opinion should be accepted, having undertaken three previous
surgeries on the applicant.
respondent concedes that Dr Bodel’s opinion provides support for Dr
Pant’s opinion but no weight or little weight
should be attached to it.
His opinion involves superficial and muted explanation for his conclusions. He
provides a subjective conclusion
that there has been a deterioration in the
applicant’s condition, requiring further surgery. The respondent contends
Bodel is “abrogating [his] role as an IME and [he is] passing it
that Dr Bodel
does not say anything about a “repair” or a “rotator
cuff” at all in his report, other than
noting by historical explanation
that the diagnosis is of a rotator cuff injury to the right shoulder but nothing
is said about a
re-tear. The respondent adds that Dr Bodel does not have access
to the investigations, noting there were no X-rays or other tests
available. The
respondent concedes that Dr Bodel provides some reasons for the reasonable
necessity of the proposed surgery but it
only provides a bare necessity in terms
of what is required and there is “no explanation or reasoning”.
respondent refers to Professor Murrell’s evidence. The respondent refers
to his reports noting the applicant’s symptoms,
that the ultrasounds show
the repair is healing nicely, good range of motion and some mechanical
impingements.
respondent refers to Dr Rimmer’s evidence, where he notes that the
applicant was approximately 15 months post-surgery and
she said she was
“going good”. The respondent concedes that Dr Rimmer considers the
applicant has a permanent impairment,
slight reduction in range of motion, and
should undertake a home based exercise program. He reviews the imaging online
the findings. The respondent submits that Dr Rimmer, having reviewed
the imaging online, found that there was no surgical pathology
present. The
respondent submits that his report is “even[ly] balanced”. It is
consistent with Professor Murrell’s
reports that the applicant was making
steady progress.
Rimmer in his supplementary report notes that the applicant said she was
“going good”, which means “no pain,
no requirement of oral
medication”. This, the respondent submits, is in stark contrast to history
recorded in Dr Bodel’s
report which notes Panadol, Osteo and Tramadol
(latter, rarely) use. He notes that there is “near full pain free range of
He concludes that the need for surgery is totally inappropriate.
respondent submits the crux of the matter really falls to whether the Commission
should accept Dr Pant’s evidence about
the findings of the radiology or Dr
Rimmer’s evidence which is the reporting of the MRI scans which show no
pathology. The
respondent submits that Dr Rimmer’s comment that there
is no surgical pathology means there “is no pathology that warrants
surgery”; there is “just no real tear.”
respondent then refers to the MRI report of 2024, which notes there is no
significant change in appearance when compared to the
previous examination. The
respondent then refers to the 2021 MRI report, which it concedes precedes the
last surgery on the right
shoulder. The respondent then refers to the 2024 MRI
report in detail. The respondent submits that Dr Pant finds a potential
rotator-cuff
re-tear, significant changes around the biceps and AC joint
metallic anchors, AC joint arthropathy. Dr Rimmer accepts that there
some mild AC issues but the respondent submits that the question is whether the
proposed surgery is reasonably necessary.
Murrell says there is improvement after the third surgery and there is minimal
objective abnormality on the basis of his
reports. The respondent submits that
he does not support surgery, but later concedes he does not state this in his
Bodel is reliant on subjective complaints rather than identifying specific
pathology on imaging, and does not refer to the imaging.
Rimmer’s findings is that the rotator cuff repair is intact, which is
consistent with Professor Murrell. There is no pathology
that warrants surgical
intervention. There are clinical findings of no pain, no analgesics or
anti-inflammatories, and a near normal
examination. He considers that his
findings on examination and the MRI shows no surgical pathology and he does not
support surgery.
Pant recommends complex surgery, which is not consistent with the MRI
Lu in November 2024 notes MRI shows rotator cuff slightly thinner due to disuse,
but nothing in relation to re-tears.
Applicant’s
submissions in reply
applicant submits that Dr Pant provides a specialist opinion as a shoulder
surgeon, having examined the MRI, and made findings
that the pathology includes
a possible tear. The applicant submits that it would be inappropriate to treat
the 2024 MRI report of
Dr Hazan as the sole record of that MRI. Dr Hazan has
interpreted the MRI, as has Dr Rimmer and Dr Pant. Dr Pant’s opinion
is one that should be accepted.
applicant concedes that Dr Bodel did not have access to the imaging but he notes
her current complaints and findings on range
of motion which contribute to the
need for surgery. There was a notable discrepancy between left and right
shoulders in range of
motion, together with ongoing disabilities of pain and
stiffness and loss of function.
applicant submits that even Professor Murrell acknowledged after the third
surgery that the applicant had some mechanical impingement
and physical
restrictions. There had been no resolution of her shoulder condition, and there
is evidence of continuing pain.
applicant submits that Dr Pant in his July 2025 report explains the reason for
the surgery is to target mechanical and structural
issues driving pain and
dysfunction. The surgery is designed to address biceps pathology, AC joint
degeneration and suspected rotator
cuff failure. The applicant submits that
there may be a debate about the nature of the AC joint problems but the MRI
reports that
there is attenuated thinning of the superior rotator cuff for
further clinical correlation. The applicant contends that the correlation
undertaken by the treating surgeon. Dr Hazan offered an impression of the
imaging. Dr Pant provides a clinical evaluation of the
applicant and an
examination of the MRI. Dr Rimmer does not say the surgery will not reduce pain,
or improve range of motion, which
Dr Pant says the surgery will provide. Dr
Rimmer has not addressed the nature of the surgery and indicated what the
surgery involves
and why it cannot relieve the applicant of her deficiencies in
range of motion and ongoing pain. Dr Rimmer also proceeds on the basis
applicant has fully recovered and fit for pre-injury duties, but this is
Pant reviews the MRI and finds that despite artefact, the scan confirms metallic
anchors in place and possibly misplaced, AC joint
capsular arthropathy, thinning
and suspected re-tear of the supraspinatus. The thinning is not in dispute and
an arthroscopy will
definitively confirm whether there is a re-tear. There is
also biceps and interval changes. The respondent has sought to focus on
re-tear, but the pathology is far broader than merely this question of whether
or not there is a tear. Dr Pant’s findings,
when correlated with the
applicant’s symptoms which are not disputed, constitute surgical
Clinical correlation
submissions in reply, the parties, with leave, further addressed the issue
concerning clinical correlation. The applicant restated
her position regarding
the reference to further clinical correlation in the 2024 MRI report. The
applicant submitted that there is
a preliminary opinion which Dr Hazan has
offered and then he suggests that it is for the treating surgeon to consider the
and clinical condition of the applicant on examination to contribute to
provide a more comprehensive conclusion.
response, the respondent submits that Dr Pant refers to the thinning of the
superior rotator cuff. The respondent submits that
he calls this “on the
one hand, suspected cuff failure” and also “thinning and suspected
re-tear of the supraspinatus”
(which the respondent suggests is a
reference to the supraspinatus component of the rotator cuff which Dr Hazan says
in MRI report
as the thinning of the supraspinatus). Dr Pant finds a possible
re-tear of the supraspinatus and also suspected rotator cuff failure,
explanation as to how the rotator cuff “has failed”.
respondent also states that the applicant in her statement does not refute what
Dr Rimmer says of there being no pain and analgesics
or the history
provided to him.
FINDINGS AND REASONS
Relevant law
applicant bears the onus of proof, to establish her case under s 60 of the
1987 Act, on the balance of
probabilities.
Section 60 of the
1987 Act requires two questions to be answered in the affirmative. Firstly,
whether the proposed surgery “results
from” the accepted injury,
and, secondly, whether the proposed surgery is “reasonably
necessary”. These are questions
which involve matters of impression and
degree, having regard to the available
first question does not require determination. That is because the respondent
properly concedes that the proposed surgery is “as
a result of” the
accepted right shoulder injury. The only question that requires determination is
whether the proposed surgery
and ancillary expenses are “reasonably
necessary”.
, Deputy President Roche
considered the application of s 60 of
the 1987 Act and the phrase “reasonably necessary”. Deputy President
Roche stated:
“Reasonably necessary does not mean
‘absolutely necessary’ (
). If something is
‘necessary’, in the sense of indispensable, it will be
‘reasonably necessary’. That is
because reasonably necessary is a
lesser requirement than ‘necessary’. Depending on the circumstances,
a range of different
treatments may qualify as ‘reasonably
necessary’ and a worker only has to establish that the treatment claimed
of those treatments. A worker certainly does not have to establish that
the treatment is ‘reasonable and necessary’,
significantly more demanding test that many insurers and doctors apply. Dr Bodel
and Dr Meakin were both wrong to apply
President Roche then considered the criteria of
reasonableness:
“[88] In the context of s 60, the
relevant matters, according to the criteria of reasonableness, include, but are
not necessarily
limited to, the matters noted by Burke CCJ at point (5)
above), namely:
(a) the appropriateness of the particular
(b) the availability of alternative treatment,
and its potential effectiveness;
(c) the cost of the treatment;
(d) the actual or potential effectiveness of the
treatment, and
(e) the acceptance by medical experts of the
treatment as being appropriate and likely to be effective.
[89] With respect to point (d), it should be noted that while the
effectiveness of the treatment is relevant to whether the treatment
reasonably necessary, it is certainly not determinative.
The evidence may
show that the same outcome could be achieved by a different treatment, but at a
much lower cost. Similarly, bearing
in mind that all treatment, especially
surgery, carries a risk of a less than ideal result, a poor outcome does not
necessarily mean
that the treatment was not reasonably necessary. As always,
each case will depend on its facts.
[90] While the above matters are ‘useful heads for
consideration’, the ‘essential question remains whether the
treatment was reasonably necessary’ (
Margaroff v Cordon Bleu Cookware
[1997] NSWCC 13
(1997) 15 NSWCCR 204
). Thus, it is
not simply a matter of asking, as was suggested in
, is it better that the
worker have the treatment or not. As noted by French CJ and Gummow J at
v Commonwealth of Australia
[2010] HCA 28
, when dealing with how the
expression ‘no reasonable prospect’ should be understood,
‘[n]o paraphrase of the expression
can be adopted as a sufficient
explanation of its operation, let alone definition of its
and citations omitted)
only dispute, as agreed between the parties, is whether the proposed surgery by
Dr Pant and ancillary expenses are reasonably
necessary. It is not disputed that
the proposed surgery is as a result of the accepted injury to the right shoulder
on 11 November
applicant underwent three necessary surgical procedures due to the accepted
right shoulder injury and complications arising from
the surgeries undertaken.
This is not disputed. The applicant now seeks to undertake a fourth surgical
procedure, at the hand of
a new treating surgeon, to address ongoing symptoms in
her shoulder arising from the accepted injury and surgical procedures.
applicant and respondent provided detailed submissions, with extensive regard to
(and reproduction in-part of) the content of
the medical evidence. I have
considered those submissions carefully, together with the medical evidence which
I have extracted at
length above. Much of the submissions of the parties
focussed on a contest between the evidence of Dr Pant and Dr Rimmer,
with the findings made in the 2024 MRI report. I will address this
further below.
accept the applicant’s submissions that she has ongoing symptoms of pain,
functional and mechanical impairment of her right
shoulder. In this regard, I
note the following evidence:
(a) Applicant – the applicant, in her statement evidence, explains that
her pain did not resolve with conservative treatment.
She states that she
experiences pain, discomfort, reduced range of motion, stiffness, a
clicking/catching sensation, weakness and
has several physical restrictions in
respect of her right shoulder.
(b) Professor Murrell – the applicant’s former treating surgeon, in
July 2023, after the third surgery, notes restricted
range of motion and mild
clicking. By October 2023, he notes stiffness and some clicking and catching
sensations, together with some
restrictions in range of motion, in the right
shoulder. By February 2024, he notes that the applicant is making good progress
her stiffness is resolving. He also notes good range of motion and
elastography numbers, but there are physical restrictions in lifting.
2024, and in his last report in evidence, Professor Murrell records the
applicant is making a steady progress but notes a
good (but not full) range of
motion and some mechanical impingement.
(c) Dr Rimmer – the respondent’s qualified independent medical
expert, in October 2024, records that the applicant considered
her outcome after
the third surgery as “going good.” He does not exclude the existence
of pain, but says there is “[e]ssentially
no pain” and that there is
residual stiffness. He records his findings on examination of range of motion
which are reproduced
at [36] above, which show a reduction in the range compared
to a normal shoulder which he considers only “slight”. Dr
Rimmer’s further report of December 2024 and June 2025 provides no further
insight into the applicant’s symptoms, apart
from noting in the latter
report that his findings on examination (which took place in October the
previous year) of a near full
pain-free range of motion and nil pain relief were
in marked contrast to the findings made by Dr Bodel.
(d) Dr Pant – the applicant’s treating shoulder surgeon, from
November 2024 records right shoulder pain and progressive
symptoms in reduced
range of motion and significant limitations in daily living and functional
impairment. This included pain in
the AC joint and rotator interval, weakness on
superior cuff loading and biceps pathology. In July 2025, Dr Pant confirms
the applicant’s
symptoms of night pain, overhead limitations and weakness
of the right shoulder.
(e) Dr Lu – the applicant’s treating general practitioner, between
November and December 2024 on four occasions notes
ongoing shoulder pain
(presumably in relation to the right shoulder) but in late December 2024 notes
it is “going okay at this
moment.” He also provides a series of
Certificates of Capacity from 18 June 2024 until July 2025 which consistently
physical limitations and restrictions in respect of
lifting/carrying/pushing/pulling in relation to the right shoulder.
(f) Dr Bodel, the applicant’s qualified independent medical expert, in
January 2025, records that the applicant reports pain
and stiffness in the right
shoulder. He notes restrictions on range of motion in the right shoulder when
compared to the left shoulder
(and when compared to a normal shoulder) and
physical limitations in use of the arms. He records his findings on range of
of the right shoulder which demonstrate measurements well below the norm.
He also notes impingement in the right shoulder but no
instability.
is no real dispute about the applicant’s ongoing symptoms, but there is
some variation as to the severity of symptoms
including in assessment of the
range of motion, level of pain and need for or use of pain medication.
Notwithstanding that, the only
evidence in direct contradiction to the overall
evidence of persisting symptoms is that of Dr Rimmer, who reports the applicant
essentially no pain and was near full pain-free range of motion and used no
medication. However, to the extent the respondent relies
on this, I do not
consider this variation of opinion as suggestive of a resolution of symptoms or
a complete recovery. It is inconsistent
with the balance of the medical evidence
of persistent symptomatology in the right shoulder, which is set out directly
any event, range of motion, pain levels and medication use may
fluctuate from time to time and this is not indicative of a resolution
symptoms or determinative of the reasonable necessity of surgery.
Specialisation
parties made submissions in respect of the weight to be attached to the evidence
of Dr Pant and Dr Rimmer, on the basis of their
respective specialisation
and reference to Littles Lawyers in the letterhead of Dr Pant’s evidence.
accept that Dr Pant is a specialist shoulder surgeon and Dr Rimmer promotes
publicly his specialisation in hips and knees. However,
I also accept that
Dr Rimmer is also a SIRA trained medical assessor in the permanent
impairment modules such as the “upper
extremity” which includes
assessment of the shoulder.
basis, it is not appropriate that I place more or less weight on the opinion of
Dr Pant or Dr Rimmer as both are qualified
in their own right to examine and
make clinical findings in respect of an injured shoulder.
I do not consider a reference to Littles Lawyers gives me cause to treat Dr
Pant’s evidence with any circumspect. The
respondent submitted that it did
not seek to call into question Dr Pant’s integrity, but the basis of the
submission with respect
to the reference to Littles Lawyers and Sydney Shoulder
Legal Unit remains unclear and unsupported. There is only one document in
evidence (of at least five) from Dr Pant that refers to the “Sydney
Shoulder Unit Legal Team – Littles” that the
respondent refers to in
support of this submission, and that is the letter dated 6 November 2024. That
document is a letter to the
insurer seeking approval for the subject right
shoulder surgery. The reference to “Sydney Shoulder Unit Legal Team”
Littles Lawyers appears in the letter-header and also the last paragraph of
that document. The latter reference appears in commentary
relating to the
consequences of failure to pay invoices and any contest regarding item numbers,
to be referred to the Sydney Shoulder
Unit and that Littles Lawyers handle
“all issues”. There is no evidence to suggest that the reference to
Littles Lawyers
or the Sydney Shoulder Unit Legal Team has any bearing on
Dr Pant’s opinion on the reasonable necessity of the proposed surgery
or provide any basis for any ill-intended motive. The respondent’s
submission on this basis is rejected.
Medical opinions
prefer Dr Pant’s evidence over Dr Rimmer. Dr Pant’s opinion is
supported by Dr Bodel, the contemporaneous evidence of
ongoing complaint of
symptoms, and the applicant’s statement evidence. I will address this
further below.
Pant consistently provides a detailed analysis of the applicant’s clinical
history, presenting complaints and symptoms, his
findings on examination and
recommendations for treatment. Dr Pant provided an objective and
comprehensive assessment of the radiology
(see [48], [57], [75]), and conducted
a thorough examination of the applicant, before drawing a conclusion that the
applicant’s
symptoms are driven by the AC joint pain, rotator interval and
biceps pathology (see [55]-[56], [74]). In this regard, Dr Pant conducted
clinical tests including range of motion, ASE assessment of functional
limitations and pain (resulting in a score of 53.3) and subjective
value assessment (resulting in an outcome of 40%) (see [54]-[56]). Those tests
revealed a reduced range of motion and the
cause or origins of pain which Dr
Pant considered indicated significant functional impairment that would benefit
from surgical intervention.
I accept the applicant’s submission that
there is no evidence, apart from range of motion studies, to dispute the
from those tests.
respect to the range of motion studies, Professor Murrell, Dr Pant, Dr Rimmer
and Dr Bodel each assessed the applicant to have
a reduced range of motion
in the right shoulder albeit at varying degrees. It is not uncommon that these
assessments may vary from
time to time and from practitioner to practitioner. In
this regard, I note Dr Rimmer’s examination of range of motion was
in October 2024 and Dr Bodel’s examination showing a more
reduced range of motion (and more aligned to Dr Pant’s examination)
undertaken in January 2025. It is also relevant to note that Professor Murrell
did not record the applicant’s range of
motion in the right shoulder had
returned to normal when he last reported in June 2024.
do not accept, when reading his evidence as a whole, that Dr Rimmer considered
that the applicant had achieved a complete recovery
as the applicant sought to
suggest. In October 2024, Dr Rimmer conceded that the applicant was partially
incapacitated and made an
assessment of permanent impairment of 3% in respect of
the right shoulder. He does not divert from this opinion and assessment in
subsequent reports. In December 2024, Dr Rimmer suggests that the
applicant’s approval to work her normal 35 hours week
with respect to her
right shoulder indicated “for the main part she had made a complete
recovery”. Dr Rimmer does not
explain what he means by “for the main
part”. However, I do not consider that he formed a view that the
applicant’s
symptoms or restrictions necessarily resolved. In June 2025,
Dr Rimmer provides further context to his opinion. He records that on
of his findings, the MRI findings and the fact the applicant had been cleared
for 35 hours of work per week in respect
of her right shoulder, the proposed
surgery is totally inappropriate. It is clear he did not consider the
applicant’s condition
had resolved or that she had achieved a complete
recovery. Rather his view was that despite slight restrictions (and partial
and permanent impairment) in her shoulder the proposed surgery was
inappropriate.
I accept the applicant’s submission that Dr Rimmer proceeded on a
misconceived basis that the applicant had been certified
fit for her normal 35
hours of work and that this formed part of his reasoning to dispute the
reasonable necessity of the proposed
surgery. It is true the applicant was never
certified fit to work her pre-injury duties at 35 hours per week, and certainly
June 2024 (and at the time of Dr Rimmer’s examination of the
applicant in October 2024) as confirmed by the contemporaneous
medical evidence.
The Certificates of Capacity demonstrate a partial capacity to work limited
hours varying from time to time (of
less than 32 hours per week) but with
consistent physical restrictions. To the extent that Dr Rimmer relies on this
incorrect history
in forming his ultimate conclusion his opinion has not been
arrived at in a fair climate.
Further, as the applicant aptly contends, a certification of fitness for
pre-injury duties does not preclude a worker from an entitlement
treatment under s 60 of the 1987 Act. However, and contrary to what may have
been submitted, while the reasonable necessity
of proposed surgery is not
dependent on whether it will facilitate a return to work this may be a factor of
consideration in the
assessment of the likely effectiveness of the proposed
treatment. Indeed, an improvement in function or symptoms as a result of surgery
often facilitates a return to the workplace whether gradual or otherwise.
also accept the applicant’s submission that Dr Rimmer’s opinion is
impacted by a failure to explain why there is no
prospect of treatment which
would restore (or improve) the applicant's range of motion. It is also affected
by his comment that there
is no surgical pathology present, which he indicates
is confirmed by the MRI imaging, but this comment is undeveloped and provides
(or any adequate) analysis of the imaging or the MRI report. Indeed, he fails to
engage in any detail with the symptoms and pathology
identified by Dr Pant (that
is, AC joint pain, biceps pathology and a possible rotator cuff re-tear) that
would give force to his
opinion that surgery is “totally
inappropriate”. This affects the weight to be attached to his opinion.
accept the respondent’s submissions that Dr Bodel’s report can only
be given limited weight. Dr Bodel provides a history
of complaint of pain and
symptoms which is consistent with the applicant’s statement evidence and
history recorded by Professor
Murrell and Dr Pant. His findings on
examination, in particular his assessment of the applicant’s range of
motion, are useful
and confirm a reduced range of motion in the right shoulder.
However, Dr Bodel has not had the benefit of reviewing the 2024 MRI
or imaging, for reasons which are unclear. Further, his opinion that the
proposed surgery is reasonably necessary is provided
without any proper
evaluation to identify how he arrives at that opinion. This affects the weight
to be attached to his opinion.
I accept that his opinion provides little
assistance.
Clinical correlation
do not accept the respondent’s submission that there is a significant
discrepancy between what Dr Pant’s says is on
the radiology and what is
recorded on the radiology report, and, even if this were true, it is not
determinative. The respondent’s
submission was founded largely on Dr
Pant’s findings of a possible “re-tear” of the rotator cuff.
It is also on
the basis that Dr Pant’s findings of mechanical sources of
pain, such as anchor migration, biceps pathology and AC joint degeneration,
which the respondent submits are not apparent on the MRI reports. On this basis,
the respondent submits, Dr Pant’s conclusion
is not available on the
is true that Dr Pant finds a possible re-tear (or failure) of the rotator cuff.
Whereas Dr Rimmer does not consider that there
is a rotator cuff tear and
Dr Bodel does not provide an opinion on the possibility of a rotator cuff tear.
It is also true that Dr
Lu states that the MRI shows rotator cuff slightly
thinner due to disuse, but nothing in relation to re-tears. However, this does
little to assist to resolve the existence or otherwise of a rotator cuff
Murrell comments in October 2023, February 2024 and June 2024 that an ultrasound
showed the rotator cuff repair had healed
nicely and the applicant was making
good progress. This is consistent in-part with Dr Rimmer’s evidence. It is
also true that
Professor Murrell does not recommend surgery but he also does not
say further surgery is not needed. However, he was also of the
applicant had ongoing symptoms including a reduced (or not full) range motion
and impingement of the right shoulder. There
is no further evidence from
Professor Murrell post June 2024.
is notable that the 2021 MRI report, which preceded the surgical procedures
involving rotator cuff repair undertaken by the applicant
at the hand of
Professor Murrell in May 2022 and September 2022 (the latter involving a
“large” repair), did not note
a rotator cuff tear but noted thinning
of the supraspinatus component of the rotator cuff. The 2024 MRI report also
noted the same
findings and specifically that the imaging was “very
similar in appearance to” the 2021 MRI.
2024 MRI report prepared by Dr Hazan contained his opinion and findings
following his interpretation of the imaging. His findings
were also qualified by
his comment of the need “for further clinical correlation”, in
respect of his findings of “[a]ttenuated
thinned superior rotator
cuff”. As the applicant submits, Dr Hazan provided an opinion and then
suggested that those findings
be correlated by clinical examination. That is, as
the applicant submits, that the treating surgeon consider the imaging and
condition of the applicant on examination and provide a more
comprehensive conclusion. This is what Dr Pant did.
the respondent correctly submits, Dr Pant describes a suspected rotator cuff
failure and also thinning and suspected re-tear of
the supraspinatus component
of the rotator cuff. However, contrary to the respondent’s submission, it
was not necessary that
Dr Pant explain how the rotator cuff failed because he
did not find that it failed. In any event, Dr Pant explained why he suspected
rotator cuff re-tear. Reading his report as a whole, his opinion is based on his
clinical findings on examination of the applicant,
review of the clinical
history and the imaging. It was reasonable for Dr Pant to have made this finding
based on his clinical judgment,
and, as the applicant submits, the proposed
arthroscopy will definitively confirm whether there is a tear of the rotator
reasoning equally applies to Dr Pant’s other findings,
including in relation to metallic anchors (possibly misplaced), biceps
joint pathology (although, I note that the 2024 MRI specifically notes AC joint
pathology).
evidence must be considered as a whole, against lay complaint of symptoms,
radiological findings and clinical findings on
examination. While objective
radiological evidence (or imaging) is important it still requires a subjective
analysis by a skilled
medical professional in interpreting the imaging, drawing
conclusions and making findings. Often those findings need to be reviewed
further radiological investigations and/or clinical correlation, as medical
concerns may be overlooked, imaging may be unclear,
for example, due to
paramagnetic artefact, and/or imaging may be interpreted differently. In this
regard, I am mindful of the general
need to treat medical records with
A skilled medical
professional that has the benefit of the entire clinical picture is well placed
to form an opinion on radiological
images and make any necessary findings, in
addition to those found in radiological investigation reports.
I accept that there are aspects of Dr Pant’s findings on examination that
may not be specifically recorded in the MRI
report, including a possible
“re-tear”, this does not mean that his conclusions and
interpretation of the imaging is
incorrect. The respondent’s submissions
seek to minimise the clinical role of a treating specialist and disregard the
provocation tests and measurement tool outcomes undertaken by Dr Pant,
in relation to range of motion, ASES and SSV scores. Dr Pant
required to explain why he drew a conclusion on the imaging which may be
different to that reported in the MRI report (although
this is implicit in his
findings and commentary on interpretation of the imaging, clinical examination
and response to Dr Rimmer’s
opinion). However, it was incumbent upon him
to explain how he arrived at the conclusion that the surgery proposed was
recommended
and reasonably necessary. Dr Pant, on review and interpretation
of the imaging and against the applicant’s history and his
findings on
clinical examination, found that there was a possible re-tear of the superior
cuff of the rotator cuff, together with
biceps and AC joint pathology, requiring
right shoulder revision surgery.
Reasonable necessity
Pant provided an itemised quote for four separate procedures. I accept that Dr
Pant may not have specifically indicated, using
the descriptions of each
procedure, why they are reasonably necessary procedures. However, he has clearly
identified the applicant’s
symptoms and impairment in functioning which
requires revision shoulder surgery in respect of the AC joint, biceps and
rotator cuff
(see [55]-[57] and [73]-[79]). He also concludes that the proposed
surgery, which he itemised the day he recommended the surgery,
will address each
of those symptoms and the mechanical and structural issues driving the pain and
dysfunction.
Rimmer, Professor Murrell and Dr Bodel do not address the specific nature of the
surgery proposed, and this does not assist either
these reasons and those set out above, I am satisfied that Dr Pant provided an
explanation for the basis of his recommendation
for surgery. His path of
reasoning is adequately exposed by reference to his record of the reported
history, his findings on examination
and interpretation of the imaging. I am
satisfied that the proposed treatment is appropriate to address the
applicant’s symptoms
of pain and mechanical dysfunction in her right
parties did not specifically provide submissions on the availability of
alternative treatment. The applicant has undergone extensive
physiotherapy
treatment. It is true that Dr Rimmer suggests that this treatment should cease
and be replaced with a home-based exercise
program only, as does Mr Silcock.
However, Mr Silcock did not consider the applicant’s pre-injury functional
capacity had been
restored or would improve with further physiotherapy and
Dr Rimmer was not of the view that the applicant’s symptoms had
Indeed, they did not consider or form a view that any alternative
treatment would restore the applicant’s function or resolve
her symptoms.
Conservative options may be available to continue to provide relief to the
applicant’s right shoulder symptoms
but this does not preclude the
proposed surgery from being reasonably
As Dr Pant explains,
notwithstanding the extensive treatment undertaken which in his view failed to
provide relief, the proposed
surgery is required to address the
applicant’s pain, functional and mechanical impairment. There is no
evidence to suggest
conservative treatment will or could have the same effect as
the proposed surgery.
cost of the proposed surgery is $11,135. The proposed cost is not prohibitive
and has not been put in issue by the respondent.
applicant is not ignorant of the fact that the potential effectiveness of
further surgery on her shoulder is guarded given the
outcome and the undertaking
of her three previous surgeries. Dr Pant provides an opinion, which I have
accepted, that supports potential
effectiveness of the proposed surgery. That
is, he finds that the proposed surgery will target the mechanical and structural
driving the applicant’s pain and dysfunction. He finds that it is
designed to reduce pain, improve range of motion and improve
her function. While
Dr Rimmer does not consider the surgery is appropriate he does not address
whether it would be effective in alleviating
the applicant’s undisputed
symptoms. I accept that there is no compelling countervailing evidence on the
potential effectiveness
of the proposed surgery.
proposed surgery is, by the submissions of the parties, complex and complicated.
This is likely due to the nature of the various
surgical procedures recommended
and the background of previous surgery. However, the evidence supports that the
proposed surgery
(with the various surgical procedures) is acceptable in the
medical profession.
is some doubt around the reasonableness of the proposed procedure. However, for
the reasons set out above, I accept the evidence
of Dr Pant. I also accept that
the applicant’s symptoms including pain, reduced range of motion,
mechanical impingement, and
functional impairment. I consider the proposed
surgery is appropriate and will likely be effective in restoring some of the
applicant’s
function, alleviating her symptoms and restoring her quality
follows that there will be an award for the applicant.
am satisfied that the applicant has discharged her onus of proof on the balance
of probabilities that the proposed right shoulder
surgery is reasonably
necessary as a result of injury on 11 November 2019, pursuant to s 60 of the
respondent is to pay the costs of the proposed surgery recommended by Dr Pant
and any incidental treatment costs in accordance
with the workers compensation
gazetted rates.
Accordingly,
I make the orders set out above.
[2014] NSWWCPD
Nguyen v Cosmopolitan
[2008] NSWCA 246
, [44] (per McDougall J (McColl and Bell JJA
agreeing));
Department of Education and Training v Ireland
NSWWCCPD 134.
Cement Pty Ltd v Bates
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
10 NSWCCR 796
Diab v NRMA
[2014] NSWWCCPD 72.
Diab v NRMA Limited
[2014] NSWWCPD 72,
Diab v NRMA Limited
[2014] NSWWCPD 72,
sira.nsw.gov.au.
John Holland (Constructions) Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 58
Makita (Australia)
Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305.
Davis v Council of the City
of Wagga Wagga
[2004] NSWCA 34
, at [35] (per Mason
Diab v NRMA Limited
[2014] NSWWCPD 72, [86].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.35 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter