URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2012/195.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Daily Examiner Pty Ltd v Mundine; Brown v Mundine [2012] NSWCA 195 (28 June 2012)
Court of Appeal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Daily Examiner Pty Ltd v Mundine; Brown v
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2012] NSWCA 195
Hearing Date(s):
2 April 2012
Decision Date:
28 June 2012
McColl JA, Whealy JA & Tobias AJA
(1) Refuse the appellants'
applications for an extension of time to file their Notices of
(2) Appellants to pay the respondent's costs of the
applications to extend time and of hearing of the appeal proceedings
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to
be entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
Catchwords:
DEFAMATION - common law qualified privilege - jury
trial - appeal against primary judge's findings - where respondent not
in matter - whether trial judge correct that publication was to world
at large - whether publication to recipients who would not
identify respondent
merely incidental
DEFAMATION - statutory qualified privilege - s 30
Defamation Act 2005
- whether appellants' conduct reasonable in the
circumstances - whether reasonableness determined by principles in Reynolds v
Newspapers Ltd.
PRACTICE and PROCEDURE - extension of time - where
leave applied for unnecessarily - leave rejected - whether time to file notice
of appeal should be extended
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Defamation Act 2005
Supreme Court Act 1970
Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) - 51.9
Cases Cited:
- Adam v Ward
[1917] AC 309
- Aktas v Westpac
Banking Corp Ltd
[2010] HCA 25
- Amalgamated Television Services
Pty Limited v Marsden
[2002] NSWCA 419
- Andreyevich v Kosovich &
Publicity Press (1938) Pty Ltd
[1947] NSWStRp 2
(1947) 47 SR(NSW) 357
- Aon Risk Services
Australia Ltd v Australian National University
[2009] HCA 27
239 CLR 175
Austin v Mirror Newspapers Ltd
(1985) 3 NSWLR 354
- Australian Broadcasting
Corporation v Comalco Ltd
(1986) 12 FCR 510
- Bashford v Information
Australia (Newsletters) Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 5
218 CLR 366
- Bennette v Cohen
[2005] NSWCA 341
64 NSWLR 81
- Besser v Kermode
[2011] NSWCA 174
- Bonnick v Morris
[2002] UKPC 31
[2003] 1 AC 300
- Cush v Dillon; Boland v Dillon
[2011] HCA 30
85 ALJR 865
- Daily Examiner Pty Ltd v Mundine
[2011] NSWCA
- Davis v Nationwide News Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWSC 699
71 NSWLR 606
Jones & Co Inc v Gutnick
[2002] HCA 56
; 210 CLR 575
- Fairfax Publication
Pty Ltd v Hitchcock
[2007] NSWCA 364
70 NSWLR 484
- John Fairfax & Sons
[2001] NSWCA 290
52 NSWLR 373
- Farah Constructions Pty Ltd v
Say-Dee Pty Ltd
[2007] HCA 22
- Flood v Times Newspapers Ltd
[2012] UKSC 11
; 2 WLR 760
- Gett v Tabet
[2009] NSWCA 76
; 254 ALR 504
Goyan v Motyka
[2008] NSWCA 28
[2008] Aust Torts Reports 81-939
- Hebditch v
[1894] 2 QB 54
- Holmes a Court v Papaconstuntinos
[2011] NSWCA
[2011] Aust Torts Reports 82-081
- Jameel v Wall Street Journal Europe
Sprl Jameel v Wall Street Journal Europe Sprl
[2006] UKHL 44
(2007) 1 AC
- Korean Times Pty Ltd v Pak
[2011] NSWCA 365
- Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
189 CLR 520
- Lazarus v Deutsche
Lufthansa AG
(1985) 1 NSWLR 188
- Lindholdt v Hyer
[2008] NSWCA 264
- Martin v The Nominal Defendant
(1954) 74 WN (NSW) 121
[2010] NSWSC 686
- Moit v Bristow
[2005] NSWCA 322
Mirror Newspapers Ltd
[1977] 2 NSWLR 749
- Mundine v Brown (No 6)
- Mundine v Brown (No 7)
[2011] NSWSC 170
- Reynolds v Time
Newspapers Ltd
[1999] UKHL 45
; (2001) 2 AC 127
- Richards v Cornford (No 3)
[2010] NSWCA 134
- Roberts v Bass
[2002] HCA 57
Nationwide News Pty Ltd
[2003] HCA 52
216 CLR 327
- Sali v SPC Ltd
67 ALJR 841
- Skalkos v Assaf
[2002] NSWCA 14
[2002] Aust Torts
Reports 81-644
- Sophron v Nominal Defendant
[1957] HCA 27
(1957) 96 CLR 469
v West Australian Newspapers Ltd
[1994] HCA 45
182 CLR 211
- Stollznow v
[1980] 2 NSWLR 749
- Theophanous v Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
[1994] HCA 46
182 CLR 104
- Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
142 CLR 531
Witten v Lombard Australia Ltd (1968) 88 WN (Pt 1) (NSW)
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Avery Brown (Appellant/Second Respondent)
Examiner Pty Ltd (Appellant/Second Respondent)
Lana Mundine (First
Respondent)
Representation
Ms P. Wass (Appellant/Second
Respondent)
G.O'L. Reynolds SC, A.T.S. Dawson, Ms G.R. Rubagotti
(Appellant/Second Respondent)
T. Molomby SC, R.K.M. Rasmussen (First
Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Solicitors:
Holding Redlich Lawyers
(Appellant/Second Respondent)
Bani Haddock Fiora (Appellant/Second
Respondent)
Slater & Gordon Lawyers (First Respondent)
File number(s):
2009/297431
Decision Under Appeal
- Court / Tribunal:
Supreme Court
- Date of Decision:
05 November 2010
- Citation:
[2010] NSWSC 1285
- Court File Number(s)
2009/297431
Publication Restriction:
An overview
There are two appeals before the Court. The first appellant is Avery Brown
("Mr Brown"). The second is Daily Examiner Pty Limited
("the newspaper"). The
appellants were defendants in defamation proceedings brought against them by the
first respondent ("Ms Mundine").
The proceedings related to a front page article
published on 18 August 2008 in the
Daily Examiner
newspaper, of which Mr
Brown was in large measure the author. The
Daily Examiner
is a newspaper
published on the north coast of New South Wales. It has a circulation that
principally covers the Clarence Valley
region, but it extends beyond that area.
It describes itself as
"the north coast's first newspaper"
. At the time
of publication, it had a readership of some 11,948.
the jury's findings that the newspaper article defamed Ms Mundine -
notwithstanding that she was not named in the publication
- by imputing that she
was incompetent in her occupation as a mental health worker in Grafton, Harrison
J (the primary judge) set
established defences of qualified privilege, and, if applicable, to quantify
His Honour rejected these defences, both statutory and at common law,
and awarded Ms Mundine damages of $60,000:
Mundine v Brown (No 6)
("the primary judgment"). Later, in a separate judgment, his Honour
ordered the newspaper to pay indemnity costs and Mr Brown to
pay costs on the
ordinary basis:
Mundine v Brown (No 7)
[2011] NSWSC 170
("the costs
judgment").
Notices of Appeal, in circumstances we shall mention shortly, were filed well
out of time. Each appellant seeks to invoke the
Court's power to extend time for
the filing of those notices: UCPR 51.9(1)(b). Ms Mundine opposes the
applications to extend time,
arguing that she has been prejudiced and that the
appeals, in any event, are without merit.
Notices of Appeal raise a number of grounds that, it appears, are not pressed.
The essential issues on appeal raised in the written
and oral submissions for
each of the appellants concern the primary judge's findings that the article was
not published on an occasion
of qualified privilege at common law and that the
appellants had not established a defence pursuant to
(NSW) ("Defamation Act"). The appellants seek orders that both
judgments of the primary judge be set aside and that this Court should
the article was published on an occasion of qualified privilege at both common
law and pursuant to
Defamation Act
The procedural issue - should time to file the Notices of Appeal be
primary judgment was delivered on 5 November 2010. The costs judgment was given
on 18 March 2011. A Notice of Intention to Appeal
was filed on 30 November 2010.
The respective appellants then apparently formed the view that leave to appeal
was necessary and a
summons for leave to appeal from the November 2010 judgment
was lodged. That summons was within time had leave to appeal been the
appropriate appellate route. Leave was opposed. After hearing argument, on 13
May 2011 this Court (Basten and Macfarlan JJA) refused
leave to appeal with
Daily Examiner Pty Ltd v Mundine
[2011] NSWCA 126.
Their Honours
identified the qualified privilege argument, but determined that the primary
judge's rejection of the defence had not
been patently wrong, had essentially
involved issues of fact, and did not raise any question of principle.
Thereafter, the appellants
made applications for special leave to appeal from
this decision to the High Court of Australia.
reason for the appeals being out of time is not in issue. Simply, the
appellants' lawyers made a serious error. Experienced lawyers,
with the guidance
of counsel, took the view (wrongly) that an appeal from the primary judgment did
not lie as of right as the damages
awarded were less than $100,000, and that it
was necessary to apply for leave to appeal pursuant to
(NSW). The correct position was that an appeal lay as of
right pursuant to
Supreme Court Act
solicitor for the newspaper, Mr Graham Hryce, deposed in his affidavit of 31
August 2011 that after the primary judge had handed
down his judgment in
relation to liability and damages on 5 November 2010, he formed the view that,
because of the amount of the
judgment, it was necessary to seek leave to appeal
He said that, in forming this view, he did not turn his mind to
Supreme Court Act
. On 30 November 2010, a Notice of Intention
to Appeal was filed and a summons seeking leave to appeal was filed on 4
February 2011.
appears that, after 13 May 2011, when the application for leave to appeal was
dismissed by this Court, Mr Hryce decided to brief
Mr G.O'L. Reynolds SC to
advise in relation to bringing an application for special leave from that
dismissal in the High Court. In
mid-June 2011, Mr Reynolds SC, although not
briefed to advise on the point, stated that, in his view, the appellant had an
as of right pursuant to
Supreme Court Act
. Following
receipt of this advice, a Notice of Appeal was filed on 17 June
Berry, the solicitor for Mr Brown, received instructions on 3 February 2011 to
appeal the primary judge's decision given on 5 November
2010. He sought the view
of his trial counsel, Ms Penelope Wass, in respect of the appeal procedure.
Following discussions with Ms
Wass, Mr Berry came to the view that, because of
the amount of the judgment sum, it was necessary to seek leave to appeal under
He said that he did not consider the possibility of a right of appeal under
Supreme Court Act
mid-June 2011, he was contacted by Mr Graham Hryce who told him that advice had
been given by counsel that there was an appeal
as of right. Following this, Mr
Berry sought once again the views of Ms Wass and, thereafter, a Notice of Appeal
was filed on 21
appears that, notwithstanding the decisions made by the newspaper and Mr Brown
to each lodge an appeal in this Court, the High
Court proceedings have been kept
well and truly alive. The chronology filed on behalf of Ms Mundine shows the
Appellants granted first extension of time from High Court to file summary
of argument and draft Notice of Appeal until 19.08.11
First return date before Registrar, Court of Appeal
Appellants seek second extension of time from High Court to file summary of
argument until 19.09.11
Call-up - Court of Appeal - hearing date not set
Appellants granted third extension of time from High Court to file summary
of argument to 13.10.11
Second call-up - appeal set down for hearing - 02.04.12
Appellants granted fourth extension of time from High Court to file summary
of argument and application books to 30.04.12
the hearing of this appeal, it has been accepted that an appeal lay as of right
from the decision of the primary judge made, as
it was, following a jury trial:
Bennette v Cohen
[2005] NSWCA 341
64 NSWLR 81
per Bryson JA, with whom
Beazley JA and Brownie AJA agreed. Mr Dawson (who appeared with Mr Reynolds SC
) was trial counsel in the present matter and appears again
with Mr Reynolds as his leader on this appeal. Mr Dawson also appeared
newspaper when leave to appeal was sought and refused by this Court. Ms Wass
appeared for Mr Brown on the leave application.
Reynold's submissions on the extension of time application may be stated
briefly. He argued that the failure to appeal within time
arose out of a simple
oversight on the part of the lawyers, and that his client should not be punished
in that regard. Secondly,
the summons for leave to appeal was filed within time,
even though the appeal was not. Thirdly, there was no prejudice to Ms Mundine.
Fourthly, the appeal is a meritorious one, involving matters of high principle.
Ms Wass joined with Mr Reynolds in these submissions.
Molomby SC, for Ms Mundine, submitted that more than simply oversight was
involved. The appellants' lawyers were very experienced
in this field and,
indeed, as we have said, Mr Dawson was junior counsel in
. Secondly, Mr Molomby argued that a particular feature of this matter
is that the appellants have endeavoured, over a considerable
period of time, to
keep their High Court application for special leave alive. They are, as he put
it, "endeavouring to have the best
of both worlds". Thirdly, Mr Molomby
submitted that his client has sustained prejudice. She has not been paid her
verdict. She has
been made to endure the now admittedly misconceived leave
process and now faces the uncertainty and delay of a further appeal. Further,
each application for an extension of time in the High Court was made without
notice to his client. He contended that costs are not
a sufficient answer to
these real matters of prejudice. Finally, Mr Molomby argued that there is no
merit in the present appeal and
that it is being used as no more than a vehicle
to agitate an issue not raised at trial in the special leave application
before the High Court, or in any future application for special leave
to appeal from this decision.
all parties to the appeal agree that one important consideration in the
extension of time application relates to the merits
or otherwise of the grounds
of the appeal, it is desirable to turn now to examine the issues raised on
appeal in some detail having
had the advantage of full argument on those
The central issue - the statutory background
we have said, the central issue in these appeals is whether the primary judge
erred in finding that the appellants had not established
their defences of
qualified privilege. The submissions at first instance addressed both the
statutory and common law defences of
qualified privilege. The common law defence
is retained according to
Defamation Act
. That section
24 Scope of defences under general law and other law
not limited
(1) A defence under this Division is additional to any other defence or
exclusion of liability available to the defendant apart from
this Act (including
under the general law) and does not of itself vitiate, limit or abrogate any
other defence or exclusion of liability.
(2) If a defence under this Division to the publication of defamatory matter
may be defeated by proof that the publication was actuated
by malice, the
general law applies in defamation proceedings in which the defence is raised to
determine whether a particular publication
of matter was actuated by
statutory defence of qualified privilege is provided for under
Defamation Act
, which provides:
30 Defence of qualified
privilege for provision of certain information
(1) There is a defence of qualified privilege for the publication of
defamatory matter to a person (the "recipient") if the defendant
(a) the recipient has an interest or apparent interest in having
information on some subject, and
(b) the matter is published to the recipient in the course of giving to
the recipient information on that subject, and
(c) the conduct of the defendant in publishing that matter is
reasonable in the circumstances.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), a recipient has an apparent
interest in having information on some subject if, and only if,
at the time of
the publication in question, the defendant believes on reasonable grounds that
the recipient has that interest.
(3) In determining for the purposes of subsection (1) whether the
conduct of the defendant in publishing matter about a person is
reasonable in
the circumstances, a court may take into account:
(a) the extent to which the matter published is of public interest,
(b) the extent to which the matter published relates to the performance
of the public functions or activities of the person, and
(c) the seriousness of any defamatory imputation carried by the matter
published, and
(d) the extent to which the matter published distinguishes between
suspicions, allegations and proven facts, and
(e) whether it was in the public interest in the circumstances for the
matter published to be published expeditiously, and
(f) the nature of the business environment in which the defendant
operates, and
(g) the sources of the information in the matter published and the
integrity of those sources, and
(h) whether the matter published contained the substance of the
person's side of the story and, if not, whether a reasonable attempt
was made by
the defendant to obtain and publish a response from the person, and
(i) any other steps taken to verify the information in the matter
published, and
(j) any other circumstances that the court considers relevant.
(4) For the avoidance of doubt, a defence of qualified privilege under
subsection (1) is defeated if the plaintiff proves that the
publication of the
defamatory matter was actuated by malice.
(5) However, a defence of qualified privilege under subsection (1) is
not defeated merely because the defamatory matter was published
for reward."
Factual background
is convenient at this point to examine the newspaper article ("the article") in
more detail. It was entitled
"Aboriginal Services nowhere to be seen"
was published in the newspaper on 18 August 2008. The article was largely
written by Mr Brown, subject to some minor editing
by the sub-editor of the
newspaper, Ms Kirsty Allen. He was an employee of the Aboriginal Legal Service,
as well as being a leading
Aboriginal affairs advocate, an Aboriginal elder and
a co-head claimant in a land rights claim in the area. The text of the article
was as follows:
"ABORIGINAL SERVICES NOWHERE TO BE SEEN
Leading Aboriginal affairs advocate Avery Brown has watched on in frustration
during the past two years as more and more Aboriginals
have been paraded before
district courts. Disappointed and upset with the inadequacies in Aboriginal
services, he is now speaking
out in the hope of a better tomorrow for his
people. He pulls no punches in his comments about how local Aboriginal services
failing to meet their obligations.
We do not need to visit the Northern Territory to comprehend the quality of
life that remote Aboriginal communities endure. We only
need to look in our own
Last week I attended a forum in Grafton to discuss the issues of domestic
violence and mental health. As a field officer with the
Aboriginal Legal
Service, these issues frequently affect my clients.
I was sorely disappointed in the forum. It was organized by the Grafton
Domestic Violence Committee so Aboriginal service providers
could meet and
discuss their concerns.
But unfortunately, many of the services did not attend, even though they were
told about it months in advance.
I am now wondering whether they are interested in providing a good service or
have just grown complacent.
We have a mental health crisis in the Clarence Valley and the truth is that
mental illness - including alcohol and drug abuse - leads
to crime, it leads to
violence and it leads to poverty.
It has played a large part in the Aboriginal community becoming
over-represented in the courts.
The Aboriginal Legal Service is under immense pressure from the justice
system to provide an alternative to gaol, as it realises the
extent of mental
illness in our community and its link to domestic violence.
Although it is a big problem here, visibility from the Aboriginal services
dealing with these issues is almost non-existent. There
is a growing perception
that service workers are hiding behind their desks.
I have on many occasions tried desperately to engage mental health
intervention in extreme circumstances, but to no avail.
I hoped this forum would provide me with resources available to assist my
clients. I was wrong.
I am sick and tired of being directed to use Aboriginal workers attached to
mental health and domestic violence services and not getting
the information or
assistance I need.
Although I value Aboriginal-specific services, if being referred means my
clients get a second-rate service, then I would rather use
I do not believe the support workers in the Aboriginal sector are
appropriately accredited when compared with mainstream service providers.
As a result, the Aboriginal community is receiving below-standard level
At the moment there seems to be no performance review of workers and
services, both in Aboriginal and mainstream providers.
What is clear is that Aboriginal services need to get out of their offices
and into the community, especially in remote areas such
as Baryulgil and
Malabugilmah.
The disappointing part is that the services could make a huge difference in
the community and in countless families if they did their
jobs properly.
Today I am no closer in being able to access the services my clients
And they do need it.
article appeared principally on the front page of the newspaper together with a
large picture of Mr Brown. Its text was continued
Brown gave evidence at trial that his objective in writing the article was to
inform the community about the inadequacies of Aboriginal
services. He cited
issues including
"chronic alcohol and drug abuse issues, domestic violence,
suicides, homelessness, truancies from school"
as issues that are not being
adequately addressed: primary judgment at [43]. He stated that
"the article
in the paper was to try and draw attention to those issues in the community and
to also jog those persons, CEOs and managers,
to say, you workers need to get
out there and you workers need to get together and deal with these issues and
: primary judgment at [44]
Mundine commenced proceedings for defamation against the appellants in relation
to the article because she saw it as a public attack
on her. It is significant
that the article did not mention Ms Mundine by name. For this reason, one of the
issues for the jury was
whether she had proved on the balance of probabilities
that she was identified by the article, that is to say, in the language of
Defamation Act
, that "the [appellants] ... published
defamatory matter about [her]". The jury found that she had done
Mundine is a qualified mental health worker with the Aboriginal Medical Service
("AMS") in Grafton. She grew up as an Aboriginal
child and adolescent in the
local community outside Grafton called Baryulgil. There are four separate
Aboriginal communities in the
Grafton area, including those of Maclean and
Yamba. These are all located within the Clarence Valley District. Ms Mundine
Diploma in Mental Health and an Advanced Diploma in Health Science
(Aboriginal Mental Health), among other qualifications. At the
time the article
was published she had been working for the AMS since 2001.
AMS was established in 1990. It is a non-government, non-profit organisation
controlled by directors who all come from the local
Aboriginal communities.
Importantly, at the relevant time, Ms Mundine was the only Aboriginal mental
health worker employed by that
organisation. As such, she contended that the
remarks in the article (regarding the quality of Aboriginal mental health
were directly addressed at her and moreover, that since the Clarence
Valley District is a comparatively confined region and her working
life were closely connected to that community, a number of people were able to
identify her as the target of the article.
There was evidence that a specific
number of people had identified her, but her case was that there were many
others who would have
recognised her as the object of the remarks in the
article. Her work took her to Aboriginal people throughout the Clarence Valley,
including to hospitals and prisons. She dealt with many people, in the ordinary
affairs of her life, on a regular basis.
The primary judgment
The issues at trial
Defamation Act
, Ms Mundine had a single cause of action in
relation to the publication of the article, a position which reflects the common
At common law, it has become the practice to plead the defamatory
imputations for which the plaintiff contended even where the plaintiff
the natural and ordinary meaning of the defamatory words: see generally
Besser v Kermode
[2011] NSWCA 174
282 ALR 314
. Consistently
with that practice, Ms Mundine had pleaded in her Amended and Further Amended
Statement of Claim (and in substance
in her original Statement of Claim) that
the article conveyed the following defamatory imputations:
(a) as a mental health worker she is failing to meet her obligations to the
aboriginal community;
(b) as a mental health worker in the aboriginal community she bears
responsibility for the gross over-representation of the aboriginal
community in
the Courts;
(c) as a mental health worker she is incompetent;
(d) as a mental health worker she is unwilling to go out to the locations where
her services are needed;
(e) she is not appropriately accredited for her job as a mental health worker
when compared to mainstream service providers;
(f) she lacks commitment to her job as a mental health
claimed that the publication of the article resulted in her being subjected to
hatred, ridicule and contempt and [that she] has suffered and continues to
suffer distress and damage to her personal as well as her
business and
professional reputation
": respondent's Further Amended Statement of Claim,
dated 11 August 2009 at [6].
their defences, the appellants denied that the article was defamatory of Ms
Mundine and that it could be understood to convey any
of the above imputations
Defamation Act
, common law qualified privilege, honest opinion
, and fair comment at common law. The newspaper also raised the
defences of qualified privilege and honest opinion.
her reply to the defences of qualified privilege, Ms Mundine contended that the
publication of the article was actuated by an improper
purpose or purposes on
the appellants' part because each knew the imputations were false and because of
their knowledge of the following
facts, among others: that she was an Aboriginal
mental health worker; that she visited remote communities in the Clarence Valley
area; that she was the only Aboriginal person working in that area for an
Aboriginal mental health service; that, at the date of
publication, the
appellants had no knowledge of Ms Mundine's accreditation as a mental health
worker; and, that no attempt had been
made to put the allegations to her before
publishing the article. In addition, in response to Mr Brown, she contended that
aware that the forum referred to in the article was not intended to cover
mental health issues in the Aboriginal community at all
and that he had not, in
fact, tried to engage Ms Mundine's services for his clients.
The role of judge and jury
Defamation Act
, the jury was to determine whether any
defence raised by the appellants had been established. However,
provides that nothing in
requires or permits a jury to determine any issue
that, at general law, is an issue to be determined by a judicial officer. At
law, it is for the judge to say whether, on the facts as found by the
jury (in the case of dispute), the matter complained of was
published on a
privileged occasion:
Hebditch v MacIlwaine
[1894] 2 QB 54
[1917] AC 309.
Davis v Nationwide News Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWSC
71 NSWLR 606
, McClellan CJ at CL approached
on the basis that the general law position - that the question of
reasonableness of the appellant's conduct for the defence of qualified
is a matter for the judge - is preserved by virtue of
s 22(5)(b).
The primary
judge appears to have followed that course in determining the
Neither appellant suggests his Honour erred in any respect in so doing. We shall
assume, without finally deciding, that his
Honour was correct to do
is not apparent that the parties contended there were any disputed issues of
fact for the jury's determination for the purposes
of the qualified privilege
defences: cf
Hebditch v MacIlwaine
. However, the jury was asked to
determine for the purposes of the appellants' defences of honest opinion
Defamation Act
) whether they established that certain matters were
substantially true:
Defamation Act
. Both the appellants and
the respondent have sought to invoke various of the jury's findings in this
respect in relation to the issues
arising under qualified privilege. We proceed,
accordingly, as the primary judge did, on the basis that those findings of fact
also be considered as relevant to whether the qualified privilege defences
were established.
the light of the foregoing, it fell to the primary judge to determine as a
matter of law whether the article was published on an
occasion of qualified
privilege at common law or whether the appellants had established a defence of
qualified privilege pursuant
Defamation Act
having found that Mr Brown's publication of the article was not actuated by
The findings of the jury and primary judge
a seventeen day hearing, the jury made the following relevant findings (primary
judgment at [1]-[2]):
(1) that Ms Mundine had proved on the balance of probabilities that she was
sufficiently identified by the article even though she
was not named in
(2) that she had proved on the balance of probabilities that the article
conveyed two meanings to an ordinary reader;
(3) that of these two meanings only one was defamatory, namely, that Ms Mundine
was incompetent as a mental health worker;
(4) that Mr Brown was not motivated by malice towards Ms Mundine in publishing
the article.
we have said, the jury also made a number of findings of fact for the purposes
of the defence of honest opinion. The appellants
relied upon the following facts
as found by the jury:
(a) Avery Brown is an Aboriginal person;
(b) there are inadequacies in Aboriginal services in the Clarence
(c) Avery Brown is a Field Officer with the Aboriginal Legal Service,
(d) Avery Brown's clients are frequently affected by issues of domestic violence
and mental health;
(e) on 14 August 2008, Avery Brown attended a forum organised by the Grafton
Domestic Violence Committee ("the forum");
(f) the forum was organised so that Aboriginal service providers could meet and
discuss their concerns;
(g) Aboriginal service providers had been invited to attend the forum and were
on notice of the forum prior to the event;
(h) many service providers did not attend the forum;
(i) there is a mental health crisis in the Clarence Valley;
(j) mental illness including alcohol and drug abuse leads to crime, violence and
poverty related issues;
(k) Aboriginal persons are over represented in the criminal justice
(l) the Aboriginal community is receiving below standard
(m) there are remote Aboriginal communities in the Clarence Valley area,
including Malabugilmah and Baryugil;
(n) there is a significant need for Aboriginal services in the
jury also found the following facts to be untrue (primary judgment at
"(h) The Forum was convened to discuss mental health issues
and domestic violence issues.
(m) There is pressure on the Aboriginal Legal Service from the justice system
to provide an alternative to gaol.
(n) Mr Brown had tried to engage mental health intervention on many occasions
in extreme circumstances to no avail.
(o) Support workers in the Aboriginal sector are not appropriately accredited
when compared with mainstream service providers."
Preliminary issue - who were the recipients?
the issue of common law qualified privilege, the primary judge identified a
preliminary issue for consideration. This related to
the fact that the article
in question did not refer to Ms Mundine by name. The preliminary issue was
whether the appellants needed
to establish the defence of common law qualified
privilege in relation to publication to the whole readership of the newspaper,
whether it was sufficient to establish it in relation to only those people
who identified Ms Mundine as the subject of the defamatory
imputation in the
article. Ms Mundine submitted that the article was published to the public at
large and that, essentially, the
appellants needed to defend the publication to
its entire readership. On the other hand, the appellants contended that only a
group of readers were actually able to identify Ms Mundine and that they
only needed to show that publication to those recipients
was protected.
Mundine gave evidence that fourteen people had identified her as the person
referred to in the article. They included her family
and close friends, work
colleagues and clients: primary judgment at [12] and [15]. She also submitted
that it could plainly be inferred
that there was identification that went beyond
these fourteen people. In support of this inference, she pointed to her
in the community in her role as an Aboriginal mental health care
worker and the fact that there was an article that appeared in
that referred to her by name as an Aboriginal mental health care
worker: primary judgment at [16].
Brown submitted that the defamatory imputation was published only to those that
were able to identify Ms Mundine as a mental health
worker and consequently, the
group of people was limited to patients, carers and co-workers: primary judgment
newspaper similarly contended that publication in these proceedings was not to
its entire readership but only to a small group
of identified people who had
knowledge of certain facts about her: primary judgment at [14]. Further, the
newspaper submitted that
there was no evidence that any person outside that
group of people had identified Ms Mundine from the article: primary judgment at
[17]. If there were any people outside this group, the newspaper submitted, they
would be few in number and should properly be regarded
"incidental
recipients"
: primary judgment at [19].
considering this preliminary issue, the primary judge referred to the High
Court's decision in
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
189 CLR 520
"... apart from a few
exceptional cases, the common law categories of qualified privilege protect only
occasions where defamatory
matter is published to a limited number of
recipients. If a publication is made to a large audience, a claim of qualified
at common law is rejected unless, exceptionally, the members of the
audience all have an interest in knowing the truth."
Honour also quoted the following statement from
Aktas v Westpac Banking
Corporation Ltd
[2010] HCA 25
, per French CJ, Gummow and Hayne
JJ at [14]:
"The requirement of reciprocity of interest generally denies the
common law privilege where the matter has been disseminated to the
this issue, his Honour found that the appellants' argument regarding the
identification of a specific group of people was
"to a considerable extent
both circular and self-serving"
. He continued (at [26]):
proceeds upon the assumed basis that only those people with an interest in or
understanding of the provision of Aboriginal mental
health services in the
Clarence Valley would have identified Lana Mundine as an Aboriginal mental
health worker. The argument seeks
in effect to draw upon the proposition that Ms
Mundine was unidentifiable or unknown beyond the range of people who knew her
professionally
or who were in some close and informed relationship to such
people. That is a proposition that the defendants must prove on the balance
probabilities. I do not consider that they have done so. I do not consider that
they could do so."
primary judge therefore found that the matter was disseminated to the public at
large and that any defence of qualified privilege
at common law must be
established in relation to the whole readership: primary judgment at
Common law qualified privilege
addressing this preliminary issue, the primary judge then moved onto the
substantive issue of the defence of common law qualified
privilege. Mr Brown
submitted that, to make out the defence, he had to demonstrate that he published
the matter complained of on
a matter of public interest, that he had a duty to
publish the information and that those to whom it was published had a reciprocal
interest in receiving it: primary judgment at [41], see also [46].
Mundine contended that the fact the appellants had denied that the article was
capable of referring to her tended to suggest that
it had not been published
pursuant to any reciprocity of duty or interest with the newspaper's readership:
primary judgment at [34].
There was, it was submitted, an element of
inconsistency between the two situations.
Mundine also submitted that the fact that the publication was volunteered,
rather than requested, went towards a finding that there
was no defence of
common law qualified privilege. She cited the dissenting judgment of McHugh J in
Bashford v Information Australia (Newsletters) Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 5
"... where neither life is in immediate danger nor harm to
the person or injury to property imminent, the fact that the defendant
volunteered defamatory matter is likely to be decisive against a finding of
qualified privilege"
Goyan v Motyka
[2008] NSWCA 28
Aust Torts Reports 81-939
per Tobias AJA;
Bennette v Cohen
[21] per Ipp JA. We note in passing that this passage in McHugh J's judgment was
considered by the Court of Appeal in
Holmes a Court v Papaconstuntinos
[2011] NSWCA 59
[2011] Aust Torts Reports 82-081
in which the Court (McColl JA,
Allsop P, Beazley, Giles and Tobias JJA agreeing) found (at [98]) that his
differed from the majority on that point; (at [103])
that McHugh J's opinion in the quoted paragraph was not supported by authority;
and (at [140]) that his views on the decisiveness of voluntariness were not the
law in Australia. The High Court granted special
Holmes a Court v
Papaconstuntinos
. The appeal has been heard and judgment has been reserved.
The primary judge in these proceedings did not determine the defence on
basis of voluntariness and none of the parties in this appeal addressed it. As
such, we shall say no more about it.
Brown submitted that, in his role as an advocate for Aboriginal affairs and a
Field Officer with the Aboriginal Legal Service,
he had a duty to speak out
Valley. He submitted that
the lack of health treatment and high levels of
incarceration of Aboriginal people in the region were clearly matters of public
for both the publisher and the recipients: primary judgment at [48]. He
also adopted the newspaper's submissions.
newspaper adopted the approach to determining the issues raised by the defence
of common law qualified privilege outlined by Simpson
[2010] NSWSC 686.
Its written submissions at trial, relevant to the
question of both common law and statutory qualified privilege, raised the
matters: that the article and defamatory imputation related to
subjects of public interest; that the newspaper published the article
information of the public and had a social and/or moral duty to do so; that the
recipients had a reciprocal interest in receiving
it; that the newspaper
believed that readers had an interest in the activities of Aboriginal service
providers; that the newspaper
published the article as a means of giving Mr
Brown a way of communicating the matters of public interest to the public; that
had an honest belief in the truth of what it published and took care to form
a belief in the accuracy of the information in the article;
that its conduct was
reasonable in the circumstances; and, finally, that to the extent that the
publication were found to be published
to one or more recipients, the matter
would be published under an occasion of qualified privilege with regard to those
recipients,
and the publication was reasonable to that extent.
primary judge considered (at [51], [53] and [82]) the defence of common law
qualified privilege within the
Megna v Marshall
"framework". He examined
four issues under the heading "The first question". First, the circumstances of
Moit v Bristow
[2005] NSWCA 322
per McColl JA. He
considered the evidence given by Mr Brown that 99% of his clients who had been
incarcerated had a mental illness,
a drug or alcohol issue or all three: primary
judgment at [56]. He also considered Mr Brown's evidence on the forum referred
the article which was the Grafton Forum on Aboriginal Services for
Domestic Violence, the contact he had previously had with Michelle
Fairweather,
the drug and alcohol worker at the Aboriginal Medical Service, the findings of a
University of New South Wales report
regarding the Aboriginal community and
evidence given by the local Member of Parliament. Based on this evidence, his
Honour accepted
(at [62]) that there was a
"mental health crisis in the
Aboriginal community in the Clarence Valley, and that the article was published
in those circumstances"
his Honour turned to the identification of the subject matter of the
communication. The appellants submitted that the subject
matter was the
perceived inadequacies in the delivery of medical and social services to the
Aboriginal community in the Clarence
Valley. Ms Mundine contended that the
subject matter was that Aboriginal services were letting down their community.
The primary
judge considered (at [65]) that there was no material difference
between these characterisations and it was
"sufficient to identify the
subject matter as the inadequacies in Aboriginal service delivery to Aboriginals
in the Clarence Valley
his Honour considered (at [46]) the relevant duty or interest of the appellants.
The appellants submitted that as an Aboriginal
services worker, Mr Brown had a
duty to speak out to those who were in a position to do something about the
crisis in the region,
and that the newspaper had a duty to bring matters of the
public interest to the attention of the local community: at [68]-[70].
point, the primary judge found (at [72]) that:
" ... the appellants
had neither a duty to, nor an interest in, publishing the matter complained of
in any circumstances. The subject
matter of the publication was of general
interest and a local newspaper has an uncontroversial interest in publishing
material on
local issues. However, as is well known, a publication in a
newspaper is not the subject of qualified privilege merely because it
public information concerning a matter in respect of which the public is
interested. Something more is needed to constitute
either a duty or an interest
on the part of the newspaper to communicate the information: see
v Mirror Newspapers Ltd
[1977] 2 NSWLR 749]
his Honour considered whether the recipients of the publication had a reciprocal
interest in receiving information of the
kind the article contained. The
appellants relied relevantly on the following passage in the judgment of
Smithers J in
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v Comalco Ltd
"It cannot be doubted that the treatment of
Aboriginals by Australian authorities and white Australians is a matter of
public interest,
not in the sense of mere interest such as the result of a
football match or the Melbourne Cup, but as a matter in respect of which
governments and all Australians have a continuing responsibility to examine
developments and policies and in relation to which
the formation of an informed
public opinion is of importance for the formation of official policy and the
establishment of standards
of private conduct. ... [I]t is essential that
Australians generally should be as accurately and as fully as possible informed
the conduct of governments, business men and others in Australia in relation
to the Aboriginals."
this point, the primary judge found as follows (at [79]):
though at a level of generality it can be said that the population of the
Clarence Valley might hopefully have been expected
to be interested in the
provision of services to members of the Aboriginal community by the Aboriginal
Medical Service, every member
of that community did not have a reciprocal
interest in receiving the information published to them by the defendants."
Accordingly,
his Honour found (at [80]-[81]) that the circumstances in which the matter was
published, including its subject matter
and the identity of the publisher and
recipients, did not give rise to a reciprocal duty or interest in the publisher
and recipients.
consequence of the primary judge's findings in relation to "The first question"
was that he had concluded the article was not
published on an occasion of
qualified privilege at common law. That was sufficient to dispose of that
defence: see e.g.
Megna v Marshall
at [175]. No doubt for more abundant
caution, his Honour then considered what he said was "The second question": was
the statement
complained of sufficiently relevant, germane, or did it have a
sufficient connection to "the occasion" for which the appellants contended?
this question (at [85]), he found that the defamatory statements about Ms
Mundine's lack of competence as a mental health worker
"effectively
qualitatively disconnected from the subject matter of the publication"
"[i]t was not relevant, germane or sufficiently connected"
subject matter or occasion of the article.
on these findings, his Honour concluded that the defence of common law qualified
privilege was not available because the publication
was to the world at large
and the appellants had not shown that there was a reciprocity of duty and
interest between them and the
receivers of the publication: primary judgment at
Statutory qualified privilege
primary judge then turned his attention to the defence of statutory qualified
privilege under
Defamation Act
observing (at [89]) that only
Mr Brown addressed that issue, and then only in his oral submissions. This was
not entirely correct
as the newspaper did make brief oral submissions on the
question. His Honour made the following relevant findings (at
[99]-[100]):
(1) the article was concerned with matters of public
(2) to the extent that it refers to her in particular, the article relates
exclusively to Ms Mundine's performance of her public
functions and
activities;
(3) no part of the article descends into criticism or abuse;
(4) the defamatory imputation carried by the article was
(5) no steps were taken by the appellants to verify the information in the
(6) the article appeared very close to the conclusion of the forum but there was
no need for urgency. As such, further time could
have been taken to examine the
(7) most significantly, the article did not contain Ms Mundine's side of the
story and no attempt was made to obtain it;
(8) no attempt has been made since to obtain or publish a response from Ms
Mundine or the Aboriginal Medical Service on her behalf.
on the above considerations, his Honour held (at [101]) that he was not
satisfied that the conduct of the appellants was reasonable
in the circumstances
and, therefore, that they had not established a defence under
Issues on the appeal
their Notices of Appeal, the appellants listed four grounds upon which they
alleged that the primary judge erred:
(1) in finding that there was no occasion of qualified
(2) in awarding damages in respect of publications to persons who did not
identify (and could not have identified) the respondent;
(3) in the directions given in respect of identification;
(4) that the jury's determination that the imputation was published of and
concerning the respondent was perverse and unreasonable.
in their written and oral submissions, the appellants only addressed the first
ground of appeal relating to the findings
with respect to the defence of
qualified privilege. It may be taken, as we said earlier, that the other grounds
have been abandoned.
The appellants' submissions
Brown relied on the written submissions of the newspaper and his Summary of
Argument filed on 7 March 2011 for the purposes of
the leave application. He
also made the following additional submissions relating to the statutory defence
of qualified privilege.
First, that the primary judge's reasoning that the
article did not relate to an issue that required urgent examination was not
with the jury's finding that there was a mental heath crisis in the
Clarence Valley. Secondly, the primary judge's finding that the
appellants did
not make a reasonable attempt to obtain Ms Mundine's side of the story could not
be maintained for three reasons:
Mr Brown did not intend to name Ms Mundine, nor
did he have her in mind; Mr Brown was in no position to seek and publish Ms
views; and Mr Brown did contact the Chief Executive Officer of the
Aboriginal Medical Service (Mr Scott Monaghan) and obtained his
consent to the
publication of the story, so long as no names were mentioned. Thirdly, Mr Brown
argued that the primary judge erred
in applying an equal standard of conduct to
the newspaper and himself and that the evidence was clear that the article
his genuine and bona fide statements that were made from first-hand
experience.
newspaper submitted that the primary judge should have upheld both the common
law and statutory defences of qualified privilege.
It contended that his Honour
erred in relation to his findings that the article was published to "the public
at large". It submitted
that the primary judge fell into error in finding that
the fact that Ms Mundine was not named "
makes no difference for the purposes
of a defence of qualified privilege"
. In addition, the newspaper argued
first, that his Honour's finding contravened the basic principle that in an
identification case,
publication takes place to a
"necessarily limited number
of readers"
Rogers v Nationwide News Pty Ltd
[2003] HCA 52
at 354; that publication only occurs when the material is
"available in
comprehensible form"
Dow Jones & Co Inc v Gutnick
[2002] HCA 56
210 CLR 575; and finally, that the article was only comprehensible to those
recipients who could identify Ms Mundine. The newspaper
therefore submitted that
as a result, his Honour fell into further error because
"the extent of a
publication is always a relevant matter in determining whether the occasion was
privileged"
Bashford v Information Australia Pty Ltd
Lazarus v Deutsche Lufthansa AG
(1985) 1 NSWLR 188
per Hunt J.
relation to the primary judge's finding on
that the appellants' actions in
not contacting Ms Mundine were unreasonable, the newspaper argued that if the
article did not name
her, and she was unknown to the publisher, then it could
not be unreasonable not to contact her. Further, the fact that it was accepted
that there was a mental health crisis amongst Aboriginals in the Clarence Valley
meant that prompt publication was warranted.
oral submissions and contrary to the principal approach taken at trial, Mr
Reynolds submitted first, that even if the article were
published to the whole
readership of the newspaper, this did not preclude a defence of common law
qualified privilege. In particular,
he argued that the facts brought this case
within the species of cases described by McHugh J in
Stephens v West
Australian Newspapers Ltd
[1994] HCA 45
182 CLR 211
265. Secondly, he argued that the newspaper had a defence in accordance with the
House of Lords' decisions in
Reynolds v Time Newspapers Ltd
[1999] UKHL
; [2001] 2 AC 127 ("
Jameel v Wall Street Journal
Europe Sprl
[2006] UKHL 44
[2007] 1 AC 359
), and that the
considerations in
should be construed in the light of those decisions.
Finally, in
John Fairfax & Sons Ltd v Vilo
[2001] NSWCA 290
, this Court held that
should not be followed in New South
Wales. He submitted formally that
was incorrectly
Ms Mundine's submissions
response to the appellants' submissions, Mr Molomby submitted that the
appellants' argument - that the primary judge erred in law
in finding that the
publication was to the general public - had no merit. This was because his
Honour made that finding on a factual
basis after considering the circumstances
of the case. Further, Mr Molomby noted that the appellants had advanced a new
case on appeal:
that the publication went beyond the limited group for which
they had argued at trial. They now contended that the publication to
"incidental recipients" did not destroy the defence of qualified privilege.
However, Mr Molomby argued that the primary judge
found that the recipients,
other than the confined class for which the appellants contended, were not
"incidental recipients". Rather,
his Honour found that the publication was aimed
at the general public among whom there were an indeterminate number of
people whose knowledge enabled them to identify Ms Mundine from the
response to the appellants' submission that the Court should apply the approach
of McHugh J in
Stephens v West Australian Newspapers
, Mr Molomby
submitted that McHugh J's comments (at 263) only apply where
"publication by
newspaper or radio is the only reasonable mode of communication with the
He further submitted that there was no evidence that communication
of this issue to the recipients with an appropriate interest in
receiving the
information could not have been achieved by other means. As to the more general
statement by McHugh J in
(at 265), it was observed that his
Honour was in the minority, that his statement had not been adopted by any other
decision of the
High Court and, in any event, was not applicable to the
situation of Ms Mundine, as she was no more than an employee of a non-government
organisation.
response to the newspaper's contention in relation to its
defence that it
did not know of Ms Mundine, Mr Molomby pointed out that her position was tied in
with the AMS, and there was equally
no attempt to obtain their side of the
story. The call made by Mr Brown to contact the Mr Monaghan was not an attempt
to obtain a
response to the article because he was told nothing as to its
content but, rather, was only told of its "very general theme".
Molomby next submitted that there was no evidence at trial as to the state of
mind of the newspaper regarding the reliability of
its source (Mr Brown), the
truth of the content of the article or the importance of the issues it
addressed. He also referred to
the matters the jury found to be untrue (see
primary judgment at [93]) as demonstrating that the appellants' conduct was
unreasonable.
Insofar as the appellants sought to rely upon
Reynolds v Times
, Mr Molomby pointed out that the appellants did not plead or
argue a defence based on that case at trial, nor was it raised in the
unsuccessful leave application. To that extent, Ms Mundine was disadvantaged
because the primary judge had not been required to,
and did not, make any
findings based on the test in that case.
Discussion and resolution - qualified privilege at common law
do not consider that there is any occasion in this judgment to repeat the
origins and history of the common law treatment of qualified
privilege in the
law of defamation. Recent decisions of this Court are replete with statements of
the relevant principles:
Moit v Bristow
at [73]-[79] per McColl JA with
whom Beazley and Campbell JJA agreed;
Lindholdt v Hyer
[2008] NSWCA 264
251 ALR 514
per McColl JA at [69]-[81];
Aktas v Westpac Banking Corp Ltd
per McClellan CJ at CL with whom Ipp and Basten JJA agreed; and, most recently,
Korean Times Pty Ltd v Pak
[2011] NSWCA 365
per Nicholas J, with whom
Beazley and Basten JJA agreed. Moreover, the primary judge, in a thorough
judgment, gave great attention
to the statement of those relevant principles and
the citation of the relevant authorities which established
is sufficient, in our view, that brief reference be made first to the statements
of principle appearing in
Bashford v Information Australia
principles are stated by the plurality (Gleeson CJ, Hayne and Heydon JJ) at
"[9] The principles to be applied in determining whether
the occasion of publication of matter about which complaint is made was an
occasion of qualified privilege are well known. The authorities that state those
principles are equally well known. Frequent reference
is made to the statement
of Parke B in
Toogood v Spyring
'In general, an action lies for the malicious publication of statements which
are false in fact, and injurious to the character of
another (within the
well-known limits as to verbal slander), and the law considers such publication
as malicious, unless it is fairly
made by a person in the discharge of some
public or private duty, whether legal or moral, or in the conduct of his own
affairs, in
matters where his interest is concerned. In such cases, the occasion
prevents the inference of malice, which the law draws from unauthorized
communications, and affords a qualified defence depending upon the absence of
actual malice. If fairly warranted by any reasonable
occasion or exigency, and
honestly made, such communications are protected for the common convenience and
welfare of society; and
the law has not restricted the right to make them within
any narrow limits.'
Reciprocity of duty or interest is essential.
[10] These principles are stated at a very high level of abstraction and
generality. 'The difficulty lies in applying the law to the
circumstances of the
particular case under consideration'. Concepts which are expressed as 'public or
private duty, whether legal
or moral' and 'the common convenience and welfare of
society' are evidently difficult of application. When it is recognised, as it
must be, that 'the circumstances that constitute a privileged occasion can
themselves never be catalogued and rendered exact', it
is clear that in order to
apply the principles, a court must 'make a close scrutiny of the circumstances
of the case, of the situation
of the parties, of the relations of all concerned
and of the events leading up to and surrounding the publication'."
is advantageous to refer, in addition, to the remarks of Gummow J who agreed
with the plurality that the appeal should be dismissed.
In particular, his
Honour said at [148]:
"The remaining element of the defence of
qualified privilege arising out of a reciprocal duty or interest may be dealt
with shortly.
On the evidence before the primary judge, it is clear that the
recipients of the defamatory imputation contained in the relevant
possessed a corresponding interest in the subject-matter to which the imputation
related. In
Howe & McColough
, Higgins J noted:
'[T]he word 'interest', as used in the cases, is not used in any technical
sense. It is used in the broadest popular sense, as when
we say that a man is
'interested' in knowing a fact - not interested in it as a matter of gossip or
curiosity, but as a matter of
substance apart from its mere quality as
In the same case, Higgins J justified the existence of a requisite interest
on the part of the recipients of the defamatory communication
in the following
'When information is given to these men as to the solvency of a buyer, it is
not given to them as idle gossip; it is for solid business
Cush v Dillon
[2011] HCA 30
243 CLR 298
French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ.
these statements we would add the observations of the plurality (French CJ,
Gummow and Hayne JJ) in
Aktas v Westpac Banking Corporation
"As a general proposition, the common law protects the
publication of defamatory matter made on an occasion where one person has a
or interest to make the publication and the recipient has a corresponding duty
or interest to receive it; but the privilege
depends upon the absence of malice.
The requirement of reciprocity of interest generally denies the common law
privilege where the
matter has been disseminated to the public at large."
turn then to apply these principles to the first argument advanced on behalf of
the appellants, namely, that dealing with qualified
privilege at common law.
There are two aspects to this argument. The first focuses on the argument
principally advanced at trial.
The second focuses on a somewhat revised argument
advanced by Mr Reynolds on the appeal, albeit related to an alternative position
taken at trial.
case the appellants principally sought to make at trial, and on the leave
application to this Court, recognised the difficulty
arising from the fact that
the newspaper had a very substantial readership. Indeed, slightly more than 10%
of its readers - 1,040
persons - came from outside the Clarence Valley. It was,
having regard to the authorities to which reference has been made, extremely
difficult for the newspaper to make out an occasion of qualified privilege in
those circumstances. Nevertheless, it sought to do
so by arguing that a
reciprocal duty and/or interest could be demonstrated by confining the
recipients relevantly to the fourteen
or so individuals identified by Ms
Mundine's evidence. Each of those persons, it was argued, had a specific
interest by virtue of
his or her connections with the AMS and its functions in
being informed about
"the inadequacies in Aboriginal service delivery to
Aboriginals in the Clarence Valley region"
: appellants' written submissions
consider that there is a clear answer to this submission. It derives from the
fact, already adverted to, that the publication to
more than eleven thousand
persons meant that the appellants could not identify who - beyond the fourteen
specified persons - the
recipients of the article were who may have known Ms
Mundine and her occupation, and how there could be said to arise in them a
"special and reciprocal"
Andreyevich v Kosovich
[1947] NSWStRp 2
47 SR(NSW) 357
Bashford v Information Australia
per Gummow J at
[140]. Moreover, the evidence that those fourteen persons could identify Ms
Mundine from the article was adduced
in her case to show that, though she was
not named in the article, it was
"of and concerning"
her. It was not
evidence to establish a special or reciprocal interest on their part, although
undoubtedly it could be relied on
by the appellants, if sufficient, for that
any event, in our opinion it is clear that, as the primary judge found, the
appellants' submission that the article was published
to a confined group cannot
be sustained. It is clear that there were many more people in the community -
both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal
- who were likely to have identified Ms
Mundine as the (or a) person referred to in the article. Such people, it might
also be inferred,
while knowing Ms Mundine, had no reciprocal interest in the
relevant sense at all. Thus the appellants, on whom the onus of establishing
their qualified privileges defences lay, could not and did not show that such
persons, or any of them, had the relevant interest.
Mundine had held her position in Grafton for some seven years at the time of the
publication of the article. Unquestionably, she
would have been known to many
people in the local community as a mental health worker who had been employed
during those years by
the AMS. The community's knowledge of her in this regard
would have extended well beyond the persons who worked with her as fellow
employees or those who had been directly the recipients of her services as an
employee of AMS. The primary judge recognised this
situation when he
"[27] Ms Mundine purchased her newspaper on 18 August 2008
from the newsagent or outlet as she regularly did. I have no way of knowing
the state of the evidence whether the person with whom she dealt on those
occasions knew her as an Aboriginal mental health worker
in the local area. The
same could be said for the teller at her bank or the mechanic who serviced her
car. It is probable that Ms
Mundine had friends and relatives who also knew that
she worked for the Aboriginal Medical Service as a mental health worker. Such
people may have been large or small in number. The evidence does not permit me
[28] For presently relevant purposes it seems to me that the defendants would
have to prove that there were no such people, beyond
the limited group or class
described, to whom their defamatory imputation was published in the way they
suggest. They understandably
did not attempt to do so by direct evidence,
preferring instead to rely upon the availability of an inference that there were
such people. I am not satisfied that such an inference is available.
[29] In my opinion, the defendants published the matter complained of and the
defamatory imputation that Ms Mundine as a mental health
worker is incompetent
to the whole of its readership. The matter was disseminated to the public at
large. Any assessment of whether
or not the defendants can maintain the defence
of common law qualified privilege must be assessed in that context."
In our view the inference the primary judge drew at [28] was well open to
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
142 CLR 531.
do not accept, as the newspaper argued in its written submissions, that his
Honour's findings contravened the principle that in
an identification case
publication takes place to a
"necessarily limited number of readers"
v Nationwide News
at 354. To the contrary, we consider that
his findings recognised that this was so. However, his Honour correctly reasoned
number of readers who may identify a person who was not named in an
article will often extend well beyond those persons who work
or reside with that
as the appellants' first argument appears to accept that publication went beyond
the group of fourteen persons, so that they
focused on the point that
publication to
"incidental"
recipients did not destroy the defence of
qualified privilege, we do not consider that this advances the newspaper's
position. The
article was published to the general community, amongst which
there was an indeterminate number of people who had the knowledge that
them to identify Ms Mundine as being referred to therein. Merely because some of
those persons had an interest that may have
attracted qualified privilege did
not mean that publication to the others was
"incidental"
. Moreover, as Ms
Mundine submitted, this was not a situation where communication to the limited
group identified by the appellants
to attract qualified privilege could not have
been achieved by other means. An obvious illustration is that a letter could
sent by Mr Brown to the AMS itself. The situation mentioned by McHugh
at 263 simply did not arise. We therefore consider that the
first aspect of the appellants' argument directed to qualified privilege
is plain that Mr Reynolds recognised the difficulty confronting the appellants'
approach to qualified privilege at the trial. Simply
stated, they failed to
establish reciprocity of duty and interest to the wider community or to those
members of the community who,
apart from fellow workers, family and friends,
would have recognised Ms Mundine as a person whose competence was challenged in
Reynolds' first response to this difficulty was to turn the principal argument
advanced at the trial on its head. It had been argued
at trial, alternatively to
the "confined class" proposition with which we have dealt, that there was a
reciprocity of duty and interest
even if the publication was regarded as having
been made to the general readership of the newspaper: see primary judgment at
That argument had been advanced on the basis of Smithers J's judgment
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v Comalco Ltd
on the appeal Mr Reynolds argued that McHugh J's statement in
(at 265) ushered in a new approach. His Honour said:
"Accordingly,
it is now appropriate for the common law to declare that it is for 'the common
convenience and welfare'' of Australian
society that the existing categories of
qualified privilege be extended to protect communications made to the general
public by persons
with special knowledge concerning the exercise of public
functions or powers or the performance of their duties by public representatives
or officials invested with those functions and powers. ... If such persons,
acting honestly, inform the general public of what they
know about such matters,
their publications will be made on an occasion of qualified privilege. The
defence of qualified privilege
will be available even if the information is
subsequently proved to be incorrect. Thus, the occasion will still be privileged
if the 'whistleblower'' mistakenly but honestly publishes information which
defames another person or the scientist or journalist
honestly overlooks some
fact which undermines the thesis of his or her claim. The publication of
erroneous information may be evidence
of malice in some cases. But by itself an
error in the published information will not destroy the occasion of privilege.
... speaking generally, the occasion will be privileged whenever a person
with the requisite special knowledge honestly publishes
information about the
functions or powers or the performance of duties by public representatives or
officials for the purpose of
informing the public about such matters."
involved a defamation action pending in the Supreme Court of Western Australia
which had been removed into the High Court pursuant
to the provisions of the
Judiciary Act
(Cth). The respondents were all members of the
Legislative Council of Western Australia. The appellant newspaper published
articles reporting statements made by another member of Parliament to the
effect that the respondents had been involved in
"a junket of mammoth
proportions"
. The case stated asked, inter alia, whether the newspaper
articles were published
"on occasions of qualified
decision in
was delivered contemporaneously with the Court's
judgment in
Theophanous v Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
[1994] HCA 46
182 CLR 104.
The principal matter considered in both decisions was the
availability of the implied freedom of political communication in the
Commonwealth
Constitution
. This had been the subject of a pleaded defence in
both matters, as was the defence of common law qualified privilege. On the
question, it was held by the majority (Mason CJ, Deane, Toohey and
Gaudron JJ), that there was implied in the
Constitution
a freedom to publish
material discussing Government political matters, and material of and concerning
members of the Parliament of
the Commonwealth relating to the performance of
their duties as such. Brennan, Dawson and McHugh JJ dissented on this principal
, on the issue of the defence of qualified privilege, Mason CJ,
Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ held that the defence was good in law.
again, in separate decisions, each of Brennan, Dawson and McHugh JJ also
dissented on this second point.
discussing the common law of qualified privilege, McHugh J introduced the topic
in these terms (at 260):
"At common law, it is a defence to the
publication of defamatory matter that the matter was published in good faith on
an occasion
of qualified privilege. Statements 'fairly made by a person in the
discharge of some public or private duty, whether legal or moral,
conduct of his own affairs, in matters where his interest is concerned' are
privileged even though they contain untrue
defamatory statements (
[1834] EngR 363
[1834] 1 C.M.&R. 181
149 ER 2044
, at pp 1049-1050).
However, the defence of qualified privilege is generally not available where
defamatory matter is published in
a newspaper. At common law, the defence is not
open unless the recipient of the publication possessed an interest in receiving
was under a duty to receive the communication that corresponded with the
interest or duty of the person making the publication.
Reciprocity of interest or duty is essential to a claim of qualified
privilege at common law (
Adam v Ward
[1917] AC 309
at 334). The need for
reciprocity usually defeats a claim of qualified privilege where the publication
has been made to the general
public. Only in exceptional cases does a person
have an interest or duty to publish defamatory matter to the world at large.
in Australia and elsewhere, common law courts have repeatedly held that a
person has no legitimate interest or duty to publish defamatory
matter to the
general public if no more is established than that the subject matter of the
publication is one in which the public
is interested (
Loveday v Sun
Newspapers Ltd
[1938] HCA 28
(1938) 59 CLR 503
Morosi v Mirror Newspapers Ltd
[1977] 2 NSWLR 749
Nationwide New Pty Ltd v Wiese
J recognised that there are some occasions where circumstances may make the
interest of the general public in a particular
subject sufficient to allow the
availability of a defence of qualified privilege. His Honour instanced two
examples where publications
were made in reply to attacks on the respondent or
some other person which had been published to the world at large. There were
other instances cited by his Honour to demonstrate that the proprietor
of a newspaper was in some circumstances entitled to a defence
of qualified
privilege when it had published statements made by a third person pursuant to or
in discharge of that person's interest
or duty to inform the general public
determining whether
a person has an appropriate or sufficient interest or duty
to publish to the world at large, the extent of the publication and the
proportion of readers who have a legitimate interest in receiving the
communication were relevant matters to be weighed in the
J then observed (at 263-264):
"Although, as the foregoing account of
the case law demonstrates, the common law has upheld defences of qualified
privilege for publications
to the world at large, common law courts have taken a
restricted view of the occasions when a person has an interest or duty to
material to the general public. Protection of reputation has generally
been preferred to the right of the public to know. It is not
surprising that
successive generations of common law judges have been loath to extend the
categories of qualified privilege to protect
publications in the general
was at this point of his judgment that McHugh J introduced the topic which led
him to make the remarks upon which reliance has
been placed by the appellants in
the present matter. In the paragraph preceding those remarks (at 264), McHugh J
"In the last decade of the twentieth century, the quality of
life and the freedom of the ordinary individual in Australia are highly
dependent on the exercise of functions and powers vested in public
representatives and officials by a vast legal and bureaucratic
apparatus funded
by public moneys. How, when, why and where those functions and powers are or are
not exercised are matters that
are of real and legitimate interest to every
member of the community. ... It follows in my opinion that the general public
legitimate interest in receiving information concerning matters relevant
to the exercise of public functions and powers vested in
public representatives
and officials. ... If this legitimate interest of the public is to be properly
served, it must also follow
that on occasions persons with special knowledge
concerning the exercise of public functions or powers or the performance by
representatives or officials of their duties will have a corresponding
duty or interest to communicate information concerning such
functions, powers
and performances to members of the general public."
was in this context that his Honour considered (at 265) it appropriate
"... the common law to declare that the existing categories of
qualified privilege be extended to protect communications made to the
public by persons with special knowledge concerning the exercise of public
functions or powers or the performance of their
duties by public representatives
or officials invested with those function and powers."
is necessary to add that McHugh J eventually decided that the pleadings in
revealed that the material which was capable of being defamatory
of the respondents was essentially comment. As such, it did not
attract the
protection of the doctrine of qualified privilege. For this reason, McHugh J
thought that the defence pleaded by the
newspaper in that case was bad in
can be seen from this examination of the full context of McHugh J's remarks that
the situation with which his Honour was directly
concerned related to published
criticism of elected members of Parliament. Further, his Honour's general
statement at 265 arose in
the broader context of his reluctance to accede to the
majority's position on the issue of the implied freedom of political
communication
Constitution
we have said, Mr Reynolds argued that McHugh J's remarks in
ushered in a new approach. Alternatively, he argued that his Honour's remarks
were, in any event, a repetition of the accepted law
in relation to discerning
an occasion of qualified privilege.
arguments advanced seized upon - indeed, relied upon - the wider publication of
the article to the general community of the Clarence
Valley area. This broad
body of persons, Mr Reynolds submitted, had an interest in matters relating to
the exercise by the AMS and
its employees of their functions in supplying mental
health services to the local Aboriginal community. Mr Brown had special
of matters relating to the crisis in mental health among Aboriginals
in the area and thereby had a duty to publish the defamatory
matter to the
general public. The newspaper had an ancillary privilege to do the same,
particularly having regard to its role as
the principal newspaper in the local
so far as Mr Reynolds sought to place reliance upon McHugh J's remarks in
, five responses may be made. First, the submission, as we have
said, takes his Honour's remarks somewhat out of context. Secondly,
importantly, to the extent that McHugh J may be said to have been suggesting a
general extension to common law privilege, this
was not adopted by any of the
other Justices in
, and has not been adopted in any decision of
the High Court since
. Thirdly, as we discuss below, it was
positively curtailed in
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Fourthly, as McHugh J's dicta has not commanded majority of the High Court, this
Court is not bound to apply it:
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd v Say-Dee Pty
[2007] HCA 22
. Fifthly, read in context, McHugh J's
remarks arguably had no application to the position held by Ms Mundine in any
event. She was
an employee of non-government nonprofit
organisation.
is convenient at this point to proceed directly to the decision of the High
decision in
brought into sharp focus the previous division of the
High Court in relation to the question as to whether there was an implied
Constitutional
freedom of political communication which itself imposed a limit
on the law of defamation. In
, at 259, McHugh J repeated the view
he had stated in
Theophanous
(see [ REF _Ref327972792 \r \h 84]-[ REF
_Ref327972801 \r \h 88] above) and, accordingly, concluded that the
Constitution
contained no guarantee of freedom of expression that would render the appellant
immune from an action for defamation.
, those members of the Court who had favoured both a Constitutional
immunity and an expansion of the existing common law defence united
of the latter approach: see
Korean Times Pty Ltd v Pak
at [29] per Basten
JA. The Court declared unanimously that common law qualified privilege extended
to communications made to the
public on government or political matters, subject
to the requirement that the conduct of the publisher was reasonable. It said,
"Accordingly, this court should now declare that each member of
the Australian community has an interest in disseminating and receiving
information, opinions and arguments concerning government and political matters
that affect the people of Australia. The duty to
disseminate such information is
simply the correlative of the interest in receiving it. The common convenience
and welfare of Australian
society are advanced by discussion - the giving and
receiving of information - about government and political matters. The interest
that each member of the Australian community has in such a discussion extends
the categories of qualified privilege. Consequently,
those categories now must
be recognised as protecting a communication made to the public on a government
or political matter."
And at 572:
"But, apart from a few exceptional cases, the common law categories of
qualified privilege protect only occasions where defamatory
matter is published
to a limited number of recipients. If a publication is made to a large audience,
a claim of qualified privilege
at common law is rejected unless, exceptionally,
the members of the audience all have an interest in knowing the truth.
Publication
beyond what was reasonably sufficient for the occasion of qualified
privilege is unprotected. Because privileged occasions are ordinarily
of limited publication - more often than not occasions of publication to a
single person - the common law has seen honesty
of purpose in the publisher as
the appropriate protection for individual reputation. As long as the publisher
honestly and without
malice uses the occasion for the purpose for which it is
given, that person escapes liability even though the publication is false
defamatory. But a test devised for situations where usually only one person
receives the publication is unlikely to be appropriate
when the publication is
to tens of thousands, or more, of readers, listeners or viewers."
And at 573:
"Given these considerations and given, also, that the requirement of honesty
of purpose was developed in relation to more limited
publications,
reasonableness of conduct seems the appropriate criterion to apply when the
occasion of the publication of defamatory
matter is said to be an occasion of
qualified privilege solely by reason of the relevance of the matter published to
the discussion
of government or political matters. But reasonableness of conduct
is imported as an element only when the extended category of qualified
is invoked to protect a publication that would otherwise be held to have been
made to too wide an audience. For example,
reasonableness of conduct is not an
element of that qualified privilege which protects a member of the public who
makes a complaint
to a minister concerning the administration of his or her
department. Reasonableness of conduct is an element for the judge to consider
only when a publication concerning a government or political matter is made in
circumstances that, under the English common law,
would have failed to attract a
defence of qualified privilege."
development was explained in
Roberts v Bass
[2002] HCA 57
held that communications of
political matter to audiences in circumstances which would not fall within that
earlier understanding
of an occasion of qualified privilege could be privileged,
but only if a different test was met.
did not hold that any
different test was to be applied if the publication did fall within that earlier
understanding of an occasion
of qualified privilege.
[223] It is important to notice that the decision in
from two premises, first, that each member of the Australian community has an
interest in disseminating and receiving information,
opinion and arguments
concerning government and political matters that affect the people of Australia
but, second, that this interest
did not suffice to found a claim to qualified
privilege according to then understood principles. The interest which was
was not restricted to the interest of electors or of federal electors
in matters of federal politics."
to stating its conclusions, the High Court in
prefaced its
discussion by reference to both
Theophanous
Theophanous
decided that in
particular respects the law of defamation throughout Australia was incompatible
with the requirement of freedom of
communication imposed by the
Constitution
However, those cases did so without expressly determining whether the law of
defamation in its common law and statutory emanations
has developed to the point
that it is reasonably appropriate and adapted to achieving a legitimate end that
is compatible with the
system of government prescribed by the
Constitution
Because that is so, those cases ought not to be treated as conclusively
determining that question, which should be examined afresh."
Honours commenced the examination
of this common law rule is that reciprocity of interest or duty is essential to
a claim of qualified privilege at common
law. Only in exceptional cases has the
common law recognised an interest or duty to publish defamatory matter to the
general public.
However, the common law doctrine as expounded in Australia must
now be seen as imposing an unreasonable restraint on that freedom
communication, especially communication concerning government and political
matters, which 'the common convenience and welfare
of society' now requires.
Equally, the system of government prescribed by the
Constitution
impaired if a wider freedom for members of the public to give and to receive
information concerning government and political
matters were not
recognised."
Court then referred to the passage from McHugh J's judgment in
(at 264) which we have set out above at [ REF _Ref327972849 \r \h 87]. The Court
continued at 571:
"Because the
Constitution
requires 'the people' to
be able to communicate with each other with respect to matters that could affect
their choice in federal
elections or constitutional referenda or that could
throw light on the performance of ministers of State and the conduct of the
branch of government, the common law rules concerning privileged
communications, as understood before the decision in
Theophanous
reached the point where they failed to meet that requirement. However, the
common law of defamation can and ought to be developed
to take into account the
varied conditions to which McHugh J referred. The common law rules of qualified
privilege will then properly
reflect the requirements of
related sections of the
Constitution
can be clearly seen that, far from adopting the broad approach suggested by
McHugh J in
(at 265), the High Court restricted it to the single
extension to qualified privilege concerning communications on political matters.
The force of McHugh J's remarks was acknowledged by an extension of the common
law defence to cover publications in that one area,
but not beyond
result of this uncontroversial analysis is that we must deal with the
appellants' present submissions on the basis of the well
understood and
frequently stated principles of common law qualified privilege, except as
extended by
. We have briefly stated those general principles in
dealing with the first aspect of Mr Reynolds' arguments. It is clear, of course,
extension has no part to play in the resolution of the
present matter. Neither Ms Reynolds nor Ms Wass suggested that it did. But
have referred to it in order to emphasise the reasons why we reject the
appellants' reliance on McHugh J's approach in
focus then becomes whether Mr Brown and the newspaper had a duty or interest to
publish the matter complained of, and whether
the community at large in the
Clarence Valley (and those 1,000 or so readers beyond) had a reciprocal duty or
interest to receive
, Brennan J explained the basis for the limited availability of
the defence of common law qualified privilege to the publication of
a newspaper.
He said, at 242:
"In principle, the defence of qualified privilege
is available to a newspaper defendant as it is to any other defendant who
defamatory matter. But a newspaper defendant is often unable to
satisfy the requirements or elements of the defence of qualified
privilege. ...
As Evatt J pointed out in
Telegraph Newspaper Co Ltd v Bedford
'guiding principle' of reciprocal duty or interest, which is necessarily broad
and general, is based solely on public utility.
When a publication is said to
have been made in discharge of a social or moral duty, the occasion is
privileged only if it be in
'the interest of the community', 'for the welfare of
society' or 'for the good of society in general' - these phrases being synonyms
for Baron Parke's 'for the common convenience and welfare of society'. When it
is said that a publication is privileged because it
is made in the public
interest, 'interest' is not to be equated with curiosity. It is used in a
non-technical sense to mean that
the publication is made for the welfare of
society. As
case illustrates, a publication defamatory of the
plaintiff is not made on an occasion of qualified privilege merely because the
person or persons to whom it is made - in that case, the readers of the
newspaper - were interested in the subject matter. And, if
the publication is
made to protect an interest of the person making the defamatory statement, the
publication is protected only if
it be made to 'a person who, if the defamatory
matter be true, may reasonably be expected to be of service in the protection of
interest'. The common law places a higher value on the protection of
personal reputation than on the satisfaction of curiosity or
dissemination of defamatory material which is not reasonably calculated to be of
service in the protection of the interests
of the person making the defamatory
statement."
Austin v Mirror Newspapers Ltd
(1985) 3 NSWLR 354
at 358, the nature of
the interest relevant to the defence of qualified privilege at common law was
described as
"... an interest material to the affairs of the recipient of the
information such as would for instance assist in the making of an
decision or the determining of a particular course of
Morosi v Mirror Newspapers Ltd
, this Court, after an extensive
examination of the authorities, held that defamatory statements do not fall
within the scope of common
law qualified privilege merely because they may
relate to a matter of public interest. It said, at 778:
apparent from these decisions and dicta that, at common law, a publication in a
newspaper is not the subject of qualified privilege
merely because it gives the
public information concerning a matter in respect of which the public is
interested. Something more is
needed which is said in some circumstances to
constitute a duty, and in other circumstances an interest, on the part of the
to communicate the information."
And, at 792:
"Newspapers play an important role in our society, but that role does not
call for an unrestricted licence to defame people, simply
because it can be
shown that the defamatory material was part of an article or other form of
publication on a matter of public interest,
and that the publication was not
malicious. Defamatory publications on matters of public interest are protected
under the common
law, and by statute, in various ways, but something more than
mere public interest is required. It may be truth; or it may be reasonableness,
in all the circumstances, of the conduct of the publisher in making the
publication; or it may be some other requirement."
application of these principles leads to the clear conclusion that the primary
judge was correct in finding that there was, in
the present matter, an absence
of the necessary reciprocity of duty and/or interest. As his Honour
"[80] Ms Mundine submitted that the weight of authority was
strongly against there being a defence of qualified privilege for the
unrestricted publication in the circumstances in this case. The analysis in
in particular shows an important difference between addressing a
problem in general terms and attacking individuals involved in the
situation. As
the submissions of Ms Mundine emphasise, whilst public discussion of any matter
of public interest will usually be
for the benefit of the public, that is not
sufficient to establish that such a publication is for the common convenience
and welfare
of society, or that a special and reciprocal interest exists. If
what Mr Cohen had to say about Mr Bennette at the two public meetings
he spoke did not qualify as statements made on occasions of qualified privilege,
the article here in question must also
not qualify.
[81] 'If a publication is made to a large audience, a claim of qualified
privilege at common law will fail unless the members of the
audience all have an
interest in knowing the truth': per Ipp JA in
Bennette v Cohen
Even if it is to be hoped that all of the readers of the
Daily Examiner
in 2008 would have had an interest in knowing the truth about the crisis in the
provision of health services to members of the Aboriginal
community in the
Clarence Valley, it was at the level of a general and public interest in the
topic. They did not in my view all
have the special and reciprocal interest
necessary for the defence of qualified privilege. It is one thing to assert that
the recipients
had a special and reciprocal interest in the subject matter of
the publication, even as broadly described as an interest in information
kind conveyed, and to assert that the recipients may have been merely interested
in what was published. They are different.
If it were otherwise the unlimited
publication of defamatory material to the world at large could be legitimised
merely by the identification
of a subject matter arguably of general interest to
the public. The currently qualified privilege to disseminate defamatory matter
would become unqualified. This would be to discard, or to disregard, the current
requirement that a defendant establish the special
and reciprocal interest
between it as the publisher of the material concerned and the recipients to whom
it is disseminated."
it may be accepted that the problems of Aboriginal mental health and Aboriginal
criminality were important topics in the Clarence
Valley area, the appellants
had no duty to attack the professional reputation of Ms Mundine and publish any
such attack to their
readership of more than 11,000 persons, more than 1,000 of
whom lived outside the Clarence Valley. Similarly, the very large readership,
while no doubt
"interested"
in a general sense in the topic, did not have
"special and reciprocal"
interest as between themselves and the
publisher of the article necessary to found an occasion of qualified privilege.
It may well
be that Mr Brown's position entitled him to raise his concerns -
even if he were wrong in his views about Ms Mundine - with the CEO
of the AMS or
its Board. But that did not, in any sense, provide him with the defence of
common law qualified privilege for the broader
publication chosen by himself and
the newspaper.
Reynolds then argued that it was necessary to "read between the lines" to find
the slur against Ms Mundine. In our opinion, that
is not so. The article as a
whole conveys a general flavour of incompetence, but the linkage to Ms Mundine
is most sharply made by
the reference in paragraph 14 to
"the Aboriginal
workers attached to mental health and domestic violence services"
. To anyone
with knowledge of the local area and its services, it should have been obvious,
if it had been considered, that this reference
could well be understood as a
reference to Ms Mundine. The real subject matter of the article was that those
who worked in providing
Aboriginal services - especially workers attached to
mental health and domestic violence services - were letting their own community
down. There is obviously a considerable difference between addressing a problem
in general terms and attacking individuals involved
in the situation. The
authorities establish that, whilst public discussion of any matter of public
interest will usually be for the
benefit of the public, that is not sufficient
to establish that such a publication is made on an occasion of qualified
For that to be shown, a special and reciprocal interest must be shown
to exist, and the appellants have simply failed to do so.
do not consider that the appellants have demonstrated any merit in relation to
the issue of common law qualified privilege.
Defamation Act
turn now to the appellants' challenge to the rejection of their statutory
defence of qualified privilege. We have set out the provisions
_Ref327972600 \r \h 17] above and the primary judge's findings on
_Ref327972614 \r \h 55] and [ REF _Ref327972623 \r \h 56]. Essentially his
Honour placed particular emphasis upon three
factors. First, no steps were taken
by either appellant to verify the information in the published article.
Secondly, the article
did not relate to an issue that required urgent
examination and further time could therefore have been taken to examine the
or otherwise of the matters that it raised. Thirdly, the article did not
contain Ms Mundine's side of the story and no attempt was
made to obtain it for
inclusion in the article.
his written submissions Mr Brown challenged those findings in so far as they
were the foundation of his Honour's conclusion that
his conduct in publishing
the article was not reasonable in the circumstances. He submitted that those
findings could not be sustained
in light of the fact that first, Mr Brown did
not intend to name Ms Mundine and did not have her in mind when he wrote the
secondly, he was in no position to seek to have Ms Mundine's side of
the story published by the newspaper and, thirdly, he had contacted
Executive Officer of the AMS and obtained his consent to the story so long as no
individual was named.
the newspaper's original written submissions (that is, those included in the
Orange Book), it was contended that his Honour was
in error in finding that the
defence was defeated because no attempt was made to obtain or publish a
response from Ms Mundine prior to the publication of the
article. The newspaper
had argued that it could not be unreasonable for the publisher not to have
not only dealt with matters of public
interest but that did not name Ms Mundine and she was unknown to it. With
respect to the issue
of urgency, although it was accepted that the article did
not have to be published on the day that it was, it contended that the
there was a mental health crisis amongst Aboriginals in the Clarence Valley area
required and justified prompt and expeditious
publication.
his written submissions handed to the Court during the hearing of the appeal, Mr
Reynolds addressed the factors set out in
and, relevantly, asserted
the defamatory
imputation found by the jury was low in seriousness compared with other
defamatory imputations (a submission rejected,
in our opinion properly, by the
primary judge);
existence of a local crisis in Aboriginal mental health and the effect of the
matters raised on the community, it was in
the public interest that those issues
be raised expeditiously so that corrective action could be taken promptly;
the newspaper
was a daily country newspaper which published only a small number of papers
mostly in the Clarence Valley area;
the newspaper's
source for the article was Mr Brown who was
"a leading Aboriginal Affairs
"a field officer within the Aboriginal Legal Service"
and who had a high degree of personal knowledge and experience in relation to
the matters raised in the article;
no attempt was
made to include Ms Mundine's side of the story as she was not named in it and
unknown to the newspaper, and was only
identifiable by persons who had knowledge
of various facts extrinsic to the article;
neither Mr Brown
nor the newspaper intended to convey any defamatory imputations with respect to
Ms Mundine;
Mr Brown spoke
to Mr Scott Monaghan, the Chief Executive Officer for the AMS, a week before the
article was published to tell him
that he proposed to write an article and to
advise him that his intention was to deal with services in general and not to
any specific individual or organisation.
Reynolds then set out a series of other factors pursuant to
a number of respects, were repetitive of those which he had referred to pursuant
to the first nine sub-paragraphs of
To the extent that they were not,
they relevantly included the following:
Mr Brown had an
actual and ostensible duty to publish and an interest in publishing the article;
it was published
for the purpose of informing the public about information relating to the
functions, powers and performance of duties
by public representatives and
Aboriginals who had mental or alcohol problems were vulnerable persons in
respect of which everyone had a duty to look after
their interests;
the article was
originally conceived as a letter to the editor but was turned into a piece under
the name of Mr Brown of the Aboriginal
Legal Services;
defamatory imputation was conveyed;
neither Mr Brown
nor the newspaper intended to convey the defamatory imputation;
Mr Brown was not
a professional journalist; he believed every single word in the article; he did
not believe any part of the article
to be untrue and he intended to convey
generalised meanings that people were not doing their jobs properly.
It was then submitted, somewhat curiously and enigmatically, that it was
for the common convenience and welfare of society for the Court to recognise
a qualified privilege
his oral submissions Mr Reynolds submitted (for the first time) that the primary
judge's view as to reasonableness did not accord
with the approach of the House
of Lords in
Jameel v Wall Street Journal of Europe Sprl
particular, to Lord Hoffmann's observation (at [56]) that
"the standard of
conduct required of a newspaper must be applied in a practical and flexible
manner with regard to practical realities"
Reynolds further contended that
reflected the non-exhaustive list of
factors referred to by Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead in
Reynolds v Times
Newspapers Limited
at 205. It was contended that the House of Lords in
had extended the established common law approach to qualified
privilege and that
should now be applied in New South Wales. We
will address this argument first before considering the arguments challenging
the primary
judge's findings on
application of
in this State was decisively rejected by this
John Fairfax & Sons v Vilo
by Heydon JA, with whom Handley
and Giles JJA agreed, at [107]-[112]. This Court's rejection of
was confirmed by this Court in
John Fairfax Publication
Pty Ltd v Hitchcock
[2007] NSWCA 364
70 NSWLR 484
per McColl A, Ipp
and Tobias JJA agreeing on this point;
Skalkos v Assaf
[2002] NSWCA 14
[2002] Aust Torts Reports 81-644
per Mason P; and
Amalgamated
Television Services Pty Limited v Marsden
[2002] NSWCA 419
per Beazley, Giles and Santow JJA.
Court is not bound by its previous decisions, although it will only depart from
such authority if of the view that the decision
"plainly wrong"
such an error having been identified, there are
"compelling reasons"
depart from the earlier decisions:
Gett v Tabet
[2009] NSWCA 76
504. The Court has made it clear to the profession that if it wishes to
challenge the correctness of one of its previous
decisions, the Court should be
so advised and asked to constitute a bench of five. No such notice from either
appellant was received
in relation to
. As noted at [ REF
_Ref327972665 \r \h 62] above, Mr Reynolds reserved the newspaper's position by
formally submitting that
was wrongly decided and should not be
involved an extension of the common law with respect to the defence of qualified
privilege. It was the subject of detailed discussion
by the House of Lords in
under the heading "
privilege". Lord Bingham of
Cornhill, at [32], noted that in
(at [202]) Lord Nicholls
proposed a test of
"responsible journalism"
, a test he repeated in
Bonnick v Morris
[2002] UKPC 31
[2003] 1 AC 300
at 309. The rationale of this test, as
understood by Lord Bingham, was that there was no duty to publish, and the
public had no interest
to read, material which the publisher has not taken
reasonable steps to verify.
her speech in
(at [146]), Baroness Hale of Richmond acknowledged
that it was now clear that the
defence was a
jurisprudential creature"
from the law of privilege although a natural
development of that law. The expression
"responsible journalism"
referred to by Lord Scott of Foscote (at [137]) although his Lordship noted that
that expression was only a succinct summary
of the circumstances in which a
defamatory article in a newspaper can claim protection.
it was on some observations of Lord Hoffmann in
that Mr Reynolds
particularly relied. At [46] his Lordship observed that although Lord Nicholls
had used the word "privilege" in
, he clearly was not using it in
"old sense"
. He thus agreed that the "
privilege" was
"different jurisprudential creature from the traditional form of privilege
from which it sprang"
. His Lordship considered that it might more
appropriately be called the
public interest defence rather than
[53] Lord Hoffmann observed of this novel defence that if the publication,
including the defamatory statement, passed the public
interest test, the inquiry
then shifted to whether the steps taken to gather and publish the information
were responsible and fair.
Thus was coined the concept of
"responsible
journalism"
[56] his Lordship relevantly remarked:
Nicholls gave his well-known non-exhaustive list of ten matters which should in
suitable cases be taken into account. They are
not tests which the publication
has to pass. In the hands of a judge hostile to the spirit of
they can become ten hurdles at any of which the defence may fail. ... But that,
in my opinion, is not what Lord Nicholls meant.
As he said in
p 309, the standard of conduct required of the newspaper must be applied in a
practical and flexible manner. It must have regard
to practical realities."
Reynolds' submission was that the requirement in
that the appellants
prove that their conduct in publishing the article was reasonable in the
circumstances, was to be approached
utilising the "template" articulated by Lord
Hoffmann in the passage from his speech in
referred to in the
preceding paragraph. The concept of reasonableness was required to be applied,
particularly in the case of the
newspaper, in a practical and flexible manner
having regard to practical realities. That was the "spirit" to be injected, as
into the construction of the words in
s 30(1)(c).
would observe that the application of
may be guided by the matters
referred to in
Some, but not all, of these factors reflect those Lord
Nicholls identified in
"practical realities"
in the present case, according to Mr Reynolds,
included the facts that the newspaper was a small local newspaper with a
small circulation; it did not have the resources to check the
accuracy of every matter or article that it published; and it was entitled
rely on Mr Brown, being a
"leading Aboriginal Affairs Advocate"
"field officer with the Aboriginal Legal Service"
who obviously had a
high degree of personal knowledge and experience in relation to the matters
raised in the article, as sufficient
verification of the information contained
in the article. Accordingly, he contended that there should be a fresh approach
issue of whether the conduct of the newspaper in publishing the article
was reasonable in the circumstances from the less flexible
and somewhat more
strict approach to that which had heretofore been adopted by the courts. That
approach, as we understand Mr Reynolds'
contention, has been to regard
non-compliance with only one or more of the factors listed in
determinative of whether the conduct of the publisher was reasonable. Mr
Reynolds identified no Australian authorities to support
his approach, but
rather suggested that the "vibe" of the
jurisprudence in the UK,
followed in
and recently in
Flood v Times
Newspapers Ltd
[2012] UKSC 11
; 2 WLR 760, pointed to a less rigid
construction of what is reasonable in the circumstances. He further submitted
that, because of
the list of factors in
evolved from those set out by
Lord Nicholls in
, the Court should interpret this section in
line with the
jurisprudence.
our opinion Mr Reynolds' submissions should be rejected. The so-called
"flexible approach having regard to practical
adumbrated by Lord Hoffmann in
was stated by his
Lordship in the context of the so-called
based on the concept of
"responsible journalism"
. That approach has been
rejected by this Court in so far as it purported to extend the common law and,
in our view, it cannot be
introduced by the backdoor, as it were, by imposing a
gloss on the plain words of
s 30(1)(c).
Those words should be construed in
accordance with their natural meaning.
requirement that a defendant prove that its conduct in publishing defamatory
matter was reasonable in the circumstances involves
an evaluative judgment
taking into account, as relevant, not only the nine specific factors referred to
but all other circumstances that the court considers relevant:
It requires a balancing exercise in respect of which, in the
particular circumstances, greater weight may be given to some factors
others. We see no reason to depart from that approach and to apply a
construction to the plain words of
which imbues them or the court's
approach to their application with the alleged
said to be found
in Lord Hoffmann's adoption of the concept of responsible journalism. The
passage at [56] of his Lordship's speech
relied on by Mr Reynolds was
articulated by Lord Hoffmann solely in the context of expanding the common law
with respect to a newspaper's
defence to an action for libel but which has been
decisively rejected by this Court in
and confirmed in
(see [ REF _Ref327973997 \r
\h 118] above).
any event the courts in this State do have regard to practical realities, where
appropriate, when performing the balancing or weighing
exercise with respect to
factors. For example, although a newspaper may not have taken any or
any adequate steps to verify the information in the matter published,
be due to the necessity to publish urgently so that it would not have been
practical to make further enquiries. In our view,
the words of Lord Hoffmann
relied on by Mr Reynolds do not require a different approach to the court's
determination of the issue
than has heretofore been
we note that Mr Reynolds was careful not to make a specific submission that the
approach for which he contended would necessarily
apply to the newspaper in the
present case. Rather, he submitted that the Court should make a general finding
in relation to small
country newspapers to which a lesser standard of
reasonableness should apply due to their role in serving the public interest in
a small community.
our opinion, there is no proper basis for the proposition so advanced. If
anything, small newspapers with a limited circulation
within a particular town
or region should be required to meet a higher standard of reasonableness for the
very reason that their
readers, being limited in number and living in a
close-knit community, would be more likely to identify one of their number who,
without being named, is defamed by a particular article published by their local
newspaper. The larger the circulation of a particular
newspaper, the less likely
that such an identification will be made.
turn now to the appellants' challenge to the primary judge's finding that,
having taken into account the
factors, he was not satisfied that the
conduct of either appellant in publishing the article was reasonable in the
circumstances.
In this context his Honour found that the article was concerned
with matters of public interest
(s 30(3)(a))
; that it related exclusively to Ms
Mundine's performance of her public functions and activities
(s 30(3)(b))
the defamatory imputation carried by the article was serious
(s 30(3)(c))
that the article did not distinguish between proven facts and allegations
from asserting a number of factors which, it was submitted, were relevant but
not taken into account by the primary judge pursuant
and which we
have noted at [ REF _Ref328037532 \r \h 115] above, the appellants' challenges
on the appeal essentially concentrated
on his Honour's findings with respect to
the factors referred to in
, (h) and (i). His Honour made no findings
with respect to the factors referred to in
it was common ground that the newspaper was a daily country newspaper with a
limited publication mostly within the Clarence
Valley area, as noted at [ REF
_Ref327974148 \r \h 72] above, the appellants acknowledged that the newspaper
had a very substantial
readership. Its estimated readership at the time of
publication of the article was 10,908 in the Clarence River district and 11,948
in New South Wales generally: see primary judgment at [14]. It therefore could
not be asserted, as the appellants did (see [ REF
_Ref327972725 \r \h 114]
above), that its circulation was small even if generally confined to the
Clarence Valley area.
appellants' primary challenge was to his Honour's findings first, that no steps
were taken by them to verify the information in
the article; secondly, that the
article did not relate to an issue that required urgent examination and that
further time could have
been taken to examine the truth or otherwise of the
matters raised in it; and thirdly, it did not contain Ms Mundine's side of the
story and no attempt was made to obtain it for inclusion in the article. Each of
these factors overlap. The essence of Mr Brown's
challenge was that it was not
his intention to convey any defamatory imputation with respect to Ms Mundine
although the evidence
established that he was aware that Ms Mundine was employed
by the AMS as its only Aboriginal female mental health worker but that,
than being aware of her position and title, he had no idea as to her duties. The
newspaper's case was, essentially, first,
that it was unnecessary for it to have
taken any steps to verify the information in the article or to seek out Ms
Mundine or anyone
else at the AMS as it was entitled to rely on Mr Brown as a
"leading Aboriginal Affairs Advocate"
"field officer within the
Aboriginal Legal Service"
and, secondly, there was no reference in the
article either to Ms Mundine or to the AMS so that the newspaper would not have
who to approach for the purpose of seeking verification or a response to
Mr Brown's allegations.
evidence was called by the newspaper relevant to the present issue. Mr Brown's
evidence as to how he came to write what became
the article was as follows (see
primary judgment at [67]):
"I was at the courthouse on a Monday
morning and the person from the
Daily Examiner
was there to report on the
Court matters that day. We got to talking about services in general, or lack of
services, and I said to
him that I was going to write a letter to the editor to
air my concerns. After some discussion, he told me that because the issues
so prevalent in the community it was far too important to be addressed in the
letters to the editor column and we should do
could legitimately infer that the newspaper court reporter knew that Mr Brown
was an employee of the Aboriginal Legal Service.
What else he knew about Mr
Brown is simply unknown. He may or may not have known that he was a reputable
and/or leading Aboriginal
affairs advocate. The extent of the reporter's
exposure to Mr Brown's advocacy at court was also unknown. As Mr Molomby
and as the primary judge found at [97] of the primary judgment, there
was no evidence as to whether the conversation outside the
courthouse was the
first that the reporter had had with Mr Brown, and/or whether it was the first
time that that reporter had ever
heard of him.
Furthermore,
although it may be accepted that the reporter was aware that Mr Brown held
strong views on the question of lack of appropriate
services to his clients,
there was no evidence as to whether any consideration was given by the reporter
or his sub-editor, Ms Kirsty
Allen, or anyone else in the newspaper's
organisation as to whether the article, given the robust terms in which it was
may have been an attempt to settle a score or an attempt by Mr Brown to
turn himself into some sort of local celebrity, or even if
what the article
alleged was right, wrong or exaggerated. There is no doubt that the newspaper
regarded the article as highly newsworthy
as it was published on its front page
together with a picture of Mr Brown. But that was no substitute for evidence to
support its
assertions as to the reasonableness of its conduct. In fact, it is
difficult to envisage a newspaper being able to support a
defence based on
its conduct being reasonable without it calling at least some evidence.
Nevertheless,
the newspaper maintained, and we would accept as a matter of probability, that
although it would have known of the existence
of the AMS, it would not
necessarily have known that Ms Mundine was a mental health worker employed by
that organisation. However,
a modicum of consideration on the part of the
sub-editor would have revealed that the article was directed generally at the
employed by Aboriginal services and, in particular, at those workers who
provided mental health services. It was a small step from
that realisation to
appreciate that the Aboriginal organisation that provided mental health services
must have been the AMS. In the
foregoing circumstances, we would reject the
newspaper's challenge to the emphasis placed by his Honour on his finding that
were taken by it to verify the information in the article, a statement
which, of course, was true.
Brown relied heavily on five factors. First, he did not intend to name Ms
Mundine and did not have her in mind when he wrote the
article. Secondly, he was
in no position at any time to seek and have published by the newspaper Ms
Mundine's side of the story.
Thirdly, he did contact Mr Monaghan of the AMS and
obtained his consent to the story so long as no individual was named. Fourthly,
the same standard of conduct could not be attributed to Mr Brown as might be
attributed to the newspaper. Fifthly, although the defamatory
imputation found
by the jury was unforeseen and unintended, the article contained Mr Brown's
genuine and bona fide beliefs made from
first hand experience.
respect to the third matter, Mr Brown's evidence was that in the previous week
he had spoken to Mr Monaghan, Chief Executive
Officer of the AMS at the time,
informing him of the Aboriginal Services Provider Forum which was to take place
in August. In his
evidence in chief he said that at the conclusion of the Forum
and after he had received from the newspaper's sub-editor the article
for publication, he spoke to Mr Monaghan by telephone to tell him that he was
writing an article. However, in cross-examination
he could not recollect whether
he had that conversation with Mr Monaghan before or after the Forum. In fact he
eventually agreed
that it was at least a week to a week and a half before the
Forum. When asked why he telephoned Mr Monaghan before the Forum he responded
"Well, Scott and I were in the process of, well, in
discussion about forming partnerships to deal with the issues in the community
because the ALS and the AMS should be working side by side. That wasn't
happening so I rang Scott to tell him that I was thinking
and for him to take no offence to it because it had no - no intention to refer
to any one organisation or
any one person. It was to do with services in
Monaghan's evidence on this issue was slightly different. He agreed that he had
a conversation with Mr Brown a week before the
article was published. Mr Brown
informed him that he was going to submit an article to the newspaper about
Aboriginal services in
the Clarence Valley, specifically the lack of such
services. In that conversation he did not seek any information from Mr Monaghan
with respect to the operation of the AMS, nor did he raise with him any
complaint as to any defect in its operations. When asked
what he said to Mr
Brown he responded:
"My words were if the article was going to name
a Service or any particular individuals he should be careful about the article
because it could have repercussions on the community itself"
Mr Brown then responded that the article:
"... wouldn't name any Service and it was about services in general,
specific services
." [Emphasis added]
two versions do not differ in so far as Mr Brown informed Mr Monaghan that the
article was going to deal with "services in general".
Either expressly
(according to Mr Monaghan) or inferentially (on the basis of Mr Brown's
evidence), the article was not going to
refer to any specific services. However,
it clearly did. Although the article contains some general assertions that local
services were failing to meet their obligations, it is otherwise
replete in its criticism of mental health services. Critically,
the article
"... visibility from the Aboriginal services dealing with
these issues is almost non-existent. There is a growing perception that
workers are hiding behind their desks.
I have on many occasions tried desperately to engage mental health
intervention in extreme circumstances, but to no avail.
I am sick and tired of being directed to use the Aboriginal workers attached
to mental health and domestic violence services and not
getting the information
or assistance they need."
The reference to the "issues" which Mr Brown asserted to be "non-existent"
was clearly a reference to issues dealing with mental illness
in the local
Aboriginal community and its link to domestic violence.
our view it is thus clear that, contrary to what Mr Brown told Mr Monaghan as to
the limits of the article he was proposing, it
did refer to "specific services"
being the provision of mental health services. It was the workers who were
supposed to be providing
those services who were
"hiding behind their
. However, it was well known to Mr Brown that the only Aboriginal
services that provided a mental health worker was the AMS and that
that worker
was Ms Mundine. In these circumstances, Mr Brown gains no comfort from the
conversation that he had with Mr Monaghan.
the sake of completeness we note that in her oral submission on behalf of Mr
Brown, Ms Wass stated, relevantly, that:
"... It was simply not his
intention to unduly criticise organisations in particular when he saw it as a
systematic problem. Certainly
he's talking about mental health. That was the
thing that concerned him at the Grafton forum. And to the extent that he thought
would necessarily implicate the AMS, because no doubt clearly they would be
necessarily implicated. He spoke to Mr Monahan. And in
accordance with what he'd
promised, no service provider was mentioned by name."
The concession in the above statement was properly made.
thus follows from the foregoing that before he burst into print it behoved Mr
Brown to verify his assertion in the article to the
effect that the mental
health workers engaged by the AMS were failing in their duty for that, in
essence, was what the article alleged.
Given his lack of knowledge of Ms
Mundine's duties, including any restrictions under which the AMS may have been
operating at the
time, it would have been reasonable for Mr Brown to have at
least enquired further of Mr Monaghan before he criticised the AMS as
provider of mental health services to Aborigines in the Clarence Valley. If he
had enquired he may have ascertained the
lack of funding and staff which was
affecting the AMS's operations, as was also properly conceded by Ms Wass.
Mr Brown submitted that it was not his intention to name any particular
Aboriginal service provider or any particular Aboriginal
service worker, the
article did not reflect that intention. There is no doubt that it emphasised a
mental health crisis in the Clarence
Valley. It must have been plain to the
sub-editor of the newspaper, as well as to Mr Brown, that the article referred
to those who
were providing mental health services in the Clarence Valley. In
particular, as Mr Brown intended to criticise the provision of such
services, he
approached Mr Monaghan of the AMS to obtain his consent to his writing the
article. The only inference available is
that Mr Brown was fully aware that the
AMS provided the mental health services which he was about to criticise and that
those services
were provided at least by Ms Mundine who, it must be inferred,
was one of the workers he had in mind as "
hiding behind their
these circumstances, it was clearly open to the primary judge to find that Mr
Brown's conduct was unreasonable in not only failing
to verify the information
contained in the article but also in not attempting to ascertain from Mr
Monaghan and Ms Mundine their
response to the allegations contained in the
article. For all he knew, there may have been justifiable reasons for the
of the provision of mental health services in the Clarence Valley.
the appellants challenged the primary judge's finding that the article did not
relate to an issue that required urgent examination.
It was submitted that
because it was acknowledged that there was a crisis in the provision of mental
health services in the Clarence
Valley, there was a necessity for the article to
be published expeditiously and promptly. This urgency left no time or
opportunity
for either Mr Brown or the newspaper to verify the reasons for the
crisis or to obtain the response to the allegations from either
Mr Monaghan or
Ms Mundine.
there was a crisis did not, in our view, relieve the appellants from the
necessity to examine the veracity or otherwise of the
matters raised in the
article. It is apparent from the evidence that the crisis was not something
which had suddenly occurred. It
had been ongoing for some time, which was no
doubt one of the reasons that eventually galvanised Mr Brown in "going public"
issue. But there was no pressing necessity for publication to have taken
place when it did. Another few days or a week would not
have prejudiced the
force of what Mr Brown wished to convey. Thus his Honour was correct in finding
that further time could have
been taken to examine the truth or otherwise of the
matters raised in the article and, in particular, obtain a response from either
or both Ms Mundine and Mr Monaghan to the allegations affecting them.
our view, therefore, it was clearly open to the primary judge to find that he
was not satisfied that the conduct of the appellants
in publishing the article
was reasonable in the circumstances. Not only was it open to his Honour so to
find, but in our view that
finding was inevitable. Accordingly, the appellants'
challenge to the rejection of their
defence fails.
Extension of time
return now to consider the extension of time application made by each appellant
pursuant to UCPR 51.9(1)(b), a Notice of Intention
to Appeal having been filed
in November 2010.
principles relevant to the applications are stated in the decision of this Court
Richards v Cornford (No 3)
[2010] NSWCA 134
, at [98]-[110].
Critically, at [98],
"[t]he statutory framework for the exercise of the power
and discretion to extend or not to extend time as sought in the motion is
constituted by the CP Act, ss 5660"
. The facts in
Richards v Cornford
vary significantly from the present. There, the primary and instrumental course
of the failure sought to be remedied by an extension
of time was that of the
client and not the solicitors. Nevertheless, the failure of the lawyers involved
was a matter taken into
account by the Court.
present purposes, however, the principles stated by the Court in
are relevant to the exercise of this Court's discretion. It is not necessary to
repeat those principles, other than to stress, as
we have observed, that the
statutory framework is constituted by s 56 to
Civil Procedure
. Further, the civil procedure legislation is to be read against the
background of the modern approach to the proper despatch of litigation
need for reasonable expedition referred to in
Sali v SPC Ltd
67 ALJR 841
Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian National
[2009] HCA 27
239 CLR 175.
Matters relevant to the exercise of
discretion include the presence or absence of a satisfactory explanation for the
delay; the question
of prejudice to Ms Mundine; injustice to the appellants if
the applications are refused, and, of course, the merits of the arguments
involved in the appeals.
turn first to examine the reasons for the failure to file Notices of Appeal, and
for the continued maintenance of the High Court
special leave application. The
evidential basis is somewhat scant. For the appellants, for example, there is no
evidence from Ms
Wass or, for that matter, from Mr Dawson. The precise reasons
why experienced counsel did not advert to
Supreme Court Act
or to this Court's decision in
Bennette v Cohen
are not apparent. Nor is
there any evidence to explain why it is that the application for special leave
to the High Court is still
being pursued. While it might be inferred that the
reason concerns an element of insurance to cover the eventuality that an
of time is not granted in these proceedings, there is no evidence to
satisfactorily explain the unusual situation of the maintenance
of High Court
proceedings in the face of the concession to this Court that the leave
application was inappropriate. Their maintenance
has left an unnecessary sword
of Damocles hanging over Ms Mundine's head, a relevant aspect to consider in the
extension application:
Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian
National University
at [100] per French CJ.
evidence as to Ms Mundine's present situation is also scant. There is, for
example, no evidence from her pointing to any particular
degree of financial
hardship arising from the fact that the verdict has not been paid or otherwise.
Nevertheless,
we consider that there is ample justification to conclude that Ms Mundine will
be prejudiced if the applications are
granted. This arises from the fact
particularly that she has been required to face the stress and anxiety of a
leave application
which was unnecessary, and that she still faces the prospect
of this appeal and the unresolved extant proceedings in the High Court.
not insignificant to note that the application for special leave seeks to
challenge not only the primary judge's findings on
the issue of qualified
privilege. It also seeks to overturn the assessment of damages, a matter not
pursued in this Court. We are
entitled to take into account that Ms Mundine is
an Aboriginal woman and probably a person of reasonably limited means. It is now
nearly four years since the publication of the article in the newspaper. Damages
were awarded in Ms Mundine's favour as long ago
as 5 November 2010. The Notices
of Appeal were not filed until June 2011. They were approximately four months
out of time, if one
does not consider (as might be thought to be the case) that
the Notice of Intention to Appeal was superseded by the filing of the
otiose application for leave to appeal, in which case the delay was
approximately seven months. Either way, the delay is egregious.
If allowed to
continue, the litigation has the capacity to linger throughout 2012 and perhaps
beyond. We consider that there is undoubted
prejudice to Ms Mundine. We also
consider that costs orders made to date in her favour and protection against the
overturning of
costs orders (as foreshadowed by Mr Reynolds in his submission)
is not a sufficient answer to the prejudice we have described.
bear in mind, of course, that if the extensions of time are not granted,
prejudice will be sustained by Mr Brown and by the newspaper.
We acknowledge
that neither Mr Brown nor the newspaper were personally at fault in the
situation where the appropriate relief was
not sought following the decision of
the primary judge. In that regard, responsibility must be sheeted home to the
lawyers concerned.
However, that fact of itself cannot constitute an
impenetrable bar to the making of an order refusing an application for an
Martin v The Nominal Defendant
(1954) 74 WN (NSW) 121
per Walsh J;
Witten v Lombard Australia Ltd
(1968) 88 WN
at 411-412;
Stollznow v Calvert
[1980] 2 NSWLR 749
Nominal Defendant
[1957] HCA 27
(1957) 96 CLR 469
the case of the newspaper, it may be properly inferred that it is one of the
leading local newspapers in New South Wales and its
ownership is a matter of
public record and knowledge. Its financial standing and commercial situation
bear no comparison to the situation
of Ms Mundine. On the other hand, Mr Brown
is an Aboriginal elder and we have no reason to suppose that he is a person of
substance. We acknowledge that a refusal to extend time will occasion
an undoubted prejudice to both Mr Brown and the newspaper.
It must be, however,
that, in a situation such as the present, it may be necessary for the Court to
make a decision which is capable
of producing a sense of injustice in one party
for the sake of doing justice to the other. Although it is a matter of fine
we incline to the view that, although not determinative in itself, the
prejudice to be sustained by Ms Mundine if the applications
to extend time are
granted outweighs the prejudice that would be sustained by Mr Brown and the
newspaper if their applications were
is necessary, however, to add into the mix of relevant considerations the fact
that, in our view, the arguments advanced in support
of the appeals are without
merit. We do not consider, contrary to Mr Reynolds' submissions, that any matter
of general principle
has been identified. Rather, as this Court determined on
the leave application, the case turns, as is so often the situation, essentially
upon the facts and circumstances which were examined in careful and thorough
detail by the primary judge. We see no reason, as we
have said, to differ from
the views and findings he ultimately reached. Further, it is significant, in our
view, that the appellants
seek to advance a new case on appeal. The newspaper
only advanced brief oral submissions at trial in relation to
, more or less
an afterthought, whereas it now seeks to found one of its two principal
arguments on the defence provided by that section.
our view, balancing all the factors, the applications for extensions of time
should be refused.
Accordingly,
we make the following orders:
(1) Refuse the appellants' applications for an extension of time to file their
Notices of Appeal.
(2) Appellants to pay the respondent's costs of the applications to extend time
and of hearing of the appeal proceedings generally.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (371 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter