URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2024/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Aviga v Boral Resources (Country) Pty Ltd [2024] NSWDDT 5 (17 May 2024)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
Aviga v Boral Resources (Country) Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWDDT 5
Hearing Date(s):
8 April 2024; 18 April 2024
Date of Orders:
17 May 2024
Decision Date:
17 May 2024
Strathdee J
(1) The Notice of Motion filed 18 April 2024 is dismissed.
reserve the question of costs for the trial judge.
(3) The matter is listed
for further directions on 3 June 2024 in the Dust Diseases Tribunal general
Catchwords:
DUST DISEASES TIRBUNAL – Parties to the proceedings –
nomination of experts allowed or disallowed – interests of
Legislation Cited:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act 1989
Dust Diseases Tribunal Rules 2019
Uniform Civil Procedure
Cases Cited:
Davies v State of New South Wales
[2013] NSWSC 1277
Procedural rulings
Sonny Esekia Aviga (Plaintiff)
Boral Resources (County) Pty Limited
(Defendant)
Representation:
Mr D Hooke SC and Mr A Schonnell appeared for the
Mr D Toomey SC appeared for the
Solicitors:
Maurice Blackburn (Plaintiff)
Agnew (Defendant)
File Number(s):
INTRODUCTION
Statement of Claim filed 17 February 2023, Sonny Esekia Aviga (
) seeks damages, interest and costs from Boral Resources
(Country) Pty Limited
(‘the defendant’
) and an order pursuant
section 11A
Dust Diseases Tribunal Act 1989
(NSW) with regard
to any future condition he may develop as a consequence of his exposure to
silica dust whilst working in the Mugga
One and Mugga Two Quarries
‘the Quarries’
), quarrying and processing rock from the
matter was listed for directions before me on 8 April 2024, at which point the
defendant raised the issue of the medical evidence
upon which the plaintiff
wished to rely. As the matter was in the general directions list, I directed the
defendant to file a Notice
of Motion outlining the relief that was sought, and
made orders with regard to the service of evidence in support of the
defendant filed a Notice of Motion (
‘the Motion’
) on 18 April
2024, the morning of the hearing this application, some five minutes before I
was on the bench. It did not provide any
written submissions, despite written
submissions being requested.
plaintiff filed and served written submissions in anticipation of the
defendant’s Motion, and helpfully agreed to accept
short service of the
Motion, which it received just before I came onto the bench.
Motion seeks the following order:
Orders pursuant to UCPR
31.20 that the plaintiff be limited in respect of those issues in the case
calling for opinion evidence from
a respiratory physician or like expert, to the
evidence of Dr Jonathon Burdon
‘Dr Burdon’
defendant read the affidavit of Stephen David Taylor-Jones
) dated 16 April 2024, which became exhibit 1 on the
Motion. The plaintiff read the affidavit of Jonathan Walsh
) dated 10 April 2024, which became exhibit 2 on the
to this application, I note that the proceedings were previously before the
Court on 26 June 2023. On that occasion, I made
case management orders by
consent. Those orders included directions regarding expert witnesses. The
specific terms of the orders
were that the parties were to serve expert evidence
they intend ‘
to rely on at mediation’
is not contentious that the plaintiff complied with those case management
orders, and that the defendant did not. The defendant
served its defence five
months late, and its expert evidence between two and three months late. By
reason of the defendant’s
default, a mediation that was ordered to take
place by 4 December 2023 did not occur until 13 February 2024.
essence, the defendant seeks orders that the plaintiff is only permitted to rely
on the earlier Respiratory Physician, Dr Burdon,
who had been retained by the
plaintiff and had provided two reports dated 15 June 2023 and 26 July 2023 which
had been served on
the defendant.
Burton’s reports had been provided to various experts that the plaintiff
sought expert opinions from. These reports were
attached to the Form 1 Statement
of Particulars filed on 29 August 2023, and served on the defendant. Those
expert reports are as
Dr Joel Singer
‘Dr Singer’
), psychiatrist, provided a report dated 5 June
2023, which makes no reference to Dr Burdon’s opinion;
Shakespeare (
‘Mr Shakespeare’
), functional assessor, provided
a report dated 27 July 2023, which makes passing references to Dr Burdon’s
Jasmine Grey
), occupational therapist, provided a report dated
8 August 2023, which relies on the prognosis opinion given by Dr Burdon;
Irinah Jurkowski
‘Ms Jurkowski’
), vocational assessor, provided a report
dated 16 August 2023, which makes references to Dr Burdon’s opinions;
Kain Elsmore
‘Mr Elsmore’
), forensic accountant, who provided a report
dated 25 August 2023, which makes no reference to Dr Burdon’s
Elsmore provided a supplementary report which was served and two reports from Dr
Kevin Hedges (
‘Dr Hedges’
), occupational hygienist, relevant
to liability only.
the exception of Mr Elsmore’s supplementary report, all of the
plaintiff’s expert reports relevant to quantum were
served prior to 28
August 2023 in accordance with the case management orders that I had made, by
solicitor for the plaintiff requested from the defendant a copy of their
defence, which was not responded to, an agreement as
to the appointment of a
mediator, which was not responded to, and a request for a response to those
earlier requests, which was not
responded to.
18 December 2023, in contravention of the case management order that I had made,
the defendant forwarded to the plaintiff its defence,
a report of Associate
Professor David McKenzie (
‘A/Prof McKenzie’
) dated 25 August
2023 and a joint report from Dr Benson Sheng (
Andrew Hook (
) dated 14 November 2023. The
correspondence also agreed to the appointment of a mediator, but indicated that
the defendant would
not be in a position to mediate until February 2024 as it
was waiting for a report from Dawn Piebenga (
‘Ms Piebenga’
occupational therapist (see annexure ‘E’ to exhibit 2 on the
the defence being served, the plaintiff became aware for the first time that the
following issues were in dispute:
(a) the applicability of the law of the Australian Capital Territory and a
denial of the entitlement to provisional damages under
that law; and
(b) contributory negligence.
McKenzies’s report raised issues that were not addressed by Dr Burdon,
including the plaintiff’s co-morbidities
and his Polynesian ancestry.
was a further directions hearing before me on 19 December 2023 where I made an
order that the parties mediate by 13 February
2024 and I listed the matter
before me for a further directions hearing on 26 February 2024. The matter was
not set down for hearing.
parties participated in a mediation on 13 February 2024 and the matter did not
resolve. Subsequent to the mediation, the plaintiff
sought further and better
particulars of the defence (see annexure ‘H’ to exhibit 2 on the
21 February 2024, the plaintiff wrote to Professor Yates (
) to request her to assess the plaintiff and provide an expert
report. Although the plaintiff says that he has no obligation to explain
Prof Yates was retained, JW has provided evidence (in exhibit 2 on the Motion)
that explains this decision. JW deposes that it
was informed by his perception
of the quality of Dr Burdon’s reports, the fact Dr Burdon had not assessed
the plaintiff in
person, issues raised in the defendant’s defence (not
served until 18 December 2023) and an assessment of the probability of
proceeding to trial.
exhibit 2 on the Motion, JW explains his decision to retain Professor Yates as
(a) it did not offend any direction as to the use or service of expert evidence,
the previous orders having been couched in terms
of reliance at mediation;
(b) it was made prior to the allocation of trial dates;
(c) it established a hitherto unidentified fact, that the plaintiff’s
silicosis had progressed between 2020 and 2023; and
(d) it did not breach any statute, rule, practice or convention.
plaintiff was assessed by Prof Yates on 7 March 2024 and her report dated 26
March 2024 was received by JW on 26 March 2024 and
served on the defendant on 28
March 2024.
importance is that Prof Yates opined that the plaintiff’s radiology
demonstrated a progression of silicosis between 2020
and 2023. On that basis JW
requested a report from Professor Catherine Jones (
), expert radiologist, requesting a medico-legal report on the
plaintiff’s radiology.
Jones report was received by JW on 7 April 2024 which confirmed disease
progression, and was served on the defendant that day.
a further directions hearing on 8 April 2024 before me, the defendant indicated
that they would be serving further expert evidence.
LEGISLATION
Civil Procedure Act 2005
) relevantly
(1) The overriding purpose of this Act and of rules of court, in their
application to civil proceedings, is to facilitate the just,
quick and cheap
resolution of the real issues in the proceedings.
(2) The court must seek to give effect to the overriding purpose when it
exercises any power given to it by this Act or by rules of
court and when it
interprets any provision of this Act or of any such rule.
(3) A party to civil proceedings is under a duty to assist the court to
further the overriding purpose and, to that effect, to participate
processes of the court and to comply with directions and orders of the
(3A) (Repealed)
(4) Each of the following persons must not, by their conduct, cause a
party to civil proceedings to be put in breach of a duty identified
subsection (3)—
(a) any solicitor or barrister representing the party in the
proceedings,
(b) any person with a relevant interest in the proceedings commenced by the
(5) The court may take into account any failure to comply with subsection
(3) or (4) in exercising a discretion with respect to costs.
(6) For the purposes of this section, a person has a
in civil proceedings if the person—
(a) provides financial assistance or other assistance to any party to the
proceedings, and
(b) exercises any direct or indirect control, or any influence, over the
conduct of the proceedings or the conduct of a party in respect
proceedings.
Examples of persons who may have a relevant interest are insurers and
persons who fund litigation.
(7) (Repealed)
Objects of case
(1) For the purpose of furthering the overriding purpose referred to in
(1), proceedings in any court are to be managed having regard to the
following objects—
(a) the just determination of the proceedings,
(b) the efficient disposal of the business of the court,
(c) the efficient use of available judicial and administrative
(d) the timely disposal of the proceedings, and all other proceedings in the
court, at a cost affordable by the respective parties.
(2) This Act and any rules of court are to be so construed and applied,
and the practice and procedure of the courts are to be so
regulated, as best to
ensure the attainment of the objects referred to in subsection (1).
Court to follow dictates of
(1) In deciding—
(a) whether to make any order or direction for the management of proceedings,
(i) any order for the amendment of a document, and
(ii) any order granting an adjournment or stay of proceedings, and
(iii) any other order of a procedural nature, and
(iv) any direction under Division 2, and
(b) the terms in which any such order or direction is to be made, the
court must seek to act in accordance with the dictates of justice.
(2) For the purpose of determining what are the dictates of justice in a
particular case, the court—
(a) must have regard to the provisions of sections 56 and 57, and
(b) may have regard to the following matters to the extent to which it
considers them relevant—
(i) the degree of difficulty or complexity to which the issues in the
proceedings give rise,
(ii) the degree of expedition with which the respective parties have
approached the proceedings, including the degree to which they
have been timely
in their interlocutory activities,
(iii) the degree to which any lack of expedition in approaching the
proceedings has arisen from circumstances beyond the control of
the respective
(iv) the degree to which the respective parties have fulfilled their duties
under section 56 (3),
(v) the use that any party has made, or could have made, of any opportunity
that has been available to the party in the course of
the proceedings, whether
under rules of court, the practice of the court or any direction of a procedural
nature given in the proceedings,
(vi) the degree of injustice that would be suffered by the respective parties
as a consequence of any order or direction,
(vii) such other matters as the court considers relevant in the circumstances
of the case.
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
relevantly provides:
purposes of Division
(cf Queensland
Uniform Civil Procedure
; United Kingdom Civil Procedure Rules 1998, rule
(1) The main purposes of this Division are as follows—
(a) to ensure that the court has control over the giving of expert
(b) to restrict expert evidence in proceedings to that which is reasonably
required to resolve the proceedings,
(c) to avoid unnecessary costs associated with parties to proceedings
retaining different experts,
(d) if it is practicable to do so without compromising the interests of
justice, to enable expert evidence to be given on an issue
in proceedings by a
single expert engaged by the parties or appointed by the court,
(e) if it is necessary to do so to ensure a fair trial of proceedings, to
allow for more than one expert (but no more than are necessary)
to give evidence
on an issue in the proceedings,
(f) to declare the duty of an expert witness in relation to the court and the
parties to proceedings.
31.18 Definitions
(cf SCR Part 36, rules
13A and 13C; DCR Part 28, rule 8; LCR Part 23, rule 1D)
(2) In this Division—
(3) court-appointed expert
means an expert appointed
pursuant to rule 31.46.
, in relation to any issue, means a person who has
such knowledge or experience of, or in connection with, that issue, or issues of
the character of that issue, that his or her opinion on that issue would be
admissible in evidence.
(5) expert witness
means an expert engaged or appointed
for the purpose of—
(a) providing an expert’s report for use as evidence in proceedings or
proposed proceedings, or
(b) giving opinion evidence in proceedings or proposed proceedings.
(6) expert’s report
means a written statement by
an expert (whether or not an expert witness in the proceedings concerned) that
sets out the expert’s
opinion and the facts, and assumptions of fact, on
which the opinion is based.
(7) hospital report
means a written statement
concerning a patient, made by or on behalf of a hospital, that the party serving
the statement intends
to adduce in evidence in chief at the trial.
(8) parties’ single expert
means an expert
engaged pursuant to rule 31.37.
Subdivision 2
Expert witnesses
Parties to seek directions before
calling expert witnesses
(1) Any party—
(a) intending to adduce expert evidence at trial, or
(b) to whom it becomes apparent that he or she, or any other party, may
adduce expert evidence at trial,
(2) must promptly seek directions from the court in that regard.
(3) Directions under this rule may be sought at any directions hearing or
case management conference or, if no such hearing or conference
has been fixed
or is imminent, by notice of motion or pursuant to liberty to restore.
(4) Unless the court otherwise orders, expert evidence may not be adduced
(a) unless directions have been sought in accordance with this rule,
(b) if any such directions have been given by the court, otherwise than in
accordance with those directions.
(5) This rule does not apply to proceedings with respect to a professional
negligence claim.
Court may give directions
regarding expert witnesses
(1) Without limiting its other powers to give directions, the court may at
any time give such directions as it considers appropriate
in relation to the use
of expert evidence in proceedings.
(2) Directions under this rule may include any of the
(a) a direction as to the time for service of experts’ reports,
(b) a direction that expert evidence may not be adduced on a specified
(c) a direction that expert evidence may not be adduced on a specified issue
except by leave of the court,
(d) a direction that expert evidence may be adduced on specified issues
(e) a direction limiting the number of expert witnesses who may be called to
give evidence on a specified issue,
(f) a direction providing for the engagement and instruction of a
parties’ single expert in relation to a specified issue,
(g) a direction providing for the appointment and instruction of a
court-appointed expert in relation to a specified issue,
(h) a direction requiring experts in relation to the same issue to confer,
either before or after preparing experts’ reports
in relation to a
specified issue,
(i) any other direction that may assist an expert in the exercise of the
expert’s functions,
(j) a direction that an expert who has prepared more than one expert’s
report in relation to any proceedings is to prepare a
single report that
reflects his or her evidence in chief.
plaintiff does not oppose an order being made that each party be limited to
reliance on the evidence of one expert witness in
the speciality of respiratory
physician. Further, the plaintiff accepts that his reliance on Prof Yates may
extend the proceedings
and increase costs, but he submits that the time lost and
expense incurred will be negligible.
defendant relies on Part 6 Division 1 of the
and submits that as the
plaintiff is still working, there was no urgency for JW to request a report from
Prof Yates and wait for
its receipt, noting the time that he refers to in
exhibit 2 [39]-[41]. The defendant also asserts that if the plaintiff is
to rely on Prof Yates, this will necessitate the defendant having to
seek further opinion from the experts it has retained, which
will create further
delay and an increase of costs.
defendant submits that the plaintiff made a forensic decision as to which expert
he would qualify, and then rely on and serve
on the defendant.
careful and close analysis of Prof Yates’ and Dr Burdon’s opinions
reveals they reached substantially the same conclusions,
save that Prof Yates
identified progression of the plaintiff’s disease.
following table illustrates the comparison of the conclusions reached by Prof
Yates and Dr
Silicosis and COPD.
Silicosis and COPD. She also identified autoantibodies consistent with
silica-related connective tissue disease.
Silica exposure caused the silicosis. Silica exposure and smoking made
equal contributions to the COPD.
Silica exposure caused the silicosis. Silica exposure and smoking made
equal contributions to the COPD.
Likely slowly progressive, especially with further exposure.
Likely slowly progressive irrespective of further exposure.
Loss of life expectancy
5 to 10 years.
5 to 10 years.
following table illustrates the extent of reliance on Dr Burdon’s
conclusions.
Extent of Reliance on Dr Burdon
Ms Grey, occupational therapist
Ms Grey relies on Dr Burdon's opinion that the plaintiff's life expectancy
has likely been reduced by 5-10 years. On instructions
from the plaintiff's
solicitors, Ms Grey provides two assessments based on 5 and 10 years of lost
life expectancy. She did not rely
on Dr Burdon to estimate rates of disease
progression.
Ms Jurkowski, vocational assessor
She quotes passages of Dr Burdon's report. She also answers a question that
refers to Dr Burdon's opinion:
"We note Mr Aviga is presently employed with Boral. However, Dr Burdon has
opined the following: 'Mr Aviga should cease working for
Boral and seek
employment elsewhere in an occupation where he will not be exposed to silica or
other dusts.' In your expert opinion,
and on the balance of probabilities, is Mr
Aviga likely to ever be able to obtain paid work in any occupation, which he is
suited by virtue of his education, training and experience? Please
provide reasoning."
Her answer is largely independent of Dr Burdon's opinion. It could not be
seriously suggested that her answer would be different if
faced with Prof Yates'
Professor Jones, radiologist
Kain Elsmore, forensic accountant
The accountant's calculations are based on assumptions supplied by the
plaintiff's solicitor. He has not had independent regard to
Dr Burdon's
Dr Singer, psychiatrist
Ms Shakespeare, functional assessor
Two passing references are made to Dr Burdon's report. There is no
obvious reliance on Dr Burdon and his opinions are irrelevant to
conclusions.
issue of progression of the plaintiff’s disease is an issue upon which the
parties will have to revert to their other experts
in any event, and goes more
to the likelihood of progression rather than prognosis in the event of
progression. The plaintiff also
asserts, and I agree, that because of the
similarity of their conclusions, the assumptions relied upon by other expert
in the formulation of their opinions remain unchanged.
Reconciliation
of the expert evidence is a straightforward matter. In my view, it can largely
be achieved by the following questions:
‘Does Prof Yeats’ opinion
cause you to change the opinions expressed in your previous report(s)? If so,
how and why?’.
am of the view that Prof Yates’ opinion has not recast the
plaintiff’s case, and that it is highly likely that the opinions
other experts will remain constant. Dr Burdon’s opinion itself did not
drastically alter the nature of the case when
the treating physician, Dr
Hurwitz, had already diagnosed both silicosis and COPD.
plaintiff’s submission is that there is minimal prejudice to the
defendant, save as to the extent that it is now confronted
by a new expert.
note that the defendant has served five expert reports which make minimal
reference to Dr Burdon’s opinions.
Importantly,
the reports obtained from A/Prof McKenzie make no reference to Dr Burdon’s
reports. The most recent of A/Prof McKenzie’s
reports, dated after the
plaintiff had served Prof Yates’ reports, makes no reference to Prof
Yates’ views.
is apparent that the defendant made a forensic decision to not forward Prof
Yates’ report to A/Prof McKenzie and request
his views. This would have
occasioned little, if any, additional expense, yet the defendant chose not to do
making directions regarding expert evidence, I accept that the Tribunal should
have regard to rules 31.19 and 31.20 of the
31.20(2) identifies the directions a court may make. These directions include a
direction limiting the number of expert witnesses
that may be called to give
evidence on a specified issue.
rule 31.17 makes reference to the reliance on expert witnesses, and rule
31.17(e) allows for the court to make orders as to the number
of experts to be
relied upon. In my view, it does not, however, provide the power to dictate whom
those witnesses will be.
plaintiff has agreed that if he can rely on Prof Yates’ opinions, then he
will not tender or rely on Dr Burton’s reports.
This complies with rule
31.17(e) of the
, as the plaintiff has indicated that he will only
rely on one respiratory physician.
applies equally to rule 31.20 of the
which refers to the number of
expert witnesses, but not whom.
am not aware of any power that the Tribunal has to give a direction that would
restrict a party’s choice of expert.
defendant submits that the Tribunal ought be very cautious in making the order
to allow the plaintiff to rely on Prof Yates’
opinions, as if the
plaintiff is allowed to do this, then a defendant may also wish to do so. The
defendant also asserts that this
may open the floodgates
for parties in other proceedings.
my view, each case and each application must be decided on its merits based on
the facts and issues peculiar to the case. Even
if I thought that the orders in
the Motion should not be made because it may ‘open the floodgates’,
that is a matter
that should not affect my decision. Further, if I think that
the interests of justice are better served by the refusal of the application
this matter, which I do, then that is the course I should adopt.
coming to my determination, I have had regard to Part 6 of the
, Part 6 of the
does not contain any power to
dictate a party’s choice of witness. I must also have regard to section 56
when making any orders,
including interlocutory ones. However, that is not a
standalone power, and serves only to inform the powers confirmed elsewhere in
. I must also have regard to section 58,
which requires that a court must act according to the dictates of justice, and I
plaintiff’s submission that this could hardly be achieved by
dictating a party’s choice of witness.
am not aware of, and the parties have not been able to draw my attention to, any
authority which would support the making of the
orders sought. Whilst the
defendant has referred my attention to the matter of
Davies v State of New
South Wales
[2013] NSWSC 1277
, I am of the view that the circumstances of
those proceedings can be easily distinguished from this claim, and that it is
authority which would influence my determination, and it has not done
Dust Diseases Tribunal Rules 2019
(NSW) do not empower the Tribunal to
restrict a party’s choice of expert witness, nor are there any practice
notes to that
accept that a party is free to prepare a case of their choosing within the
confines of practice and procedure. The right to assemble
evidence and prove a
case is central to the adversarial system of justice. To do so would traverse
ordinary common law to choose
the evidence which they wish to put before a
I do not believe that the Tribunal has the power to restrict a party’s
choice of expert witness.
plaintiff’s reliance on Prof Yates over Dr Burdon is unlikely to cause any
substantial cost or expense, and any prejudice
to the defendant is
the stage of the proceedings, whereby a trial date has not yet been set and a
hearing would, in any event, be several months
away given the Tribunal’s
commitments, there is no principled case management reason to make restrictive
directions in respect
of expert evidence.
is especially so in circumstances given the defendant’s disregard for case
management orders to date, which occasioned
delay. Further, the late service of
the defence which pleads contributory negligence (based on cigarette smoking),
was the first
instance that the plaintiff became aware of this allegation. That
has created a need for the plaintiff to qualify an addiction expert,
the defendant may wish to respond.
Unfortunately,
delay and an increase in costs will inevitably occur, and even if I did have the
power, which I do not believe I have,
the interests of justice would require
that the application be refused.
make the following orders:
(1) The Notice of Motion filed 18 April 2024 is dismissed.
(2) I reserve the question of costs for the trial judge.
(3) The matter is listed for further directions on 3 June 2024 in the Dust
Diseases Tribunal general list.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (315 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter