URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/287.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Deepwater Production Pty Ltd v SMG Holdings Pty Ltd t/as Worthington BMW & Anor [2025] NSWCATAP 287; (11 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Deepwater Production Pty Ltd v SMG Holdings Pty Ltd t/as Worthington BMW
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 287
Hearing Date(s):
12 June 2025
Date of Orders:
11 November 2025
Decision Date:
11 November 2025
Appeal Panel
J Redfern PSM, Senior Member
N Kennedy, Senior Member
(1) Appeal allowed.
(2) The decision is set aside and the
proceedings are remitted to the Consumer and Commercial Division for
reconsideration according
to law, with such further or other evidence as the
Tribunal grants leave to admit.
Catchwords:
APPEALS — Australian Consumer Law — whether BMW vehicle was of
acceptable quality — adequacy of reasons —
whether failure to
exercise jurisdiction or denial of procedural fairness — failure to make
material findings — constructive
failure to exercise jurisdiction
Legislation Cited:
Australian Consumer Law (NSW)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
Cases Cited:
Al-Daouk v Mr Pine Pty Ltd t/as Furnco Bankstown
[2015] NSWCATAP
Alexandria Landfill Pty Ltd v Transport for NSW
(2020) 103 NSWLR 479
[2020] NSWCA 165
Bele-Verdy v The North Coast Community Housing Company Ltd
[2025] NSWCATAP 13
Chapman v McLaughin
[2016] NSWCATAP 212
Collins v Urban
[2014] NSWCATAP 17
Cominos v Di Rico
[2016] NSWCATAP 5
Crooks v Hyundai
Motor Company Australia Pty Ltd [2023] NSCATCD 29
Ford Motor Company of
Australia Pty Ltd v Capic
[2023] FCAFC 179
Frediani v Hall t/as Happy Camper
Conversions
[2024] NSWCATAP 134
Hernady v Raccani
[2016] NSWCATAP 67
[2014] NSWCATAP 48
NSW Land and Housing Corporation v Orr
[2019] NSWCA
Orell v Clas Concrete & Constructions Pty Ltd [2024] NSCATAP
Prendergast v Western Murray Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP
Resource Pacific Pty Ltd v Wilkinson
[2013] NSWCA 33
Ryan v BKB Motor
Vehicle Repairs Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP 39
Unique Commercial Group Pty Ltd v
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Deepwater Production Pty Ltd (Appellant)
SMG Holdings Pty Led t/as
Worthington BMW (First Respondent)
BMW Australia Ltd (Second
Respondent)
Representation:
Appellant (Mr D Gleeson, Director)
First Respondent (Mr B Worthington,
Second Respondent (Mr T Hall, Company Secretary)
File Number(s):
2025/00097069
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
Date of Decision:
12 February 2025
K Mortensen, General Member
File Number(s):
2024/00312864
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an internal appeal under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(NSW) (NCAT Act). These appeal proceedings arise out of a decision of the
Consumer and Commercial Division of the Tribunal dated
12 February 2025 in which
the appellant’s case was dismissed after a hearing.
appellant purchased a new BMW vehicle from the first respondent in April 2022
for $101,961, including trade in and discounts.
The BMW was supplied by the
second respondent, a wholly owned subsidiary of the German manufacturer. The BMW
developed water leaking
issues through the sunroof and in August 2024, the
appellant (then the applicant) commenced proceedings seeking a refund for the
car and compensation for other losses incurred.
appellant alleged the vehicle was not of acceptable quality due to a persistent
leak in the sunroof, in breach of
Australian Consumer Law
(ACL). The appellant further claimed that the breach was a major failure within
the meaning of s 260 of the ACL, thereby entitling
him to a refund. The first
respondent opposed the claim, contending that the problems with the BMW could be
Tribunal dismissed the appellant’s claim. The appellant appealed to the
Appeal Panel from that decision on the grounds that
there was a substantial
miscarriage of justice because the decision was not fair and equitable, it was
against the weight of evidence
and significant new evidence has arisen that was
not reasonably available at the time of the hearing. The appellant needs leave
appeal on these grounds. The appellant further claimed that the decision was
unfair because there had been a denial of procedural
fairness and the Tribunal
had failed to consider all claims made and evidence provided by the appellant.
reviewing the written reasons and considering the material and oral submissions
from the parties at the hearing, the Appeal
Panel identified obvious errors
which raise questions of law. These errors became apparent during the hearing of
the appeal.
appellant did not specifically challenge the adequacy of the written reasons in
its Notice of Appeal, but the claims made about
procedural fairness and the
failure of the Tribunal to record the basis for its findings or to sufficiently
particularise the parties’
contentions and its reasoning process led us to
the conclusion that the reasons were inadequate.
summary, the written reasons were materially inadequate to the extent that the
Appeal Panel was not satisfied the Tribunal had
properly engaged with the
evidence and arguments or that it had properly considered and determined
significant relevant claims made
by the appellant in the proceedings. As such,
we find that the Tribunal at first instance erred by failing to exercise its
to consider and determine material relevant claims.
have set aside the decision, and the proceedings are remitted to the Consumer
and Commercial Division for reconsideration according
the appeal proceedings, the appellant was represented by its director, Mr D
Gleeson, the first respondent was represented by Mr
B Worthington, director and
the second respondent was represented by Mr T Hall, Company Secretary of the
second respondent.
The proceedings at first instance and the
decision of the Tribunal
appellant purchased the BMW vehicle in April 2022 from the first respondent. The
first respondent is a motor dealer. The appellant
and the first respondent had
previous dealings through the earlier purchase of another BMW vehicle which was
subsequently sold.
appellant reported water leaks in the BMW by about July 2023. The first
respondent worked on the vehicle to resolve those issues
and the appellant,
unsatisfied with the result, commenced proceedings in the Tribunal under the ACL
in August 2024.
were attempts to resolve the dispute by conciliation. These attempts were
unsuccessful.
appellant alleged that the respondents had failed to comply with consumer
guarantees in
of the ACL, which provides that goods supplied to a consumer
must be of “acceptable quality”, which for the purposes
of the ACL,
means fit for all the purposes for which the goods of that kind are commonly
supplied, acceptable in appearance and finish,
free from defects and safe and
durable. If goods are not of acceptable quality, the ACL provides certain
statutory remedies to consumers.
A consumer may be able to obtain a refund where
the failure to comply with the guarantee is a “major failure” under
260 of the ACL. The issues in dispute between the parties in the proceedings
at first instance were, first, whether the respondents,
or either of them, had
and secondly, if so, whether this was a “major
failure” entitling the appellant to a refund.
reasons for decision are nine pages in length, comprising 46 numbered
paragraphs. The decision sets out the details of the parties,
the application
and the procedural directions, the background, the grounds for jurisdiction and
a summary of the relevant law that
applies to the claim. The applicable
legislation, legal authorities and the relevant legal principles governing
consumer guarantees
under the ACL and the remedies for breach of those
guarantees are well explained at [26] to [35]. This comprised more than half the
decision. There is no complaint about this aspect of the decision as the
legislation and authorities cited and the legal principles
summarised are
difficulty is that the Tribunal’s findings of fact, reasoning and outline
of evidence, or rather the effect of the evidence,
and the Tribunal’s
conclusions on the claims made are brief.
Tribunal set out the background facts at [6]-[16]. These facts are not in
dispute are as follows:
(1) The appellant purchased the BMW from the first respondent for $64,888.14
(excluding the trade-in) and took delivery of the vehicle
on 6 April 2022 [6]
(2) In or about June 2023, the appellant observed leaking form the sunroof in
heavy rain and contacted the first respondent to schedule
a repair [7].
(3) The appellant observed further leaking from the sunroof on or about 15
February 2024 but the first respondent was unable to replicate
the leak under
test conditions [9].
(4) Further leaks were observed until June 2024 at which time faults were found
with the windscreen and sunroof, which were subsequently
repaired [10].
(5) The appellant made contact with the second respondent in August 2024 which
advised that as the first respondent had not been
able to replicate the leak
under test conditions, the matter was closed. The appellant commenced
proceedings [11]-[13].
(6) The BMW was left outside during September 2024 when the director of the
appellant was overseas and on his rerun water and mould
was found in the vehicle
Tribunal directed that the vehicle be made available to the second respondent
for inspection and stated, at [15]:
Whilst the reported results of that inspection were not made available to the
Tribunal, during the hearing Mr Worthington, appearing
for Worthington, conceded
that that inspection had confirmed that the sunroof was still leaking and that
in response, further repairs
were then carried out.
was no dispute that after the repairs were carried out, the appellant refused to
collect the vehicle, which remained the case
on the date of the hearing [16].
findings about jurisdiction, the Tribunal summarised the evidence as
23 The applicant's evidence covered the facts already recounted above, as well
as including information from published articles relating
to common complaints
with the same model vehicle as the applicant's. Whilst the rules of evidence do
not apply in the Tribunal, I
have given the evidence of complaints made by
others little weight as I consider them to be hearsay. Even if I were to afford
evidence greater weight, I do not see the relevance of that evidence as it
is not evidence of fault in the applicant's vehicle, and
if it is evidence of
anything at all, it is evidence of fault with other people's vehicles.
24 At the hearing, Worthington gave oral evidence that upon delivery of the
vehicle to the workshop in December 2024, independent
testing indicated that the
sunroof of the vehicle leaked, and that subsequent repairs were then
25 The applicant then refused to collect the vehicle following completion of
those repairs.
outlining the relevant law and authorities, the Tribunal set out its findings
and conclusions in relation to the claim as follows:
36 It is certainly fair to say that the applicant's vehicle has had a teething
problem. From the evidence led by both parties it
is evident that the particular
teething problem is that the vehicle's sunroof leaks.
37 The applicant has not provided evidence establishing that the repairs now
done to the vehicle have been inadequate, or to support
the applicant's
subjective assertions that the problems will continue to occur. Based upon the
evidence of Worthington, I consider
it entirely possible that Worthington's most
recent attempt to rectify the defect by the repairs and adjustments made
following the
independent identification of particular issues with the sunroof
of the vehicle might have been successful.
38 It necessarily follows that it is impossible for me to find, on the balance
of probabilities, that the teething problems within
the vehicle complained of
have not been now addressed by the respondents.
39 At the hearing, the applicant also submitted that the vehicle was unsafe due
to the presence of mould within the vehicle and relied
upon the independent
report of Mouldsafe dated 8 October 2025 in support of that submission.
40 Even if that evidence is capable of establishing, on the balance of
probabilities, that the vehicle is unsafe, it does not establish
that the mould
growth has been caused by the breaches complained of. It is for the applicant to
prove that the respondent's breach
was the real and effective cause of the
mould. If an intervening event, such as the applicant's negligence is the
primary cause,
the claim will fail.
41 What the evidence before the Tribunal does show, is that following the
applicant's application to the Tribunal, the applicant
travelled overseas and
elected to leave the vehicle outdoors where it would be exposed to any
prevailing rainfall for some four weeks.
42 Given that the basis of the applicant's application was that the leak from
the sunroof was not able to be repaired, it is difficult
to understand the
applicant's choice to leave the vehicle exposed to prevailing whether in that
43 The claimant did not take any reasonable steps to reduce or avoid the very
real possibility that water would enter the vehicle
whilst left locked and
unattended for four weeks. If steps were taken by the applicant to protect the
vehicle from weather, for example
by garaging it or wrapping it under a
waterproof car cover, is most unlikely that mould could have taken hold inside
the vehicle
in the way that it has.
44 The Tribunal is therefore unable to find that the mould complained of is a
safety defect of a kind flowing from the breach of
Australian Consumer Law
alleged. On the balance of probabilities, it is much more likely to have been
caused by the intervening failure
by the applicant to take steps necessary to
mitigate any further possible damage.
45 It is clear that the applicant is subjectively dissatisfied with the vehicle.
However, that subjective dissatisfaction is not
sufficient, when considered in
the context of all of the evidence, to satisfy the Tribunal that a reasonable
consumer, fully acquainted
with the state and condition of the vehicle, would
not regard the vehicle as acceptable having regard to the matters in
46 As the applicant has failed to establish breach of
of the ACL, it
follows that there is no entitlement to the remedies set out in ss 259-263 of
the ACL, or any alternative remedy under
s 79N of the FTA.
application was dismissed and there was no order made in relation to costs,
notably none of the parties were legally represented.
before the Appeal Panel
following materials were provided by the appellant to the Appeal
Notice of Appeal
Notice of Appeal, with attached particulars, was filed on 12 March 2025, within
the required time under the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Rules 2014
(NSW) (NCAT Rules), being within 28 days of the day on which the appellant was
given written reasons for or notified of the Tribunal’s
whichever is the later in time. (r 25(4)(c) of the NCAT Rules).
appellant requests leave to the appeal on the basis that the appellant may have
suffered a substantial miscarriage of justice
(1) The decision was not fair and equitable; and
(2) The decision was against the weight of evidence; and
(3) Significant new evidence had arisen that was not reasonably available at the
time of the Tribunal hearing.
Grounds of Appeal, which were attached to the Notice, are summarised
Other documents
appellant filed documents on 29 April 2025 and 4 June 2025. Those documents
(1) Documents provided to the Tribunal at first instance.
(2) A copy of the Mould Safe Report.
(3) Submissions, including submissions in reply to the respondents’
submissions.
(4) Evidence which was not before the Tribunal at first instance, being
documents and a USB containing video footage.
First Respondent
first respondent filed the following documents:
(1) Submissions in reply to the appeal, including a copy of an email dated 20
March 2025 with submissions and the documents referred
to in the submissions.
(2) Reply to Appeal dated 2 April 2025, together with submissions (which was a
duplicate of (1)).
(3) Submissions in response to the appeal.
(4) Documents said to have been provided to the Tribunal.
(5) Photographs that were not before the Tribunal at first instance.
submissions included a chronology and assertions of fact about contentious
matters. For instance, the submissions Included statements
undertaken by the first respondent in response to the appellant’s
complaints, evidence relating to the escalation
of the matter to the second
respondent and references to the results of an independent report obtained by
the second respondent,
which was not provided to the appellant and was not
before the Tribunal at first instance.
first respondent did not seek leave to rely on the new evidence and, as such, we
did not have regard to the photographs filed.
second respondent filed a Reply to Appeal on 4 April 2025 and submissions in
response to the appeal on 16 May 2025. No further
documents were filed by the
second respondent.
Leave to rely on new evidence refused
was apparent during the hearing of the appeal that the appellant and first
respondent were proceeding under the misapprehension
that the purpose and scope
of the appeal was for the parties to relitigate the issues in dispute. Both
provided evidence that was
not before the Tribunal at first instance and
included in their submissions assertions of fact about matters relevant to the
appellant seeks leave to rely on new evidence which is said to be in reply to
submissions made by the first respondent. The appellant
contends that the new
evidence is relevant to challenge the credibility of oral evidence of the
witnesses of the first respondent
at the Tribunal hearing. The appellant further
contends that the first respondent’s written evidence before the Tribunal
not include any statement or report by the first respondent’s witness
and therefore the appellant could not reasonably have
known that evidence in
relation to the witnesses’ statements would be required.
the Appeal Panel stated in
Chapman v McLaughin
[2016] NSWCATAP 212
... The point of limiting fresh evidence to that which was not reasonably
available at the first hearing is to ensure finality of
proceedings. This means
that it is in the interests of justice for parties to put
forward all their evidence as best they can at
the hearing, as
otherwise, if they were free to add fresh evidence after a case was
decided, the proceedings would run the risk of
not being finalised until after
many hearings. This principle is of particular importance in the Tribunal
because of the provisions
of s 36 of the Act. That section requires the
Tribunal to proceed to decide cases justly, quickly and cheaply.
test of whether evidence was reasonably available at the time is an objective
test, that is, whether the evidence was unavailable
because no person could have
reasonably obtained it (
Al-Daouk v Mr Pine Pty Ltd t/as Furnco
[2015] NSWCATAP 111
Bele-Verdy v The North
Coast Community Housing Company Ltd
[2025] NSWCATAP 13
scope and purpose of an internal appeal is not to relitigate the issues that
were before the Tribunal at first instance. We therefore
refused leave to the
appellant to rely on this new evidence.
Nature and scope of an
basis upon which appeals from decisions of the Tribunal may be brought are
identified in s 80 of the NCAT Act, which states that
an appeal may be made
‘as of right on any question of law, or with leave of the Appeal Panel, on
any other grounds’ (s
80(2)(b) of the NCAT Act).
meaning of a “question of law” was discussed in detail by the Appeal
Unique Commercial Group Pty Ltd v Cusumano
[2024] NSWCATAP 204
) at [25]-[40]. A pure question of law does not depend on the
facts found and the question of law must be, self-evidently, a question
and not depend on the answer. A question of law is distinct from a mixed
question of fact and law, for which leave to appeal
is required. Examples of
questions of law include the matters set out in
Prendergast v Western Murray
Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 69
However, the categories of question of law are not closed.
the ground of appeal does not raise a question of law, the appellant may seek
leave to appeal.
Principles regarding leave to appeal
there is an appeal from a decision of the Consumer and Commercial Division, the
circumstances in which Appeal Panel may grant
leave to appeal are limited to
those set out in cl 12(1) of Sch 4 to the NCAT Act. In such cases, the Appeal
Panel must be satisfied
that the appellant may have suffered a substantial
miscarriage of justice on the basis that:
(a) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was not fair and equitable; or
(b) the decision of the Tribunal under appeal was against the weight of
evidence; or
(c) significant new evidence has arisen (being evidence that was not reasonably
available at the time the proceedings under appeal
were being dealt with).
Appeal Panel considered the meaning of a substantial “miscarriage of
justice” for the purposes of cl 12 of Sch 4 to
the NCAT Act in
[2014] NSWCATAP 17
, stating that a substantial
miscarriage of justice may have been suffered where:
... there was a "significant possibility" or a "chance which was fairly open"
that a different and more favourable result would have
been achieved for the
owners corporation had the relevant circumstance in para (a) or (b) not occurred
or if the fresh evidence under
para (c) had been before the Tribunal at first
principles to be applied by an Appeal Panel in determining whether leave to
appeal should be granted are well settled. In
the Appeal Panel concluded at [84] that:
(1) In order to be granted leave to appeal, the applicant must demonstrate
something more than that the primary decision maker was
arguably wrong in the
conclusion arrived at or that there was a bona fide challenge to an issue of
BHP Billiton Ltd v Dunning
[2013] NSWCA 421
the authorities cited there,
Nakad v Commissioner of Police, NSW
Police Force
[2014] NSWCATAP 10
(2) Ordinarily it is appropriate to grant leave to appeal, only in matters that
(a) Issues of principle; or
(b) questions of public importance or matters of administration
or policy which might have general application; or
(c) an injustice which is reasonably clear, in the sense of
going beyond merely what is arguable, or an error that is plain and
apparent which is central to the Tribunal's decision and not merely peripheral,
so that it would be unjust to allow the finding
to stand; or
(d) a factual error that was unreasonably arrived at and
clearly mistaken; or
(e) the Tribunal having gone about the fact-finding process in
such an unorthodox manner or in such a way that it was likely to
unfair result so that it would be in the interests of justice for it to be
appeal is not an opportunity for the losing party to rerun the party’s
Ryan v BKB Motor Vehicle Repairs Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP 39
Accordingly,
in an appeal from a decision of the Consumer and Commercial Division, the
appellant must satisfy the requirements of
cl 12(1) of Sch 4 and, if so
satisfied, the Appeal Panel must also then consider whether it should exercise
its discretion to grant
leave to appeal under s 80(2)(b).
Grounds of Appeal
appellant’s grounds of appeal are set out in its Notice of Appeal and can
be summarised as follows:
(1) The decision was unfair because the appellant was not afforded the
opportunity to present a 65 page document detailing the correspondence,
defect history, failed repairs and independent report and warranty issues over
22 months. The hearing was scheduled for three
hours but was concluded within
one hour, severely limiting the appellant in presenting its case.
(2) The Tribunal relied on the first respondent's oral evidence of an
independent inspection report that was not provided to the
Tribunal or to the
appellant, preventing the appellant from challenging its findings. This was a
failure to provide procedural fairness
which materially impacted the outcome of
the decision.
(3) The Tribunal accepted that the sunroof of the BMW was leaking, which is in
breach of s 54 of the ACL because goods supplied must
be free from defects and
durable. However, the Tribunal failed to consider the full history of failed
repairs as evidence that there
was a major failure within the meaning of s 260
of the ACL. The Tribunal focused only on the final repair attempt in December
rather than the cumulative history of defects and failed repairs. The
Tribunal overlooked the inconvenience, loss of use and financial
burden on the
appellant as part of the claim.
appellant seeks orders that the original decision of the Tribunal be set aside
due to procedural unfairness and errors in legal
reasoning and that there be a
full rehearing of the matter to allow proper consideration of all of the
evidence, including any documents
that were not provided to him that are
relevant to the dispute. This includes an independent inspection report obtained
by the second
respondent and referred to in the reasons (at
Reply to Appeal
First respondent
first respondent agrees with the decision of the Tribunal and opposes any
application for leave to appeal.
first respondent contends that the BMW has been repaired and has been available
to be collected by the appellant since December
2024. The first respondent
submits that the appellant raised similar issues with a previous vehicle
purchased in 2021, which were
resolved and sold to another purchaser with no
issues. The leak was not reported to the first respondent until July 2023. When
leak was tested, it was confirmed that there was water ingress to the rear
section of the sunroof. This was subsequently repaired
after an independent
inspection commissioned by the second respondent.
first respondent submits that the appeal should be
Second respondent
second respondent supports the orders made by the Tribunal on 12 February 2025.
is contended that the appellant needs leave to appeal because the notice of
appeal does not raise a question of law and, insofar
as the appellant needs
leave, the grounds do not meet the threshold for such consideration. It is
submitted that the decision made
by the Tribunal at first instance was fair and
equitable and the appellant was afforded all reasonable opportunity to put it
The decision was not made against the weight of evidence as the Tribunal
considered all materials provided by the parties and determined
appellant had provided no evidence that the vehicle was defective. Furthermore,
the grounds do not raise general issues
of public policy or public interest that
needs to be considered by the Appeal Panel.
is submitted that the Tribunal provided comprehensive reasons to support its
decision, complying with s 62 of the NCAT Act. The
reasons accurately reflected
the relevant legal principles and demonstrate that the Tribunal considered those
principles having regard
to the evidence. The Tribunal found that the evidence
submitted by the appellant did not establish that the vehicle in question had
failed to comply with the consumer guarantee of acceptable quality or that the
appellant was entitled to a refund under s 260 of
the ACL. The reasons expressly
refer to the materials tendered as evidence in the proceedings at paragraph [14]
and the reasons demonstrate
that the Tribunal had regard to the evidence and
considered the evidence as part of its determination, for example at paragraph
Tribunal did not rely on the inspection report that was commissioned by it as
the report was not provided. Rather the Tribunal
relied on the oral evidence
from Mr Worthington as to the condition of the vehicle. The Tribunal referred to
this evidence in its
reasons at paragraph [15].
second respondent accepts that the results of the inspection report were not
made available to the appellant or to the Tribunal
but submits that the
appellant was not entitled to the report. The report was not tended nor was it
relied on by the Tribunal in
its reasons in any event. It is further submitted
that the appellant was not prejudiced by this and the appellant had ample
opportunity
to file its own expert evidence in support of the case. The
appellant filed a report from Mould Safe about the presence of mould
but did not
provide any report relating to the mechanical state of the vehicle itself. There
has been no denial of procedural fairness
and this ground must fail.
is further submitted that there was no error because the Tribunal found that the
appellant had failed to meet its burden of proof
in demonstrating that at the
time of sale, the vehicle failed to comply with a guarantee of acceptable
quality. This was a finding
that was open to the Tribunal on the evidence.
Evidence of persistent failures does not establish that there has been a major
under s 260 of the ACL. The vehicle was not unsafe; it had been repaired
and was available for collection. The Tribunal’s the
finding that there
was no major failure was open on the basis of the available evidence. Insofar as
the appellant relies on the failure
of the Tribunal to consider delay and
inconvenience, these are non-mandatory considerations which do not raise a
question of law
and require leave.
written submissions filed before the hearing, the second respondent contends
that, reduced to its essence, the appellant’s
grounds of appeal amount to
request for a hearing de novo by the Appeal Panel with no additional facts or
evidence. Proper and extensive
reasons were provided and the questions
identified for determination were correct. The Tribunal correctly reflected the
principles and the decision by the Tribunal first instance was fair and
equitable. The material findings of fact made by the Tribunal
were open on the
evidence and the conclusion reached by the Tribunal at first instance was not
one which could be said to be so against
the evidence that it could not be
reached by a member acting reasonably.
appellant had the onus to establish the vehicle was defective. Mr
Worthington’s evidence relating to the outcome of the
inspection was not
challenged by the second respondent at the hearing. His evidence was found to
provide both positive and negative
evidence for the first respondent. The
Tribunal took into account the evidence of Mr Worthington and found at [37] that
it was “entirely
possible” that the first respondent’s
attempts to rectify the defect “might have been successful”. It is
submitted by the second respondent that the finding by the Tribunal that there
was no evidence from the appellant that the repairs
were inadequate was a
finding that was open to the Tribunal. The second respondent further submits
that the findings made by the
Tribunal [40]-[44] were open on the facts and
evidence available at the hearing and the materials filed.
the Appeal raise a question of law?
, the Appeal Panel observed that what constitutes a question of law
“is vexed and context dependent in the sense that the distinction
matters of fact and of law may turn on the circumstances in which the question
at [37]). It was also noted that, when dealing with
self-represented parties, the Appeal Panel may consider for itself whether a
question of law is raised. As such, if the material and submissions raise a
question of law in substance, a more generous approach
is warranted as an aspect
of ensuring procedural fairness, even though the ground has not been raised
expressly or with precision:
at [27]-[28]. This was also the
approach taken by the Appeal Panel in
Cominos v Di Rico
[2016] NSWCATAP
, where the Appeal Panel stated at [13] that it was,
..appropriate for the Appeal Panel to review an appellant's stated grounds of
appeal, the material provided, and the decision of
the Tribunal at first
instance to examine whether it is possible to discern grounds that may either
raise a question of law or a
basis for leave to appeal.
this case, the appellant raises two issues in its Grounds of Appeal, which on
their face, raise questions of law, namely, the denial
of procedural fairness
and the failure to consider all evidence and claims made by the appellant. The
appellant does not need leave
to appeal on these grounds.
considering the Grounds of Appeal, we have closely examined the reasons of the
Tribunal to ascertain whether the appellant’s
complaints are established.
As already noted, the written reasons are unhelpfully brief on critical aspects.
In our view, the reasons
do not meet the requirements of s 62 of the NCAT Act.
The question is whether these deficits are material and whether the reasons,
such as they are, disclose more fundamental errors on questions of
Consideration
Adequacy of written reasons
the Tribunal makes a decision and produces a written statement of reasons, those
reasons must comply with s 62(3) of the NCAT
Act, which states:
(3) A written statement of reasons for the purposes of this section must set out
the following--
(a) the findings on material questions of fact, referring to the evidence or
other material on which those findings were based,
(b) the Tribunal's understanding of the applicable law,
(c) the reasoning processes that lead the Tribunal to the conclusions it made.
Appeal Panel discussed the importance of written reasons in
Khan v Kang
[2014] NSWCATAP 48
, where it stated that the Tribunal was obliged
to give adequate written reasons. Section 62(3) provided a “useful summary
what oral reasons or a written statement of reasons are to contain”: at
[40]. And further at [41],
41. The reasoning processes referred to in s 62(3)(c) include the reasoning by
which the law was applied to the facts as found to
reach all intermediate and
ultimate conclusions. It is important to bear in mind, however, that these
reasoning processes also encompass
the reasoning which led the Tribunal to reach
its factual conclusions: why certain evidence was accepted and other evidence
why a factual conclusion was reached; and similar matters.
the Appeal Panel also observed at [42] that s 62 was not the sole source of the
obligation and there is a common law duty
to give reasons. Relevantly,
[43] There are two bases identified in the authorities for the imposition of
this duty. First, it facilitates a litigant who may
be aggrieved, exercising
rights he or she may have to appeal and thus ensures that any appeal right is
not rendered nugatory or illusive
- Pettitt v Dunkley
[1971] 1 NSW LR 376
[44] Secondly, reasons are required since a failure to provide sufficient
reasons promotes “a sense of grievance” and
denies “both the
fact and the appearance of justice having been done”, thus working a
miscarriage of justice...
[citations omitted]
has been further explained by the NSW Court of Appeal stated in
NSW Land and
Housing Corporation v Orr
[2019] NSWCA 231
In the context of appellate review of the adequacy of reasons, the function of
an appellate court is to determine not the optimal
level of detail required in
reasons for a decision but rather the minimum acceptable standard: Resource
Pacific Pty Ltd v Wilkinson
[2013] NSWCA 33
(Resource Pacific). The
standard is not one of perfection: Bisley Investment Corporation v Australian
Broadcasting Tribunal
[1982] FCA 58
(1982) 40 ALR 233
at 255 (Bisley).
is an overlap, at a practical level, between the failure to give adequate
reasons and consideration of whether a court or Tribunal
has failed to take into
account material relevant claims as either a constructive failure to exercise
procedural fairness.
Appeal Panel has discussed the principles of constructive failure to exercise
Orell v Clas
Concrete & Constructions Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCATAP 220
[53], citing
Alexandria Landfill Pty Ltd v Transport for NSW
103 NSWLR 479
[2020] NSWCA 165
, where Basten JA explained the notion of a
“constructive” failure to exercise jurisdiction in the context of
that have not been adequately expressed as follows:
6 The premise underlying a ‘constructive’ failure to exercise
of the jurisdiction of
the court, but one that has failed in a way which can only be teased out by
reference to the underlying issues
and the materials presented to the court. It
may then be demonstrated that a material issue presented for determination has
resolved. By contrast, a failure to give adequate reasons implies that
the relevant issues have been identified, addressed and resolved,
reasons for reaching the conclusion have not been adequately expressed.
7 Despite the conceptual difference between the two complaints, they are related
in a practical way. Because there is no means of
interrogating a judge as to his
or her intellectual processes, evidence that issues were not addressed can
usually only be demonstrated
by reference to the reasons. Thus, on the
assumption that the judge addressed in the reasons all material matters, the
reference to a particular matter may allow the inference that it was
not addressed and determined.
link between the elements of a claim, which must be determined in the exercise
(or purported exercise) of jurisdiction, and the
written reasons, which explain
how and why a decision was made, has been also discussed by the Appeal Panel in
Hernady v Raccani
[2016] NSWCATAP 67
as follows:
52. The Appeal Panel considers that a Member called upon to
determine claims such as the Compensation Claims, the Rectification
the Cleaning Claim would generally be required to do the following in order to
exercise the jurisdiction of the Tribunal,
assuming that it has been properly
(1) Identify each relevant claim for relief and the statutory provision or
common law principle supporting the claim;
(2) Identify each of the relevant elements of the causes of action which must be
satisfied in order to justify granting the relief
(3) Make material findings of fact and law in respect of each of those
(4) Explain what relief, if any, should be granted and why.
53. It may be the case that the fact that these steps have been
taken can be seen to be implicit in the reasons and orders made
and this will be
sufficient. The reasons for decision and orders of the Tribunal below concerning
the amount of the reduction in
rent in respect of the Rent Reduction Claim in
the present case are an example of where the findings, reasoning and wording of
orders, reflecting the wording of s 44 of the RT Act, are sufficient to
establish that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal has been
exercised in that
54. It is always preferable, however, unless circumstances do
not permit, for the steps outlined above to be explicitly addressed
reasons for decision or the orders made. As we have made clear above, in doing
so the reasons do not always have to be lengthy
or detailed, especially if that
would be neither necessary nor proportionate. Nonetheless, the orders and
reasons must make it clear
that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, where it has
been properly invoked, has been exercised.
55. In the present case, the Compensation Claims, the
Rectification Claim and the Cleaning Claim were not identified by the Tribunal
as claims for relief in the proceedings, the statutory bases for the claims were
not referred to even though they had been explicitly
identified in the
Hernadys’ Amended Claims, no findings of fact or law were made in respect
of the claims and no orders, whether
upholding or dismissing the claims, were
56. In these circumstances, the Appeal Panel can only conclude
that the Tribunal below failed to address and determine the issues
necessary to
deal with each of the Compensation Claims, the Rectification Claim and the
Cleaning Claim, to the extent that each of
those claims was properly before the
Tribunal at first instance. To this extent, the Tribunal failed to exercise the
of the Tribunal under the RT Act which had been properly invoked by
the Hernadys.
our view, the problems identified by the Appeal Panel in
dissimilar to the issues raised in this appeal.
Is there error
on a question of law?
claim which is the subject of the dispute is a consumer claim alleging breach
pursuant to s 54 of the ACL. Section 54 of the ACL
relevantly states:
54 Guarantee as to acceptable quality
(a) a person supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by auction;
there is a guarantee that the goods are of acceptable quality.
(2) Goods are of acceptable quality if they are as:
(a) fit for all the purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly supplied;
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from defects; and
(d) safe; and
(e) durable;
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods (including any hidden defects of the goods),
would regard as acceptable
having regard to the matters in subsection (3).
(3) The matters for the purposes of subsection (2) are:
(a) the nature of the goods; and
(b) the price of the goods (if relevant); and
(c) any statements made about the goods on any packaging or label on the goods;
(d) any representation made about the goods by the supplier or manufacturer of
the goods; and
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the goods.
Appeal Panel has addressed the application of s 54 of the ACL in
Hall t/as Happy Camper Conversions
[2024] NSWCATAP 134
[18], where the Appeal Panel stated:
[18] The matters in s 54(3) are “mandatory considerations” to
establish whether or not goods are not of acceptable quality
54(2)(a)-(e) such that a reasonable consumer, fully acquainted with the state
and condition of the goods, would regard the
goods as being of acceptable
quality, determined at the date of the supply of the goods (
Company of Australia Pty Ltd v Capic
[2023] FCAFC 179
Capic-Appeal
at [43] and [56]).
this case, the Tribunal identifies at [36] that there has been a defect, or
‘teething problem”, with the vehicle. That
teething problem is
identified as the “vehicle’s sunroof leaks”.
Tribunal then addresses whether there is a defect with the vehicle, relying on
Mr Worthington’s oral evidence referred to
in paragraphs [15] and [24],
concluding at [37] that “[b]ased on the evidence of Worthington, I
consider it entirely possible
that Worthington’s most recent attempt to
rectify the defect and the adjustments made following the independent
identification
of particular issues with the sunroof of the vehicle might have
been successful”.
Tribunal therefore makes the finding that the BMW may no longer be defective
because the rectification work “might have
been successful”. The
evidence relied on is the oral evidence of Mr Worthington which refers to the
“independent identification
of particular issues with the sunroof”.
This appears to be a reference to Mr Worthington’s evidence about the
report obtained by the second respondent. The Tribunal relies on this
evidence of Mr Worthington to support the finding because at
[37] the applicant
had “not provided evidence that the repairs now done to the vehicle had
been inadequate, or to support the
applicant’s subjective assertions that
the problems will occur”. The Tribunal then went on to find at
It necessarily follows that it is impossible for me to find, on the balance of
probabilities, that the teething problems within the
vehicle complained of have
not been now addressed by the respondents.
difficulties with the above findings are:
(1) The findings at [15] and [24] are to the effect that the sunroof was leaking
and further repairs were carried out however, these
findings do not demonstrate
that the Tribunal has engaged with the question of whether there was a breach of
s 54 and, relevantly,
whether any or all of the elements of s 54(2), having
regard to s 54(3), have been established.
(2) The Tribunal makes further findings about the water leak at [14] and
[41]−[43]. The Tribunal accepts there was a water
leaking problem that was
not resolved by September 2024, and it is inferred that the appellant caused
damage by electing to leave
the BMW ungaraged while he was overseas. Leaving a
motor vehicle ungaraged for four weeks does not seem unreasonable. However, this
is not the critical issue. The essential problem is that it is unclear how these
findings impact the appellant’s claim that
the first respondent failed to
comply with s 54 of the ACL.
(3) The Tribunal found, and we accept, that the applicant bears the onus to
establish its case. The determinative question was whether
the BMW was of
acceptable quality. The existence of a persistent water leak over an extended
period was described by the Tribunal
as a “teething problem” at [36]
but what the Tribunal does not explain is how it came to this conclusion. Nor
Tribunal explain the basis for its finding at [37] that it was
“entirely possible” that the first respondent’s
recent attempt
to rectify the defect by repairs and adjustments “might have been
successful”, why this was relevant to
the question of whether there was a
breach of s 54 and the basis for its findings at [38] that it was
“impossible” to
find that the “teething problems” had
not been addressed.
(4) At best, the evidence before the Tribunal was that repairs had been
undertaken to the BMW in line with an independent report,
the details of which
were not known to the Tribunal or the appellant. It may have been open to the
Tribunal to infer the repairs
were successful, but it is not correct to say that
it was “impossible” to find otherwise. As such, the decision did not
reveal the reasoning or weighing process. Ultimately, this issue exposes further
issues about the adequacy of the reasons.
have therefore identified what appear to be errors and inconsistencies in the
decision. In our view, the reasons are inadequate,
and they do not meet the
minimum standard required to identify how and why the Tribunal dismissed the
appellant’s claim. It
follows that we do not accept the submissions of the
second respondent that the Tribunal’s reasons were comprehensive or that
they complied with s 62 of the NCAT Act.
summary, we are unable to discern from the decision the reasoning process that
led to the Tribunal to conclude those matters set
out in [37] and [38] and
finally at [45] and [46].
fundamental problem with the decision is that while the Tribunal correctly
identifies the question for determination as being,
“Whether the Vehicle
is of Acceptable Quality” and sets out the relevant legislation and
authorities, it does not engage
with the elements of ss 54(2) or (3) of the ACL
or with the principles outlined by the Tribunal in paragraph [32], referring to
Crooks v Hyundai Motor Company Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] NSCATCD 29 at
[63]. The only reference made by the Tribunal is at [35] – [37] in which
the Tribunal describes the issues
raised by the appellant as “teething
paragraph [43], the Tribunal states:
43. The claimant did not take any reasonable steps to reduce or avoid the very
real possibility that water would enter the vehicle
whilst left locked and
unattended for four weeks. If steps were taken by the applicant to protect the
vehicle from weather, for example
by garaging it or wrapping it under a
waterproof car cover, is [sic] most unlikely that mould could have taken hold
inside the vehicle
in the way that it has.
is on this basis of lack of mitigation, that the Tribunal finds the vehicle is
not unsafe at [44].
than at [44], the Tribunal does not actively engage with ss 54(2)(a)−(e)
or with ss 54(3) (a)–(d) of the ACL in
the reasons. The Tribunal refers to
evidence that the sunroof was leaking at [9]–[10] and [14]–[15] and
makes findings
not the BMW was “free from defects” as required under
s 54(2)(c),
“fit for all purposes” under s 54(2(a) or “durable”
under s 54(e).
Tribunal has not recorded material findings of fact in respect of each of the
matters in s 54(3) of the ACL, or the basis for
those individual findings. In
at [18], as referred to above, the Appeal Panel noted that each
of the elements of s 54(3) are “mandatory considerations”
establish whether or not goods are not of acceptable quality under s
54(2)(a)-(e) such that a reasonable consumer, fully acquainted
with the state
and condition of the goods, would regard the goods as being of acceptable
quality, determined at the date of the supply
of the goods (
Company of Australia Pty Ltd v Capic
[2023] FCAFC 179
Capic-Appeal
at [43] and [56]).
Tribunal makes findings at [45] and [46] that there is no breach of s 54 but
does not explain why, other than that the appellant’s
“subjective
dissatisfaction” with the BMW was not sufficient to establish breach
“when considered in the context
of all the evidence”. The Tribunal
did not actively engage with or outline all the relevant evidence and these
findings, on
their face, are inconsistent with other accepted evidence referred
to elsewhere in the Tribunal’s decision.
Tribunal purports to resolve the disputed question about whether there was a
breach of s 54 of the ACL but, in our view, has not
done so. The Tribunal fails
to make the material findings in relation to the mandatory considerations of
section 54(3) and fails
to make the relevant findings in respect of s 54(2). It
therefore follows that the Tribunal has not resolved the determinative question,
namely, whether there has been a breach of s 54 of the ACL.
accordingly find that the Tribunal has constructively failed to exercise its
the reasons outline above, we also have concerns about whether the appellant was
denied procedural fairness. However, it is unnecessary
for us to make findings
in relation to this ground because we have decided to allow the appeal on the
ground that Tribunal has failed
to exercise its jurisdiction and this failure is
fundamental to the appellant’s claim.
decision is set aside, and the proceedings are remitted to the Consumer and
Commercial Division for reconsideration according
to law, with such further or
other evidence as the Tribunal grants leave to admit in those remitted
proceedings.
Conclusion and orders
Appeal Panel has determined, for the reasons above, that the appeal should be
make the following orders:
(1) Appeal allowed.
(2) The decision is set aside, and the proceedings are remitted to the Consumer
and Commercial Division for reconsideration according
to law, with such further
or other evidence as the Tribunal grants leave to admit.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (346 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter