URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2012/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v WHYTE (No 4) [2012] NSWPST 6 (8 November 2012)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL
LAW (NSW) No 86a
PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
SECTION 167
STEPHEN JAMES WHYTE
MATTER NUMBER: PS 02/2011
REGISTRATION NUMBER: PSY
REASONS FOR DECISION
(FOR FINAL ORDERS MADE
16 OCTOBER 2012)
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v Whyte (No 4)
[2012] NSWPST 6
PARTIES: Stephen Whyte
(Respondent) – represented by Mr S J
Walsh of counsel instructed by Mr T Kulukovski, solicitor, Thompson Cooper
Mr P Riordan appearing.
Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant) represented by Ms S
McNaughton of senior counsel instructed by Ms R Lewis, solicitor, Health Care
Complaints Commission.
FILE NUMBER: PS 02/2011
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
Ms Elisabeth Shaw (Psychologist
Mr Peter Champion (Psychologist Member)
Jacqueline Milne (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: Re Orders: 15 and 16 October 2012
DATE OF DECISION: 8 November 2012
DATE OF ORDERS: 16 October 2012
ORDERS (in summary): Registration cancelled after ‘period of
grace’, prohibition order, no review of either order for
a period of 18
months, costs in favour of HCCC.
CATCHWORDS: Psychologist – unsatisfactory professional conduct
– professional misconduct – boundary violations –
allegations
of sexual relationship with former client.
CASES CITED
HCCC v Whyte (No 1)
Whyte (No 2)
HCCC v Whyte (No 3)
REASONS FOR DECISION
RE: ORDERS ONLY
Introduction
Psychology Tribunal (Tribunal) conducted an Inquiry into a Complaint made by Ms
Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings, Health Care
Complaints Commission (HCCC),
dated 7 December 2010 in relation to a registered psychologist, Stephen Whyte
(the Respondent).
parties indicated at the conclusion of the Inquiry that if the Tribunal was
minded to consider making orders imposing a period
of suspension and/or
conditions on registration that they wished to make further submissions.
Tribunal made Findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct with respect to this Complaint –
HCCC v Whyte (No 1)
Findings of this nature will usually result in Orders being
made and therefore a ‘phase two’ Inquiry was required. To
further dates for the continuation of the Inquiry for a ‘phase two’
(i.e. an Inquiry dealing with Orders to
be made) were fixed. Due to various
factors, including counsels’ availability, the Tribunal made Interim
Orders pending ‘phase
two’ of the Inquiry. These orders are found in
HCCC v Whyte (No 2)
Tribunal held the ‘phase two’ Inquiry on 15 and 16 October 2012 and
late on 16 October 2012 handed down Final Orders
HCCC v Whyte (No 3)
Reasons for Decision document relates to the Final Orders made in
Whyte (No 3)
Evidence before the
Tribunal in the ‘Phase Two’ Inquiry
Tribunal had the benefit of documentary evidence as well as the oral evidence of
Dr Trapolini and the Respondent.
in the period between the Tribunal making Findings with respect to the two
Complaints and the holding of the ‘phase
two’ Inquiry the Tribunal
held two Directions Hearings. During these Directions Hearings the issue of the
Respondent’s
failure to comply with the Interim Orders made by the
Tribunal was raised.
Respondent filed a bundle of documents in May 2012 in anticipation of the
‘phase two’ Inquiry in June 2012. Unfortunately
these dates had to
be vacated for a number of reasons. The documents filed by the Respondent at
this time included a statement dated
1 May 2012 which annexed various documents.
annexed documents included:
Letters signed
by the principles of each of the practices in which the Respondent conducted his
practice (none on the letterhead of
the particular organisation and all but one
undated) stating they had been provided with a copy of the Reasons for Decision
HCCC v Whyte (No1)
The dated document
being dated 14 days after the Interim Orders was not provided to the Tribunal
until filed as an annexure to the
Respondent’s statement dated 1 May
A letter to the
Tribunal dated 7 March 2012 from the Respondent’s lawyer detailing the
difficulty the Respondent had encountered
potential supervisors nominated by the Respondent in a letter dated 9 February
2012) and informing
the Tribunal that an appointment had been with another
person for the purpose of supervision. The Tribunal notes at this point that
this person did not meet the criteria defined by the Tribunal in the Interim
correspondence between Dr Lennings and the Respondent (Exhibit R1-D). The first
email from the Respondent to Dr Lennings is
dated 24 February 2012 and
I am psychologist wanting to organise some supervision. I have a matter
before the Psychologist’s Tribunal which requires me
to organise some
supervision. I put your name forward and the Tribunal approved you as a
supervisor. I remember you from the READ
Clinic and the supervision you did with
[work colleague]
. She spoke highly of you.
If you are available my contact details are:
[email and mobile
Kind Regards Stephen Whyte.
A copy of a GP
Mental Health Care Plan completed by Dr Sira on 27 February 2012. This document
records a diagnosis of depression being
treated by medication, low level of
attention/concentration, sleep disturbance, physical and emotional anxiety
symptoms (feeling
jittery with palpitations at times), fluctuating mood, a K10
score of 31 and recommends treatment with medication and cognitive behaviour
therapy (CBT) by a psychologist. The Plan recommended that he be reviewed by the
GP one month after the date of the plan. Attached
to the GP Mental Health Care
Plan is an Authority to Dr Sira in accordance with Interim Order 5(Exhibit
A bundle of pro
forma letters signed by clients in accordance with Interim Order 8 (Exhibit
A letter from
the University of New England advising the Respondent that he had been offered a
place in the Graduate Certificate in
Mental Health Practice (being a Part-time
Off Campus course) commencing on 13 February 2012 along with course and unit
information
(Exhibit R1-G).
A bundle of
references, including a number of references from clients (Exhibit
the Directions Hearing held on 28 June 2012 the Tribunal noted that the Inquiry
(phase two) was set to continue on that day, however,
senior counsel for the
HCCC was unavailable due to another matter exceeding the estimated hearing time.
The Respondent consented
to the adjournment application made on the basis that
the matter was adjourned to a time when the Respondent’s counsel was
available. As detailed below the Tribunal drew the attention of the
Respondent’s legal representatives to a number of areas
Respondent did not appear to be complying with the Interim Orders made on 16
February 2012. These concerns included the
facts that there had been no report
received from the treating practitioner under the GP Mental Health Care Plan,
there appeared
to be no supervision in place; and the filing of references from
a number of the Respondent’s clients, which was of concern
to the Tribunal
as it was professionally inappropriate.
Tribunal ordered that the Respondent was to provide evidence that he had
complied with the Interim Orders within 14 days and foreshadowed
that if the
Respondent did not comply it was likely the Tribunal would make an order
preventing him from providing treatment to clients.
The Respondent was also
directed not to request any further references from clients.
the Directions Hearing held on 18 July 2012 the Tribunal was informed that the
Respondent had commenced supervision with Dr Trapolini
and a report regarding
this supervision would shortly be forwarded to the Tribunal. The Tribunal was
also informed that the Respondent
had commenced treatment with a psychologist
(Mr Steve Sutton) in accordance with the GP Mental Health Care Plan prepared by
GP, Dr Sira (Dr Khan indicating he did not consider he was an
appropriate person to act in this role). The Tribunal was informed
authority and Direction to Mr Sutton for him to provide reports had been signed.
At this point the Tribunal notes that a
copy of a document of this nature did
not come before the Tribunal.
issue raised at this Directions Hearing by the Respondent was the cost of
compliance with the summons to produce issued at
the request of the HCCC to the
Respondent for the production of all of the clinical notes with respect to the
clients from whom he
had obtained a statement in accordance with Order 8 of the
Interim Orders (see
HCCC v Whyte (No 2)
Reservations
were also expressed on the part of the Respondent as to the
‘ownership’ of these files and whether the Respondent
was entitled
to access these files for the purpose of obtaining copies thereof to answer the
summons. Concern was also expressed
regarding the cost of compliance. The
Tribunal indicated that if the files were those of the Respondent’s
patients then he
had an obligation under the relevant codes of conduct (there
having been a change on 1 July 2010) for the Respondent to keep his
own records
as a private practitioner and an obligation to keep those files securely.
However, if the Respondent had some other type
of arrangement in place the
Tribunal offered to issue a separate summons to each of the practices in which
the Respondent worked.
The return date for the summons was extended to allow
time for compliance.
this second Directions Hearing, the Tribunal questioned the manner in which the
‘references’ from patients provided
by Respondent in the May bundle
of documents were obtained. The Tribunal was assured that none of the patients
had been asked to
provide a reference despite the content of one of the
references including a statement that the client had been asked to provide
reference. The Tribunal indicated that it was of the view that requesting
patients to provide references was not an appropriate
statement of the Respondent dated 1 May 2012 (Exhibit R1) was comprehensive. The
Respondent stated that he fully acknowledged
and appreciated the serious nature
of the findings made by the Tribunal and that he had applied himself
‘diligently to ensure compliance with the interim orders’.
Respondent stated he had complied with Interim Order 1 by providing each of the
principals of the practices in which he worked
with a copy of the Reasons for
Decision document and the Interim Orders and their confirmation of same formed
annexure A to his statement.
Respondent stated both in his statement and his oral evidence that he had not
worked in any other practices (thereby complying
with Interim Order
Respondent stated that he first telephoned Dr Lennings’ office on 21
February 2012 to arrange professional supervision.
He was advised to email Dr
Lennings, which he did on 21 and 24 February 2012. The email of 21 February 2012
was not produced to the
Tribunal. The email of 24 February 2012 was not answered
until 15 March 2012 (and as noted elsewhere Dr Lennings indicated that he
unable to assist in this role). In answer to questions from the Tribunal the
Respondent gave oral evidence that he had not made
any contact with Dr Lennings
prior to his name being put in the letter from his legal representatives on 9
February 2012. He had
considered Dr Lennings would be an appropriate supervisor
from his observations of him at the READ clinic and from the recommendation
his work colleague who had undertaken some supervision with Dr Lennings (T47).
The Respondent also gave evidence that it was his
work colleague who decided she
was not the appropriate person to fulfil the Interim Order and she then gave him
the names of some
appropriate persons. These names included Dr Zuessman (T48).
statement records that on 5 March 2012 as the Respondent had not received a
response from Dr Lennings he instructed his legal
representative to write to the
Tribunal on 7 March 2012 indicating his difficulties. This letter is annexure C
to his statement.
The statement then reads
‘I am not aware of a
response having been received to that letter’.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s statement indicated he was aware of
the Tribunal’s declinature to approve his
work colleague communicated in
the email exchange of 20 February 2012. The Tribunal also notes discussion of
this issue at the Directions
Hearing held on 28 June 2012. The Tribunal notes
that an email letter from the Respondent’s legal representatives dated 20
February 2012 read as follows:
We refer to the Tribunal’s Orders dated 15 February 2012.
In relation to order [3], our client has already organized supervision
[work colleague]
. We are instructed to seek the Tribunal’s
approval of
[work colleague]
as Approved Supervisor.
We would be grateful to hear from the Tribunal soon, given the time limit
imposed with respect to our client complying with order
Tribunal further notes that a reply of even date was provided to the parties
from the Registry on behalf of the Tribunal which
I refer to your letter dated 20 February 2012 which has been forwarded to
the Chairperson of the Tribunal.
The Chairperson has indicated that the Tribunal noted the advice in your
letter dated 9 February 2012 (at paragraph 2.1) and considered
this during its
deliberations. The Tribunal also noted the content of paragraph 2.2 of the same
While the Tribunal accepts it is unfortunate that the Respondent has
engaged the services of
[work colleague]
, having regard to the
circumstances of this matter, and having specifically considered the matter
raised, the Tribunal declines to
amend the Orders as made on 15 February 2012.
Tribunal further notes that the following record was made of the discussion of
this topic at a Directions Hearing held on 28 June
The Tribunal has given a clear indication that it did not consider
[work colleague]
to be an appropriate supervisor for the purpose of
Interim Order 3. This has been specifically conveyed to those acting for the
Respondent.
[Work colleague]
was not a practitioner of equivalent
standing in the profession as Dr Lennings, she had previously worked with the
Respondent and
she had a connection with the Complaint. This clearly put her
outside of the category of psychologists that the Council may consider
in the eventuality that Dr Lennings was unable or unwilling to act in the role
of supervisor (which appears to be the case
from the material filed on behalf of
the Respondent). There did not appear to the Tribunal to be any evidence that
the Respondent
has complied with Interim Order 3 i.e. that he had been
practicing since February 2012 without a Council approved supervisor.
cross-examination the Respondent gave the following evidence regarding his
understanding of the suitability of his work colleague
as a supervisor at the
time the Interim Orders came into place (T43-44):
Q. So is it the case that as of the date of the interim orders, that's
15 February 2012, you knew that
[work colleague]
inappropriate person, is that right?
the circumstances set out above it is therefore curious that the Respondent
considers that the letter of 7 March 2012 remains unanswered
given that the
Tribunal had dealt with the matter definitively in both the Interim Orders and
the email of 20 February 2012. While
it may have been that the letter of 7 March
2012 was not directly answered the Tribunal had made a clear indication to the
that there would be no alteration to Interim Order 3 to accommodate
the approval of the Respondent’s work colleague as a supervisor.
paragraph 13 of the Respondent’s 1 May 2012 statement he indicates he
supervision. During his
oral evidence the Respondent produced a copy of the email response from Mr
Costello (of the Mind Profile
Psychology Clinic – Exhibit R1-L). In his
oral evidence the Respondent elaborated on his contact with Mr Costello. He had
and disclosed the reason he was requiring supervision (i.e.
to comply with the
Interim Orders). The Respondent had left the meeting with the understanding that
supervision arrangements were
in place but then a week or so later the email
(Exhibit R1-L) arrived advising that supervision could not be provided (T12).
his oral evidence the Respondent provided details of the manner in which he
undertook the task of finding a supervisor to fulfil
Interim Order 3 which in
essence largely consisted of ‘searching the internet’. The
Respondent also stated that as at
1 May 2012 he was attempting to arrange
supervision with Dr Ronnie Zuessman. When the Respondent gave evidence before
the Tribunal
he indicated that this had not eventuated as Dr Zuessman was
located in the city and this made it inconvenient for him given his
practice locations and the time it would take to travel into the city to meet
with Dr Zuessman.
order to address Interim Order 4 the Respondent attended a general practitioner
(GP). This was not his usual GP, Dr Khan, as Dr
Khan had indicated he considered
he would be conflicted in the matter (Dr Khan being the principal of one of the
practices in which
the Respondent worked). Dr Sira, a general practitioner at
one of the other practices in which the Respondent worked, provided the
Respondent with the GP Mental Health Care Plan which was forwarded to the
Tribunal on 29 February 2012.
this plan indicating that the Respondent required treatment with anti-depressant
medication (which was prescribed by Dr Sira
and which the Respondent continues
to take) and treatment from a psychologist (Mr Steve Sutton), in his oral
evidence the Respondent
advised the Tribunal that he had only attended four
sessions with Mr Sutton. The Respondent had then decided not to attend any
sessions. There was no formal termination of the therapeutic
relationship between Mr Sutton and the Respondent, as the Respondent
failed to continue with his sessions (T50), cancelling the last scheduled
appointment (T66).
oral evidence the Respondent stated that he was not aware that he needed to
provide an Authority and Direction to Mr Sutton to
provide reports to the
Tribunal at the end of every six sessions. It appeared from the evidence before
the Tribunal that interpretation
of Order 4 by the Respondent’s legal
representatives may have contributed to the Respondent’s failure to
forward this
Authority to the Tribunal. The Tribunal notes that the following is
included in a record made of a Directions Hearing held on 18
Mr Riordan also stated that the Respondent had commenced receiving
treatment from Steven
Sutton (psychologist) and that an authority
and direction to Mr Sutton to provide reports had been signed.
Tribunal notes that no Authority of this nature came into evidence nor was there
any material placed before the Tribunal regarding
the four sessions the
Respondent says he attended with Mr Sutton. The Tribunal also notes the comments
of the Respondent’s
legal representatives regarding this matter (T50). In
the circumstances of this matter this issue has not been taken into
consideration
by the Tribunal in determining the appropriate Orders. It is
important to note however, that despite taking this position on this
the Tribunal is strongly of the view that it considers the interpretation of
Orders to be an obligation that falls upon
the registered health practitioner
who has conditions imposed on their registration as a result of Orders. The
Tribunal continues
to be of the view that the obligations imposed on the
Respondent by the Interim Orders are clear and that the
‘practitioner’
can only be interpreted as the treating psychologist
providing treatment pursuant to the GP Mental Health Care Plan.
Tribunal further notes that the Respondent did provide a copy of an Authority to
Dr Sira to provide a report after six ‘sessions’
and to inform the
Council should there be any concerns regarding the Respondent (which is put
forward as satisfaction of Interim
Orders 4 and 5).
Respondent gave oral evidence relevant to Interim Order 5, and was shown a copy
of a document that became R1-N as follows (T20):
Q. Just pause there. I'll show you a document. Do you recognise that
A. I do. That was the letter that I sent to him. You know, I didn't
personally give it to him. I gave it to the secretary to put
on file so that he
could be aware of it when we met up. I've since learned in one of the sessions
that I sat in with the doctor,
there happens to be two Stephen Whyte's at the
clinic, and when I sat in with him, he actually had the other person's file.
I'm just hoping that he has got this.
respect to Interim Order 6 the Respondent stated that he had only consulted with
clients during standard business hours and when
at least one other health
professional was present in the relevant practice.
Respondent also confirmed that he had limited his contact with clients outside
of consultations to matters concerning the making
of appointments or referrals
for other treatment (in order to comply with Interim Order 7).
noted above the Respondent’s statement indicates that he had provided the
Tribunal with copies of letters from each of his
current patients in compliance
with Interim Order 8. At this point the Tribunal notes that an analysis of the
clinical files of the
Respondent’s clients provided by the HCCC indicates
deficits in record keeping which are not explored in this matter but may
significant consideration for any Tribunal hearing an application for
re-registration.
Tribunal notes that on four of these letters the name of the client is illegible
(as noted by the Respondent himself in paragraph
20 of the Respondent’s
Statement dated 1 May 2012).
21 of the Respondent’s 1 May 2012 reads:
I have commenced studies at the University of New England
(“UNE”). I have enrolled in the Graduate Certificate in Mental
Health Practice, on a part time basis.
his oral evidence the Respondent informed the Tribunal that as at 15 October
2012 he had not in fact commenced these studies as
he had not been successful in
his attempts to enrol on line for the first Semester and then had decided not to
enrol in the second
semester pending the decision of the Tribunal. He stated he
intended to commence the subject
‘Introduction to Mental Health
on 1 November 2012.
in his evidence the Respondent stated that he had not discussed the suitability
of the course with Dr Trapolini. The Tribunal
notes in passing the relevance and
appropriateness of such a seemingly elementary course given the
Respondent’s qualifications
and length of experience. The Respondent (at
T51) gave further details of the reason why he had failed to commence the course
to the representation made in his 1 May 2012
statement):
Q. Could you have started that course at the beginning of this
A. Well, the intention was to start at the beginning of the year, but
when I got the acceptance, I missed out on the compulsory weekend
residential,
so I couldn't start it first semester. I then went about trying to change my
enrolment and, look, I must be the whole
enrolment system for
universities now is very electronic and I got quite confused by the whole thing,
and when it came to I thought
I was enrolled in second semester, I actually
wasn't enrolled in second semester. So I contacted the university and they've
explained to me what to do, but when I went and had a look the other day,
I'm still not enrolled, so I have to get back to them and
find out what's
happening. I don't know because as far as I was concerned I pushed the dots
where they were supposed to be, you
know, and I put submit and, you know, it
said that I was enrolled in the subjects, but it's not coming up like that at
the moment,
so I have to get back to them.
Respondent ends his 1 May 2012 Statement with an assurance that he remains
willing to cooperate with the Tribunal and with the
orders that it may make.
Tribunal received two reports from Dr Trapolini (registered psychologist), the
first dated 30 July 2012 and the second dated 18
September 2012 (Exhibits
R1-I(a) and (b)). Another letter written by Dr Trapolini to the
Respondent’s legal representatives
also came into evidence as Exhibit
R1-O. The reports record that the Respondent contacted Dr Trapolini regarding
supervision on 20
May 2012 and after a brief meeting on 4 June 2012 supervision
commenced on 18 June 2012. By the time of the Tribunal convened on
October 2012 the Respondent had attended approximately 13 one hour supervision
sessions with Dr Trapolini.
report dated 30 July 2012 notes that the Respondent is only undertaking one hour
of supervision per week with her and indicates
that two-hour weekly supervision
was discussed but was not possible
‘largely because of the financial
cost to Mr. Whyte’
. The report also indicated that Dr Trapolini had
limited availability due to her part-time work status and her current workload.
In her oral evidence, Dr Trapolini clarified that it was an assumption/inference
on her part that two-hour weekly supervision would
be too costly for the
Respondent based on comments that the Respondent had made during their initial
session. Dr Trapolini also confirmed
that she was working at capacity but it
would not have been impossible for her to accommodate two-hour weekly
supervision. Dr Trapolini
stated that she had remained concerned that the
Respondent was not complying with the Interim Orders.
Trapolini reported that the Respondent informed her he had been found guilty of
professional misconduct and that she had read the
Reasons for Decision document
dated 1 February 2012.
Trapolini reported that the Respondent had informed her he had been working hard
‘at prioritising his own self-care, which has improved his personal
functioning, particularly in the context of the significant
stressors associated
with the Tribunal matter and the upcoming Hearing’.
The Respondent
informed Dr Trapolini that he had reduced his client load, contact hours,
consolidated his practice locations and intended
to attend peer supervision on a
regular basis.
Trapolini records the general matters discussed during the supervision sessions
and notes that the Respondent had read the articles
or books recommended by her
in preparation for each supervision session. Dr Trapolini also stated that the
Respondent demonstrated
sound awareness of the reasons for the supervision and
presented as open and willing to discuss specific client and therapeutic
considerations.
Trapolini provided details of the work undertaken on the Codes of Ethics and
felt that the Respondent demonstrated a good understanding
of the need to
provide clients with a ‘secure base’ (this concept relates to
attachment theory) although she felt that
‘further exploration’
was required.
was given that an invitation had been extended by Dr Trapolini to the Respondent
to attend Group Peer Supervision. This group
of registered and clinical
psychologists meet on a six weekly basis. In oral evidence Dr Trapolini stated
that the Respondent had
not taken up this offer.
Dr Trapolini stated in her reports that she considered the Respondent was fit to
practice as a psychologist and that it was
very unlikely that there would be a
recurrence of the past improper and unethical behaviour, however in her oral
evidence Dr Trapolini
placed some reservations on these statements.
her oral evidence Dr Trapolini stated she had not seen a copy of the Interim
Orders although she understood the Respondent was
required to undertake two
hours of supervision per week. She thought the failure of the Respondent to
arrange for a second hour of
supervision (over and above the one hour she was
providing) was perhaps a result of the difficulty he encountered arranging for a
supervisor and
’some resistance’
(T99). Dr Trapolini was not
aware that the Respondent had come under the care of a psychologist or that he
was taking antidepressant
medication. When asked why he had not provided this
information to Dr Trapolini the Respondent gave the following evidence
A. Well I felt that her role was as a supervisor for me. I mean I can
see that it might be helpful to her to understand where I'm
at that particular time or my mental health status but I guess at the time all I
was interested in was providing and having
a supervisor and somebody that would,
you know, I guess take me on.
Trapolini stated in her evidence that she herself had sought and found a copy of
the Reasons for Decision document on the Internet.
Respondent gave oral evidence that he had not shown any of his clinical notes to
Dr Trapolini during the supervision sessions
nor had he advised her of or shown
her his GP Mental Health Care Plan (T62).
Sira provided a report dated 10 July 2012 (Exhibit R1-J). The report recorded
that the Respondent consulted him on 27 February
2012, 26 March 2012 and 18 June
2012. The report reads as follows:
He presented to me saying that he was a psychologist and he wanted to see
one due to long standing depression and anxiety after his
marriage brokedown
He has been on Zoloft (sertraline) 100mgs daily which he has been on,
before he presented to me. He was referred for counseling to
a psychologist.
I have only seen him twice in regards to this and am not able to make the
decision if he is fit to be practicing as a psychologist.
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any questions.
Respondent gave evidence that he thought he had probably seen Dr Sira
‘five, six times, seven times maybe’
(T20). Apart from the GP
Mental Health Plan, Dr Sira had concerns about the Respondent’s physical
health but the Respondent
had not managed to organise to undego the glucose
tolerance test or the 24 hour blood pressure monitoring Dr Sira had wanted him
to undertake. In answer to questions from the Tribunal the Respondent stated
that he had a conversation with Dr Sira about ceasing
the treatment with the
psychologist in late August or September (T53). But later the Respondent gave
the following evidence (T67):
Q. Is Dr Sira aware that you're not seeing Mr Sutton?
A. I don't know. I don't know whether I have actually discussed it with
him at this stage, no.
Q. You wouldn't have thought that important? I mean the mental health
plan was put in place in February this year, which is some
eight months ago,
seven to eight months ago?
A. All I have discussed, I have discussed with him that this is what
He said that I was
to continue with the medication and that we were to review I'm not
sure whether he said review all the medications
or just the hypertension
medications at a later date.
Q. Are you seeing that the work with Dr Sira is being a substitute
or an alternative to the psychological treatment to which he referred
A. No, I don't think he engages in therapy with me. I don't think he
really would want to do that to some extent. I think he's
concerned about my
physical health and concerned about my mental health and he agrees that, you
know, what I'm doing at the moment
is at least managing those
situations.
Q. But when Dr Sira is writing things it would appear that he's not
actually aware that you are not seeing the psychologist?
A. When he wrote I don't know what he writes down in his
Q. But I mean you haven't told him that you're not seeing
A. I haven't informed him that I'm not seeing Mr Sutton. I will
inform him next time but I haven't informed him as yet.
Q. Dr Sira has not asked why we have had nothing back from
A. No. He hasn't asked anything about I mean I am not sure
whether he has had any correspondence. I mean he should have because
first session I know that's what I do. I mean after the first session you
write back to the GP. I really don't know what
he's obtained.
Q. As I say, we have this indication for a review after a month. As far
as we are aware, that hasn't formally happened. Has anybody,
the Tribunal or
the council or anybody been made aware of the fact that you are not seeing
A. Not that I know of.
answer to a question from the Tribunal the Respondent indicated his
understanding of a K10 score of 31 that was recorded in the
GP Mental Health
Care plan administered to him by Dr Sira (T65):
Q. You did a K10, and the score was 31. What significance would you put
on a score of 31?
A. What significance? I'd say that that particular person would need
some sort of monitoring, although I'd be also mindful that
the instrument used
is fairly crude. So I found it difficult filling that in, and at the
time, I was quite anxious, in filling
it in. I don't think it's representative
of how I feel at the moment, but I was anxious at the time, because I was trying
somebody that would, you know, help me with a mental health plan, and
also, you know, you know, so that I could get that off to the
Tribunal, to
satisfy that requirement.
...........
Q. Do you think that that score of 31, as you say, that would be a bit of
a flag, if we use that term, if you're a clinician. Does
that have any
potential reflection, or significance, in terms of your capacity to maintain
your practice?
A. As I said, at that particular time, I was quite anxious about what was
going on. But, what I'm able to do is I'm able to use
I've developed, through mindfulness, I'm able to actually try and be in the
present as much as possible and so, when I'm
when I'm actually in my
practice, I'm actually trying to be in the present, with those people, and not
have my mind wandering off
onto other things. As I said, I don't think that K10
is reflective of where I am now. Not at all, even with the stress of these
proceedings, I still think I'd fare better with the K.
15 October 2012 the Respondent produced to the Tribunal a letter addressed to Dr
Sira dated 4 April 2012. The Respondent gave evidence
that he was not sure that
Dr Sira had received this letter as when he was with the doctor subsequently he
became aware that Dr Sira
had two patients with the name Stephen Whyte when Dr
Sira made reference to issues that did not relate to him. It appears that this
letter relates to Interim Order 5. The letter reads as follows:
Dear Dr Siraj Sira,
I am a patient of yours and I’ve seen you twice now. I need to
inform you about A Psychology Tribunal decision that found against
with regards
to a complaint that goes back to 2009. In order to comply with the
tribunal’s interim orders I need to inform
you of the results of the
Hearing and that you can access the ‘Reason for the Decision’ and
‘Interim Order’
via the NSW Government website or I can provide a
copy of the file to you if you so wish. If you do have concerns about my mental
health and ability to practice as a psychologist you have my permission to
Thankyou for your assistance and treatment provided thus far. I am more
than happy with your manner, caring nature and thorough attention
to my medical
appears to be a discord between this letter and the Authority provided to the
Tribunal in the bundle of documents attached to
the Respondent’s Statement
dated 1 May 2012 which read as follows:
I STEPHEN WHYTE of
in the State of New South
HEREBY AUTHORISE AND DIRECT you to notify
THE PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL OF
THE PSYCHOLOGY COUNCIL OF NSW
of Level 6, 477 Pitt Street,
Sydney, if you become aware of any issues that may affect my ability to practice
as a registered psychologist.
I confirm that I have provided you with a full copy of the Reasons for
Decision document (HCCC v WHYTE (no 1)
[2012] NSWPST 2.
My date of birth is
Dated 29/2/12
Respondent gave the following evidence about the information he had provided to
Dr Sira (T68 - 69):
Q. So just to make it clear, you haven't said directly to Dr Sira
that some of the anxiety or some of your mental health issues at
the time you
asked for the mental health plan were arising from the fact that you were
undergoing stress from a Tribunal?
A. I didn't actually I am I said there are a number
of stressors in my life. And I said that's why I needed the mental health
at this stage. And also when I wrote to him I said that this is a requirement
of the Tribunal.
Q. So if I can just take it one step at a time. If I can read you
something from Dr Sira's report, he says:
"He presented to me saying that he was a psychologist and he wanted to see
one due to longstanding depression and anxiety after his
marriage broke
There's nothing else in the letter indicating anything about the Tribunal
proceedings?
A. I'm not sure how he interpreted it but what I said to him was that I
had relationship issues and I also had some work stress issues
as well and
eventually I wrote to him saying that there was a Tribunal finding, it's remiss
of me that I haven't probably asked him
if he's read it but I just assumed that
he would have read it.
Q. So that's the letter that has been provided to the Tribunal today, the
one dated 4 April 2012, and the one where you said that
Dr Sira had got this because there were two Stephen Whytes in the
A. I only found out about the two Stephen Whytes later on, after I had
written that. It would have been probably in May because
when I actually went
in to see him he started to talk about this situations and things that didn't
relate to me and I said I was
a bit concerned as to what was going on there and
I said, "Have you got the right person?" He said, "Let's look at your date of
birth" and it wasn't the same date of birth.
HCCC provided the Tribunal with a summary document regarding the letters from
clients produced by the Respondent in compliance
with Interim Order 8 and the
client files produced by the Respondent under summons. The Tribunal has perused
all of the letters from
clients regarding them having been notified of the
Findings of the Tribunal in accordance with Interim Order 8 and the client files
produced under Summons and has found the summary document to be an accurate
reflection of the contents of those files.
Tribunal notes that the letters from the clients are undated with two exceptions
which are dated on the first recorded consultation
post the Interim Orders
– one in late June and the other early July – Clients 50 and
Respondent only produced the clinical notes of approximately two-thirds of the
clients from whom he obtained a letter in accordance
with Interim Order 8. Of
the files that were produced one had no record of any consultations having
occurred post 16 February 2012
(the date on which the Interim Orders were put in
place). Of the balance of the clinical records none record when the client was
informed, when the letter was signed by the Respondent nor any reaction that the
client may have had to this information.
Tribunal notes that in his oral evidence the Respondent stated that he waited
until he thought it was
‘an appropriate time’
to inform each
of the clients (see in particular around T53) and that this may have been at the
end of a consultation. When this
issue was further explored with the Respondent
by the Tribunal the Respondent accepted that this process did not fulfil the
obligations
of a psychologist to obtain informed consent as it did not allow the
client to make a decision not to continue with the treatment
from the outset.
The Respondent also accepted that there may have been an issue with how he
suggested to clients that they access
the Reasons for Decision document related
to his complaint. He reported suggesting two options: either they ask at the
of the practice they were attending, or they could look at the
‘NSW Government web site’. He reported that none of his
clients had
indicated to him that they had trouble accessing the material. (T54).
Tribunal also notes at this point the oral evidence of the Respondent that he
had not thought to undertake a search or make further
enquiries as to the
location of the 20 odd missing files from the time they were produced to the
Tribunal to the time the Inquiry
ultimately re-commenced on 15 October 2012. He
advised the Tribunal that at the time he collected the files to answer the
the missing files could have been on another person’s desk for the
purpose of an outstanding account being followed up or may
have been misfiled,
for example, with the files of the physiotherapist working in the same practice.
Despite not being sure where
the files were his evidence was that he believed
that the files were secure, they just could not be located on the day that he
for them (T52).
Respondent was questioned by the Tribunal about his understanding of the
obligations imposed on registered psychologists by the
Code of Ethics (the PsyBA
Code of Ethics) regarding the keeping of client files. The Respondent gave the
following oral evidence
in this regard (T51-2):
A. Well, my understanding is that it's my responsibility in terms to have
them in a secure place. It's my responsibility to put
adequate documentation on
file, notes on file, if the patient requests or the client requests information
from that file, then to
be able to inform them of what's on the file and so I
put that trust in the clinics that I work at.
few days before the commencement of ‘phase two’ the Tribunal called
upon any correspondence between the Council and
the Respondent (or his legal
representative) regarding compliance with the Interim Orders. These documents
were initially provided
to the parties and marked as MFI-1.
the parties had had time to consider these documents there was no objection to
them coming into evidence and they were marked
as Exhibit T-1.
Respondent gave evidence regarding the supervision he had undertaken with Dr
Trapolini. His account of the sessions accords with
the information provided to
the Tribunal by Dr Trapolini. While the evidence of the Respondent on this topic
was traversed on a number
of occasions the Tribunal notes some of the
Respondent’s evidence as follows:
We talked about, as I said the boundaries, and quite significantly what
came out of that for me was and it became very clear in my
what a client meant to me was that I provided a safe place for them and that
anything beyond that in my opinion was not
So even if you asked me can you have a social can you have
social contact with a client or even a former client, I would say no,
my head I have provided that safe place and that's all I can provide to them,
and that's where it stands and I think that
was one of the more important things
to come out of those couple of sessions and since then ethical issues have come
up but they've
mainly come up through case conferencing and we've done some
interesting case conferencing and we've also done some interesting look
at at theory, in particular one of the interests is attachment
theory, which we have we've looked at and applied to cases. So
guess we set up the supervision so that it had a strong base on how you were
going to manage clients, the boundaries that should
exist and then moved into
case and theoretical work to see how you could apply that or how I was applying
that in real life.
Respondent gave the following evidence regarding his discussions with Dr
Trapolini regarding his own mental state and details
his current regimen
Q. At the previous hearing late last year, you gave evidence about your
own psychological state. Did you discuss that issue with
Dr Cappellini?
(as transcribed)
A. Well she was obviously I mean usually the sessions would
start off with being concerned about my own mental health and just how
travelling and even our last session she we did some just
some a little bit of therapy work looking at how I would manage,
last weekend leading up to this. I have explained to my supervisor that I'm a
user of mindfulness techniques and meditation,
which I use regularly, and
continue to use that and have a very strict exercise regime that covers six days
a week, which I have
discussed with my local GP as well. So, yeah, we've
discussed it informally and she's very much aware of the need for me to be able
to cope with, I guess what's going on at the moment.
Respondent gave evidence that he had reduced his work load so that he only saw
four or five patients a day and had more time to
devote to paperwork. He had
reduced his commitments at Liverpool and Bankstown to once per fortnight rather
than once a week. He
also stated he had not taken on any extracurricular
activities that he usually would have done (T29).
respect to his consultations with Mr Sutton the Respondent gave the following
evidence (T17):
Q. What did you see him for?
A. Well, it was in relation to the health plan and managing depression
and I guess managing my overall mental health state.
Q. What treatment did he provide?
A. I think most of it was about there was
reconsolidating what I was already doing and perhaps looking at some different
make some of the exercises, particularly the mindfulness exercises, more
automatic for me. The other thing that we looked at was
some opportunities for
reading, things I could read; like, we looked at reading The Compassionate Mind
by Gilbert, and there was
a few other things that we looked at in terms of just
dealing with relationships in life. So, it was more or less a lot of how would
you problem solve things, a lot of problem solving. But by the time we got to
the third and fourth session, we started to sort of
go a little bit around in
circles, and I felt I wasn't getting a lot out of it. So, I went back to my GP
and we looked at some different
ways that I could some other things
that I could do as well in conjunction with the medication.
in answer to a question from the Tribunal the Respondent stated he had not
informed Mr Sutton of the Tribunal proceedings (T65).
oral evidence the Respondent stated that he had complied with Interim Order 6
and 7. With respect to Interim Order 8 the Respondent
gave evidence that he did
not actually give a copy of the Reasons for Decision document
HCCC v Whyte
to his clients. He explained the process he undertook as follows
Q. What was the process that you put in train, to ensure you complied
with order 8 about informing clients and obtaining their
acknowledgement?
A. At an appropriate time with each with each patient, and I
felt that, you know, that it was a good time to tell them, I explained
that I had something to explain, to tell them about, a finding, from the New
South Wales Psychology Tribunal. I told them
that the findings I was
found, of misconduct, professional misconduct. That a copy of those findings,
the reasons for those findings
were at the front office. They were also
available on the web, and the New South Wales government website and that this
of one of the orders, the interim orders, as the hearing was not
finalised until a later date. At that stage, I wasn't aware of
the date, at
all. Sometime after that, I mean, later on, I was, when we found the date, and
when I have to tell people, no, that's
not a problem. So at that time, I wasn't
really aware of what date the findings were going to be completed and that one
of the requirements
is that I get them to sign this form, which 99% of people
signed, not a problem.
in his oral evidence the Respondent stated that the clients generally signed the
acknowledgment at the end of the session. The
Respondent gave evidence that 99%
of his clients had signed the acknowledgment. However one client had refused to
sign and he thought
he may have mislaid the form signed by another. He later
gave evidence that he had not enquired of each patient if they had located
read the Reasons for Decision document but he felt confident they had ample
opportunity to ask him questions if they had wanted.
Respondent gave the following oral evidence regarding the manner in which the
client clinical note files were gathered in answer
to the Summons
Q. Can I then ask you about the patient records that were produced in
response to the notice to produce. Who physically holds the
records in relation
to your patients?
A. Each clinic.
Q. Who is responsible for maintaining those files?
A. The administrative staff.
Q. When you received the notice to produce, the records for the Tribunal,
what did you do to comply with that direction?
A. I just asked the administrative staff if they could find these
Q. When you say, "these files", what did you ask them, which
A. I gave them a list of the files that would be from that clinic, just
Q. So if it transpires that some files have not been produced, are you
able to assist the Tribunal with some information as to why
they haven't been
A. Well, the administrative staff haven't been able to find them at the
time. I mean, some of the files could have been used in
there would
be a times, a few people, using those files. Maybe for costings, for chasing up
invoices and things of that nature
and on other occasions, some clinics are
better than others, but on other occasions things just get filed in the wrong
Respondent gave evidence that the Continuing Professional Development (CPD) he
had undertaken since February 2012 amounted to
paying for two Australian
Psychological Society (APS) e-courses. He had commenced the course on record
keeping but not yet commenced
the course on care for Indigenous populations
asked about his intentions regarding continuing with supervision with Dr
Trapolini the Respondent gave the following evidence
A. I want to continue it, I thoroughly enjoy it. I guess in hindsight I
kick myself for not pursuing supervision all the way along.
I think it's
absolutely essential and it's helped me so much just on some of the cases that,
you know, we have been able to discuss.
It's been able to focus me on certain
aspects of what I need to look at, been able to set boundaries and be very clear
So I intend to continue it.
Respondent was then asked what his intentions were regarding undertaking a
second hour of supervision per week and he gave the
following evidence
Q. Mr Whyte, you say that it could equally be said that you were
required to have two hours of supervision and you have only had
one. What are
you going to do about the extra hour?
A. I'm still because I have built a good relationship with my
supervisor and it's a good supervision psychologist relationship,
believe so, I still would like to negotiate that with my supervisor because I
think there are possibly some areas that we
could just concentrate on in that
second hour.
Q. If the Tribunal were minded not to deregister you on this occasion and
if the Tribunal reached the view that it was essential
that you now comply with
the direction that you have throughout the supervision, how would you comply
A. I would have to look around. It took me a long time even to find
Dr Trapolini. So I would just have to look around. I think
that I would
go back to my supervisor and say do you have anybody that really
would I could could suit my purposes at this stage.
would be the only thing I could do. I guess I mean would also, you know, like
to be even guided by the council. I think we
made an inquiry at some stage as
to whether they could help us find some supervisors. So, you know, even if some
names could be
put forward in that regard.
Q. I won't ask any questions about that because it's not a matter that's
in evidence but to your knowledge have you received any
names from the council
of prospective supervisors?
A. No. All the searching has really been well, it's been done
by me, assisted by my solicitors to some extent but basically, yeah,
left up to me and it's been a very educative exercise, believe you me.
Respondent provided the following answers to questions from the Tribunal
exploring the reason for his lack of compliance with
the Interim Orders as
follows (T69):
Q. I have one question, Mr Whyte. I noted that in evidence earlier
you said that the one hour sessions that you had with Dr Trapolini
valuable in providing insight. I'm puzzled about why then together with the
mindfulness that you practice, that you were unable
to grasp the imperative of
fulfilling the critical requirements of the interim orders and can you assist us
in understanding why
you did not fully comply with the orders?
A. I think if I had to sum it up, I think just the frustration of getting
one supervisor and going through the process of getting
another supervisor.
What I was envisaging was what my ideal picture was to have that one supervisor
at hand there with Dr Trapolini
so that I could then get total continuity
into what we were trying to achieve. Another supervisor, I didn't have the
sort of two supervisors at the start, so I had to sort of reformulate
and say I have to do this all again, and that means that, you
know, I have to
work out how am I going to have this supervision and then also have this
supervision and not necessarily have things
overlapping. You know, what am I
going to do with this supervisor and what am I going to do with this supervisor,
or what is this
supervisor going to do with me, vice versa. So I'm still, as I
said, you know, if that supervisor presents themselves tomorrow I'm
take that up.
Q. But I'm just wondering why you're worrying about the supervisor,
having the same one. I mean, were you not concerned about the
fact that you
weren't meeting the requirements?
A. Yeah, of course I was concerned. I was concerned, but to get the one
supervisor was mentally draining, just to, you know, find
someone. Even when I
found Dr Trapolini she said to me, you know, "You're quite lucky somebody
took you on, you know". So that
in itself was, okay, that's a
selfesteem from a selfesteem point of view really knocked me around.
You know, I mean
Q. You said that you like sorting things out yourself. You didn't think
that you would seek help from somewhere, from a counsellor
A. I like the supervision. I do. I like the supervision and I'm more
than prepared if I could find a supervisor to have another
Q. But you had a period of time when you had to and there was an
imperative there.
A. I was trying at that stage to get the most I could out of the one hour
that I was, you know, because I
Q. But knowing that that wasn't fulfilling the requirements, though, that
you had to have two hours?
A. Yeah. I knew that and I take full responsibility and acceptance of
that, that I perhaps should have made a bigger effort in being
able to obtain
that extra hour, but at the time, you know, I was really concentrating on
getting the most out of that hour because
that was there and I feared that if I
start to look for another hour, then, you know, or another supervisor, that I'm
going to go
through this whole process again of, you know, not being able to
find someone.
Respondent was taken to the comments made by the Tribunal in paragraph 242 of
HCCC v Whyte (No 1)
regarding his conduct towards Client A being
‘utterly thoughtless, opportunistic and cruel’.
Respondent was asked what he thought of the Tribunal’s comments and he
replied (T27-28):
A. I accept the Tribunal's findings. I accept it from the point of view
that it was a wakeup call for me to change the way that
I practice.
Q. Have you had any thoughts about the effect that the conduct the
subject of this complaint upon Client A herself?
A. Absolutely. I regret. I mean I consider myself to be a compassionate
and caring person. So I would never want to inflict any
harm on anybody or any
discomfort to anybody.
Respondent was asked to comment on another paragraph of the Tribunal’s
Reasons for Decision as follows (T28):
Q. Can I then take you to what the Tribunal said at paragraph 243 of
its reasons and that was this, that:
"Although the conduct of the respondent demonstrates significant flaws that
require remediation, it is not in the Tribunal's view
an irredeemable position,
if he applied himself fully to remediation."
Perhaps pausing there. What do you say you have done to apply yourself
to your own remediation in this case?
A. I think I have adhered to the interim orders as best I can. I have
taken on the supervision, I think, in a responsible and professional
have been the one that in terms of supervision I have taken on the
responsibility of preparation, of materials and anything
that is required for
supervision sessions. I have changed my practice hours. I have changed the way
that I the number of people
that I'm seeing. I have a definite view
of where the boundaries are and quite clearly that I provide a safe place for my
and that's all I provide for them, in terms it was a safe place for
their treatment and services they need. You know, I think that
this process is
ongoing for me. It's not something that you just sit back on your laurels and
say, well, okay, done enough. I think
it's something that once started keeps
going. It's an ongoing evaluation of your own professional integrity.
Respondent was asked about the concerns expressed by the Tribunal in
Whyte (No1)
with respect to his own mental health as follows
Q. The Tribunal also is concerned in paragraphs 20 and 25 of the
reasons that you had suffered from some kind of depression on and
1997. You've already given evidence about your treating doctor, Sira. What is
your intention in relation to continuing
your ongoing treatment for that
A. Well, just the same as my supervisor. I would see that as a very
important part of my practicing is to continue with treatment.
I have a very
strict, and I've discussed this with the doctor in terms of an exercise regime,
I have researched and looked at the
relevant research in terms of exercise and
depression and there's a very strong link in using exercise as a way of
mediating moods
and controlling depression. I've actually brought along a
number of articles if the Tribunal was interested. So my treatment of
depression is a very strict regime. That's six days a week of exercise which
benefits me physically and it benefits me mentally
as well and I've adhered to
that, at least for the last three and a half years, so it is a habit. It's a
definite habit that I follow.
I get all sorts of comments from people around me
saying how disciplined I am and sometimes how crazy I am, but believe you me,
the exercise is my lifesaver. Even getting through these last, you know,
12 months or so, exercise has been the lifesaver.
T 32-33 the Respondent gave the following evidence regarding his compliance with
conditions on registration (note: the transcript
has been corrected by the
Q. You accept, don't you, that you haven't met the requirement for two
hours with Dr
A. I accept that, yes.
Q. One of the comments or observations that the Tribunal made in its
reasons at paragraph 247 that if the Tribunal formed the view
that in lieu
of (losing) your registration you were subject to conditions, that the
supervision provision would need to be extremely
stringent, intense and
structured. Would you say that your supervision has been stringent, intense and
structured with Dr
A. I would say so. Given that we don't have any major guidelines to
that, but I have every confidence in her as a supervisor and
her curriculum
vitae and her experience. Everything that we've done we've done in a very
structured way. After every session we
have made plans for the next session so
we know what we're going on to. The responsibility is with me. I don't expect
the responsibility
to be with my supervisor unless she offers help in organising
the next session, so that might be okay, I've got some documents or
some readings that might be of interest to you or so on and so on, but I've
taken on the responsibility of providing the
information we need. So when we
looked at ethics it was myself that went and got the Code of Ethics from the APS
website, went through
it and we started to look at it in a very structured and,
I think, applied way. We applied it to the findings. We also applied
I was working my practice at the time.
Cross-examination
of the Respondent commenced with exploration of the Respondent’s
understanding of the Tribunal’s Reasons
for Decision document and the
importance of complying with the Interim Orders.
Considerable
cross-examination focused on the Respondent’s failure to comply with the
Interim Order requiring the Respondent
to engage in two-hour weekly supervision.
The following evidence was given by the Respondent (T 39):
Q. You also understand that during a reasonably recent directions hearing
in June this year, 28 June, the Tribunal noted: if the
respondent has not
complied with the interim orders, the Tribunal foreshadows that it was likely
that the Tribunal will make an order
that he no longer be permitted to provide
treatment to clients. Were you aware of that?
A. I was aware of that.
Q. Being aware of that, you still were not able to get another hour a
week of supervision?
A. Well, as I said, if somebody presented the hour or I was able to get
that hour, I would have taken that hour up. At that time,
I was doing the hour
with Dr Trapolini and that hour was most valuable to me: it was most
valuable to me in terms of changing the
way that I practise; it was most
valuable to me in terms of understanding the impact I had on the particular
complainant which I
had to sort of process for myself which made took
some time of soul searching and insight into being able to understand the
implications
for me, and I believe the hour with Dr Trapolini although I
fully accept I didn't comply with the two hours, the hour was most valuable
gaining that insight.
Respondent gave the following evidence regarding his remorse for his conduct
Q. Going back to the subject matter of this Tribunal, can I just ask you
now how do you view your conduct with Client A?
A. I'm totally remorseful of it. I mean, as I've mentioned before, I'm a
compassionate and caring person. I don't want to inflict
any sort of distress
on anybody, and, as I said before, that's part of the process that I've had to
go through in all of us is understanding,
you know, well, if I'm going to take
up the responsibility of being a psychologist, I have to understand these
issues, I have to
be able to understand that, you know, I've had an impact, a
negative impact on this person and caused this person some sort of an
distress, and, you know, that it's all over me because that's just
not me, and I don't, you know I think even from the
references that
you've got from certain people would see that's totally out of character for
answer to questions from the Tribunal the Respondent gave the following evidence
regarding the insight he had gained as a result
of engaging in supervision
regarding professional boundaries (T55):
Q. .... You mentioned that in your supervision that you've been very
interested in the ideas from attachment theory about the safe
base and that this
could be a way of considering the therapy relationship?
A. I think it's a very from the conceptual point of view it's
something that I relate to I can relate to. I can put that in place
very clearly that as soon as somebody walked into my door and they're in my care
that, you know, I'm providing a safe base for them
to have this service. It
also, you know, it gives me a greater insight into the therapeutic benefit of
them being there just not
necessarily the, you know the strategies that we use
and all that but just the fact that they're there and they can, you know, be
able to talk about things that perhaps otherwise they haven't been able to talk
Q. So do you, from having realised this now and you know found those
ideas helpful did you reflect more on why you didn't think of
therapy as a safe
base from the beginning of your practice, why you felt that you could understand
it as a safe base now when you
couldn't before it seems like this was
a new idea you're suggesting you got?
A. It's a new I guess it's a new concept it's a
different way of looking at it and a more useful way of looking at it from my
perspective
and that's where I you know, now see the supervision as
invaluable in that respect, you know, because it's given me some insight
into you know I always knew that, you know people came in, and they,
you know they trusted you with their confidentiality and all
that but this has
given me I guess a way of understanding, you know, why we don't go out and
socially make contact with our clients
and all that sort of stuff. It's given
me a definite reason for those boundaries which I now sort of respect and
understand and
each time I see somebody I'm sort of reinforcing that to
the end of his oral evidence the Respondent answered the following questions
Order requiring two hours of
supervision per week (T124):
Q. Did you see that it was a serious problem before yesterday?
A. It was an ongoing problem for me but I think as my supervisor
indicated, and I think this is an issue that I have to address through
health is that a lot of anxiety takes over and and I can sometimes
avoid things, and I think that's what my supervisor
was talking about, some
resistance.
Q. So do you see that your failure to comply comes about, at least in
part, because of personal anxiety that you have?
A. I think it does and I think I need to address that issue.
Q. So in fact your mental health, now looking back, was not being
adequately dealt with by your six day a week exercise and your
attending your
GP, is that right?
A. Well I think the anxiety, a lot of it was specific to this process.
That the six day a week exercise was invaluable in that I
can't attend, you
know, I can't avail myself of counselling at 7 o'clock at night whereas I
can do that and I believe that from
counselling, you know, that's one
of the strategies that I would use anyway.
Q. What do you mean by that?
A. The exercise would be one of the main strategies that I would use to
manage, you know, my anxiety and depression.
Q. You said though that you had a unique opportunity to demonstrate your
suitability to stay on the register that between February
and now, by strictly
complying with the conditions set by or the orders made by this
A. I do see that.
Q. Do you see that you are in a serious position because of failure to
A. I do that yes, I am in a serious position and you know, if
I was to be given a second chance, I would like to rectify that
re-examination the Respondent gave the following evidence
Q. Mr Whyte, as I understand, you were asked some questions shortly
before the luncheon adjournment, the difficulty you recall question
of you not complying with the orders. I wanted to return to that. You say that
you think you had issues with anxiety and depression.
Can I ask you to explain
to the Tribunal the insight that you have now, at least when it was that you
find this insight.
A. To the Tribunal, I think it's an insight that I've had over these last
couple of days in that I lacked the objectivity to be able
to assess myself,
that anxiety over the three years that this had been going on, I think the
anxiety kicked in and there was some
avoidance behaviour. I need to address
that with my supervisor and my GP, and I believe that if the Tribunal was to
give me a second
chance, I would take up any conditions that they impose on me
and I would address those issues for myself with my supervisor and
lengthy professional reference dated 12 October 2012 was provided by the
Respondent from Dr Joseph Nicholas (Exhibit R1-K). Dr Nicholas
is a general
practitioner working as a clinician, an educator and
‘chairman of a
health organisation’
. Dr Nicholas stated he had referred many patients
to the Respondent and had found that there were some excellent outcomes as a
of the Respondent’s treatment especially in adolescents and
patient’s suffering depression. Dr Nicholas reports that
the Respondent
had delivered educational seminars with him to GPs and other allied health
providers and there had been positive feedback
from the attendees. Dr Nicholas
reports that he had not received any complaints regarding the Respondent in his
role within the Australian
Medical Co-operative Limited (AMCL) network. Further,
he had found the Respondent to be punctual, willing to see patients (with
not being a barrier), very reliable, dependable and honest as a
contractor to AMCL. Dr Nicholas concludes his report as
For me Mr. Whyte has always impressed as a highly professional, well
trained, and experienced psychologist. He is acutely aware of
his duty of care
to his patients. His role in the team care arrangements with Doctors,
Rehabilitation consultants, and other allied
health providers has always been
carried out ethically and with due consideration of patient confidentiality. He
displays an outstanding
character and I unreservedly will continue to refer
patients and support his contractual role in AMCL.
owner of Parramatta Allied Health, Mr Michael Shilson-Josling provided a
reference dated 1 May 2012. Mr Shilson-Josling is a registered
physiotherapist
who has worked with the Respondent since purchasing Parramatta Allied Health in
2004. He states he has found the
Respondent to have an excellent rapport with
patients based on feedback from patients and local GPs. He considered that the
was an integral part of the allied health professional team at
Parramatta Allied Health. The Respondent had provided Mr Shilson-Josling
copy of the Tribunal’s findings. He stated he had found over the years
that the Respondent had a ‘general outstanding
character’ and that
he was happy to continue to have the Respondent working in his
reference provided by the Respondent to the Tribunal came from Mr Glen Wambeek,
the Chairman/CEO of a construction company.
The reference dated 30 May 2012 is
addressed ‘To Whom it May Concern’. The reference states that Mr
Wambeek had known
the Respondent for a period of two years and had found him
a quiet and precise individual’
who had helped
him in his personal and business life. The reference continues:
I was absolutely stunned, surprised and flabbergasted to hear the findings
from the New South Wales Psychology Tribunal. I’m
absolutely shocked to
know that the Tribunal would take such an action against a person as Stephen,
who is such a professional.
included in the bundle of references provided to the Tribunal by the Respondent
(Exhibit R1-H) are a number of references from
current clients of the
Respondent. One of these references includes the comment:
I have been asked to provide a reference in support of Stephen who I am
aware is appearing before the New South Wales Psychology Tribunal.
of the references are addressed to the Tribunal and others to the
Respondent’s legal representative. These references speak
in positive
terms regarding the Respondent and the treatment he has been providing to them.
One client indicated she had been receiving
treatment from the Respondent for a
period of four years and was happy to continue receiving therapy from him.
Another had been receiving
treatment from the Respondent since 2004 and had
found the Respondent to be
‘compassionate’
and to have
‘listened attentively to his problems’
. Yet another client
had commenced receiving treatment from the Respondent in late 2003 and had found
the Respondent had
‘provided professional and helpful
for the past eight and a half years.
Considerations relevant to Orders
Tribunal exercises a protective jurisdiction. Having made a finding of
professional misconduct the Tribunal considers what orders
should flow therefrom
in the circumstances of the particular matter. Cancellation of registration is
not an inevitable outcome. In
this particular matter the Respondent has been in
a somewhat unique position of having had the benefit of the extensive findings
of the Tribunal as set out in
HCCC v Whyte (No 1)
as a comprehensive set of Interim Orders as set out in
HCCC v Whyte (No 2)
and a period of approximately eight months to demonstrate,
by his conduct, that he was able to comply with conditions on registration
had taken steps towards remediation.
is of deep concern that the Respondent did not fully comply with the Interim
Orders made on 16 February 2012. Even taking into
account the advice that was
given to the Respondent by his legal representative regarding Order 4, the
Tribunal is of the view that
as a treating practitioner himself under the Better
Access Program there should have been little confusion on his own behalf about
the interpretation of this Order. The Respondent’s compliance with Interim
Order 3 was only partial and well outside the required
time frame. While comment
could be made about the 21 days set by the Tribunal to put in place supervision,
the Tribunal relied upon
the content of communication from the
Respondent’s legal adviser which suggested that certain arrangements were
place (i.e. that there were arrangements in place to contact Dr
is the Tribunal’s view that the steps taken by the Respondent to comply
with the condition on registration to undertake two
hours of supervision per
week fell significantly short of being adequate. In preparation for the making
of the Interim Orders the
Respondent was invited to address certain issues. When
providing this information (letter from Respondent’s legal representative
dated 9 February 2012 – Exhibit R1 – N) the indication given to the
Tribunal regarding Dr Lennings read as follows:
Mr Whyte will contact professional colleague
[work colleague]
(clinical psychologist) and Dr Chris Lennings, in the week commencing 13
February 2012, with a view to putting in place peer supervision
arrangements.
is further noted that the Interim Orders made by the Tribunal clearly indicated
that the work colleague nominated in this letter
was not an acceptable
supervisor. Not only had she been a colleague of the Respondent, she had had
previous contact with Client A
and information regarding this interaction had
formed part of the evidence before the Tribunal. The Tribunal also had no
information
that would suggest that the work colleague was of an equivalent
standing to Dr Lennings.
evidence before the Tribunal suggests that it was actually not until around 21
February 2012 that the Respondent rang Dr Lenning’s
office and received
advice to make email contact with him. The Respondent stated that this email was
sent on 21 February 2012. The
Tribunal received a copy of a 24 February 2012
email sent by the Respondent to Dr Lennings which appears to be initiating
regarding supervision. Unfortunately this email did not reach Dr
Lennings for some time and was only discovered by Dr Lennings when
the ‘junk mail’ section of his email on 15 March 2012.
was nothing in the evidence before the Tribunal that indicates that the
Respondent had made any prior arrangement with Dr Lennings
before the letter of
9 February 2012 to the Tribunal nor was there follow up contact with Dr Lennings
after the 24 February 2012
email. The Tribunal received a letter dated 7 March
2012 from the Respondent’s legal representative advising of the difficulty
in contacting Dr Lennings and that an appointment had been made with the work
colleague so that supervision could commence while
also noting that the Tribunal
had indicated it did not approve the work colleague as a supervisor.
Tribunal finds it difficult to see any merit in making arrangements for
supervision with a person who clearly did not satisfy
the Interim Order
particularly after the Tribunal had specifically indicated it would not approve
of this person as a supervisor.
evidence given by the Respondent regarding the manner in which he went about the
task of securing supervision can only be described
as naïve in the extreme
and, for a registered psychologist with the experience of the Respondent lacking
in judgment and volition.
There is an expectation that all registered
psychologists will engage in some type of peer supervision. The nature of that
supervision
will very much depend upon the type of practice. The Respondent did
not make any contact with organisations such as the APS, universities
Council in his attempts to secure the services of a supervisor.
the Respondent did engage the services of an appropriate supervisor but was
still not able to comply with the Interim Order.
The Tribunal notes the evidence
of Dr Trapolini that the Respondent had made good progress. It was disappointing
that the Respondent
had not shown the Interim Orders to Dr Trapolini. It is
disappointing that the Respondent did not take the opportunity for supervision
with another practitioner due to the location being in the city. It is
disappointing that the Respondent did not pursue orthodox
methods of obtaining
further supervision.
Tribunal also notes that the Respondent also did not take the opportunity to
engage in Peer Group Supervision which had been offered
by Dr Trapolini which
may have been a source of supervision suitable to satisfy the requirements of
the Interim Orders or finding
another suitable supervisor.
there would be financial implications involved in both meeting the costs of the
supervision and clearing the time to attend
same in the particular circumstances
of the Respondent. However, the evidence given by the Respondent indicated to
the Tribunal that
he did not appreciate how imperative it was for him to comply
with the Interim Orders and the likely consequences of not so doing.
remained the situation despite the two ‘reminders’ that were
provided by the Tribunal in the June and July Directions
hearings as well as the
‘reminders’ provided by the Council in correspondence to the
Respondent.
this regard the Tribunal notes the Respondent’s attitude regarding
undertaking the supervision recommended by the READ Clinic
[see paragraph 83 of
HCCC v Whyte (No 1)
The Respondent gave evidence under
cross-examination that he considered the arrangement was an informal arrangement
and it had not
continued past a few sessions due to the time constraints of Dr
Ashley Craig (T43). The Tribunal sees the Respondent’s failure
undertake supervision in accordance with the Interim Orders in the context of
the evidence of the Respondent that he had found
supervision with Dr Craig to be
very ‘informative’.
noted in paragraph 130 of
HCCC v Whyte (No 1)
the Respondent had informed
the READ clinic that he had been able to obtain supervision
number of sources’
which was explained in oral evidence by the
Respondent to have been the couples counselling he had received with his wife
view of the Tribunal, either an example of a lack of candour on the
part of the Respondent or a total lack of understanding of what
constitutes
supervision.
Tribunal notes the evidence before the Tribunal in ‘phase one’ that
the Respondent had informed Ms Irvine-Rundle on
6 August 2009 [see paragraph 83
HCCC v Whyte (No 1)
that he acknowledged the need to
take care of his own physical and mental health. The Respondent also gave oral
evidence to this
effect. It is difficult to understand in this context why the
Respondent took it upon himself to cease treatment with Mr Sutton after
four sessions of the initial six sessions planned by Dr Sira. This decision of
the Respondent is made even more difficult to
understand when it occurred within
the context of there being Interim Orders in place and when the Respondent had
had the benefit
of reading the Reasons for Decision document published by the
Tribunal wherein various concerns were set out in detail.
asked by the Tribunal about his difficulty accessing supervision and
satisfactory psychological care the Respondent gave the
following evidence
Q. Well, you know, it's just that being in the field, I'm just surprised
that you feel so unsure where to look for supervision or
A. I guess it comes down to I have a belief in myself that what I was
doing was quite beneficial to me at the time and that I looked
at the research
into exercise, and it dates back to 1986 where it can be beneficial for me. So,
that combined with what I already
knew, I felt, was enough at the time. That
was my own personal evaluation. I thought, you know, I'm travelling pretty
well, considering.
You know, I could continue I would have to take
this issue up with my doctor again and discuss it with him because there are
some physical issues that benefit in terms of the exercise as well and
that's the hypertension and the hypertension and also there
was a period there
where I had elevated sugar levels. So, I can understand the doctor being quite
concerned about those situations,
my physical health. Although, again, I was
pretty confident that I could control that as well.
Tribunal is reinforced in its view that the Respondent lacked insight into the
importance of complying with the Interim Orders
as illustrated during the
cross-examination of the Respondent (T34-36) and is concerned about his
continued failure to fully comprehend
the import of the Tribunal’s
findings. The Tribunal indicated in clear terms that the Interim Orders were to
be strictly complied
with and also indicated to the Respondent that it did not
consider that the Respondent was in an irredeemable position. It is the
Respondent’s subsequent conduct that has placed him in a position where
the Tribunal is not satisfied that he would comply
with any final orders in any
more diligent fashion than he did with the Interim Orders. The Tribunal also
notes other unsatisfactory
aspects of the Respondent’s conduct such as
unilaterally deciding to discontinue with the treatment from Mr Sutton and his
continuing lack of candour (e.g. the 1 May statement indicates that the
Respondent had commenced studying in accordance with the
letter of offer from
the UNE, however, in evidence on 15 October 2012 he stated he had not actually
enrolled in the course and therefore
had not actually commenced studying).
Tribunal has also had regard to the Respondent’s evidence regarding the
manner in which he went about securing supervision
to comply with the Interim
Order. In particular the evidence given by the Tribunal in cross-examination is
illuminating (see in particular
around T44-45). The Respondent did not
demonstrate a level of knowledge expected of a registered psychologist when
undertaking this
process. Rather, his conduct demonstrates a continued avoidance
and denial of an issue that was essential to practising within the
conditions on
his registration. The Respondent’s complacency in being in a position
where he was practicing while in breach
of an Interim Order is difficult to
understand or reconcile with the level of professionalism required of a
registered psychologist.
The Tribunal was not provided with clear reasons for
the Respondent’s conduct (actions and omissions) in this regard and
speculation
as to whether this resulted from a fundamental lack of appreciation
for matters such as the importance of supervision or the role
Respondent’s current medication regimen and health issues is well outside
this Tribunal’s remit.
Respondent gave evidence that when he was unable to secure supervision he spoke
to the principals of two of the practices in which
he worked and decided not to
take on any new clients until he was able to obtain supervision. By taking this
action the Respondent
showed some modicum of insight.
Tribunal accepts the submission made by the HCCC that the Respondent continued
to provide evidence that was given in general terms
and lacked frankness. The
evasiveness, self-justification and implausibility of his evidence also
before the Tribunal indicates that the Respondent is a person who has been
diagnosed as suffering from anxiety and depression
and this is a matter that
would have to be considered should the Respondent apply for re-registration.
breaching of the Interim Orders of the Tribunal is a serious matter in the
nature of unsatisfactory professional conduct. Orders
of a Tribunal are not mere
guidelines or suggestions or prescribing some optimal position, they are to be
strictly complied with.
The Orders made herein should act as a deterrent for any
practitioner considering not complying with conditions placed upon their
registration.
Tribunal accepts the HCCC submission that the Respondent’s
attitude towards complying with the Interim Orders
was exemplified by the manner in which he evidenced his compliance with Interim
Order 5. The letter produced to the Tribunal (Exhibit R1-M) addressed to Dr Sira
dated 4 April 2012 failed to comply with the Interim
Order as it did not attach
a full copy of the Reasons for Decision document or an Internet address where it
could be easily found.
The Respondent’s evidence was that he was not even
sure that Dr Sira had received the letter; rather he was ‘hoping’
that he had due to there being another patient in the practice with the same
name. The Tribunal accepts the HCCC submission that
this is illustrative of the
casual and irresponsible attitude displayed by the Respondent.
Tribunal has not been satisfied that the Respondent has sufficient insight into
his conduct let alone evidence of significant
changes in his practice which
would have allowed the Tribunal to repose trust that the Respondent could
practice safely with rigorous
conditions on his registration.
Tribunal also accepts the submission of the HCCC that it could not repose trust
in the Respondent that he would comply with conditions
on his registration.
Tribunal notes that both parties agreed as to the general legal principles to be
applied in this jurisdiction as summarised by
the HCCC in a written outline of
submissions handed up to the Tribunal on 16 October 2012.
the lack of insight into the seriousness of the issues before the Tribunal
demonstrated by the Respondent, his failure to comply
with the GP Mental Health
Care Plan and the deficits in the Respondent’s practice identified by the
Tribunal it is the view
of the Tribunal that any application to review the Order
cancelling the Respondent’s registration should be made before a Tribunal.
It is likely that a comprehensive report dealing with the steps taken by the
Respondent with respect to taking care of his health,
in particular his anxiety
and depression, will form part of the material that the Respondent will place
before such a Tribunal.
Final Orders made on 16 October
Having made a finding of professional misconduct (see
HCCC v Whyte (No 1)
, and having conducted ‘phase
two’ of the Inquiry, the Tribunal Ordered on 16 October 2012 (Stephen
Whyte being referred
to as the Practitioner herein):
Practitioners Registration is cancelled from 5pm on 23 November 2012.
is a condition on the Respondent’s Registration from 16 October 2012 to
5pm on 23 November 2012 (being the time on which
the Respondent’s
registration will be cancelled) that the Respondent is only to see each of his
current clients/patients on
a maximum of two occasions for the purpose of
terminating the therapeutic relationship, reporting to the referring
practitioner and
referring the clients/patients on as appropriate.
the Practitioner is prohibited from providing the following health service as
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
until he is registered as a psychologist:
(ii) counselling
(iii) psychotherapy
(iv) hypnotherapy
(v) welfare services (as defined in
Health Care
Complaints Act 1993
(vi) any other mental health service and/
(vii) and/ or
(viii) any other alternative/healing health care/therapies.
Practitioner is not entitled to apply for review of the Order cancelling his
registration or the Prohibition Order until 18 months
after the date of the
HCCC v Whyte (No 3)
Practitioner is to pay the costs of the HCCC as agreed or assessed by the
Tribunal. If agreement cannot be reached the parties
have leave to relist the
matter for the Tribunal to make an assessment of the
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for
Decision document is to be forwarded by the Registry to:
Respondent and his legal representative,
2) The HCCC,
3) The Psychology
Council of New South Wales,
4) The Psychology Board of Australia,
READ Clinic,
7) The Australian Psychological Society,
7) as the Council
and Board see fit.
Dated: 8 November 2012
___________________
___________________
___________________
___________________
Jacqueline Milne
Annexure A:
Documents in evidence – ‘Phase Two’
Annexure B: Schedule of
suppressed names
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION
DOCUMENTS IN ‘PHASE TWO’
C1 Box of Client Files produced under summons by the
R1 Statement of the Respondent
dated 1 May 2012
R1-A Letters from various principals of practices in which the Respondent
consulted clients
R1-B Letter from the Respondent’s legal
representative dated 7.3.2012
R1-C Emails correspondence between the
Respondent and Dr Lennings
R1-D GP Mental Health Care Plan prepared for the Respondent by Dr Sira dated
R1-E Authority and Direction from the Respondent to Dr Sira
R1-F Acknowledgments from clients that they had been supplied with a copy of
the ‘Tribunals Findings’ and that they had
been advised that they
could be referred to another ‘treating specialist’
R1-G Letter dated 10 February 2012 from the University of New England
advising that the Respondent had been offered a place in the
Certificate of Mental Health Practice commencing on 13 February 2013.
R1-H Bundle of references
R1-I (a) Report from Dr Trapolini dated 30 July 2012
(b)Report from Dr Trapolini dated 18 September 2012
R1-J Letter from Dr Sira dated 10 July 2012
R1-K ‘To Whom it May Concern’ reference from Dr Joseph
R1-L Email correspondence from Mind Profile Psychology Clinic to the
Respondent dated 19.5.12
R1-M Letter from the Respondent addressed to Dr Sira dated 4 April 2012
R1-N Letter from the Respondent’s legal representative to the Tribunal
dated 9 February 2012
R1-O Letter from Dr Trapolini to the Respondent’s legal adviser dated
T-1 Bundle of documents produced by the Council re correspondence with
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (612 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter