URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Metz v Joseph Frederick Gordon Smith t/as Ashmont Electronics [2003] NSWCC 20 (1 August 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Metz v Joseph Frederick
Gordon Smith t/as Ashmont Electronics [2003] NSWCC 20
Michelle L Metz
Joseph Frederick Gordon Smith t/as Ashmont
Electronics
CASE NUMBER: 52516 of 1999 of
CATCH WORDS:
LEGISLATION CITED:
CORAM: Neilson J
DATES OF HEARING: 04/11/02, 29/07/03,
EX TEMPORE DATE: 01/08/2003
REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT:
Mr E Pike instructed by Gain Kent McRae
appeared for the applicant.
FOR RESPONDENT:
Mr J A D Roberts instructed by
Vadanega Roberts appeared for the respondent.
1. This is an application by the respondent concerning costs. To understand
the nature of the application, it is necessary to briefly
consider the history
of this matter. Proceedings were commenced by an application for determination
filed on 22 March 2000. In
that application the applicant, Michelle Louise Metz
of Wagga Wagga, relied on an event which is alleged to have occurred to her
the course of her employment with the respondent on 20 April 1999. Weekly
payments of compensation were claimed from that date
for either total or partial
incapacity as well as her expenses under
Workers’ Compensation
. An amended application for determination was received by the Court on
31 May 2002 and passed under the seal of the Court on 18
June 2002. That added
unspecified claims under
and s 67. A further amended application for
determination was filed on 30 October 2002. That maintained the claim for
weekly payments
of compensation and specified claims under
for 90 per cent
loss of efficient use of the right leg at or above the knee and 50 per cent
impairment of the back and claimed half
of the total amount payable for pain and
suffering, anxiety and distress pursuant to s 67. It was upon that further
amended application
for determination that I granted the applicant leave to
proceed at Tumut on 4 November 2002.
2. The matter has not had a happy, curial history. The applicant had
requested that the matter be heard at Wagga Wagga. The matter
was first called
over by his Honour, Judge Armitage on 13 February 2001. The matter was then
stood to the bottom of the Wagga Wagga
Pending List, his Honour noting that the
applicant’s condition had not yet stabilised and that the applicant failed
upon the respondent’s medical examinations. The matter was
again called over by her Honour, Judge Ashford on 15 June 2001.
When her Honour
noted the applicant was not ready, the matter was again stood over to the bottom
of the Pending List at Wagga Wagga.
The matter was again called over by her
Honour, Judge Quirk on 25 September 2001. Again the applicant was not ready.
was told that the applicant’s condition had not stabilised. On
that occasion the respondent sought to have the matter struck
out for want of
prosecution but her Honour refused the respondent’s application. Her
Honour stood the matter to the bottom
of the Pending List at Wagga Wagga and
reserved the question of the applicant’s costs.
3. The matter was again called over by his Honour, Judge Bishop on 11
February 2002. The matter was not ready. His Honour ordered
that the matter be
stood over for mention to 13 May 2002 for directions as to listing. The
applicant was ordered to file and serve
an affidavit of readiness seven days
prior to 13 May 2002. On 13 May 2002 the matter was listed before the Registrar
but there is
no appearance by either party. The matter was again mentioned
before the Registrar on the following day, 14 May 2000, when there
appearance by the applicant. The Registrar stood the matter over for mention
to 21 May and directed the respondent to notify
the applicant of the order made
on that day. Costs were reserved.
4. On 21 May 2002 the matter came before Assistant Registrar Cox. She
ordered an affidavit concerning the applicant’s readiness
for hearing to
be filed and served by 28 July 2002 and confirmed a call-over on 3 June 2002.
On 3 June 2002 the matter came for
further call-over before her Honour, Judge
Quirk. Her Honour noted the respondent was not ready to meet a lump sum claim
been intimated to the respondent during the week before the call-over.
The respondent had accordingly no medical evidence concerning
the claims under
and s 67. Her Honour stood the matter to the top of the Pending List at
Wagga Wagga.
5. The matter was called over before me on 24 September 2002. I was told
that the matter was ready to proceed, that the applicant
would call the
applicant in her case and tender reports, that the respondent had two or three
lay witnesses and wished to tender
medical reports and the case would take one
day. I set the matter down for hearing at Tumut on Monday 4 November 2002. It
the applicant agreed to accept short service of a medical report. The
applicant was ordered to file and serve a wages schedule within
Furthermore, the applicant was ordered to file and serve a second amended
application for determination within 14 days,
that clearly being the application
for determination filed on 30 October 2002, outside the 14 days. It is to be
further noted that
the applicant ought to have filed a wages schedule prior to
the call-over. In other words, because the matter was said to be ready,
orders to ensure the matter could be ready for hearing at Tumut on 4 November
6. At Tumut on 4 November 2002 Mr Pike of counsel appeared for the applicant
and Mr Roberts appeared for the respondent. The applicant
again applied for an
adjournment. I was concerned that the matter ought be heard and determined as
quickly as possible considering
the unfortunate curial history of the matter and
bearing in mind the fact that this Court will cease to exist on 1 January 2004.
The applicant’s evidence-in-chief was taken and I stood the matter over
for mention before me in Sydney on 29 November 2002
to fix further hearing
dates. At the end of the applicant’s evidence-in-chief the estimate of
the parties was that the case
would take a further two days. On 29 November
2002 I set the matter down for hearing before me here in Sydney on 29 and 30
7. On 29 July 2003 the applicant gave further evidence-in-chief and was
cross-examined and re-examined. At the end of the day I was
told that there was
one further witness to be called in the applicant’s case. The matter was
stood over for further hearing
on 30 July 2003 in accordance with the direction
I made on 29 November 2002. It should be further noted that on 29 July 2003 the
applicant made yet another application for an adjournment. The applicant had
sustained an injury in July of this year which would
appear on the medical
evidence tendered on the adjournment application to have been subluxation of her
left patella. Medical evidence
suggested that this was not a primary injury,
that is, it was not caused by the event of 20 April 1999, but it was suggested
it might be secondary to a condition caused by the event of 20 April 1999.
Again considering the two days that had been set aside
and considering the fact
that the condition of the applicant’s left knee had not yet stabilised, I
declined the adjournment
at that time on the basis that the left knee condition
could be considered after the bulk of the applicant’s case had been
determined, as injury was very much in issue and nexus was very much in issue
and the nature of the applicant’s incapacity,
whether it be organic or
psychiatric, was hotly in issue.
8. The applicant’s left knee condition might ground a further claim
, but, as I said, that was not stable, the applicant had only recently
had surgery to her left knee and had to be removed from hospital
in order to
come to Sydney for the hearing of her case, and she was yet confined to a wheel
chair because of the surgery to her left
9. On the morning of 30 July 2003 the respondent had caused Dr Hassel, a
specialist physician, to be present at Court in order that
he be called to give
evidence. Before Mr Roberts called him, he wished to ask the applicant some
further questions in cross-examination
to which no objection was taken. The
applicant was then briefly further cross-examined. Mr Pike of counsel, who
appeared for the
applicant throughout, then asked for an adjournment for a half
hour concerning a
“development in the case”.
That is the
usual euphemism for there being some settlement negotiations. I was asked to
read the medical reports and the applicant
tendered medical reports which were
marked Exhibits ‘B’ to ‘E’ and the respondent also
tendered medical reports
which were marked Exhibits ‘4’ to
‘10’. Records of the Wagga Base Hospital were also tendered and
marked Exhibit ‘F’. I then adjourned to chambers to read
the medical evidence.
10. When I returned to the Bench Mr Pike advised me that in the meantime his
client had filed an election with the Workers’
Compensation Commission and
that this Court was no longer seized of jurisdiction to continue hearing and to
determine the applicant’s
claim. Whether an election has been filed or
not, I am completely in the hands of counsel for the applicant who advised me
an election had been filed. I have received no notice from the
Workers’ Compensation Commission that an election has been
filed with it
as required by reg 93A(5). However, the respondent accepts that such a document
has been filed with the Workers’
Compensation Commission. Mr Roberts then
sought costs against the applicant and the matter was stood over for argument
today, Friday
1 August, in order for him to advance those arguments.
11. Mr Roberts advanced those arguments this morning. Mr Pike did not appear
for the applicant this morning. He advised me that
his instructions had been
withdrawn, but he sought leave to assist the Court
amicus curiae
leave was granted. The costs orders sought by the respondent are
1. That the costs incurred when the applicant’s claim was a
“existing claim”
be not payable by the respondent.
the costs incurred by the respondent on 30 July 2003 be payable by the
12. Mr Pike’s submission is that this Court has no power to make any
costs order at all. He relies on reg 93A(2) which provides
that on receipt by
the Commission of an election, the claim is to be treated as a new claim for the
purposes of the Workers’
Compensation Acts. He points out that under sub
reg (4) this Court does not have any jurisdiction or power to refuse to accept
election made under reg 93A. Mr Pike submits that the Court’s only
in reg 93B and in
particular in the four paragraphs numbered (a) to (d) of that regulation.
13. The first question before I consider, if necessary, the merits of the
respondent’s application is whether the Court has
order for costs. The first thing to note is that subject to the privative
clause preventing the Court ordering
costs against a worker unless the
application, or part thereof, was frivolous, vexatious, without proper
justification or fraudulent,
the Court has general power to order costs. A
power to order costs exists even if a Court is without jurisdiction to grant the
sought. For example, this Court does not have jurisdiction to entertain
any claim for damages. If a claim for damages was filed
in this Court the
respondent would be entitled to have the claim stayed, struck out or dismissed.
Subject to the privative clause,
the respondent could seek costs against the
party following a claim of that nature in this Court. Proceedings might be
which might ultimately be found to be an abuse of process. Even if
the Court stayed such proceedings, struck them out, or otherwise
dismissed them,
the Court would still have power to make a costs order against the moving party
whose application was held to be
without proper justification. When a party
discontinues proceedings any party who did not consent to the discontinuance can
an order for costs. That is specifically provided for in
rules of this Court.
14. That rule was considered in
Amco Wrangler v Sukkar
(1985) 1 NSWLR
It was not at all suggested that the rule was ultra vires. This Court is
a court of record, but it is not a superior court of
record. Inferior courts do
not have inherent powers but they have implied powers. (See
FAI Insurances
Limited v The Registrar of the Workers’ Compensation Commission of New
South Wales
[1982] 1 NSWLR 239.
It should be noted by the legally
uninitiated that that Workers’ Compensation Commission was the original
Compensation Commission which was a court of record and the
judicial side of which was made into this Court pursuant to the
Compensation
Court Act 1984
15. Subject to the statutory provision, the implied powers in an inferior
court include the following:
1. devise procedures to ensure the proper determination of issues before it;
2. control the practice, procedure and conduct in court;
3. deal with proceedings as an abusive process;
4. remedy a denial of natural justice; and
5. give effect to an autrefois defence.
See Halsbury’s Laws of Australia vol 8 par 125-110 at p 236,094.
16. The authority that an inferior court has power to deal with proceedings
as an abuse of process is contained in
Miller v Ryan
[1980] 1 NSWLR 93
which concerned the powers of the magistrate’s Court. In my view there
can be little doubt that if, for example, an issue
of injury was hotly contested
and an applicant deposed to an injury occurring in a certain way, at a certain
place, at a certain
time and a large number of other witnesses came forward, who
were present at that place and at that time, and deposed to the fact
injury did not occur, where it was patently clear that the case would be
determined adversely to the applicant, where it
may have become patently clear
that a finding of fraud might be made and an order for costs made against an
applicant, when an applicant
discontinued proceedings, a costs order might be
made against him with a finding that the claim made was fraudulent. One can
a discontinuance occurring, for example, after the evidence had been
completed but before counsel’s addresses had been heard
and before the
Court had proceeded to give judgment.
17. The question here, of course, is whether, assuming the same thing
happened but rather than discontinuing proceedings, a worker
elected to have his
matter transferred to the Workers’ Compensation Commission, the Court
would be deprived of making the
finding and the costs order in question. The
be construed narrowly:
State Electricity Commission of Victoria v The
City of South Melbourne
[1968] HCA 49
(1968) 118 CLR 504.
Unless there is specific
authority for the making of subordinate legislation ousting the jurisdiction of
the Court, such subordinate
legislation is ultra vires:
Australian Jam
Company Pty Limited v The Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1953] HCA 52
(1953) 88 CLR 23.
No submission has been put that reg 93 A was ultra vires
However, the
provision must be narrowly construed, in accordance with the decision of the
High Court of Australia.
18. This is not a question of a transferring of jurisdiction from one court
to another, as the Workers’ Compensation Commission
is not a court, as the
Court of Appeal has recently determined. In Halsbury’s Laws of Australia
vol 20 par 325-9530 it is stated
that where proceedings have been remitted,
removed or otherwise transferred from one court to another, the costs prior to
are in the discretion of the court to which the proceedings have been
remitted, removed or transferred. However, the authority for
that proposition
given in the footnotes is purely pursuant to subordinate legislation. The
authorities cited are all the rules of
the various Supreme Courts of the States
of the Commonwealth and of the courts exercising federal jurisdiction. There is
no specific
provision ousting the implied power of the court to make an order
for costs after a matter has been transferred to the Workers’
Compensation
Commission. Mr Pike has submitted that such ought be inferred from reg 93B.
19. Under reg 93(2)(a) an existing claim becomes a new claim at the time when
the Court makes a final award or order determining the
claim. Under reg 93B the
Court has continuing jurisdiction even though a matter has become a new claim to
re-consider a matter presumably
pursuant to
Compensation Court
, but only if such an application is made within 28 days after the
judgment, award or order is made or given. The Court also has
reconsider a matter that has been remitted to it by the Court of Appeal. That
postulates, of course, that this Court made
a final award, order or
determination, an appeal was taken to the Court of Appeal, the Court of Appeal
allowed that appeal and then
remitted the matter to this Court. The Court also
has power to make a costs order under s 112 of the 1998 Act provided an
application
for the order is sought within 28 days after the day on which the
“final award or order determining the claim”
is made. Par (d)
relates to the making of orders ancillary to proceedings before the Court, for
example, matters such as the return
of exhibits or the enforcement of awards.
Exhibits, of course, are only returned after a final award, order or
determination and
an award can only be enforced after it has been made.
20. The matter contained in reg 93B all presupposes that this Court has made
a final award, order or determination. It does not speak
of circumstances where
a matter having been part-heard over three days, the applicant decides to make
an election to transfer the
proceedings to the Workers’ Compensation
Commission. Bearing in mind the principle of statutory interpretation to which
have referred, I cannot find any provision ousting the jurisdiction of this
Court to make an order for costs in respect of the period
when the claim was an
existing claim within the jurisdiction of this Court. Mr Roberts for the
respondent has otherwise traced through
the morass of legislation and
regulations, the trail establishing the Court’s power. It appears to me
that it merely rests
on s 112 of the 1998 Act. I could make an order prior to
the election. I can make an order after the election.
21. I turn then to the merits of the application made by the respondent. On
one view of it, the applicant’s case has never
been ready to proceed. I
have recited the six call-overs of the matter as well as the other directions
hearings. I have recited
that eventually the matter was certified ready. It
came before me at Tumut when the applicant sought an adjournment, but trying
have the matter heard and determined expeditiously, I let the matter commence.
I then gave it further hearing dates in Sydney
when the applicant again applied
for an adjournment. Again, trying to have the matter heard and determined
expeditiously and prior
to 1 January 2004, I refused the adjournment at that
stage. The applicant did not mention on 29 July seeking to make any election.
The applicant did not mention to me on 30 July any intention to make an
election. In fact, an adjournment was sought, but the reason
adjournment was sought, which would appear to have been to go to the
Workers’ Compensation Commission and file the
election, was never told to
22. The applicant has been able to elect to have the matter transferred to
the Workers’ Compensation Commission at any time
on or after 28 February
2003. On one view of it, if I might paraphrase the words of the late Emperor of
Japan, the applicant’s
case may not have gone necessarily to her advantage
on 29 July. Certain concessions were made in cross-examination, inconsistencies
were established between what the applicant deposed to on oath before me at
Tumut and what she said before me on oath on 29 July,
film was exposed, taken
both before and after 4 November 2002 which was quite inconsistent with the
applicant’s presentation
to me at Tumut on 4 November 2002. Despite
submissions which in my view amount to be obfuscation on the applicant’s
the decision by the applicant to elect to have the matter transferred to
the Workers’ Compensation Commission was but a blatant
exercise in forum
23. Nothing has been achieved by the applicant by the maintenance of
proceedings in this Court other than to have a preview of what
evidence there
might be in the respondent’s case. The matter was part-heard before me
but the matter is not part-heard before
the Workers’ Compensation
Commission. Three days of hearing before me have been completely wasted. It has
been a waste of
time for the applicant herself, for the respondent - which has
incurred many costs - and it has been a waste of this Court’s
time. It has
been to the detriment of other litigants who want their cases heard and
determined in this Court prior to its abolition.
24. I accede to the respondent’s submission, especially in light of the
curial history of the matter, that nothing has been
gained by the applicant by
maintaining proceedings at this Court and accordingly I order the applicant have
no costs of proceedings
in this Court.
25. The respondent also seeks an order that the costs of 30 July be paid by
the applicant. Mr Roberts has submitted that the applicant
clearly had decided
to elect prior to coming to Court on that day and the applicant could have
advised the respondent of that so
that the respondent could have obviated the
attendance of Dr Hassel, could have obviated the attendance of another witness
no doubt to be called to prove the film which had been shown to me in
cross-examination, and could have obviated the costs of counsel
and solicitor
being here.
26. Mr Roberts has submitted that the applicant’s maintaining the
position that the matter was proceeding before me on 30 July
2003 when the
applicant was merely going to the Commission to file an election was the
maintenance of proceedings without proper
justification. I accede to that
submission. If I had been told prior to 10 o’clock on 30 July 2002 that
the applicant wished
to file an election in the Workers’ Compensation
Commission, I could have arranged to do other work and hear somebody
case. As it was, I was invited to hear evidence from the applicant
herself and to read voluminous medical reports prior to being
told that the
applicant had filed an election. As I said, I am satisfied that the hearing
before me on 30 July 2002 was without
proper justification.
27. I order the applicant to pay the respondent’s costs of 30 July
28. I order the transcript of evidence given before me on 29 July and 30 July
be taken out and placed with the papers.
Mr E Pike instructed by Gain Kent
McRae appeared for the applicant.
Mr J A D Roberts instructed by Vardanega
Roberts appeared for the respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (28.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter