URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Reeks v Ambulance Service of New South Wales [2003] NSWCC 14 (11 July 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Reeks v Ambulance
Service of New South Wales [2003] NSWCC 14
Ambulance Service of New South Wales
CASE NUMBER:
55050 of 2000 of 2003.00
CATCH WORDS:
LEGISLATION
CORAM: Neilson J
DATES OF HEARING:
EX TEMPORE DATE: 11/07/2003
REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT:
Mr I A Todd instructed by McClellands
appeared for the applicant.
FOR RESPONDENT:
Mr P C Sweeney instructed by
Turks Legal appeared for the respondent.
1. Mr Michael Alan Reeks of Elanora Heights, claims weekly payments of
compensation from 29 March 2000 to 2 April 2000 pursuant to
Workers’ Compensation Act 1987
expenses. It is common ground
that in respect of the closed period now before me, the applicant has in fact
been paid sick leave,
so the relief claimed is in fact a recrediting of sick
leave. The parties have been unable to agree as to what the applicant’s
entitlement is under
during that period. On the material I find in Exhibit
"B", I find the sum to be $741.75.
2. The applicant is an ambulance officer. He joined the New South Wales
Ambulance Service on 16 November 1994. By May 1999 the applicant
had worked his
way up the hierarchical ladder of the New South Wales Ambulance Service to be a
paramedic. After completing his paramedic’s
course in May 1999, the
applicant worked for three and a half months as a trainee paramedic at
Parramatta with an experienced paramedic.
He was then posted to Summer Hill for
8 or 9 months and then transferred to the Lane Cove Ambulance Station. The
applicant was
working at Lane Cove Ambulance Station in the early part of the
3. The applicant told me, and I accept, that in the course of his work as an
ambulance officer he has been exposed to a number of
distressing events. The
applicant in particular told me of his concern of treating elderly patients who
had suffered cardiac arrests
and his feeling of the immorality of trying to
resuscitate persons who are obviously deceased. The applicant also told me of
of young children dying of sudden infant death
syndrome. He was exposed to about six cases of that. He has also been exposed
many cases where motorists and pedestrians have suffered severe traumatic
injuries in running down cases.
4. The applicant told me that on two occasions he had sought counselling
through the respondent’s employees’ assistance
service. The
applicant also told me of having difficulties performing night shifts which
interfere with his sleep patterns and interfered
with his relationships with his
family. However, at no time prior to 23 March 2000, did the applicant need to
take any time from
work. According to the applicant’s general
practitioner, the only complaint the applicant made to her prior to 23 March
was a consultation on 5 March 2000 when the applicant attended to obtain a
vaccination for some proposed overseas travel.
5. Dr Rogley, the general practitioner, says this:
Michael works as an ambulance officer and is finding his effectiveness in
caring for the demands of seriously ill patients was being
seriously compromised
by what he regarded as a confrontationist and uncaring bureaucracy, causing him
considerable emotional stress.
Dr Rogley says in her report that she counselled the applicant at some length
and they each hoped that the applicant’s forthcoming
holiday would provide
him with some therapeutic respite from his work concerns.
6. On Thursday, 23 March 2000 the applicant was required to attend before the
Industrial Relations Commission of this State. Exhibit
A is an undated
communication from the trade union to which the applicant belongs, the Health
and Research Employees Association
of New South Wales. The communication is
addressed to whomever it may concern in the Ambulance Service of New South
document is a request for
"special leave for attendance at IRC
7. The letter verifies that the applicant was required to attend and give
evidence at the Industrial Relations Commission on Thursday,
23 March. If there
were any concerns regarding the granting of
"special leave"
Ambulance Service was to contact the senior industrial officer, presumably of
the trade union. The applicant had been, for
some time I infer, a member of
this trade union. Indeed, he had been at one stage a vice-president and
secretary of a local branch
of the union but had retired from those positions in
order to undertake his studies to be a paramedic. At the time that the applicant
attended at the Industrial Relations Commission, he was an ordinary member of
his trade union and no claim is made under
Compensation Act 1987
8. There were two matters before the Industrial Relations Commission of New
South Wales listed for hearing before Commissioner McLeay
on 23 March 2000. The
first was an application by the trade union for a variation of provisions
relating to annual leave in the
Operational Ambulance Officers’ (State)
Award. There was also an application, I infer, on behalf of the respondent to
vary that award but that is referred to in the opening address of Mr
Murphy, who appeared for the trade union, as a
application”
. Whatever that counter application was has not been
proven in evidence before me and clearly the applicant was called in the trade
union case.
9. When the applicant was called, he produced a statement which he had made
and which was admitted without objection and marked Exhibit
3. That statement
has not been put before me. Mr Murphy then adduced some evidence from the
applicant. The following appears on
pages 36 and 37 of the transcript:
Can you explain to the Commissioner how you react and what you do when you
attend a cot death case.
What we do, first of all we receive a call which tends to be quite emotive
that we’re attending a (?) - Code 2 - (?) arrest
of a child or a child not
breathing. My experience is that I/we - we tend to drive to the scenes a lot
harder, emotionally preparing
ourselves to fight for a child. In these
situations, however, you walk in - I’ve not actually had to work on any
resuscitation
actively on a child because it has been clear that the child has
been deceased for some time.
10. Then there is a request for a
"short adjournment"
which I infer
came from Mr Murphy rather than from the applicant himself. The Commissioner
then took a brief adjournment. The evidence
continued thus:
Mr Reeks, just prior to the adjournment you were about to tell the
Commissioner how the attendance at the cot death situation had
impacted upon
Yes, I obviously find it very hard. I spent time I believe building up
exteriors, barriers, walls, blinkers put on these things.
You look at them and
try to walk away. In these situations, because I haven’t had to treat the
children, I try to remove
myself from the particular home and the grieving
family very quickly whilst we wait for the Police or the doctors. But
not very far from my mind when I see these children that it’s
my daughter, they
could be there equally. As I say, I can only just
repeat that I obviously feel at the time just shelving it off, throwing it off
to one side. It’s the same if it goes on about the adults as well. I
mean, I still recall looking into the eyes of the first
70 year old man that I
had to work on in the street; no dignity. It made me think of my father. I
try to not look at their eyes
any more. I try to ignore that.
11. The applicant was then asked three questions essentially about the
pattern of his annual leave and what he would do if there was
a capacity to take
two breaks during the year, each of 4 weeks. The applicant was then asked and
said that he was capable of dealing
with cross-examination but he who
represented the respondent declined to ask any questions in cross-examination.
The applicant was
then excused.
12. There was then a short exchange between the Commissioner and counsel and
the Commission adjourned until the following day. The
inference to be drawn is
that evidence given by the applicant was on the afternoon of 23 March 2000. It
is common ground that the
reason a short adjournment was granted during the
giving of Mr Reeks’ evidence was that he had an emotional breakdown. He
referred to himself as bursting out in tears and then of feeling embarrassed
because he had done that and of also feeling ashamed
because he had done that.
The applicant’s breakdown clearly explains the short adjournment.
13. Shortly after giving evidence, the applicant noticed a headache. He was
not required to work on the evening of 23 March 2000,
which was when he was
rostered to work. His request for leave had been granted and indeed, the
respondent paid the applicant as
"Crown Witness"\
for his absence that
evening, even though he was not a witness called on behalf of the Crown. The
applicant was due to work on the
evening of 24 March 2000 but on the morning of
that day attended upon Dr Rogley.
14. Dr Rogley certified the applicant as unfit for 24 March 2000 on account
"tension headache"
. The reason for the tension headache was the
applicant’s
"appearance as witness in court case"
. No arrangement
was made at that time for Dr Rogley to see the applicant again. Dr
Rogley’s report confirms that on examination
on 24 March 2000, the
applicant’s blood pressure was normal and there were no signs of any
physical illness. She confirms
she made the diagnosis of tension headache
caused directly as a result of
"the work tensions preceeding the
patient’s visit to me".
She prescribed him with medication.
15. After 24 March the applicant had 4 rostered days off. He did not attend
Dr Rogley again until either 28 or 29 March. I say the
28th or the 29th because
Dr Rogley’s certificate bears date the 29th of March 2000, but a return to
work form bears date the
28th of March 2000. Dr Rogley’s report says that
the attendance was on 28 March 2000. According to Dr Rogley’s report,
applicant’s condition
"did not improve"
. In the certificate issued
on either 28 or 29 March Dr Rogley certified the applicant as being unfit
between 29 March and 2 April
2000 but that he would be fit for his pre-injury
duties commencing on 3 April 2000. The diagnosis given is, again, tension
16. Dr Rogley’s report confirms that the applicant has not needed to
consult her regarding the illness since 29 March 2000.
The diagnosis of a
tension headache is essentially a diagnosis of a neurological condition. What
the neurological condition might
be and how it may have been precipitated by the
applicant’s giving evidence in court has not been adequately explained.
is postulated ex post facto by Dr McMurdo that the applicant had a
psychiatric illness, although Dr Lovell says to the contrary.
17. I can accept that the applicant may have been suffering a tension
headache on 24 March and needed that evening off work. To postulate
applicant was still suffering from debilitating headache on 28 March such that
he would be unfit for the following 4 day
shift but then be fit to work is
rather a long bow to draw. One would have thought that if he had a debilitating
headache which
could not be controlled by analgesia, any prudent medical
practitioner would be investigating the applicant for a possible more insidious
problem, such as a space occupying lesion in the brain.
18. Leaving that to one side, it is clear that the headache was precipitated
by the applicant’s emotional breakdown in the witness
Industrial Relations Commission 23 March 2000. The question for my
determination is did that arise out of or in the course
of the applicant’s
employment? In my view, it does not arise in the course of the
applicant’s employment. The course
of the employment connotes a temporal
relationship between the work which the applicant is required to perform and the
19. When Mr Reeks was in the witness box in the Industrial Relations
Commission, he was not working as an ambulance officer. That
is acknowledged
both by him and by his trade union when a specific request was made for leave to
attend at the Industrial Relations
Commission hearing. The applicant is not a
professional witness. His job as an ambulance officer is not to give evidence.
question then becomes does the event arise out of his employment, that is,
is there a causal relationship between the applicant’s
appearance in court
on 23 March 2000 and his employment as an ambulance officer? One can easily
postulate many attendances of ambulance
officers in court as arising out of
their employment. For example, an ambulance officer might attend at many scenes
of death and
be required to attend at coronial inquiries. Such attendances
arise out of the employment. That is, they are causally connected
to the work
the applicant is required to do. If the applicant attends upon a scene of
homicide or violence, one can easily see that
his being required to attend at a
committal hearing or a trial on indictment would also arise out of his
employment because the evidence
he is called to give relates to what he saw,
heard or did in the course of his employment.
20. One can postulate that in some personal injury cases, in particular
running down cases, an ambulance officer might be required
by an injured person
or a defendant to give evidence. Again, if the applicant were required to give
such evidence, that would arise
out of his employment because the only reason he
is needed to give the evidence is because of what he saw, heard or did in the
of his employment.
21. The question here is somewhat different. How is there a causal
relationship between the applicant’s attending to give evidence
of his trade union against his employer, and his employment? There is in this
State an elaborate system of industrial
laws. Those industrial laws give
certain rights to both the employers and employees and to their respective
representative associations
and also impose some duties on those employers,
employees and their representatives. It has been held that the process of
a claim for workers’ compensation does not arise out of the
employment but arises under the statute, namely the
Workers’ Compensation
. On analogy with that authority, the applicant, in pursing rights that he
has a trade unionist under the industrial laws of this
State, is performing a
right given to him by statute and not by his contract of employment. The
authority to which I refer is
Lennan v Union Steamship Company of New Zealand
[1950] WCR 107, a decision of his Honour Judge Rainbow.
22. In that case the worker had an injury to his shoulder on 5 December 1949.
Shortly after that, the worker received a communication
requiring him to attend
upon a medical practitioner for examination at the request of his employer. In
the process of the journey
to attend upon that medical practitioner, the worker
injured his ankle. His Honour said at 108:
The novelty of the claim for the ankle is not against it; but the absence
of any similar reported claim makes one consider the matter
more closely. It
seems to me in performing the obligation to submit to medical examination
imposed by the
Workers’ Compensation Act
, the worker is not doing anything
associated with his contract of service, namely, the agreement between him and
his employer to
turn up at a place as directed and to perform the things his
employer wants him to do, to stand around, to sharpen or collect his
go to the office for his pay or any of the numerous things incidental to the
performance of his actual work. In doing
that which the Act requires, he is
doing something which arises out of the Statute and not out of the contract of
employment.
His duty is a duty to himself that he is performing when he goes to see
the doctor and is not a duty to the employer arising out of
his contract nor is
it in the course of.
23. The applicant, Mr Lennan, was successful but only in respect of shoulder
injury, not the ankle injury. As has been pointed out
by the late Professor
Mills, it is probably that decision which prompted the enactment of s 7(1)(d)(i)
of the Workers’ Compensation
Act 1926, which is currently
Workers’ Compensation Act 1987
24. The cases are many which indicate that, absent some special reason or
particular evidence, a worker involving himself in the affairs
of his trade
union does not arise out of or in the course of his employment. At 5.30 on a
Friday afternoon I shall not rehearse
many of them. I will merely refer to the
decision of
Kmiec v The Commissioner for Railways
[1965] WCR 44,
decision of his Honour Judge Conybeare. In that matter the worker commenced his
work at 7 am. At 10 am, the applicant
left his place of employment and attended
a stop work meeting at a park in Chullora from 10.20 am to 11.45 am. At the
of the stop work meeting, he decided to go to his home at Greenacre
to have his lunch. There was nothing to eat in the house, so
the applicant and
a friend of his went to a restaurant at Bankstown. They left the restaurant at
1.45 pm and on the way back to
work the applicant received injury when it
appears that his motor car, being driven at an excessive speed of 80 miles an
hour, collided
with a post on the wrong side of the carriageway.
25. The argument in that case was that the applicant was absent on an
ordinary recess within the meaning of s 7(1)(e) of the Workers’
Compensation Act 1926, which is now s 11 of the 1987 Act. His Honour said at
However, the absence that was contemplated between the applicant and the
respondent was from 10 am to 2 pm, was a substantial part
of the day’s
shift. There is nothing before me to indicate that there was anything usual
meeting. I have no evidence of their
frequency or of the respondent’s acquiescence in any such frequency.
There is nothing
before me that enables me to infer that attendance at stop work
meetings was reasonably incidental to performance of the applicant’s
service under his contract of employment. So that in my opinion his absence
for this period was clearly not an ordinary recess.
I think those words usually
connote the usual tea break, perhaps lunch hour’s suspension, smokos and
26. Clearly, his Honour would not hold that the attendance at the stop work
meeting was in the course of the worker’s employment
or arose out of that
employment. Here, there is no evidence of how frequently applications are made
by the relevant trade union
to the Industrial Relations Commission of this
State, nor is there any evidence of the employer’s usual attitude to such
attendances.
Clearly, the worker was granted leave to attend by the employer,
but if the leave were not granted no doubt a subpoena to give evidence
have been issued in which case the employer would have been legally obliged to
permit him to attend the Commission.
27. The argument advanced on behalf of Mr Reeks is that there was some causal
relationship between the applicant’s attendance
at the Industrial
Relations Commission and his employment. It was submitted that it was
incidental to the employment and particular
stress was made on some employer
benefit. The argument first rehearsed was that if the union’s application
were successful
there would be benefit to the employer. The transcript of the
proceedings before the Industrial Relations Commission indicates that
the trade union were entitled to 5 weeks’ annual leave but they were paid
for 7 weeks’ annual leave. The
application to the Commission was for 8
weeks’ paid annual leave which would be taken in two periods, each of 4
28. Apparently the application was successful, at least in part. I find it
very difficult to see how the employer would believe that
a successful outcome
to the litigation would be to its benefit. It would be required to pay greater
amounts of leave, it would have
less staff available, it would therefore need to
employ more people. The argument advanced by Mr Todd is that if more annual
were granted there might be less need for stress leave and less need for
workers’ compensation leave and therefore the employer
might thereby gain
a benefit. The argument is ingenious but there is no evidence to support
29. The problem with that argument is this. If the application were
unsuccessful, that is, the employer won, the employer could not
in any way be
argued to have gained any benefit. It would have, firstly, the detriment of
paying the costs of litigation which was
unsuccessful, and then have the
emotional costs of having a dissatisfied group of employees in a unhappy trade
union. Whether the
applicant’s attendance at the Industrial Relations
Commission is compensable or not, cannot in my view depend upon the outcome
the litigation. There are circumstances in which the outcome of the litigation
may have affect compensability. For example,
this Court hears cases involving
policemen. Many policemen have been called to give evidence before the Royal
Commission recently
conducted by Wood J into the New South Wales Police Force.
Many of the policemen were greatly stressed by their experience in giving
evidence in the Wood Royal Commission. Many of them were stressed by
allegations of impropriety made against them. Prima facie,
they go to the Wood
Royal Commission because of things they have heard, seen or done in the course
of their employment. However,
if it is found that the allegations that were
made are true, then what the policeman heard, saw or did did not arise out of or
the course of his employment but occurred because he was doing something
directly contrary to his duty as a police officer. However,
this is not such a
30. This case to me is analogous with the situation that confronted his
Honour Judge Rainbow in
case. In my view, the applicant
when he attended at the Industrial Relations Commission, attended pursuant to
rights given him by
the industrial laws of his State and was doing something for
his own benefit and perhaps for that of his workmates, but he was not
for the benefit of his employer. I am not satisfied the applicant’s
attendance at the Industrial Relations Commission
on 23 March 2000 arose out of
or in the course of the applicant’s employment with the respondent.
31. It is clear, in case I have not already made the finding, to me that the
sole cause of the tension headache which the applicant
suffered was the
breakdown which occurred while he was giving evidence in the Industrial
Relations Commission on 23 March 2000.
Although this argument was not advanced,
there is an argument available that the question which the applicant was asked,
to relive something that had occurred to him in the course of his
employment and therefore arose out of it. However, had he not
been asked to
recall the event, the breakdown would not have occurred and the tension headache
would not have ensued. The real causative
event was not a memory which the
applicant had which might be difficult to express without emotional upset but
rather the event which
required him to recall it. If he was required to recall
it in the course of his employment it would have been compensable but in
he was not required to recall it in the course of his employment and his
attendance at the Commission did not arise out of
his employment.
32. I have inquired of counsel at 5.47pm whether any further reasons for
judgment are required. I am told that none is so required.
33. I make an award for the respondent.
Mr I A Todd instructed by
McClellands appeared for the applicant.
Mr P C Sweeney instructed by Turks
Legal appeared for the respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (30.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter