URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2010/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NG [2010] NSWPHT 2 (29 April 2010)
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
CITATION: NG
[2010] NSWPHT 2
29 April 2010
INTO A COMPLAINT AGAINST A PHARMACIST
Complainant
NSW Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC)
Mr Peter Wing Keung NG
Tribunal Members
Nick O’Neill (Deputy Chairperson)
Jonathan Chen (Pharmacist Member)
Margaret Duguid (Pharmacist
Noel Greenaway (Lay Member)
Dates and place of Hearing
1, 2, 3, and 4 March 2010,
Date of Order and Reasons for Decision
29 April 2010
Representation
Complainant - Peteris Ginters, barrister, instructed
by Stephen Cox, HCCC Respondent - Ivan Griscti, barrister, instructed by Wendy
Blacker with Greg Moss, Gadens Lawyers
Pharmacist—Professional Misconduct—Unsatisfactory Professional
Conduct—Convictions of offences the circumstances
of which render the
pharmacist unfit in the public interest to be registered as a pharmacist.
Legislation cited
Pharmacy Practice Act
Schedule 6 Clauses 5, 11(1) & 13; Division 3 of Part 6;
Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002—
Clauses 112 (1), 173 (1);
Cases cited
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
Law Society of
NSW v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Spicer v NSW Medical Board
(Unreported, NSW Court of Appeal, 19-2-1981);
Prothonotary of the Supreme
[2003] NSWCA 320
HCCC v Schmich
[2009] NSWNMT 19
[2008] NSWNMT 12
Rawcliffe v HCCC
[2009] NSWNMT 16
HCCC v Gilmour
[2010] NSWNMT 6
[2002] NSWPB 1
[1997] NSWPB 4
[1999] NSWPB 9
[2002] NSWDC 1
Johnson v Walton
[1996] NSWDC 2
[2005] NSWPB 1
[2005] NSWPB 2
Theodorou v Dean
HCCC v Powell
[2008] NSWNMT 19
Tribunal of NSW, 20 September 2000).
REASONS FOR DECISION
Ng is guilty of professional misconduct;
Ng has been convicted of offences in New South Wales, the circumstances of which
render him unfit in the public interest to be
registered as a
pharmacist;
Ng’s registration is cancelled and he is not to be re-registered;
application by Mr Ng for review of the above order may not be made until after
two (2) years from the date of these orders;
Ng is to pay the costs of the HCCC as agreed, or if agreement cannot be reached,
either party may have the matter re-listed for
assessment by the Tribunal;
names of the persons named in any prescriptions in this matter, together with
the names of Mr C and Mr P are suppressed from publication
except for within any
part of the Attachment to these reasons for decision that are provided to the
parties to this matter . That
Attachment is suppressed from publication in any
medium to anyone other than the parties to this matter and their legal advisors.
The Complaint
HCCC’s Complainant in this matter, which had been amended prior to the
hearing, set out three complaints to be heard and
determined by the Tribunal by
way of inquiry. The first complaint was that Mr Ng was guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct
while complaint two was that Mr Ng was guilty of
professional misconduct. Both these complaints had the same particulars. The
complaint was that Mr Ng had been convicted of offences the circumstances
of which rendered him unfit in the public interest to practice
pharmacy. This
complaint had four particulars. The three complaints and their particulars are
set out, as appropriate, in the body
of these reasons for
The onus and standard of proof
the Tribunal noted in
considering the complaints before it, the Tribunal needs to be satisfied to the
standard set out in
Briginshaw v
Briginshaw.
must be comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the
complaints are proved before it may proceed to make any
orders in relation to
the pharmacist the subject of the proceedings. When determining whether it is
comfortably satisfied, the Tribunal
must have regard to the serious nature of
the allegations and the consequences of finding them proved. The
Tribunal’s comfortable
satisfaction cannot be produced by “inexact
proofs, indefinite testimony or indirect references”.
onus or obligation to provide the material proving the allegations made against
a pharmacist lies with the HCCC.
will be seen in this case, most of the particulars of the complaints are
admitted by Mr Ng. While he admitted most of the particulars,
he did not admit
to their consequences. He did not admit that he was guilty of either
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct nor did he admit
that, because of his 2007 convictions, he was unfit to be registered as a
pharmacist. Consequently, the
Tribunal had to decide whether or not it was
comfortably satisfied as to those matters.
this case, while the Tribunal has the power to make the lesser orders set out in
Pharmacy Practice Act
comfortably satisfied that Mr Ng is guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct, it cannot make an order suspending Mr
Ng’s registration or
directing that his registration be cancelled unless it is comfortably satisfied
that either or both complaints
two (professional misconduct) and three (unfit to
be registered as a pharmacist) are proved against
sources of the evidence
Ginters, on behalf of the HCCC, tendered three folders of evidence. The
documents in those folders, together with other documents
that he tendered
during the hearing, were marked Complainant’s Exhibits 1-57 respectively.
Mr Griscti, on behalf of Mr Ng,
tendered a folder of evidence. The documents in
that folder, together with other documents that he tendered during the hearing
marked Respondent’s Exhibits 1-8 respectively. These documents are
listed in the attachment to these reasons for decision.
Vincent a peer reviewer retained by the HCCC gave evidence in person and,
subsequently, over the telephone. Mr Mahony the peer
reviewer retained by Mr Ng
gave evidence over the telephone. Mr Ng gave evidence to the Tribunal in person
as did Ms Ayscough the
Registrar of the Pharmacy Board. Ms Ayscough’s
evidence was to advise on certain matters arising from the proposed national
registration scheme for health professionals and was not related to the factual
matters arising in this complaint.
The evidence relating to
complaints one and two
one alleges that Mr Ng has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
and complaint two that he has been guilty
of professional misconduct in that
(a) engaged in
conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by him in the practice
of pharmacy was significantly below the
standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist of an equivalent level of training
or experience,
(b) has engaged
in improper and/or unethical conduct in the course of the practice of
first particular was that between 6 September 2003 and 12 January 2005 at Ryde
Pharmacy Mr Ng failed to make six monthly inventories
of drugs of addiction
stock for the following drugs of addiction:
MS Contin 15 mg
Fortral 50mg
Kapanol 20mg
Ritalin LA 20mg
Ritalin LA 30mg
Kapanol 50mg
Phosphate 30mg tablets
Dexamphetamine
5mg tablets
Concerta 36mg
Ritalin LA 40mg
Oxynorm 10mg
Morphine 30mg
Kapanol 10mg
MS Contin 5mg
MS Contin 10mg
MS Contin 30mg
Ordine Mixture
Oxycontin 20mg
Morphine 10mg
contrary to clause 117 of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
legislative obligation on a pharmacist is to make an accurate inventory of all
Schedule 8 drugs (drugs of addiction) at their
place of business. These
inventories must be made in at least March and September each year. Many
pharmacists make an inventory of
these drugs much more regularly than that.
Ng admitted to this particular but noted that five of the 19 drugs of addiction
particularised were not recorded in the inventory
during the relevant period but
that the 15 other drugs referred to were recorded on one of the required
occasions. Mr Vincent was
of the opinion that Mr Ng’s failure to comply
with the requirements of the
showed a significant lack of care
and judgment in the practice of pharmacy and was significantly below the minimum
standard expected
of a pharmacist with several years of experience in community
pharmacy. He reported that Mr Ng’s failures in this regard would
the serious disapproval of pharmacists of good repute and that Mr Ng’s
failures invited his (Mr Vincent’s) strong
criticism. Mr Mahony stated
that Mr Ng’s failures in this regard could not be condoned and showed a
lack of judgment and care.
Tribunal accepted the evidence of the peer reviewers, but was of the view that
Mr Vincent’s strong criticism was justified
and not undermined by Mr
Mahony’s arguably milder “not to be condoned” because in Mr
Mahony’s view Mr Ng’s
failures still showed a lack of judgment and
care. The Tribunal was comfortably satisfied that the subject-matter of this
was proved.
second particular was that between 5 April 2004 and 6 December 2004 at Ryde
Pharmacy, Mr Ng failed to record in the Register receipt
of supplies of drugs of
addiction as follows:
Kapanol 20mg
capsules (20 received on 22/11/04)
Morphine 30mg
ampoules (10 received on 3/12/04)
MS Contin 10mg
tablets (20 received on 5/4/04)
MS Contin 100mg
tablets (1,560 received on 11/10/04, 1,440 on 12/10/04 and 60 on 2/11/04)
Ordine Mixture
10mg/ml (200ml received on 11/10/04)
Pethidine 100mg
ampoules (30 received on 2/2/04 and 30 on 3/11/04)
Morphine 10mg
ampoules (5 ampoules received on 6/12/04);
contrary to
clause 112 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
the hearing it was clarified by the Tribunal and the parties were clear that in
relation to the 100mg MS Contin tablets the
evidence showed that, as a result of
supplies and returns in the relevant period,180 tablets were unaccounted for,
not the 3000 originally
Ng admitted this particular in its reduced form and offered no excuse for his
failure to record. It was submitted on his behalf
that his actions should be
characterized as showing a “a lack of judgment and care”. Mr Vincent
considered this matter
to be one of gross incompetence and negligence and that
Mr Ng’s dangerous drugs register was one of the most disorderly and
kept registers he had ever seen. He saw the matter as one of total abrogation of
responsibility on the part of Mr Ng and condemned
his actions.
Tribunal considered that the matters alleged in particular two were more serious
than those alleged in particular one, and proven.
The evidence showed that Mr Ng
was dealing with only 43 drugs of addiction over all and that he had no
procedure in place for checking
them. The Tribunal was comfortably satisfied
that the subject-matter of this particular was proved.
third particular was that between 16 September 2004 and 21 December 2004 at Ryde
Pharmacy, Mr Ng failed to record in the Register
supply of drugs of addiction as
Hypnodorm 1mg
tablets dispensed 29/9/04,12/10/04, 13/10/04, 19/10/04, 21/10/04 (2
prescriptions),1/11/04, 9/11/04, 11/11/04, 23/11/04
(2 prescriptions), 8/12/04,
Morphine 15 mg
ampoules dispensed 2/11/04
MS Contin 100mg
tablets dispensed on 23/9/04, 11/10/04 and 2/11/04
Ordine Mixture
10mg/ml dispensed on 20/12/04, and 11/10/04
Oxycontin 20mg
tablets dispensed on 16/9/03 and 6/12/04
Pethidine 100mg
ampoules dispensed on 2/11/04
Physeptone 10mg
tablets dispensed on 3/11/04, 26/11/04, 4/12/04, 10/12/04, 15/12/04 and
tablets dispensed on 8/10/04, 25/10/04, 29/10/04, 3/12/04, 2/12/04, 6/12/04 (2
prescriptions) 15/12/04, 17/12/04, 22/12/04
and 21/12/04.
Morphine 10mg
ampoules dispensed on 3/12/04.
contrary to clause 112 (1)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Ng admitted the failures to record alleged against him and that there was no
reasonable excuse for his failure. It was submitted
on his behalf that his
failure showed a lack of judgment while Mr Vincent’s opinion was of the
same for this particular as
for particular two.
should be noted that Hypnodorm is a benzodiazepine and that Physeptone is a
methadone tablet. Except for one dispensing that was
recorded a day late, none
of these dispensings was recorded in the register even though the drugs of
addiction were supplied in each
case. The Tribunal considered the allegations in
this particular at least as serious as those in particular two. While the
would not describe the seriousness in exactly the same terms as Mr
Vincent, it agreed with him that the matters alleged and proven
particular amounted to a very serious lack of care and of judgment, in the sense
of disregarding the legislation that he
knew he was bound to follow, on the part
fourth particular was that on 31 May 2004 and/or on 5 July 2004 at Ryde
Pharmacy, the pharmacist failed to record in the Register
receipt of a drug of
addiction, namely, Morphine 15 mg ampoules on the day on which he received the
drug of addiction, contrary to
clause 112 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
Ng admitted to this, and while it is a transgression in the view of the
Tribunal, it is not as serious as many of other matters
raised by the separate
complaints. Nevertheless, the particular is proven by the documentary evidence
and Mr Ng’s admission.
fifth particular was that on the dates and in the quantities shown in Schedule A
to the Complaint, Mr Ng supplied drugs of addiction
on prescriptions which
failed to comply with the requirements of clause 77 of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
, contrary to clause 85 of the
and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
Ng admitted to all 17 of the matters alleged in this particular and acknowledged
that there was no acceptable excuse for this failure.
It was submitted on his
behalf that Mr Mahony saw this as “a misguided attempt to assist a client
and failure to comply with
a regulation to assist a client, demonstrating at the
time a lack of judgment and care”. The Tribunal wishes to make it clear
that this submission not only misconstrues what Mr Mahony, as an experienced
pharmacist, said but also fails to grasp the fundamental
importance of the
legislation, proven by the documentary evidence to have been breached, to the
practice of pharmacy. All pharmacists
from the most junior to the most senior
know that each prescription for a drug of addiction must contain the name and
designation
of the person by whom it is issued and the address and phone number
of the premises at which it was issued, the date of issue, the
name and address
of the patient, the name, strength and quantity (expressed in words and figures)
of the drug to be supplied, the
maximum number of times the drug may be supplied
on the prescription, the intervals at which the drug may be prescribed on the
prescription
and adequate directions for its use. All pharmacists also know that
they must not supply a drug of addiction unless it is in the
form, at the
relevant time set out in clause 77of the
. The exception was
that if the number of repeats was not provided for, the prescription could be
dispensed only once. If there was
any other defect the prescription could not be
dispensed and a new, correct prescription had to be obtained.
Vincent advised his opinion that Mr Ng’s standard of dispensing and record
keeping was significantly below the accepted standard
for a community pharmacist
and that it would draw severe criticism from pharmacists of good repute and
competence and from himself.
The Tribunal agreed with Mr Vincent’s opinion
and notes that Mr Mahony advised that he did not condone Mr Ng’s actions
in this regard in any way. The Tribunal was comfortably satisfied that this
particular was proved.
sixth particular was that on the dates and in the quantities shown in Schedule B
to the Complaint, Mr Ng supplied quantities of
a Schedule 4 Appendix B drugs
namely, androgenic anabolic steroids on prescriptions which failed to specify
the intervals at which
the drug may be supplied in accordance with the
requirement of clause 77 (1) (f) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
, contrary to clause 38 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
prescription requirements for anabolic steroids, as restricted substances, were,
at the relevant time and currently, similar to
those for drugs of addiction. In
particular, those prescriptions could not be dispensed more than once if the
prescription failed
to specify the interval at which the drug may be dispensed
even though the maximum number of times the anabolic steroids could be
was specified. Mr Ng admitted that he supplied anabolic steroids in the
circumstances alleged against him. It was submitted
on his behalf that he had no
acceptable excuse for this failure and Mr Mahony’s view as set out in
relation to particular five
was recruited to downplay the seriousness of these
numerous breaches of both the legislation and proper ethical practice. Mr Mahony
advised that he did not condone Mr Ng’s actions in this regard in any way
and the Tribunal accepts that advice in the terms
in which it was stated and did
not read it as an attempt, on Mr Mahony’s part, to downplay the
seriousness of Mr Ng’s
Vincent advised that, while Mr Ng’s actions fell below the standards of a
community pharmacist of Mr Ng’s experience,
he was only mildly critical of
those actions. The Tribunal did not agree with that assessment of Mr Ng’s
actions. It is unacceptable
for pharmacists to dispense restricted substances
contrary to the clear and unequivocal legislative provisions and against the
established
standards of pharmacy practice. The actions of Mr Ng in this regard
show not only a lack of knowledge of the applicable legislation
and judgment in
applying it to circumstances in which it clearly applied, but a lack of care in
relation to the people to whom he
dispensed the anabolic steroids outside the
prescription parameters. His conduct also showed improper and unethical conduct
pharmacist in the practice of pharmacy. The Tribunal was comfortably
satisfied that the subject-matter of this particular was proved.
seventh particular was that between 21 February 2004 and 21 February 2005 at
Ryde Pharmacy on divers occasions, Mr Ng failed to
properly record the details
of supply of pseudoephedrine in accordance with clause 54 of
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
, contrary to clause 23 (2) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Ng admited that he failed to record details of the supply of pseudoephedrine as
alleged against him and he acknowledged, in his
statement dated 1 March 2010,
that there could be no reasonable excuse for his failure “to record the
required details of supply
of pseudoephedrine”. It was submitted on his
behalf that the complaint was limited to the failure to record the supply and
did not refer to the actual supply of pseudoephedrine but that the failure to
record “properly” demonstrated a lack of
judgment and care. The
Tribunal was comfortably satisfied that the subject-matter of this particular
was proved.
eighth particular was that on the dates and in the quantities shown in Schedule
C to the Complaint at Ryde Pharmacy, Mr Ng supplied
drugs of addiction to
patients in quantities and/or for a purpose that did not accord with the
recognised therapeutic standard of
what was appropriate in the circumstances,
contrary to clause 109 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
Ng did not admit to the subject-matter of this particular in either of his
written statements and in his oral evidence to the Tribunal.
The documentary
evidence shows, as one example, that Mr Ng dispensed a Mr C with 60 Hypnodorm
tablets – a month’s supply
– on 6 July 2004 and a week later
on 13 July dispensed to him another month’s supply of 60 Hypnodorm
tablets. In another
example Mr Ng dispensed a Mr P, whose address was an
insufficient “First (or 1
Eastwood”, with 120 tablets of Hypnodorm on each of the following days, 11
February, 22 March, 19 May, 8 June, 24
June, 10 August, 26 August 2004. Then on
15 September 2004 Mr Ng dispensed two prescriptions for 120 Hypnodorm tablets
P. During a similar period of 23 February to 6 August 2004 he
dispensed 330 Hypnodorm tablets to a Ms M on prescriptions from Drs
and Samadi.
therapeutic dose of Hypnodorm is between a half and two 1mg tablets a day. Also
this medication is to be taken only on a short
term basis.
both his written statements he stated that he rang Dr Jackson about the
prescriptions prescribed by him. Mr Ng stated that he did
so in order “to
clarify and confirm the level of dose prescribed” and that Dr Jackson told
him that “he had prescribed
a high dose of Hypnodorm during heroin
withdrawal (while on Methadone)”.
Mr Ng was cross-examined by Mr Ginters 2 March 2010, the following exchange took
place in relation to particular 8:
Q. Could I take
you, Mr Ng, to particular 8 and your response there, which starts at paragraph
38 of your statement?
Q. What you have said in paragraph 40, you have said the prescriptions that
are the subject of this complaint were prescribed by
Dr Jackson. Do you
A. Yes I do.
Q. You would be aware from the complaint - you have got the complaint in
front of you in the witness box?
A. I don't have the complaint.
Q. I will see if I can arrange a copy of it for you. I have just opened it
at page 7 of volume 1, which is the amended complaint
and that's the schedule
that is relevant to particular 8. I withdraw that.
CHAIRMAN: That's the
wrong one. It is schedule C which is page 9.
MR GINTERS: Schedule C which is page 9.
Q. Could you just turn to page 9?
A. I've got that.
Q. Thank you. You will see that in relation to Mr C and Mr P the
prescribing doctor is Dr Jackson, do you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. But in relation to the female patient it is an combination of various
other doctors, do you see that?
A. Yes, I do.
Q. So you would accept, wouldn't you, that it is not only Dr Jackson
that is concerned with the complaint about prescribing in excess
of therapeutic
A. Yes I do.
Q. You say you spoke to Dr Jackson about these matters, correct?
Q. Would you agree with me that even if Dr Jackson told you that he had
prescribed the high dose of Hypnodorm, that as a pharmacist
you retained the
right to refuse to dispense the medication?
A. I agree, but I do not have the medical knowledge as to judge whether that
high dosage is suitable for relieving the withdrawal
symptoms of heroin.
Q. Could I ask you this then, if you look at, for example, Mr C, there
are three dispensings of 60 tablets of Hypnodorm over a period
from July until
October 2004. Do you see that?
Q. So that's 180 tablets over about three months, correct?
Q. Roughly speaking that would be on average two tablets a day?
Q. Do you not think that two tablets a day of Hypnodorm over a period of
three months is in excess of the recognised therapeutic
A. It is for
the normal useage, which is for sedation.
A. As I mentioned before, they are for withdrawal of heroin. I was told by
Dr Jackson, so I believed that that dosage would be higher.
Q. So you were happy to take Dr Jackson's advice on that regard?
At that time I was, but not now.
Q. And the same with Mr P. You will see that there is some nine
dispensings of 120 tablets of Hypnodorm over a period from February
2004 through
to September 2004. Do you see that?
Q. So that's a period of some six months. Would you accept that that level
of dispensing is in excess of a recognised therapeutic
dosage - I am sorry I
withdraw that, not in accordance with a recognised therapeutic standard of what
is appropriate?
A. It is not according to the recommended therapeutic
standard, but in the case of treatment of heroin withdrawal symptoms, I believed
at the time they would require a higher dosage.
Q. You recall Mr Vincent's evidence about this matter yesterday. Do
you recall that?
Q. Is it fair to say that you and Mr Vincent take a different view as
to the appropriateness of the level of Hypnodorm that was prescribed?
Q. What about the female patient? She was not a heroin withdrawal patient,
A. No, but I rang Dr Cook, which is in the same surgery as
Dr Samardi and spoke to Dr Cook regarding her dosage of Hypnodorm, and
Dr Cook reiterated it would be okay to give to her because she has been on
it for long time, long time treatment of insomnia.
Q. Looking back on the matter now, if you were presented with these
circumstances again, would your dispensing be the same?
A. No, I would consult with the Department of Health.
Q. And that knowledge, you have obtained because at some point in time you
have given some more thought about these matters, is that
The Tribunal members returned to the issue of Mr Ng ringing doctors about the
prescriptions covered by particular 8 and the following
exchange took place;
MS DUGUID: Q. Mr Ng, could I ask you about when you phone the doctors
to query something that is on the prescription, maybe a dosage
or, in the case
of Dr Jackson and the Hypnodorm, do you ever record that anywhere?
do record them. Shall I continue?
A. Most of the time I record on the prescription. I endorse it
most of the time.
Q. When did you start doing that? Has that always been part of your
A. Always been.
Q. Always been part of your practice?
A. Yes. When you ring up for
dosage or if there is interval missed, we often tell the patient to come back
the following day because
we have to send the script back to the doctor and have
it adjusted, or amended. We are aware of the procedure.
Q. The other question I have related to mainly the supply of the Sudafed.
There were a series of questions on this topic and then Mr Chen asked
some questions about out of date drugs. After that the questioning
returned to
particular 8.
CHAIRMAN: Q. Just coming back to this question of contacting the doctors, I
think you said in your evidence in relation to Dr Jackson,
relation to the Hypnodorm, that you contacted him on the first occasion in
relation to Mr C, is that correct?
A. Mr C or Jonathan P.
Q. It might have been Mr P. I'm not 100 percent sure but did you make
a note of that? Did you endorse that?
A. Being a private prescription I
must have endorsed on the part that was disposed. I tried to look for the
endorsement but I usually
endorse after I have spoken to the doctor, but being a
private script we only kept one of the duplicates.
Q. So you have two versions of that script as you are saying? You finish up
after a dispensing with two?
A. Usually a prescription comes in duplicates.
We put big dispensing label on the original one, or usually the claimable one,
that is not a case of claiming and the dispensing longer label on the
duplicate, but with the private prescription we only keep one
copy, unlike the
PBS medication where we send one away and we keep one for record. With the
private prescription we only keep one
of the copies and the other copies went
into the tray with the general scripts and probably got disposed of.
MR CHEN: Q. Can I clarify where that piece gets disposed of, how it get
disposed of?
A. If it is a script which is a non-claimable script we put it in the tray,
which is general scripts and then when we sort them out,
non-claimable scripts we dispose of because we would have a record in the
Q. How do they get disposed of? Do they get destroyed or filed?
A. They are non-claimable scripts. They are in duplicates. They are
shredded and disposed into the bin. For example, like if it
is Amoxil, which is
not claimable script, we keep the document for record, the top script with the
price label. That one is no longer
required we dispose of.
Q. Is that done daily, or do you keep it for a period of time?
A. We keep it for about a week or so.
Q. Who does that shredding?
A. We all do. We all do.
Q. Does anybody check them before they get disposed of, or does it get
automatically shredded?
A. We usually, when we sort the script, whoever sorts the script usually go
through it one more time in case we have missed some
of the claimable scripts in
the bundle.
Q. And that would be a pharmacist or an assistant?
A. It would be a
pharmacist.
Q. Yourself?
A. Myself, or maybe the other pharmacist, Mr Lee.
CHAIRMAN: Q.
I think you said that you rang Dr Cook in relation to Ms M?
Q. Did you make an endorsement of that conversation?
A. I usually do,
but I couldn't find the copy with the
endorsement.
Tribunal did not accept Mr Ng’s evidence that he rang and queried doctors
he revised his answer to
“Most of the time I record on the prescription. I endorse it most of the
time.” In answer to
another question about this he said;
“Being a private prescription I must have endorsed on the
part that was disposed. I tried to look for the endorsement but I
endorse after I have spoken to the doctor, but being a private script we only
kept one of the duplicates”
and then went on to explain about the shredding of the duplicates of private
prescriptions. There was no notation of any calls to
doctors on any of the
copies of the relevant prescriptions in the documentary evidence available to
the Tribunal. Mr Ng was unable
to produce any evidence to corroborate his
statement despite there being well established practices in relation to
pharmacists recording
their contacts with doctors about prescription issues.
any event, Mr Ng had a discretion as a pharmacist not to dispense prescriptions
that were for what the pharmacist considered, in
the light of their professional
training and knowledge, to be too many tablets or too high a dosage or tablets
provided at intervals
that were too frequent for the safe supply of drugs of
addiction. Mr Ng did not exercise that discretion in 2004 although he claimed
his statement dated 1 March 2010 that his current practice was to contact the
prescribing doctor “in every instance”
when he received a
prescription that did not accord with the recognized therapeutic standard and if
not satisfied, he would not supply
the medication.
Tribunal notes that it is common knowledge among pharmacists that Hypnodorm is a
legally available drug that is capable of abuse.
Also, it was Mr Vincent’s
evidence, tested on this point, that in persons with a narcotic addiction
Hypnodorm was not recommended
to be given in conjunction with methadone which at
least Mr C and Mr P were receiving. Having reviewed the documentary evidence
to the 19 cases of the supply of Hypnodorm to three patients (Mr C, Mr
P and Ms M) in dosages and at intervals that were well outside
the therapeutic
range, and having considered Mr Ng’s evidence, the Tribunal was
comfortably satisfied that the subject-matter
of this particular was
ninth particular was that between March 2004 and January 2005 at , Ryde
Pharmacy, Mr Ng, having supplied quantities of an Appendix
B substance, namely
Testosterone, on prescription for Patients A, B, and D;
(a) failed to
keep the prescriptions, contrary to clause 41 (1) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
(b) failed to
keep the prescriptions apart from other prescriptions, contrary to clause 41 (2)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
requirement that these prescriptions are to be kept apart from other
prescriptions except those for drugs of addiction should
have resulted in the
inspectors finding these prescriptions easily, but they were unable to do so.
However, Mr Ng found them “a
few months ago”. His evidence on where
and how he found them was not clear and he admitted to failing to keep the
prescriptions
“properly”. He claimed to have found prescriptions for
all three patients referred to in the particular. He said:
the prescriptions and I found these prescriptions a few months ago, but somehow
the third one was only a duplicate. Somehow
I cannot locate it, but it was
found. I went through all the DD repeats and anabolic repeats and I found these
prescriptions. I
found the three but I'm sorry, I only have the two with me
Tribunal notes that despite claiming to have found the prescriptions a few
months ago, two of them were produced to the Tribunal
on the second day of the
hearing and without notice to the HCCC. As the Tribunal did not have before it
the prescription in relation
to Patient A, it was unwilling to accept Mr
Ng’s evidence that he found it in the absence of the prescription itself
documentary proof of its existence. As to the two prescriptions that
were produced and tendered to the Tribunal, the prescription
for Patient B was
dispensed to him twice which was illegal under the
prescription did not specify the intervals at which the Testosterone may be
was submitted on behalf of Mr Ng that this breach of the legislative
requirements arose “from a lack of proper organization
at the relevant
time by Mr Ng.”. The Tribunal considered that the matters proven in
relation to this particular were further
examples of Mr Ng’s significant
lack of judgment in relation to the practice of pharmacy and his lack of
knowledge of how to
meet the legislative requirements for conducting a community
pharmacy properly. The Tribunal was comfortably satisfied that the
subject-matter
of this particular is proved.
tenth particular was that between about October 2005 and about November 2005 at
Ryde Pharmacy, Mr Ng made or caused to be made
false and/or misleading entries
in the pharmacy’s computer dispensing records, namely approximately 2,000
entries for the purported
supply of Alphapharm Brand products to two fictitious
Ng admitted to this particular which was clearly proved by the documentary
evidence. It was submitted on his behalf that he accepted
what he did was wrong
and that it was dishonest. It was also conceded on his behalf that “there
is no hiding that this action
was well below the requisite standard of judgment
and care”. Mr Ng was seeking to gain a better discount rate on his
from the drug supplier Alphapharm by fraudulently constructing
purchases from that company that he did not intend to complete. The
notes Mr Mahony’s condemnation of this activity as unethical and accepts
Mr Vincent’s opinion that Mr Ng’s
behavior in this regard would be
strongly criticized by reputable pharmacists and showed a lack of care, skill
and judgment that
was at least morally indefensible. The Tribunal was
comfortably satisfied that the subject-matter of this particular was
of the subject-matter of these particulars together with the views of Mr
Vincent, which were often supported by those of Mr
Mahony, comfortably satisfied
the Tribunal that Mr Ng’s actions and omissions demonstrated that his
knowledge, skill, judgment
and care were significantly below the standard
reasonably expected of a pharmacist of equivalent experience to Mr Ng. This
together with its finding that Mr Ng’s conduct in relation at
least to Alphapharm, and to supplying of anabolic steroids and
Hypnodorm, was
seriously unethical, led the Tribunal to find that his behaviour amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct of
such a serious nature as to justify
suspension or cancellation of Mr Ng’s registration and thus be described
as professional
misconduct.
Complaint three
three was that Mr Ng had been convicted in New South Wales of offences the
circumstances of which are such as to render
him unfit in the public interest to
be registered as a pharmacist.
particulars of the complaint were that:
February 2007 at the Local Court at Ryde Mr Ng was convicted of five (5) counts
of failure to enter relevant prescribed
particulars in a drug register in
contravention of clause 112 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
February 2007 at the Local Court at Ryde Mr Ng was convicted of one count of
making a false or misleading entry in a record
or register in contravention of
clause 173 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
February 2007 at the Local Court at Ryde Mr Ng was convicted of one count of
supplying a drug of addiction more than once
on a prescription which failed to
specify the maximum number of times, or the intervals at which, the drug may be
supplied in contravention
of clause 85 (3) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation
February 2007 at the Local Court at Ryde Mr Ng was convicted of one count of
supplying a drug of addiction on a prescription
not in the required form in
contravention of clause 85 (1) of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Ng admitted that he had been convicted of the eight offences but not that he was
unfit in the public interest to be registered
as a pharmacist.
HCCC V Schmich
, the Nurses and Midwives Tribunal expressed the following
views that: the circumstances of each of the offences set out in the particulars
may be considered as can the totality of the circumstances relating to each
offence in determining the fitness question. While a
criminal conviction or a
criminal finding may not, of itself, prove the complaint, one or more of the
offences committed may be of
such a nature that it does prove the complaint. In
some cases it may be the array of offences and the behaviour that they reveal
that are the circumstances that lead to proof of the
this case the person prosecuting the charges before the Local Court in 2007
pointed out to the magistrate hearing the case that
the eight charges, all of
which Mr Ng pleaded guilty to, were serious because pharmacists are
“gatekeepers of medication”.
They have a responsibility to account
for potent and dangerous medication, particularly drugs of addiction. When asked
by the magistrate
if there was one matter that was more serious in criminality
than the other offences, the prosecutor referred to two of the offences.
first was giving a second supply of physeptone, methadone tablets, contrary to
the legislation. This meant that the patient received
180 of those tablets
– a month’s supply – and then within seven days another 180
tablets – another month’s
supply, “adding up to quite possibly
a lethal dose”. The second was the offence relating to flunitrazepan
(Hypnodorm)
which the prosecutor noted was known as the date rape drug. The
failure by the doctor to put the dosage in both words and figures
meant that the
dosage could easily be greatly increased by forgery creating risks for the
prosecutor also noted the offence relating to false entries in the pharmacy
register (dispensing records) made between 20 and
30 November 2004. During that
time either Mr Ng or members of his staff made at least 1600 false entries in
the pharmacy dispensing
record aimed at Mr Ng getting an advantage in his
business through discounts from Alphapharm, one of the companies which supplied
drugs to him. This offence related to some of the matters also alleged against
Mr Ng in particular 10 of complaints one and two.
Mr Ng admitted to that
particular and that his actions, either in making the more than 2000 false
entries or in being responsible
for employees who did some of this, were
dishonest. The pharmacist peer reviewer called on Mr Ng’s behalf condemned
behaviour in this regard as unethical.
2009 the Nurses and Midwives Tribunal adopted, from a NSW Court of Appeal case
involving a solicitor, a list of considerations
to assist in determining whether
circumstances of offences of which a nurse or midwife had been convicted were
such that they were
unfit in the public interest to practice nursing or
considerations are appropriate to apply in relation to a pharmacist, and
probably all registered health professionals. They
(1) The onus of
proving these matters is on the HCCC;
(2) An order
cancelling the registration of a pharmacist should only be made when the
probability is that the pharmacist is permanently
unfit to practise;
(3) The fact
that the pharmacist has a conviction for a serious offence is not necessarily
sufficient reason for an order deregistering
(4) The fact of
conviction (and imprisonment) is, however, far from irrelevant and may be
regarded as carrying a degree of disgrace
Tribunal needs to consider the conduct involved in the conviction and see
whether it is of such personally disgraceful character
that the pharmacist
should not remain a member of an honourable profession;
(6) The fact
that the pharmacist pleaded guilty to the charge will usually be counted in
their favour. However, it is appreciated
that not all pleas of guilty
necessarily show remorse;
(7) Conduct not
occurring in the course of professional practice may demonstrate unfitness if it
amounts to incompatibility with the
personal qualities essential for the conduct
of practice. There may not even have been any criminal conviction with respect
conduct. This is particularly so where the conduct over a long period
shows systematic non-compliance with legal and civic obligations
(not relevant
in this case);
attitude of the professional association (or a peer reviewer) is of considerable
significance; and
question is present fitness, not fitness as at the time of the crime.
Tribunal notes that the eight offences of which Mr Ng was convicted occurred
with 11 November and 20 December 2004, a period of
approximately six weeks. They
covered a range of acts and omissions that were contrary to required processes
that were essential
to protect the public interest. They also covered some
dishonest and unethical activity and, as will be seen below, were, in some
at least, repetitions of behaviours that Mr Ng had been in trouble for
previously and which he had indicated he would not repeat.
offences were also personally disgraceful in that at least one of them
demonstrated calculated and lengthily carried out dishonesty.
Two of them opened
the possibility of serious harm to the patient or members of the public and all
of them showed a continuing disregard
for the obligation to comply with
processes made mandatory by legislation for those practicing pharmacy.
Ng’s apparent failure to change his practices, despite his claim that he
has done so, as evidenced by Mr Mahony’s statement
that Mr Ng’s
pharmacy was not, on 18 February 2010, functioning professionally and that he
has not changed his business and
professional practices sufficiently “to
prevent a recurrence of the problems” that led to the Pharmacy Board
in 2000, led the Tribunal to the view that any expressions of remorse by
Mr Ng were mere words not backed up by action.
peer reviewers in this matter were strongly critical of the behaviour that led
to the charge of false and misleading entry into
a record or register.
Mahony’s report relating to his visit to Mr Ng’s pharmacy 18
February 2010 together with Mr Ng’s recent actions
and his evidence at the
hearing in which he made claims that he had done certain things which pharmacy
practice requires to be recorded
but could not show the recordings, satisfied
the Tribunal that Mr Ng’s lack of fitness to be registered as a
pharmacist, as
demonstrated by his convictions in 2007, continued right up to
the hearing.
these circumstances, the Tribunal was comfortably satisfied that the
circumstances of these offences of which Mr Ng has been convicted
were such that
he was, and continues to be, unfit in the public interest to practice
Protective orders
the Tribunal was comfortably satisfied that Mr Ng was guilty of professional
misconduct and was, because of the circumstances of
the offences of which he was
convicted, unfit in the public interest to practice pharmacy, it has the power
to make protective orders
Pharmacy Practice Act
were a number of matters that were not the subject of the complaints made
against Mr Ng but which were relevant to the question
of what protective orders
to make in relation to him. The first of these was the fact that he was
convicted and fined for an offence
against the
Poisons Act
1966 in July
1995. However, in December 1998 he was again convicted and fined, this time for
23 offences against various provisions
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Poisons Act
1966 was renamed the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act
then Commissioner of the HCCC made a Complaint, dated 29 October 1999, against
Mr Ng. The Complaint alleged that he had been convicted
of an offence and
particularised seven offences against aspects of the poisons and therapeutic
goods legislation. The Complaint also
alleged that he was guilty of professional
misconduct and particularised 18 different allegations. The Pharmacy
Board’s Board
of Inquiry which heard and determined the Complaint found
both the complaints proved along with all the particulars except for one
prescriptions referred to in two of the particulars. The Board of Inquiry
cautioned and severely reprimanded Mr Ng and placed
a number of conditions on
his registration as a pharmacist. The Tribunal will return to these
conditions.
he gave evidence to the Board of Inquiry, in answer to questioning about the
obligation to ring doctors about prescription matters
he said that he realized
the obligation and that he was now vigilant about the matter. He also said that
he was fully aware of his
responsibility as a pharmacist to the public and to
his profession.
response to other questioning he also said that he was then fully aware of the
significance and purpose of all the (legislative)
requirements for storage and
proper prescribing of all anabolic steroids together with the requirements for
prescriptions to contain
dates, prescription numbers, quantity, repeat
information, all the doctor’s requirements and the name and address of the
claimed in his evidence to the Board of Inquiry that he had been “a bit
naïve and a bit careless” about checking
prescriptions when under
pressure from patients. He indicated that he accepted at that time that the
insistence of a patient could
never be a reason for not obeying the letter of
the law. He also said that he was fully aware of the
Regulations
and that his failure to assert his authority in relation to
prescriptions “will never happen again”. In relation to other
questioning he said that, “I am doing everything right now”.
was apparent from the evidence proving the particulars to all three complaints
in this matter that Nr Ng, despite his assurances
to the Board of Inquiry, did
not comply with the legislation, did not contact doctors when prescriptions were
incomplete and was
prepared to supply dangerous drugs when the requirements for
dispensing had not been met. He did not exercise his obligation as a
not to supply drugs when the documentation authorizing the dispensing was not
complete or correct. Nor did he exercise
his discretion to refuse to dispense
dangerous drugs in quantities or at intervals that were inappropriate for both
the drug in terms
of its potency and the patient in terms of their condition
– for example under treatment for drug addiction.
18 February 2010, Mr Mahony, a pharmacist with 40 years of experience and the
expert witness called on behalf of Mr Ng, visited
Mr Ng’s pharmacy and
reported, as already noted, that the pharmacy was not functioning professionally
and that Mr Ng had not
changed his business and professional practices
sufficiently “to prevent a recurrence of the problems” that led to
Pharmacy Board inquiry in 2000.
Mahony also noted, from his reading of the material provided to him and tendered
to the Tribunal, that Mr Ng had continued to provide
controlled drugs in a
quantity and for a purpose that were not within the therapeutic recommendations,
that he had failed to record
mandated transactions and that he had provided
large quantities of an item in a single transaction that was outside the norm
a suburban pharmacy. Mr Mahony stated in his report that, as a result of his
visit to the pharmacy, he had formed the opinion that
in relation to these
matters Mr Ng was misguided in his attempt to assist clients. In other words,
despite his assertions to the
2000 Inquiry, Mr Ng had returned to old and
professionally unacceptable practices that were contrary to the legislation.
its decision dated 14 February 2001, the Board of Inquiry imposed conditions on
Mr Ng’s registration. One of these was that
while he practiced as a
pharmacist, Mr Ng must maintain his membership of both the Pharmaceutical
Society of Australia and the Pharmacy
Guild of Australia, and to provide proof
of those memberships to the Pharmacy Board each year. In his evidence to the
Tribunal, Mr
Ng admitted that from “some time in 2006” until
February 2010 he was not a member of either organization. Consequently,
in breach of that condition of his registration as a pharmacist for a period of
more that three years until just before the
hearing and prior to his statement
dated 24 February 2010 in which he noted that he was a member of both the
Society and the Guild.
the other conditions that the Board of Inquiry imposed on Mr Ng was a
requirement that he implement the Guild’s Quality
Care Pharmacy Program in
his pharmacy within six months. The Tribunal notes from the evidence that Mr Ng
implemented the Program
between September 2001 and 2003 and again between
September 2005 and 2007. He rejoined the Program for his pharmacy a third time
on 8 February 2010, just before the Tribunal hearing. As the Guild’s
Quality Care Pharmacy Program is an on-going quality assurance
program, the
Tribunal read the Board of Inquiry’s condition as a continuing obligation
which Mr Ng honoured partly in the observance
and partly in the breach.
to the condition that required him to undertake continuing professional
education activities for five years including providing
by 31 January each year
a schedule of the activities that he planned to undertake and a summary report
of the activities undertaken
the year before, Mr Ng admitted that he
didn’t provide the required schedules and that he provided the summary
reports “for
the first three or four years”. While it is clear that
Mr Ng did not comply with the reporting elements of this condition,
unclear whether he completed the continuing professional education requirements
and what the quality of the education he undertook
was. The Tribunal proceeded
on the basis that he breached this condition only to the extent to which he
recent years the Medical Tribunal, the Psychologists Tribunal and the Nurses and
Midwives Tribunal have all expressed clear views
professionals to take seriously any conditions imposed on them as part of their
registration to practice
their profession. Such conditions may be imposed by the
body responsible for registering them to practice their profession, by the
responsible for regulating their practice or by the tribunal responsible for
dealing with serious issues relating to their impairment
or their conduct,
competence or suitability to practice their
profession.
Medical Tribunal expressed the view in a year 2000 case that (conditions)
particularly when imposed in a disciplinary/protective
context are not lightly
imposed nor may they be treated lightly. “Any practitioner whose
registration is subject to conditions
could not reasonably hold any view of
those conditions other than that they must be scrupulously observed”.
Furthermore, that
repeated wilful breaches of conditions would be treated by the
Medical Tribunal as a most serious finding against a
practitioner.
is important that pharmacists appreciate that the same scrupulous observation of
any conditions imposed on their registration
to practice is expected of
this case Mr Ng showed a cavalier approach to the conditions imposed on him by
the Pharmacy Board of Inquiry, particularly the
condition requiring him to
become (and presumably to remain) a member of both the Pharmacy Society of
Australia and the Pharmacy
Guild of Australia. No condition imposed by the
Pharmacy Board of Inquiry is imposed idly. The condition about memberships is
only regularly imposed by the Board as the cases discussed below
demonstrate, but also is one aimed at assisting the pharmacists
bound by it to
keep up with practice requirements. For example, the Pharmacy Society of
Australia provides information about such
matters as professional standards of
practice, protocols on practice matters like the supply of pharmacist only
medications, guidelines
on process issues and desired behavior in good practice
as well as information about journals and monographs and the profession’s
continuing education programs.
Ng’s approach to this condition and to the other conditions referred to
above is relevant to the question of whether he should
be permitted to remain
registered as a pharmacist in the light of the finding made against him by the
Tribunal in this matter.
relation to the particulars alleged in complaints one and two, it was submitted
on behalf of Mr Ng that where there were any inconsistencies
between the
opinions of Mr Mahony and those of Mr Vincent, the peer reviewer retained by the
HCCC, the opinions of Mr Mahony ought
to be preferred because his evidence was
measured, he was not prone to hyperbole and he was not an advocate for any
particular cause.
While the Tribunal does not accept that these criticisms of Mr
Vincent were made out by his evidence or the way he gave it, and that
opinions were entitled to appropriate weight, the differences between the
evidence of both peer reviewers was not great. Mr Mahony
reported that he could
not condone certain of Mr Ng’s actions which he said showed a lack of
judgment and care. Mr Mahony “absolutely
condemned” Mr Ng’s
preparedness to supply pseudoephedrine in the manner alleged (and subsequently
proven) against him.
Mr Mahony also condemned as unethical Mr Ng’s
dishonesty in his dealings with Alphapharm.
already noted, Mr Ng admited that he failed to record details of the supply of
pseudoephedrine as alleged against him and he acknowledged
in his statement
dated 1 March 2010 that there could be no reasonable excuse for his failure
“to record the required details
of supply of pseudoephedrine”. It
was submitted on his behalf that the complaint was limited to the failure to
record the supply
and did not refer to the actual supply of pseudoephedrine but
that the failure to record “properly” demonstrated a lack
judgment and care. While the particular is drafted in this way, the Tribunal
cannot overlook the fact that when interviewed by
a Mr Gavrilovic, Mr Ng
acknowledged that he sold pseudephedrine once a month to a particular customer
who was known to others to
be a pseudo-runner and that he admitted selling
pseudoephedrine at least once to another person who was known to others as a
pseudo-runner.
The pseudoephedrine Mr Ng sold to known
“pseudo-runners” would likely be used in the manufacturing of the
illegal and
potentially very dangerous drug methamphetamine. Methamphetamine is
commonly known as “ice”, “meth”, “crystal”
or “crystal meth”, as well as some other less common names.
consideration in relation to the dispensing of dangerous drugs contrary to the
legislative requirements is the potential for
harm created by the illegal,
improper or incompetent actions of a pharmacist. The harm does not have to have
occurred and does not
have to be proved if it did occur. This is a matter that
is considered regularly by the Nurses and Midwives
Ng’s improper dispensing of Hypnodorm in this case had the potential to
cause overdoses by patients addicted to drugs or
for the drug to be used to
assist in “date rape”. Mr Vincent described Hypnodorm’s
potential to cause harm as 9½
out of a scale of 10.
Mahony suggested it would be possible for Mr Ng to continue in practice and set
out a proposal to achieve this. Mr Vincent did
not agree with that proposal and
explained why. He also said that “a plan to rehabilitate Mr Ng is
possible” and then
went on to outline a proposal that would have required
Mr Ng to work in another pharmacy before returning to his own pharmacy where
substantial changes would have to be made both physically and in all other
Tribunal did not consider that it was appropriate to give detailed consideration
to either of these proposals because it agreed
with the sentiment of a statement
made earlier in his evidence by Mr Vincent namely that, “there is a work
ethic and an ethos
that is inconsistent with being a community
pharmacist”.
Ng was given a chance to save his career as a pharmacist in 2001. The Board of
Inquiry required him to be supervised over a three
month period and placed
quality assurance and other conditions on his registration to assist him to keep
up with developments in
pharmacy and pharmacy practice and the developing
professional, legal and ethical requirements of that practice. The evidence
the Tribunal was that Mr Ng was unable to gain or retain any benefits
from the conditions placed on his practice and by 2004 had
returned to old and
unacceptable practices.
Ng, who was born 1 June 1955, qualified as a pharmacist 30 years ago. He has
been practicing pharmacy in New South Wales for 20
years and has been the
registered owner of a community pharmacy since November 1992. Mr Ng has been
convicted of altogether 31 offences
relating directly to the practice of
pharmacy on three different occasions in 1995, 1998 and 2007. He has been found
guilty of professional
misconduct on the grounds of numerous failures to apply
the law and established professional practices on two occasions first by
Pharmacy Board of Inquiry in 2001 and now by the Pharmacy Tribunal in 2010. He
has been found to be unfit currently to be registered
as a pharmacist.
findings do not require the Tribunal to order Mr Ng’s deregistration
because it has a discretion to make the protective
orders that are appropriate
in each particular case. Nevertheless, the Tribunal should act as consistently
with other decisions as
is possible consistent with making orders appropriate to
the case in hand. It is well established in the case law relevant to the
professions’ tribunals that they must exercise their jurisdiction to
ensure the protection of the health and safety
of members of the public and that
only health professionals who are fit to practice may do so. This is consistent
with the objects
of the legislation they operate
orders made by a health profession’s tribunal should encourage the
maintenance of high standards in the relevant
profession, deter those health
practitioners who fall short of the high standards required of their profession
and help maintain
public confidence in the particular health profession. Such
tribunals should treat like cases alike insofar as it is just to do so
that each case has its own particular circumstances. In deciding what protective
orders to make in this case the Tribunal should
look to the decisions of its
predecessor bodies namely the Boards of Inquiry appointed by the Pharmacy Board
and to the relevant
decisions of the courts and other tribunals.
relation to professional and criminal misconduct relating to drugs of addiction
Mr Ginters drew the Tribunal’s attention
to a 1981 Court of Appeal case on
appeal from the Medical Tribunal, in which Hope JA said that he considered the
following to be
“an entirely correct approach to the
The Tribunal expressed its opinion as to the
seriousness of what was involved in this conduct by saying that strict adherence
statutory requirements relating to the use of drugs of addiction is
required of medical practitioners, and that the breadth and depth
of the illicit
drug problem in this community has reached alarming proportions and any medical
practitioner who prescribes drugs
of addiction other than in accordance with the
law is seriously misconducting himself in a professional
statement has been referred to many times in the NSW Medical Tribunal and it is
respectfully suggested that it applies with equal
force and vigour today to
pharmacists who fail to adhere strictly to statutory requirements and who
dispense drugs of addiction other
than in accordance with the law.
it is respectfully suggested that the following statement, also from Hope JA in
Spicer Case,
applies equally to pharmacists when handling and
dispensing drugs:
[I]t is clear beyond argument that the proper
handling and prescribing of drugs by medical practitioners are of the greatest
to the community. If a medical practitioner handles or carries out
that very great responsibility in a way which shows a disregard
to the law it
cannot be said that he is fitted at such a time to be a medical
practitioner.
support of his submission that the Tribunal should make an order deregistering
Mr Ng as a pharmacist, Mr Ginters referred the Tribunal
to a number of cases
decided either by Pharmacy Boards of Inquiry or by the District Court on appeal
from such Boards of Inquiry.
a 2002 case the Pharmacy Board of Inquiry dealt with case involving the improper
dispensing of the widely abused drug Rohypnol
(flunitrazepam. Hypnodorn is also
flunitrazepam. The Board removed the name of the pharmacist from the Register of
Pharmacists for
New South Wales and made the following comments in its reasons
for decision:
All competent pharmacists are aware that the drug
is widely abused and, accordingly, treat any prescription for it with suspicion.
In spite of this the respondent dispensed a prescription
for Michael Fogwell for
tablets with 10 repeats allegedly ordered. In spite of the
fact that the quantity was larger than usual, the number of repeats absolutely
astonishing, and that the prescription was out of date, he made no attempt to
check the validity of the prescription. Not only that,
he dispensed
on two further occasions each at an interval of seven days, a
frequency far above that which was in accordance with recognised therapeutic
In regards to the lack of recording the name of the person issuing
prescriptions, the respondent blamed pressure of work, the computer
his locum pharmacists - everyone but himself. The Board is entitled to assume
that he was either ignorant of the
or that he has an attitude
that it is not necessary for him to comply with them.
The respondent is not a member of his professional association. He subscribes
to no professional journals and when he receives papers
from such bodies as the
Pharmacy Board, he admits to only reading them sometimes. He gave no indication
of what steps he takes, if
any, to keep up to date with his profession.
The respondent broke regulations of which any competent pharmacist should
have been aware. The pharmacy profession, as well as the
public, need to receive
a message that such blatant flouting of regulations and ethics is totally
unacceptable.
The respondent does not appear to have any insight into the harm he has done
despite his admissions. Therefore the Board cannot be
sure that he will not act
in the same way again. Neither did the respondent show any remorse for his
actions, nor did he take the
opportunity to apologise to Ms Phillips. Rather, he
seemed to blame her for what he did and excused it by saying he was only trying
to help her.
For the Board, the protection of the public is of paramount importance in its
consideration of the appropriate orders. This protection
is obtained by ensuring
that those who are unfit to practise do not continue to hold themselves out as
being fit to practise, and
by ensuring that high standards of practice are
Law Society of New South Wales
The Board takes the view that the object of protecting the public includes
not only deterring the pharmacist in question from re-offending,
deterring others who might be tempted to fall short of the high standards
required of them
Law Society of New South Wales
34 NSWLR 408.
The Board considers that the respondent demonstrated a reckless attitude to
the practice of pharmacy, and abrogation of his professional
responsibilities
and posed a danger to the public. His conduct was clearly likely to bring the
profession of pharmacy into disrepute.
The respondent's behaviour is of so grave a nature as to render the
respondent, in the view of the Board, unfit in the public interest
registered as a
pharmacist.
a 1997 case a Pharmacy Board of Inquiry dealing with a case in which a
pharmacist was found guilty of professional misconduct for
a fourth time said of
the pharmacist, a Mr Mencinsky, about issues that were relevant in the present
He maintained that the matters which were the subject of the
complaint were due to lack of clerical neatness or lapses in time. Dispensing
prescription which was out of date "does not indicate any wanton disregard for
the regulations nor for the patient's welfare. I
consider myself a responsible
pharmacist concerned with patient welfare".
The Board does not agree. Mr Mencinsky has demonstrated a prolonged pattern
of failure to comply with the legal obligations imposed
upon pharmacists under
Pharmacy Act
Poisons Regulations
. The Board notes that Mr
Mencinsky's conduct as a pharmacist has been the subject of complaint on three
(3) prior occasions.
The Board cannot have confidence that the public will remain
protected by Mr Mencinsky's name remaining on the Register. Mr Mencinsky's
behaviour indicates a long history of non-compliance with his legal obligations.
The need to record and monitor the supply of
8 drugs is of
fundamental importance to a responsible pharmacist. Mr Mencinsky has
consistently failed to recognise and apply the
standards of professional conduct
which have been established by the legislature and practised by his peers. His
continued refusal
to comply with the requirements of the
Pharmacy Act
Poisons Regulations
shows contempt for the authority of the Board. If the
public interest is to be upheld, Mr Mencinsky's name must not remain on the
a 1999 case a Pharmacy Board of Inquiry removed a Mr Destro’s name from
the Register of Pharmacists for New South Wales noting
the following
circumstances that have similarities with the facts of this case:
Mr Destro has had three appearances before the Local Court. This is
the second appearance before the Board. The offences are serious.
Mr Destro's
history is characterised by a lack of insight and lack of understanding of his
professional responsibilities. He has
failed to learn from his mistakes and has
failed to heed warnings that his position as a pharmacist and his continued
registration
precarious.
the 2002 case,
Lodhia v Dean
, Judge Balla upheld the Pharmacy Board of
Inquiry’s finding of professional misconduct against the pharmacist Ms
varied the order removing her name from the Register of Pharmacists
to an order that Ms Lodhia be suspended from practice as a pharmacist.
took into account a number of matters, in particular, the following:
Next I take into account the evidence of the appellant as to her
remorse, change in attitude and change in practice. I do however,
in assessing
the reliability of the appellant’s evidence, take into account that she
initially lied to the investigating officer
and did not volunteer a full account
of the facts until after she had been provided with additional evidence by the
respondent which
must have alerted her, at least in part, to the likelihood that
her actions would be disclosed. I also take into account, to her
credit, that at
the time the appellant did disclose the additional facts in her affidavit they
had not all been discovered by the
respondent.
I accept that the appellant has made significant changes to the keeping of
practice records and that she now complies with the various
standards in
relation to which there was evidence. In arriving at this finding I have taken
into account not only the evidence of
the appellant but also the evidence of Mr
Mahony and Mr
the present case, the Tribunal did not consider that Mr Ng was remorseful in
fact. Furthermore the evidence of Mr Mahony (a different
Mr Mahoney from the one
referred to by Balla J) was that Mr Ng’s pharmacy was not functioning
professionally and could not
continue in its present mode.
the 1997 case,
Johnson v Walton
, Chief Judge Blanch of the District Court
upheld a Pharmacy Board of Inquiry’s finding of professional misconduct
that it was correct for it to conclude on the evidence before it that
Mr Johnson’s name should be removed from the Register
of Pharmacists. He
noted relevantly to the current case, although the facts were not the same,
All of these breaches are serious breaches. In explanation it could
be said that the two drug addicts were manipulative and succeeded
manipulating the appellant and the other pharmacist who worked in his pharmacy.
It is also true that the three patients involved
in these charges all had
reasons to be well above average users of the drugs involved. Some of the drugs
were dispensed by another
pharmacist. At the very least, however, this appellant
should have been aware of the real possibility of manipulation and should
been far more careful in monitoring the flow of Schedule 8 drugs through his
pharmacy and to his patients.
The pharmacist’s responsibility is not
satisfied simply because he has a prescription from a doctor. In those
circumstances
the Board was quite correct to come to a conclusion on the
evidence before it that the appellant’s name should be removed from
(Emphasis added)
CJ noted that he had to decide on the appeal whether or not Mr Johnson was
currently unfit to practice as a pharmacist. He
noted also that he had evidence
before him that Mr Johnson was quite reformed and contrite about his previous
behavior and that there
was no real chance of repetition. Furthermore, there was
overwhelming evidence that Mr Johnson had gone out of his way over the previous
five years to ensure that his pharmacy was conducted in an exemplary manner.
Blanch CJ took the view that because of the very strong
evidence of Mr
Johnson’s current capacity and attitudes, that deregistration did not mean
that re-registration was never possible
and that there was a public interest in
Mr Johnson being able to continue to run his practice, he imposed a fine on Mr
Johnson and
placed conditions on his registration.
support of his submission that the appropriate order in this case was to place
conditions on Mr Ng’s registration, Mr Griscti
referred the Tribunal to
other Pharmacy Board of Inquiry cases. The 2005 case,
elements similar to the present case but some significant differences after the
issues of concern came to light. In that
case the parties “reached an
agreement about certain facts in the matter”. Mr Chiotis admitted some of
the allegations
and that some of the particulars in the case amounted to
professional misconduct. Mr Ng’s admissions were only to those factual
matters clearly proven by the documentary evidence. He did not admit to some key
matters and did not admit to the consequences of
his behavior. The Board of
Inquiry accepted that Mr Chiotis was not only contrite but also using his
experience to assist others
in the profession to understand their professional
responsibilities. Mr Chiotis was found guilty of professional misconduct and a
substantial number of conditions were placed on his registration as a
pharmacist. These conditions were to apply for between three
Griscti also referred the Tribunal to
, a case involving the
former pharmacy business partner of Mr Chiotis and decided on the same day
The Board of
Inquiry found Mr Leftakis guilty of professional misconduct but also found that
the particular breaches ceased in practical
terms when the drugs were dispensed,
but noted that it was the potential for harm that was important. The Board of
Inquiry accepted
the peer reviewer’s report that Mr Leftakis was fit and
competent to practice and the further evidence that he had gained insight
his contraventions and was unlikely to commit a similar breach in the future.
His registration was subject to conditions lasting
five years.
Tribunal considered the post breach behaviour of the pharmacists in those two
cases was significantly different from the behavior
of Mr Ng since his first
conviction in 1995 sufficient to justify distinguishing them.
next case referred to by Mr Griscti,
Theodorou v Dean
distinguished from the present case because of Judge Phegan’s view that,
since the Board of Inquiry’s decision
in that case there was “very
substantial evidence that the appellant has set out in a quite positive way to
respond to the
decision and to correct the inadequate practices which were
clearly exposed on the evidence before the Board.” That is not
evidence in the current
final case referred to by Mr Griscti,
Johnson v Walton,
is referred to
above. When considered, it does not assist Mr Ng’s case. However, it did
raise the issue of public interest
in the pharmacist being able continue to run
his practice. Mr Ng’s two referees, a general practitioner and a retired
sociologist,
both referred to Mr Ng personally providing a home delivery service
to patients who were house bound or elderly. While the Tribunal
acknowledges
these acts of generosity on Mr Ng’s part, they do not justify the Tribunal
overlooking his serious professional
misconduct and his current unfitness to be
registered as a pharmacist.
Ginters submitted on behalf of the HCCC that Mr Ng should be deregistered and
that at least one year should elapse before he could
apply to the Tribunal for
re-registration. The Tribunal considered that given the whole of the evidence of
Mr Ng’s breaches
of the legislation and his actions and omissions that led
to the findings of professional misconduct against him and his current
to be registered, that a period of at least two years must elapse before he may
apply to the Tribunal, or any successor
tribunal for an order allowing
re-registration.
Tribunal made its orders accordingly, and also a suppression order.
[2009] NSWPHT 1
60 CLR 336.
Pharmacy Practice Act
2-3-2010 pp
Transcript 2-3-2010 pp
Transcript 2-3-2010 p
HCCC v Schmich
[2009] NSWNMT 19
[37]. The Court of Appeal case is
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court v P
[2003] NSWCA
HCCC v Powell
[2008] NSWNMT 19
and the cases referred to in
(Medical Tribunal of NSW, 20 September
HCCC v Sunjic
[2008] NSWNMT 12
Rawcliffe v HCCC
[2009] NSWNMT 16
HCCC v Gilmour
[2010] NSWNMT 6
Pharmacy Practice Act
NSW Medical Board
(Unreported, NSW Court of Appeal, 19 February 1981, Hope
[2002] NSWPB
[1997] NSWPB
[1999] NSWPB
[2002] NSWDC
[1996] NSWDC
[2005] NSWPB
[2005] NSWPB
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (311 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter