URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/233.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Montenegro v Legal Profession Admission Board [2025] NSWCA 233 (21 October 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Montenegro v Legal Profession Admission Board
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 233
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Date of Orders:
21 October 2025
Decision Date:
21 October 2025
(1) Pursuant to r 7.36(1) of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
the applicant is referred to the registrar for referral to a barrister on the
Pro Bono Panel for the provision of advice in
relation to the proceedings.
Catchwords:
CIVIL PROCEDURE – Application for pro bono referral – Relevant
considerations discussed – Referral confined to the
provision of advice in
relation to proceedings
Legislation Cited:
Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW),
Uniform Civil Procedure
(NSW), rr 7.36, 7.37, 7.38, 7.39, 7.40
Cases Cited:
Allchin v Hunter Water Corporation (No 2)
[2024] NSWCA 315
Concord Repatriation General Hospital
[2007] NSWSC 602
Renshaw v New South
Wales Lotteries Corporation Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWCA 41
Procedural rulings
Cesar Montenegro (Applicant)
Legal Profession Uniform Admission Board
(Respondent)
Representation:
Applicant (Self-represented)
Solicitors:
Crown Solicitor for NSW
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/405720
Publication Restriction:
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
By notice of motion filed on 7 October 2025, the applicant
Mr Montenegro
) relevantly seeks an order pursuant to r 7.36(1) of
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
referring him to the registrar for referral to a barrister or solicitor on the
Pro Bono Panel for the provision of legal assistance
in relation to the
proceedings.
substantive proceedings to which this application relates arise from Mr
Montenegro’s unsuccessful attempts to obtain from
the respondent
) a compliance certificate, under
Legal Profession
Uniform Law
Uniform Law
), for the purposes of
obtaining admission (or, in his case, readmission) as a legal practitioner under
Uniform Law
. According to Mr Montenegro’s initiating
process the LPAB made relevant decisions in this regard on 18 June 2024 and 8
2024. On 9 September 2025 Mr Montenegro filed a “final amended
summons” in which he seeks to review and quash those decisions
grounds, and relief extending to orders in the nature of mandamus requiring
reconsideration of his applications by the
LPAB and, more ambitiously, a
declaration that he satisfies all the requirements for admission. The final
amended summons raises
a number of grounds going to the procedure adopted by the
LPAB, including alleged bad faith, bias or apprehended bias and legal errors
affecting the criteria applied, or erroneously not applied, by the LPAB.
Council of the Law Society was previously a party to the proceedings, but was
removed by order of Harrison JA on 2 October 2025.
support of his application for an order for referral under r 7.36 of the UCPR
Mr Montenegro relies on an affidavit that he affirmed on 7 October 2025. In
his affidavit Mr Montenegro has expanded on his grounds
of complaint about the
validity of the decisions made by the LPAB, including to complain about
perceived conflicts of interest because
of the involvement of particular
decision-makers and questions about the constitutional appropriateness of
involving judicial officers
in the process of decision-making. Mr Montenegro
says that his claim raises complex and important issues that extend “well
beyond” his personal capacity. He explains that he is not in full-time
employment and cannot afford private representation.
He is on social security
and holds a pensioner’s concession card as a result of disabilities from
which he suffers.
Montenegro has also foreshadowed that he wishes to subpoena the Law Society
to obtain what he says are relevant documents relating
to the decision-making
process that has been adopted. Although Mr Montenegro initially sought leave to
issue such a subpoena as part
of his notice of motion of 7 October 2025, he has
since confirmed that he will not press that application pending the resolution
of his request to be referred for pro bono assistance. This is a prudent course.
If the referral occurs and there is a barrister
prepared to accept the referral,
one of the benefits of receiving such assistance would be to assist Mr
Montenegro in deciding if
it is appropriate to subpoena the Law Society and, if
so, for what material.
LPAB has indicated that it does not oppose Mr Montenegro being referred for
assistance under r 7.36. Both parties requested that
the application be dealt
with in their absence, on the papers, and the Court has adopted that approach.
Considerations arising under r 7.36
considering whether to make an order for referral under r 7.36(1) the Court may
take into account the matters specified in r 7.36(2),
namely the means of the
relevant litigant, the capacity of the litigant to obtain legal assistance
outside the scheme, the nature
and complexity of the proceedings and any other
matter that the Court considers appropriate. In the present case the affidavit
of Mr Montenegro has demonstrated that he lacks the means to obtain
legal advice and representation in respect of his matter. On
the question of
capacity Mr Montenegro has also properly and sensibly acknowledged that he has
raised (or at least is seeking potentially
to raise) issues that are beyond his
capacity to deal with in an effective way.
Montenegro has not been the subject of a referral within the last three years,
so the additional condition that can apply under
r 7.36(2A) is not engaged.
nature of the Pro Bono Panel and the proper approach to be adopted in
considering applications for referral have been the subject
of a number of
decisions of this Court: see, in particular,
Allchin v Hunter Water
Corporation (No 2)
[2024] NSWCA 315
Renshaw v New South
Wales Lotteries Corporation Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWCA 41
). One important consideration is that pro bono assistance
is a valuable and scarce resource, dependent on the goodwill of members
legal profession, which should not be lightly dissipated:
[11]. These concerns arise in circumstances where a solicitor or barrister who
is prepared to accept a referral becomes subject
to obligations under the rules
(UCPR r 7.38) and can only cease to provide assistance when permitted to do so
(UCPR rr 7.39 and 7.40).
Referrals ought therefore not be given lightly or
unthinkingly. One principle that emerges from these considerations is that the
Court should ordinarily be reluctant to refer a litigant for legal assistance
under r 7.36(1) in relation to a matter that appears
to be without merit:
Dafaalla v Concord Repatriation General Hospital
[2007] NSWSC 602
narrowly in terms of the efficient conduct of the litigation, there is no doubt
that it would be in the interests of justice
for Mr Montenegro to receive legal
assistance of one kind or another in circumstances where he has brought a
challenge to the validity
of LPAB decisions, but lacks the capacity on his own
to advance that case. With the benefit of legal assistance, Mr Montenegro may
well be in a position to refine his case, if it is otherwise considered with the
benefit of advice to be viable. That outcome would
be in his interests, the
interests of the LPAB as the respondent and the Court in having to hear and
determine the matter. That in
itself is not determinative, particularly as the
interests of justice have broader dimensions, which include maintaining
on the giving of referrals under r 7.36 and the sustainability of the
Pro Bono Panel scheme.
important consideration in the present matter is that the issues sought to be
raised by Mr Montenegro are relatively confined.
The precise formulation of any
claim is itself a matter that could change in light of any legal assistance
provided, but as presently
formulated the matter involves judicial review of
identified decisions, with a number of grounds of review already raised. Without
seeking to express any view about the merits of those grounds, beyond observing
that this is not a case which is evidently lacking
in merit to the point of
being inappropriate for referral, they are reasonably capable of being
understood. The significance of these
factors is that they make this matter a
reasonably contained one that may be dealt with relatively efficiently by a
barrister who
is prepared to accept a referral. While every referral involves a
significant burden on the resources and goodwill of the profession,
favouring the present application is that there is a good prospect that it could
be dealt with in a way that is reasonably
efficient and productive. Importantly,
accepting a referral to advise would not involve an open-ended and unpredictable
of time and resources. This improves the prospect of a referral being
accepted. It also limits the extent of the burden on the scheme.
Montenegro’s application seeks a general referral for “legal
assistance”. I apprehend from his affidavit that
Mr Montenegro would
ideally like to be represented by a pro bono solicitor or barrister, and not
merely have the benefit of their
advice. Pursuant to r 7.37 of the UCPR the
Court may make an order for referral of a more confined nature by specifying the
of assistance to be provided.
the circumstances of the present case, I am persuaded that it is in the
interests of justice to make a more confined order, namely
an order for referral
for the provision of advice in relation to proceedings. That would occur in the
context of the existing scheme
which involves referral to the Bar Association
for consideration by barristers who are members of the association. A referral
that contained nature may be more likely to be accepted by a barrister than a
referral requiring them to commit to representation
of Mr Montenegro. It is also
likely to be of considerable value to Mr Montenegro in understanding, refining
and advancing his claims,
if they are confirmed to be viable. It may transpire
from the provision of such advice that amendments to the “final amended
summons” are required. However, I do not consider it to be in the
interests of justice to make the preparation of such a document
an express part
of the referral. In adopting that approach I am mindful that Mr Montenegro has
shown himself capable of drafting
documents which are reasonably intelligible,
and with the benefit of legal advice he may well be in a position to give effect
that advice. A referral to provide advice could potentially lead to an
arrangement for pro bono representation, and if necessary
the Court may give
further consideration to an additional referral of that kind at a later point:
am therefore satisfied that it is appropriate to order pursuant to r 7.36(1) of
the UCPR that the applicant is referred to the registrar
for referral to a
barrister on the Pro Bono Panel for the provision of advice in relation to the
proceedings.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (226 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter