URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCCA/2025/180.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RC v R [2025] NSWCCA 180 (7 November 2025)
Court of Criminal Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCCA 180
Hearing Date(s):
25 June 2025
Date of Orders:
07 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Adamson JA at [1]
Garling J at [2]
Sweeney J at [88]
(1) Grant leave to appeal.
Catchwords:
CRIME – Appeal and review – Appeal from District Court to
Supreme Court – Appeal against conviction – Miscarriage
– Whether unedited transcript containing prejudicial material was provided
to the jury – Standard of proof
– Where balance of probabilities
determined to be appropriate standard of proof where the appeal is based on a
finding of fact
CRIME – Sexual offences – Indecent
assault of a person under 16 years of age – Applicant found guilty by a
– Aggregate sentence imposed
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE –
Trial – Jury – Access to transcript – Irregularities –
Where unedited transcript
containing prejudicial material may have been provided
to the jury – Where evidence from a previous trial may have been provided
to the jury in a second trial after the charges relevant to that evidence had
been withdrawn – Where no practitioners in the
trial have any recollection
of an incorrect transcript being provided to the jury – Where the primary
evidence of the applicant
is an unedited transcript from the court file which
was marked for identification – Where the Court unable to infer that the
incorrect transcript was provided to the jury based on the evidence before it
– Where practitioners were alert to the need
to ensure the correctness of
transcripts as a result of an error earlier in the trial – Where the
primary evidence at trial
was of a small number of recorded interviews –
Where significant discrepancies in the transcript and recorded interview would
have been alerted to the Judge – Where the recording was played whilst the
jury were in possession of the transcript and no
discrepancy was raised by any
party in the court room at the time – Where the Court was not satisfied as
a matter of fact that
the jury received an inappropriate transcript –
Miscarriage of justice not established – Appeal dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) s 61M(2)
Cases Cited:
Brawn v The King
[2025] HCA 20
; (2025) 423 ALR 69
Texts Cited:
Not Applicable
Principal judgment
Crown (Resp)
Representation:
S Hall SC / J Leaver (App)
Solicitors:
Legal Aid NSW (App)
Solicitor for Public
Prosecutions (Resp)
File Number(s):
2018/138989
Publication Restriction:
Not Applicable
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
District Court
Date of Decision:
05 October 2023
File Number(s):
2018/138989
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
In a trial before his Honour Judge Grant in the District Court in October
2023 (“the second trial”), the applicant, RC,
was convicted of six
offences, contrary to s 61M(2) of the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) of indecent
assault of a person under 16 years. Three of those offences were committed
between August 2013 and June 2015, against
the victim to whom the pseudonym
“PH” has been given, with the other three offences committed over a
three-month period
in 2016, involving the victim given the pseudonym
By way of context, the October 2023 convictions stemmed from the
applicant’s second trial in relation to the charges. In a previous
(“the first trial”), the Indictment had included three additional
charges, against another complainant, given the
pseudonym “CG”. The
primary evidence in the first trial took the form of two specialist police
interviews, known as Joint
Investigation Review Team Interviews (“JIRT
Interviews”), of PH and JB, oral evidence of PH and JB, and a tendered
of CG. In the first trial, the applicant was convicted of all counts
on the Indictment. On appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal,
the Court held
that the statement of CG was inadmissible and thereafter quashed the convictions
and ordered a new trial.
In the second trial, the Crown did not proceed against the applicant on any
of the charges which related to CG. The Crown tendered
the JIRT Interviews of PH
and JB and provided the jury with transcripts of both interviews, which
functioned as aide-memoires. The
Crown tendered the recorded evidence of both
complainants at the first trial, also providing transcripts to the jury. Prior
second trial, both parties had agreed to necessary edits to the
transcript, in part, because the charges related to CG were no longer
Before the Court, on this appeal, the applicant submits that, whilst the jury
were observing PH’s JIRT Interview in the second
trial, they were provided
with an erroneous and unedited transcript (“the unedited
transcript”). The applicant submits
that, instead of being edited to
remove irrelevant references to the charges related to CG, the transcript
provided to the jury highlighted
those sections. This contention is based on the
solicitor for the applicant locating the unedited transcript within the court
which had been marked as MFI-2, suggesting that this unedited transcript
had been provided to the jury as an aide-memoire whilst
they reviewed the JIRT
Interview of PH.
Ultimately, the applicant sought leave to appeal on the basis that the
erroneous transcript was unknowingly provided to the jury,
and that material of
such a prejudicial nature being provided to a jury, apparently unwittingly, was
an irregularity that had a meaningful
potential to affect the outcome of the
proceedings. Further, the Crown conceded that, if it were proven that the
unedited transcript
was provided to the jury, then a miscarriage of justice was
established.
(Garling J, Adamson JA agreeing, Sweeney J dissenting),
dismissed the appeal.
Held per Garling J (Adamson JA agreeing), dismissing the appeal:
The only issue for determination in the appeal was whether, having regard to
the evidence on the appeal, the Court was satisfied,
on the balance of
probabilities, that the jury were provided with the unedited and incorrect
transcript: per Garling J at [73]. Ultimately,
in assessment of the evidence
before the Court on this appeal, there were several factual circumstances which
contributed to a finding
that the Court was not satisfied, on the balance of
probabilities, that the incorrect transcript was in the possession of the jury.
The facts supporting this conclusion are summarised as follows:
(1) The defence counsel and solicitor, as well as the Crown
Prosecutor and ODPP solicitor, had a copy of the ‘final’
version of the JIRT Interview transcript. There was no reason for the ODPP
solicitor to have prepared any, let alone 12, copies
of the unedited transcript
for the jury’s use, aside from administrative error: per Garling J at
(2) There was no independent recollection by any of the
practitioners involved as to what transcript was provided to the jury. Put
differently, there was no recollection which exists suggesting that the
incorrect transcript was provided to the jury: per Garling
(3) The transcript of the second trial records two separate
occasions where concerns about the contents of the transcripts provided
jury were raised, suggesting that the practitioners were alert to the need to
ensure their correctness. Further, the two JIRT
Interviews, of PH and JB,
comprised the crux of the Crown case and the practitioners would have been
cognisant of the need for their
correctness: per Garling J at [79]-[80].
(4) No practitioner, or the Judge, raised any concerns in
the court room, and it can be assumed that they were following along as
Interview was being played: per Garling J at [81].
(5) No member of the jury drew any discrepancies to the
attention of the Judge: per Garling J at [83].
Brawn v The King
[2025] HCA 20
; (2025) 423 ALR 69, cited.
Per Sweeney J (dissenting):
In dissent, her Honour held that there was a real, and not fanciful, risk
that the incorrect transcript was provided to the jury,
it being the document
marked for identification by the Judge’s associate, and that the appeal
should be upheld on that basis:
per Sweeney J at [90]-[91].
I agree with Garling J.
In these proceedings, the applicant, to whom the pseudonym
“RC” has been given, was convicted of six offences after a
before Grant DCJ in the District Court at Albury in October 2023 (“the
second trial”). Three of those offences,
being offences contrary to
s 61M(2) of the
”) of indecent assault of a person under 16 years, were committed
between August 2013 and June 2015, against the victim to whom
the pseudonym
“PH” has been given. As well, the applicant was convicted of three
similar offences also contrary to s
61M(2) of the
occurring over a three-month period in 2016, involving a victim given the
pseudonym “JB”.
applicant was sentenced to an aggregate term of imprisonment of 3 years
with a non-parole period of 2 years to date from 14 August
the time these proceedings came before the Court, the applicant had completed
serving his aggregate term of imprisonment.
his application for leave to appeal against the convictions entered after the
jury returned with verdicts of guilty at the second
trial, the applicant
identified a single ground, in respect of which he would prosecute the appeal
(“the second appeal”)
if leave were granted, namely:
“A miscarriage of justice occurred as a result of the unedited transcript
of PH’s JIRT being provided to the jury.”
Procedural Background
are some complicating features in the procedural background which require an
explanation of the proceedings leading up to the
trial which resulted in the
convictions of the applicant.
The First Trial
applicant first stood trial in respect of the offences upon which he was
convicted in December 2020 (“the first trial”).
presided over that trial. The Indictment for the first trial also included three
additional counts in respect of a different
complainant, to whom the pseudonym
“CG” was given.
each of PH and JB had made complaints to the Police, because they were
juveniles, they were interviewed by specialist police
who were members of the
Joint Investigation Review Team (“JIRT”). In accordance with the
standard procedure, those interviews
were video and audio recorded (“JIRT
Interviews”) and a transcript of the interviews prepared.
is not at all uncommon that, before the recordings of JIRT Interviews come to be
played at trial, they are subject to editing.
Some edits are made by agreement
to remove irrelevant material, and some edits are made to reflect rulings on
evidence given by a
trial judge. In circumstances where edits are made, a fresh
video is prepared of the JIRT Interview alongside a fresh transcript
the edited video.
the first trial of RC, the JIRT Interviews of PH and JB were played to the jury
and as well, PH and JB gave further evidence, and
were cross‑examined
before the jury, by both the prosecutor and counsel for the defence. Their
evidence in court was also recorded
by audio-visual means.
the course of the first trial, the prosecutor tendered a statement of CG, the
third complainant who did not give any evidence
in person to the jury. She was
very reluctant to do so.
applicant was convicted of all counts upon which he stood trial.
The First Appeal
applicant appealed to the Court of Criminal Appeal which, on 14 December
2022, for the reasons it gave, held that the written
statement of the
complainant, CG, was not admissible in evidence in the circumstances which
existed at the time, and that the Judge
had erred in law by admitting it:
[2022] NSWCCA 281.
The Court concluded that the convictions ought be
quashed and that a new trial should be ordered in respect of all counts.
regard to the obvious and demonstrated reluctance, by CG, to give evidence
against the applicant at the first trial (which
had led to the prosecution
tendering her statement and relying upon it as evidence in the Crown case), when
the applicant was arraigned
for his second trial, before Grant DCJ in October
2023, the Crown did not proceed against him in respect of the three charges
related to CG.
The Second Trial
the second trial:
(1) the subject matter of the charges against CG became irrelevant and was not
to be referred to in the course of the evidence;
(2) neither of the complainants, PH or JB, gave any evidence in person before
the jury; and
(3) the jury was shown the recordings of their JIRT Interviews, and the
recordings of their evidence from the first trial.
the second trial, transcripts of the JIRT Interviews of each of the complainants
were handed to the jury members, for their
use as aide‑memoires during the
playing of the JIRT Interviews. The videos and the accompanying transcripts were
MFI-2, in respect of PH, and MFI‑4, in respect of JB.
well, the evidence of each of the complainants from the first trial, including
cross-examination, was also played to the jury.
The recordings of that evidence
were marked MFI-3 and MFI-5, respectively. The jury was provided with
transcripts of each of those
recordings as well. Those transcripts were not
tendered in evidence.
to the second trial, in accordance with the common practice, the parties had
discussed, and agreed upon, various edits to be
made to the recorded material.
As earlier noted, the editing, in part, occurred because the offences relating
to CG were not being
pursued at the second trial, and material prejudicial to
the applicant had to be removed from the recordings.
have earlier noted that transcripts of the recordings were provided to the jury
immediately prior to the various recordings being
played to the jury. The
transcripts were collected back from the jury directly after the recordings were
to the playing of each recording, Grant DCJ gave the appropriate directions to
the jury, including reminding them that it was
what they saw and heard on the
video screen which comprised the evidence, and that the transcripts were
provided to them by way of
an aide-memoire.
the playing of the recorded JIRT Interviews and the recorded evidence from the
first trial, the Crown called three further witnesses,
who dealt with a variety
of matters. The evidence which those witnesses gave is not of significance, or
relevance, to the issues
on this appeal.
applicant’s case consisted of an agreed fact which was announced to the
jury – that he had no record for any sexual
offences. He did not give
evidence, and no witnesses were called on his behalf.
entirety of the empanelling of the jury, the evidence, addresses from counsel
and the Judge’s summing up, occupied about
a day and a half.
the course of the playing of the recording which comprised the pre-recorded
evidence-in-chief and cross-examination of JB from
the first trial, during which
a transcript had been provided to members of the jury, it became apparent that
there was some discrepancy
between the transcript with which the jury had been
provided and the recording which was being shown to them.
this was noticed, it was brought to the attention of Grant DCJ, who invited the
jury to leave the court room and retire to the
jury room. He asked them to leave
the transcripts of MFI-5 on their chairs.
was then an exchange between the Crown Prosecutor and the Court, a part of MFI-5
was replayed, a gap or discrepancy was identified,
and the jury were asked to
the jury returned, the trial Judge said:
“Members of the jury, thanks for your patience. It would appear that there
might be some words missing from the transcript
on p 9 between line 44 and line
45. But as I said to you before, it’s what you see [and] hear which is the
important thing,
so we’re going to replay that now because you’ll
hear the words. There’s a bit missing in the transcript. That
recording, MFI-5, was then played in its entirety to the jury.
episode occurred at a point in time after the JIRT Interview of PH and the
recording of his evidence from the first trial had
been played.
jury retired to consider their verdict at 12.25pm on the second day of the
trial. After lunch on that day, the Court was reconstituted
at 2.08pm to deal
with two jury notes.
first jury note comprised a request to have the evidence of the
complainant’s grandmother read to the jury. By agreement
with counsel, the
Judge informed the jury that they would be provided with a transcript of her
evidence as soon as it was available.
second jury note read as follows:
“Could the examination and cross-examination be watched again from the
previous trial?”
Honour agreed, and the Court set about replaying the recordings to the jury.
Again, in the course of the replaying of the recordings,
the jury were provided
with a transcript, which was then removed from them once that recording was
replayed in its entirety.
is clear from the transcript of the second trial that transcripts of the
recordings were distributed to the jury, and collected
from the jury, at the
commencement, and completion of, the playing of each recording to the jury.
replaying the recordings, the Judge reminded the jury, as he had earlier done,
that what the jury saw and heard on the recordings
was the evidence upon which
they should act, and that the transcript was simply being provided to them to
assist them whilst the
recordings were being played.
Ultimately,
on the third day, the jury returned with its verdicts.
on the Second Appeal
the second appeal, the applicant relied upon a number of affidavits - one, from
the applicant himself dated 13 March 2025, which
described and explained the
delay in his institution of the appeal.
second affidavit was that of his solicitor, Ms Janet Witmer, also affirmed on 13
March 2025. Relevantly, Ms Witmer’s affidavit
includes the following
statements:
“8. In the first trial, the transcript was edited to
remove unnecessary and prejudicial material.
9. However, in the second trial, the transcript of the JIRT
(being the same JIRT as in the first trial), identified as MFI2 in
trial was neither edited nor redacted. Instead, the prejudicial portions were
highlighted in yellow, and it appears that
no solicitor or counsel noticed
14. In early December [2024], counsel identified that the
unedited transcript of the JIRT had been given to the Jury.
15. The writer then made enquiries of the Court, the Defence
and the Crown.
16. However, the solicitor for the Applicant now works in
Victoria and has almost no memory of the trial and could not confirm
otherwise whether the JIRT transcript had been edited.
17. Sharyn Hall SC, who was counsel, informed me that she had
spoken to the Crown’s barrister, Max Pincott who also had very
memory of the trial and could not confirm or otherwise whether the JIRT
transcript had been edited. Additionally she spoke
to the defendant’s
solicitor, Chris Maxwell who similarly could shed no light on the question of
the redaction of MFI2.
18. Enquiries were made to the Director of Public Prosecutions,
but the acting solicitor was no longer working for the DPP and
we were referred
to the Court file.
19. Further enquiries were made of the Court, and we were
provided with a scan of the court documents, which included a highlighted
unedited MFI2 with the identifying tag.”
applicant also relied upon the affidavit of Julian Stevens, a solicitor employed
by Legal Aid NSW, affirmed on 14 March 2025,
who was assisting with the
affidavit contained the following material. Mr Stevens identified that the
transcript of the JIRT Interview of the complainant,
PH, used in the first
trial, was marked MFI-8. This Court, on appeal, was not provided with a copy of
MFI-8 from the first trial.
The transcript used in the second trial was, with
respect to PH, as earlier noted, marked MFI-2.
Stevens says that, in the preparation of the appeal, “
all relevant
trial material was requested from the Court of Criminal Appeal section of the
District Court of NSW Registry
then said this:
“6. As part of that material, our office was provided a
scanned copy of MFI 2 in the 2023 trial. The MFI was a complete transcript
PH’s JIRT which included portions that were highlighted in yellow. I
observed that there were no redactions to the transcript.”
Stevens made enquiries with the relevant DPP office, who were unable to provide
him with any copy of MFI-2 which might have been
in their possession.
Stevens then engaged in an exercise of listening to a copy of the JIRT
Interview, which was contained in the court file, and which
MFI‑9, from the first trial. He compared that interview with the
highlighted parts of the unedited transcript of
comparison of those two items undertaken by Mr Stevens showed that there had
been some editing within the contents of the transcript.
He lists the details of
those in the following way:
“a) Last two words of A 35 –
b) Q122 – first line of Q133 –
c) Q136 – A 138 –
d) A164 – Q165 –
e) Q167 – A167 –
f) From ‘after’ Q171 –
g) Q186 – A187 –
the appeal, the Crown relied upon the affidavit of Philippa Winston, a solicitor
in the employ of the Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions
(“ODPP”). Ms Winston, by reference to the file kept physically
by the ODPP and the computer files
in relation to the proceedings, made the
following statements:
“4. At the second trial of this matter in October 2023,
the Crown was represented by Crown Prosecutor Mr Pincott and Ms Coleman,
solicitor. The applicant was represented by Mr Watson, barrister, and
Mr Moody, solicitor.
5. On 26 September 2023, Ms Coleman emailed the Crown
Prosecutor, Mr Watson and Mr Moody and attached ‘proposed transcript
and timing edits’ to the evidence of the two complainants. ...
6. On 29 September 2023, in the week before trial,
Ms Coleman emailed the Crown Prosecutor, Mr Watson and Mr Moody. ...
7. The email attached ‘final copies’ of the
relevant transcripts for trial consistent with the edits agreed between
parties. A copy of the final edit of the JIRT Interview for the complainant PH
is attached and marked ‘C’.”
of the witnesses for the applicant, or for the Crown, were cross‑examined
in the course of the appeal proceedings.
Submissions for the
applicant’s submissions contended that the transcript of PH’s JIRT
Interview which was provided to the jury, was the
unedited and highlighted
version that appeared on the court file marked as MFI-2 (“the unedited
transcript”). He further
submitted that, for the purposes of this appeal,
the highlighting in MFI-2, which was made available to this Court, was intended
to indicate parts of the JIRT Interview that should have been edited out and
which were edited out in the transcript distributed
by email from
Ms Coleman, the solicitor at the ODPP, to the lawyers involved in the
second trial (“the final transcript”).
following submission was put on the assumption that the copy of MFI-2 in the
court file was a copy of the transcript that the
jury received:
“23. The transcript the jury received on the two
occasions that they were played MFI-2 was the full transcript of PH’s
original, unedited JIRT Interview. That version of the transcript:
a) did not redact portions of the interview that had been
removed from MFIs 8 and 9 in the original trial, and
b) did not redact prejudicial references to assertions that the
applicant had ‘
tried to molest
’, had been ‘
’ and threatened to rape CG.”
applicant submitted that it was clear that the allegations which were contained
in the transcript formed no part of the Crown
case and that:
“... the parties and his Honour may not have been aware that an unedited
version of the transcript of MFI-2 went to the jury.”
Ultimately,
the applicant submitted that material:
“... of such a prejudicial nature being provided to a jury, apparently
unwittingly, was an irregularity that had a meaningful
potential to affect the
outcome of the proceedings.”
Hall SC explained, in her oral submissions, that the applicant’s
contention was:
“... that in the usual course, what would be provided to the jury would be
the exact same copy as what is marked for identification,
and so at its highest,
what the applicant submits that your Honours could take from the presence of the
marked up copy of MFI-2 being
before the court, is that the jury were provided
with information they ought not to have been.”
Hall SC submitted that this Court was not obliged to make a positive finding
that the wrong transcript, in fact, was handed to
the jury, rather, she
submitted that it was sufficient if this Court was satisfied:
“... that there is [a] very high risk that this [unedited] transcript was
before the jury and that there is, resulting from
that, prejudice to the
applicant.”
Hall SC also accepted that, if the Court were to be satisfied that the incorrect
transcript was placed before the jury, the Court
must apply the test found at
Brawn v The King
[2025] HCA 20
; (2025) 423 ALR 69, where the High
Court said:
“For other errors or irregularities to constitute a miscarriage of
justice, they must be material in the sense that the error
or irregularity could
realistically have affected the reasoning of the jury to a verdict of guilty ...
In this context, ‘
’ is to be understood as meaning
having the capacity to
realistically
’ distinguishes the relevant assessment of the
possibility of a different outcome from a possibility that is fanciful or
improbable.
This threshold to establish that an error or irregularity is
material must be satisfied by the appellant, but that burden is not
onerous. It
does not invite an analysis of whether, but for the error, the accused might or
might not have been found guilty.”
The Crown’s Submissions
Crown submits that the Court would not be satisfied that the erroneous unedited
transcript was provided to the jury and that,
accordingly, the factual
foundation for the applicant’s contention that there had been a
miscarriage of justice had not been
Crown submits that consideration of the whole of the evidence does not support a
finding that the unedited transcript of PH’s
JIRT Interview was provided
to the jury. The Crown draws attention to the following matters which can be
established from the transcript
of the second trial, and the available emails
between the parties prior to the start of the second trial.
end result of the exchange of emails between the Crown and lawyers for the
applicant, in the week prior to the trial commencing,
was that the solicitor for
the Crown emailed, to the applicant’s representatives (barrister and
solicitor), a “
” of the relevant transcripts for
the trial which were consistent with the edits agreed between the parties. The
document attached
to that email which relates to PH’s JIRT Interview,
which was called “
”, removed the
highlighted yellow portions from the unedited transcript.
Crown draws attention to the fact that this means that PH’s transcript was
not simply missed or overlooked, but rather that
an edited transcript was
prepared in advance of the trial, which reflected the agreement of the parties,
and that, on the probabilities,
that transcript was provided to the jury.
Crown next submitted that the trial transcript, when considered as a whole,
demonstrated that the parties were alive to the issue
of editing and conscious
to ensure that only admissible evidence was before the jury. The Crown draws
attention to the exchange which
took place on the first day of the trial, in the
absence of the jury, with respect to the recorded JIRT Interview of JB to which
I have referred at [
well, the Crown draws attention to the fact that, prior to the playing of the
recording of JB’s evidence-in-chief from the
first trial, there had been
an omission from the transcript of three introductory questions and answers. The
prosecutor sought, and
was granted leave, to read the questions aloud to the
Crown submitted that this Court would be satisfied from the trial transcript
that, not only were edits agreed in advance of the
trial, but that care was
being taken by the legal practitioners, during the trial, to ensure that the
transcripts and the recordings
matched, and in circumstances where this was not
so, corrections were made promptly.
Crown notes that neither the Judge, nor his associate, nor any of the lawyers
present in the courtroom when the JIRT Interview
was played to the jury raised
any issue about the accuracy of the transcript of that interview.
Crown also submits that the fact that the jury did not raise any issue about the
content of the transcript they received “
strongly militates
against the conclusion that the copies they received were anything other than
copies of the agreed edited transcript.
Crown emphasises the fact that it would be very surprising, given that the
plaintiff’s contention is that the transcript
provided to the jury ought
be found to be a copy of the transcript in the file, containing the yellow
highlighting, if the attention
of members of the jury had been drawn to that
part of the transcript, and it did not reflect the video which they were seeing,
they would not have noticed and said something.
the Crown drew attention to the fact that, in the prosecutor’s closing
address, there was a specific reference made
to Q144 of the interview, by the
prosecutor. He said this to the jury:
“And then again, I think it’s at Q144 of the interview, if you look
at it, if you get a chance to look at it, he says
this, the officer said this
You know, there’s a big difference between trying and doing
something’.
the highlighted transcript upon which the applicant’s case is principally
based, Q144 was in the following form:
“Q144 So what time of year was that in year 7?”
in the edited transcript prepared by the solicitor for the Crown and distributed
by email, Q144 is in these terms:
“Q144 Cause it’s, you understand that it’s
two different things, trying to do something and doing something?”
question described immediately above as Q144 in the edited transcript was Q158
in the highlighted transcript.
the Crown submits that whilst it was not an identical quotation, the reference
in the closing address by the Crown Prosecutor
to Q144 strongly supports a
conclusion that the prosecutor was working from the numbering in the final
transcript.
Accordingly,
the Crown submitted that, when all of the circumstances are looked at in their
entirety, this Court would not be satisfied
that the unedited transcript was the
document provided to the jury. It submits that a more likely option is that the
transcript was
tagged with the MFI-2 label in error.
Crown accepted that if the highlighted, unedited version of PH’s JIRT
Interview did go to the jury, then a miscarriage of
justice would be
established. It accepts that the provision of the highlighted transcript to the
jury was a material error in the
sense that it could realistically have affected
the reasoning of the jury to its verdict. The Crown did not rely upon the
in those circumstances.
Discernment
just observed, the Crown conceded that if the unedited and highlighted
transcript was given to the jury whilst they watched the
recorded JIRT Interview
of PH, there would have been an irregularity in the trial process of sufficient
materiality to have resulted
in a miscarriage of justice.
follows from this concession, which I accept is appropriately made, that the
only issue which falls to be determined by this Court
is whether, having regard
to the contents of the appeal book containing, as it does, the transcript of the
second trial, and the
further evidence placed before the Court, the Court is
satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the jury were provided with
unedited (and hence incorrect) transcript.
jury was provided with a transcript whilst viewing the JIRT Interview. The
second trial transcript records that the JIRT Interview
was played and for the
purpose of watching that interview, the jury were provided with a transcript.
The transcript was removed from
the jury immediately at the conclusion of the
playing of the recording of the JIRT Interview.
respect to the availability of transcripts prior to the trial, the unchallenged
evidence of Ms Winston, a solicitor in the ODPP,
is that, prior to the
commencement of this second trial, having reached an agreement with the defence
counsel as to what edits should
be made to the transcript of the JIRT Interview,
and the interview itself, a copy of the final version of the transcripts was
and then emailed to counsel and solicitors for the defence. The
evidence satisfies me that this final and edited transcript consisted
172 questions and occupied 15 pages. The unedited transcript consists of
190 questions and 17 pages. As well, there is highlighted
on that version a
series of questions and answers which do not appear in the final edited version.
my mind, the significance of this fact is that the defence counsel and solicitor
had a copy of the “
final version
”, as did the Crown
Prosecutor and ODPP solicitor who were in the courtroom. There was no reason,
unless an administrative error
occurred, for the ODPP solicitor to have prepared
any, let alone 12, copies of the unedited transcript for use in the Court by the
jury. The only transcript which was relevant to be copied for the purpose of
distribution to the jury was the edited final transcript.
am also satisfied from all of the material presently before the Court that there
is no independent recollection by any of the practitioners
involved in the
hearing of the trial, as to which transcript it was that was given to the jury.
Differently put, no-one who was present
in Court during the second trial
positively asserts that they have a recollection of or knowledge gleaned in
another way, which demonstrates
that the unedited transcript was given to the
jury during the playing of the JIRT Interview with PH.
applicant’s case is that the Court should infer from the fact that, in the
court file, identified over 12 months after the
file was closed, a label
identifying a transcript as MFI-2 had been placed on the unedited transcript, it
was that transcript which
was distributed to the jury.
am unable to draw such an inference. To my mind, the facts are to the contrary.
The transcript of the second trial records two separate
occasions to which I
have earlier referred, when concerns about the contents of transcripts being
shown to the jury were raised.
Those concerns were raised by one or other of the
practitioners appearing in the matter, thereby demonstrating that the
practitioners
were alert to the need to ensure the correctness of the
transcripts and to ensure that the transcripts reflected the recordings that
were being played to the jury.
do not find this surprising, because the recordings which were being played to
the jury of the two JIRT Interviews, and the evidence
at the first trial of the
two witnesses, PH and JB, constituted the substance of the Crown case. It is not
as though, as may happen
in other trials, there are a very large number of
videos being played, the relevance of which is not always central to the
but form part (and perhaps a peripheral part) of the proof of the
Crown’s case.
practitioner drew attention to any discrepancy between the recording of
PH’s JIRT Interview and any copy of the transcript
which the jury
received. It is obvious from a comparison of the final transcript and the
unedited transcript that there were significant
differences. I am not in any
doubt that the discrepancies would have been detected by one or more of the
practitioners in the court
room and, if detected, would have been drawn to the
Judge’s attention.
well, it can be safely assumed that the Judge was in possession of a transcript
of the JIRT Interview and was also following it
at the time the recording was
Furthermore,
the transcript was provided to 12 members of the jury. Whilst, of course, it is
not to be thought that the jury were
under any obligation to draw attention to
any discrepancy between the transcript and the recording, there is no reason to
that, had a member of the jury observed such a discrepancy, they would
have not raised it with the Judge in the courtroom or, subsequently,
summary, the fact that the recording was played whilst the jury were in
possession of a transcript and that no-one in the court
room observed and raised
the existence of a discrepancy of the kind which existed between the highlighted
transcript and the recording
which was being played, is strong evidence contrary
to the inference which the applicant asks the Court to draw.
the absence of being satisfied, as a matter of fact, that the jury received an
inappropriate transcript, I cannot be satisfied
from the entirety of the
evidence before this Court that the applicant has established, on the balance of
probabilities, the factual
circumstances necessary to underpin a finding that
there has been a miscarriage of justice.
those circumstances, the appeal must be dismissed.
proposed the following orders:
(1) Grant leave to appeal.
(2) Appeal dismissed.
I have had the benefit of reading in draft the judgment of
Garling J, and am grateful for his Honour’s account of the evidence
and issues.
have come to a different conclusion from his Honour’s.
the circumstances described by his Honour, where no one involved in the trial
has a recollection about the transcript, the fact
that the unedited transcript
of a complainant’s interview was marked for identification by the
judge’s associate has
significance.
am of the view that there is a risk, and not a fanciful risk, that the jury had
access to the unedited transcript which included
allegations of misconduct by
the applicant against a child who was not a complainant in his trial. As the
Crown acknowledged, that
would cause a miscarriage of justice in his trial.
those circumstances I would order that his convictions be quashed and order a
new trial. I appreciate that if that were the order
of the Court that RC has
served his sentence would be a consideration in whether a new trial occurred. I
would not order an acquittal,
as the applicant sought, because to do so would in
my view distort the record.
am aware that my view is in the minority.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (322 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter