URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2024/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Smith v CSR Limited & Ors [2024] NSWDDT 14 (21 November 2024)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
Smith v CSR Limited & Ors
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWDDT 14
Hearing Date(s):
19 November 2024
Date of Orders:
21 November 2024
Decision Date:
21 November 2024
Russell SC DCJ
(1) Dismiss the Notice of Motion filed by the plaintiff on
29 October 2024.
(2) Order each party to pay his or its own
costs of the Notice of Motion.
Catchwords:
DUST DISEASES – subpoena – application to set aside –
legitimate forensic purpose – documents produced may
throw light on the
issues in the substantive proceedings – defendants are entitled to put
plaintiff to proof – documents
could bear upon reliability of
plaintiff’s evidence concerning exposure event
parties to pay their own costs – dispute could have been avoided if a
plain English explanation was given when
a plain English question was
Cases Cited:
Ahmed v Ahmed
[2013] NSWSC 1814
National Employers’ Mutual General
Association Ltd v Waind
[1978] 1 NSWLR 372
SingTel Optus Pty Ltd v Weston
[2011] NSWSC 1083
(2011) 81 NSWLR 526
Spencer Motors Pty Ltd v LNC
Industries Ltd
[1982] 2 NSWLR 921
Procedural rulings
Peter Ronald Smith (Plaintiff)
CSR Limited (First Defendant)
Pty Limited (Second Defendant)
Shire of Ashburton (Fourth Defendant)
Representation:
S Tzouganatos (Plaintiff)
D Miller (solicitor) (First and
Second Defendants)
D Andersen (solicitor) (Fourth
Solicitors:
Segelov Taylor Lawyers (Plaintiff)
Biggers & Paisley (First and Second Defendants)
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
(Fourth Defendant)
File Number(s):
DDT 2024/236979
Publication Restriction:
Introduction
a Statement of Claim filed on 27 June 2024 the plaintiff Mr Peter Ronald Smith
seeks damages against six defendants. Mr Smith suffers
from malignant
mesothelioma. He is 74 years old.
first defendant CSR Limited (CSR) and the second defendant Midalco Pty Ltd
(Midalco) are alleged in the Statement of Claim to
have conducted the mining and
milling of blue asbestos in the Wittenoom Gorge in Western Australia between
1943 and 1966.
fourth defendant Shire of Ashburton (Ashburton) is alleged in the Statement of
Claim to be the local government authority responsible
for the town of Wittenoom
and the nearby mining leases.
his Statement of Particulars filed on 15 August 2024 Mr Smith alleges that in
1975 he travelled to Wittenoom with Mr Michael Doepel,
who was a geology
student. A third geology student travelled with them, but Mr Smith cannot recall
his name. Mr Smith was asked to
go to Wittenoom by Mr Doepel to assist in taking
samples from the Wittenoom mine.
par 4.1 of the Statement of Particulars Mr Smith says:
“During the trip we went to the township of Wittenoom. When
we drove into Wittenoom there was nobody around. It was a ghost
town. There were
houses but these were deserted. There were no businesses and we did not see any
other people, tourists or residents.
We drove around the township for a while.
We then got out and walked to the mine, about 400 metres.”
par 4.1 of the Statement of Particulars Mr Smith says that the three men entered
the mine and walked in about 200 metres. Mr Smith
could see “solid rock
with seams of hairy glinting silvery stuff, which I was told was
asbestos”. The three men looked
around the mine for about half an hour
before they returned to their vehicle and left. They were in Wittenoom for about
three hours.
Statement of Particulars provides no corroboration for the assertion of Mr Smith
that he was exposed to blue asbestos at the Wittenoom
mine in 1975. There are no
documents attached to the Statement of Particulars and there is no statement by
first, second and fourth defendants do not accept, without further proof, the
assertion made by Mr Smith that he was exposed to
blue asbestos at Wittenoom in
1975. In a letter dated 29 October 2024, the solicitor for CSR and Midalco wrote
to the solicitor for
the plaintiff and stated:
describes Wittenoom as a ‘ghost town’. In 1975 Wittenoom was still
an active regional centre for the Pilbara.
We understand that in 1977 there were
approximately 175 residents in Wittenoom and there were a number of businesses
operating in
and around the township. There is a real question as to whether Mr
Smith visited the town of Wittenoom.”
Subpoena Issued by Ashburton
Smith worked as a teacher at TAFE NSW (TAFE) between 1980 and 2013. Ashburton
issued a subpoena to TAFE seeking production of employment
records relating to
the plaintiff, including but not limited to:
(1) Resumé and/or curriculum vitae of the plaintiff.
(2) Any and all claims for compensation.
(3) Employment contracts.
(4) Holiday leave forms.
(5) Sick leave forms.
(6) Letters.
(7) Memoranda.
(8) Correspondence.
(9) Job descriptions.
(10) Work diaries.
(11) Training certificates.
(12) Training coursework.
(13) And any other documentation relating to the employment or training.
has produced the documents which are the subject of the subpoena and has no
objection to inspection of the documents.
Smith has filed a Notice of Motion, which is the subject of this judgment,
seeking to set aside the subpoena issued by Ashburton
a letter dated 25 October 2024 the solicitor for Mr Smith wrote to the solicitor
for Ashburton in connection with the subpoena.
The letter asserted that there
was no forensic purpose in the subpoena, pointing out that there was no claim
for economic loss. The
letter asserted that the subpoena was a “fishing
expedition”. The solicitor for Mr Smith invited the solicitor for
prior to any application being made, to advise the forensic purpose
of the subpoena.
letter dated 29 October 2024 the solicitor for Ashburton responded as
“1. We refer to your letter dated 25 October 2024, a
copy of which is enclosed.
2. The Subpoena to Produce on TAFE NSW has been issued on the basis of our
investigations, in respect of which our client does not
waive privilege.
3. The records sought will bear upon the existence or otherwise of a duty of
care on the part of our client and alleged breach thereof.”
receiving that response, the solicitor for Mr Smith filed the present Notice of
Motion on 29 October 2024, supported by the
affidavit of Ms Segelov of the same
date (PX 1).
relied upon the affidavits of Mr S Hay solicitor dated 4 November 2024 (DX 1)
and 13 November 2024 (DX 2).
Smith and Ashburton relied upon written submissions (MFI 1 and MFI 2
respectively). Oral submissions were made for Mr Smith, Ashburton,
and CSR and
Applicable Principles
principles applicable to subpoenas, and whether they should be set aside, are as
(1) The documents sought must be of apparent relevance to the issues in the
proceedings –
National Employers’ Mutual General Association Ltd
[1978] 1 NSWLR 372
(2) The documents must be reasonably likely to add in some way or other to the
relevant evidence in the case –
Spencer Motors Pty Ltd v LNC Industries
[1982] 2 NSWLR 921
(3) It is sufficient if the documents could “possibly throw light
on” the issues in the substantive proceedings, or it
appears “on the
cards” that they will do so –
Ahmed v Ahmed
[2013] NSWSC 1814
(4) The issues in the substantive proceedings are gleaned from the pleadings,
the affidavits and the legal principles which govern
the claim for relief in the
substantive proceedings –
SingTel Optus Pty Ltd v Weston
[2011] NSWSC 1083
(2011) 81 NSWLR 526.
for Mr Smith submitted that there was no legitimate forensic purpose in relation
to the TAFE subpoena. The solicitor for Ashburton,
supported by the solicitor
for CSR and Midalco, submitted that there was a legitimate forensic
Consideration
defendants drew attention to the allegation made by the plaintiff, concerning a
three-hour visit to Wittenoom, which occurred
49 years ago. The defendants are
entitled to put the plaintiff to proof on that matter, and to conduct their own
case to cast doubt
upon any evidence given by the plaintiff that he was exposed
as alleged at Wittenoom in 1975.
particular, the defendants point to the allegation made by the plaintiff in his
Statement of Particulars that when he and his colleagues
went to Wittenoom it
was a “ghost town” and there was no one around. The defendants have
evidence, which was set out
in the letter from the solicitors for CSR and
Midalco referred to above, to show that people were living in Wittenoom in 1975
that businesses were being conducted there.
defendants wish to make a case that Mr Smith was not exposed at Wittenoom in
1975 as alleged. This case has two limbs. Either
Mr Smith was not there at all,
or if he did go to Wittenoom, it was at a time well after 1975, when Wittenoom
truly was a “ghost
town” and everyone had left.
the first limb of the defendants’ argument succeeds, Mr Smith will fail in
his case. If the second limb of the argument succeeds,
there are implications
for whether there was a duty of care cast upon each of the defendants at the
time of the visit, and whether
there was a breach of that duty at the time of
defendants in this case are faced with an allegation of a tort committed over a
period of three hours, 49 years ago. The submission
was that there could be
documents in the TAFE records which would bear upon whether or not Mr Smith did
go to Wittenoom in 1975.
It was pointed out that Mr Smith started working for
TAFE in 1980. He was a teacher there involved in the sciences, although
in biology rather than geology.
defendants have no way of knowing whether there is any material in the TAFE
records which casts doubt or light upon the allegation
concerning a 1975 visit
to Wittenoom. But there could be. For example, the documents might include notes
was medical evidence put forward on the Motion (DX 2) to suggest that for many
years Mr Smith has suffered from mental health
issues, including memory
problems. From time to time he has been confused, sometimes to the point of
mania. Some of these problems
were evident to medical practitioners while Mr
Smith was still working at TAFE up until 2013. There could well be material in
TAFE records which bears upon the question of the reliability of any
recollection by Mr Smith. Further, it was submitted that any
material in the
TAFE records concerning mental or physical problems would have a bearing upon
general damages.
party in the position of the defendants in this case has only a very limited
opportunity to test the plaintiff’s case on
exposure. In my view, records
maintained by an employer, which commenced only five years after the alleged
visit to Wittenoom in
1975, and which then cover 33 years of employment, might
have something in them which bears either upon the accuracy of the assertion
made by Mr Smith about exposure, or about his reliability generally as a
explained in submissions (but not in the letter which was sent to the
plaintiff’s solicitor when Ashburton was asked to identify
the legitimate
forensic purpose of the subpoena) the TAFE documents could possibly throw light
on a crucial issue in the substantive
proceedings. It must be kept in mind that
it was Mr Smith himself who said in his Statement of Particulars that Wittenoom
was a ghost
town when he and his colleagues went there, and that there was no
one around and no one to be seen. Clearly the defendants have evidence
contradict this, which would cast doubt upon the exposure history given by Mr
am of the view that there is a legitimate forensic purpose in the TAFE subpoena.
I therefore decline to set that subpoena aside
and the Notice of Motion will
therefore be dismissed.
Costs of the Notice of Motion
the hearing of the Motion a persuasive case was put forward by the solicitor for
Ashburton, supported by the solicitor for CSR
and Midalco, that there was a
legitimate forensic purpose in issuing the subpoena to TAFE. It is unfortunate
that when the solicitor
for Mr Smith wrote to the solicitor for Ashburton before
filing the Motion, asking for that legitimate forensic purpose to be identified,
the response (PX 1 annexure B) did not set out the forensic purpose of the
subpoena. The parties could have avoided the time and
expense involved in this
Motion, if a plain English explanation had been given in response to the plain
English question asked by
the solicitor for the plaintiff.
the plaintiff has failed on his Notice of Motion, and the fourth defendant has
succeeded, I do not think that the fourth defendant
should have a costs order
against the plaintiff. If the cogent explanation put forward on the hearing of
the Motion had been advanced
prior to the filing of the Motion, the parties
could have avoided this interlocutory dispute and got on with pursuing the
through the Claims Resolution Process. In the circumstances I find that
the appropriate order is that each party pay his or its own
costs of the Notice
orders of the Tribunal are:
(1) Dismiss the Notice of Motion filed by the plaintiff on 29 October 2024.
(2) Order each party to pay his or its own costs of the Notice of Motion.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (239 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter