URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION (HCCC) V SIMONSEN (NO 2) [2013] NSWNMT 26 (23 December 2013)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Matter No: 048/ 2012
CITATION: HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION (HCCC) V
SIMONSEN (NO 2)
[2013] NSWNMT 26
(23 DECEMBER 2013)
INQUIRY INTO A
Complainant
: Health Care Complaints Commission
: Andrew Stuart Simonsen
Hon Jennifer Boland AM (Chairperson)
Mr Ronald Wilson (Nurse Member)
Ms Lynette Hopper (Nurse Member)
Ms Frances Taylor (Lay Member)
Date and place of hearing:
December 2013 at Sydney
NON PUBLICATION ORDERS APPLY
Orders and Reasons for Decision:
23 December
Representation
Complainant: Ms H Bennett of counsel instructed by Ms R Lewis for the Health
Care Complaints Commission
Respondent: Mr Simonsen appeared in person
Complaints against a practitioner of unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct found by Tribunal in Stage 1
proceedings. Where HCCC seeks orders that the practitioner’s registration
be cancelled. Where HCCC seeks period of 3 years
before the practitioner can
seek to review the de-registration order. Where HCCC seeks practitioner pay its
costs of and incidental
to the proceedings. Where practitioner admitted some of
the complaints (Complaints One, Two, Three and Five) asserted by the HCCC
denied other complaints (Complaint Four, Six, Seven and Eight) at the Stage 1
hearing. Where practitioner seeks continuation
of registration with conditions.
Whether cancellation of registration necessary to protect the public. Whether
practitioner has
overcome an impairment such that he is fit to practice with
conditions. HELD – cancellation of registration for 2 years necessary
practitioner continues to provide a risk to the public, and continues to suffer
an impairment.
COSTS – Where HCCC seek that the practitioner pay
the costs of and incidental to the proceedings. Whether there are disentitling
circumstances to the usual “costs follow the event” principle. HELD
– practitioner to pay the HCCC’s costs.
Legislation
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW)
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
Cases cited
HCCC v Davis (No 2)
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield (1997)
Health Care Complaints Commission v Rolleston
[2013] NSWMT
Health Care Complaints Commission v Simonsen
[2013] NSWNMT
Law Society v Brynes [2000] ADT 20
Law Society of NSW v
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
King v Health Care Complaints
[2011] NSWCA 363
[2012] NSWCA 80
Lucire v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA
Peter Cecil Harcourt Dawson v Law Society of NSW
[1989] NSWCA
Pillai v Messiter
(No 2) (1989) 16 NSWLR 19
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal decided:
23 December 2013 the Tribunal ordered that Andrew Stuart Simonsen (also known as
Andrew Stuart O’Neill) (“the practitioner”),
a Registered
Nurse (Division 1) be removed from the register of Health Practitioners
maintained by the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency
Tribunal further ordered that a period of two (2) years elapse before the
practitioner may apply to the New South Wales Civil
and Administrative Tribunal
(“NCAT”) under s 163A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
(“the National law”) for a review of the
cancellation order.
Tribunal ordered that the practitioner pay the costs of the Health Care
Complaints Commission (“HCCC”). If agreement
on costs cannot be
reached the parties have liberty to apply to NCAT.
Tribunal continued a non-publication order made at Stage 1 of these
proceedings.
25 October 2013 the Tribunal published its reasons for decision in respect of a
complaint made by the HCCC against the practitioner
(“the Stage 1
Tribunal found the practitioner guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
and professional misconduct. The Tribunal also
found that the practitioner
suffers an impairment, and that impairment is likely to detrimentally affect his
capacity to practise
nursing. The Tribunal’s Stage 1 reasons (
Care Complaints Commission v Simonsen
[2013] NSWNMT
should be read in
conjunction with these reasons.
the orders made following the Stage 1 reasons, the Tribunal provided a
time-table for the parties to make written submissions as
to the final orders
sought. The Tribunal’s orders further provided, if the practitioner
desired to do so, the opportunity
of a further hearing (“the Stage 2
hearing”) to make oral submissions about appropriate protective orders to
and on the question of costs. The Tribunal followed this procedure in
accordance with appellate authority (see
King v Health Care Complaints
[2011] NSWCA 363
practitioner did notify the Tribunal that he wished to avail himself of the
opportunity to make oral submissions and a Stage 2
hearing was conducted on 17
December 2013. These reasons (“the Stage 2 reasons”) are the
Tribunal’s reasons for
the protective orders now
The National Law and relevant legal principles –
protective orders
is useful, prior to discussing relevant legal principles which are applicable to
orders made in professional disciplinary matters
involving health professionals,
including the medical profession, to refer to the power to make such orders as
found in the National
Law and the type of orders which may be
starting point in any disciplinary proceeding before the Tribunal in NSW must be
the objective and guiding principle found in
s 3A of the National Law. That is
“the protection of the health and safety of the public must be the
paramount consideration”.
necessary jurisdictional basis to be established before a Tribunal can make
protective orders is found in s 149 of the National
Law. That section provides
that, if the Tribunal finds a complaint made against a practitioner proved, it
may make orders in terms
one or more of the various provisions found in ss
149A-149C. Section 149 provides as follows:
A Tribunal may exercise any power conferred on it by this Subdivision in
relation to a registered health practitioner or student if--
(a) it finds the subject-matter of a complaint against the practitioner or
student to have been proved; or
(b) the practitioner or student admits to it in writing to the
provisions found in ss 149A-149C of the National Law include the power to
suspend a practitioner’s registration or cancel
the registration. A
health practitioner may be precluded from seeking a review of his or her
registration for a particular period
of time (s 149 C (7)) or from providing
particular health services for a period of time or permanently (s 149C (5)).
The Tribunal
may also impose a fine (s 149B). It is not suggested by either
party in this case that the Tribunal should impose a fine.
the Tribunal has made a finding of professional misconduct, although not
mandatory that we do so, it is open to the Tribunal to
suspend or to cancel the
practitioner’s registration. We note that in the written submissions
filed on behalf of the Director
of Proceedings, HCCC, her counsel seeks the
practitioner’s registration be cancelled and that he be precluded from
for a review of that order for a period of 3 years. Accordingly, it
is appropriate we set out s 149 C (1) (a) (b) and s 149 C (7).
Those sections
provides as follows:
(1) A Tribunal may suspend a registered health practitioner's registration
for a specified period or cancel the registered health
practitioner's
registration if the Tribunal is satisfied--
(a) the practitioner is not competent to practise the practitioner's
profession; or
(b) the practitioner is guilty of professional misconduct; .....
(7) An order may also provide that an application for review of the order
under Division 8 may not be made until after a specified
practitioner opposes an order cancelling or suspending his registration. Rather
he seeks an order that his registration be subject
to a number of stringent
and obligations made under s 149 A (1). Section 149 A (1) is
in the following terms:
(1) The Tribunal may do any one or more of the following in relation to the
registered health practitioner--
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b) impose the conditions it considers appropriate on the practitioner's
registration;
(c) order the practitioner to seek and undergo medical or psychiatric
treatment or counselling (including, but not limited to, psychological
counselling);
(d) order the practitioner to complete an educational course specified by the
(e) order the practitioner to report on the practitioner's practice at the
times, in the way and to the persons specified by the Tribunal;
(f) order the practitioner to seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner's practice, from persons specified
role and purpose of protective orders is discussed in a number of decisions
relating to legal and health professionals (see
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Litchfield (1997)
41 NSWLR 630 at [637D and F];
Law Society
of NSW v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
[2012] NSWCA
per Barrett JA at [20]-[21]). In
Essential to a proper assessment of a tribunal's discretionary judgment in a
disciplinary jurisdiction in accordance with these criteria
understanding of the nature of the jurisdiction and an appreciation of the
purpose of orders made in exercise of it. These
matters were explained by Basten
Director-General, Department of Ageing, Disability and Home Care v
[2009] NSWCA 102
(2009) 74 NSWLR 523
. His Honour made
several important points:
1. The specific purpose for which orders are made is protective in the public
interest and is not punitive with respect to the individual.
2. That is not to deny that such orders may be punitive in effect and that
punitive effects may be relevant in formulating a protective
3. The punitive effects may be directly relevant to the need for protection
so that, in a particular case, there may be a factual
finding that the harrowing
experience of disciplinary proceedings, together with the real threat of loss of
a livelihood, may have
opened the eyes of the individual concerned to the
seriousness of his or her conduct so as to diminish significantly the likelihood
of its repetition and to produce a level of insight into his or her own
character or misconduct which did not previously exist.
The task of the Tribunal (and of this Court on appeal) centres not on
punishment as such but on the protection of the public and the
maintenance of
proper professional standards.
relevant principles, although made in the context of disciplinary proceedings
against a lawyer, are also aptly summarised in
Law Society v Brynes [2000]
Disciplinary proceedings are concerned with the protection of the public.
The Tribunal's duty to protect the public is not confined
to the protection of
the public against further misconduct by the particular practitioner. The duty
extends to protecting the public
from similar default by other practitioners.
It is relevant to take into account the effect the Tribunal's order will have
the understanding in the profession and amongst the public of the standard
of behaviour required of solicitors. "In this sense any
penalty imposed should
contain an element of general deterrence, publicly marking the seriousness of
what the instant solicitor has
(supra, per Mahoney, JA.
at 441) and see
Law Society of New South Wales v. Walsh
(Court of Appeal,
unreported 18 December 1997 at 45).
factors, which if established, may lead to de-registration are discussed in
HCCC v Litchfield .
There the NSW Court of Appeal in discussing the
conduct of a medical practitioner, where the complaints asserted against him had
over a period of five years, said:
In cases such as this, the Tribunal and this Court should not assume that the
doctor has become a reformed person. As Walsh JA said
Ex Parte Tziniolis
67 SR (NSW) 448
"Reformations of character and of behaviour can doubtless occur but their
occurrence is not the usual but the exceptional thing. One
cannot assume that a
change has occurred merely because some years have gone by and it is not proved
that anything of a discreditable
kind has occurred. If a man has exhibited
serious deficiencies in his standards of conduct and his attitudes it must
require clear
proof to show that some years later he has established himself as
a different man"
Disciplinary proceedings against members of a profession are intended to
maintain proper ethical and professional standards, primarily
for the protection
of the public, but also for the protection of the profession.
Lapse of time since the events giving rise to a complaint will be relevant in
determining whether disciplinary proceedings can be
fairly determined or should
be stayed as an abuse of process. It may also be relevant in determining whether
the doctor has undergone
a reformation of character and behaviour, or whether
the incidents can be viewed as isolated or passing departures from proper
professional
standards or attributed to youth or inexperience. Lapse of time
appears to have no other relevance and the Tribunal erred in relying
The Tribunal referred to the effect of the criminal and disciplinary
proceedings on the doctor and their cost "in money and emotional
stress". These
matters would be highly relevant if the purpose of these proceedings was
punitive, but their purpose is entirely protective.
Clyne v NSW Bar
Association
104 CLR 186
at 201-2 the Court said:
"Although it is sometimes referred to as `the penalty of disbarment' it must
be emphasised that a disbarring order is in no sense
punitive in character. When
such an order is made, it is made, from the public point of view, for the
protection of those who require
protection, and from the professional point of
view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to loss of privilege".
NSW Bar Association v Evatt
117 CLR 177
at 183-4, the Court said:
"The power of the court to discipline a barrister is ... entirely protective
and notwithstanding that its exercise may involve a great
deprivation to the
person disciplined, there is no element of punishment involved".
The parties’ submissions
party filed comprehensive written submissions. These were of considerable
assistance to the Tribunal. There is no divergence
between the parties about
the applicable provisions of the National Law, or the relevant principles to be
applied in this Stage 2
hearing. Rather, where the submissions differ is in
respect of the emphasis to be placed on certain of the Tribunal’s findings
and the consequences flowing from those findings.
referred to the considerations set out in
HCCC noted, we would say correctly, that in determining appropriate orders, the
Tribunal may take matters, including the following,
into account:
the seriousness
of the conduct;
admissions made
by the practitioner;
evidence the practitioner has reformed;
contrition,
remorse, and responsibility taken by the practitioner; and
the level of the
practitioner’s insight into his/her conduct and the risk of
re-offending.
emphasis in the submissions of the practitioner in respect of Complaint One,
(which complaint was directed to the practitioner’s
criminal charge and
conviction and failure to notify that conviction on renewing his registration)
is on the Tribunal’s discussion
at paragraph 79. In that paragraph we
found some justification for the practitioner’s confusion about the effect
of the order
following the appeal against conviction and sentence to the
District Court of New South Wales.
One, Two and Three each related to the practitioner’s charge and
conviction in respect of a forged prescription for
Temazepam. As recorded in
paragraphs 15 and 59 of our Stage 1 reasons the practitioner admitted these
complaints, although he made
submissions in mitigation of his conduct. The
Tribunal did not find Complaint Two proved on the evidence relied on by the
the practitioner’s conduct was limited to these three complaints we would
give much greater consideration to the type of
protective orders that the
practitioner submits are appropriate. While the established complaints
(Complaints One and Three), on
the most benevolent interpretation, raise serious
issues about the lack of care exhibited by the practitioner in completing his
registration,
or on a strict viewing of the matter, deliberate dishonesty, these
complaints attracted findings of unsatisfactory professional misconduct,
professional misconduct.
as noted in both parties’ submissions, the matters which attracted the
finding of professional misconduct were the
events at Chesalon on the evening
shift which commenced on 3 July 2011, and the practitioner’s failure to
comply with conditions
imposed under s 150 of the National Law. We made
findings [at 122] that the practitioner was not a witness of truth, that much of
his evidence lacked credibility, and he demonstrated a lack of insight in
respect of his actions in bringing Person A into Chesalon
when he was in charge
of the shift. We also found [at 124] that the practitioner lied in his
interview with the HCCC.
[at 138] the Tribunal expressed its “substantial concern” about the
practitioner’s conduct in admitting
Person A into Chesalon, conduct we
found to be highly improper. The practitioner’s conduct in insisting up
to and during the
hearing that Mr Mutasa, the Assistant in Nursing on the
evening shift, was lying in his evidence was found by us to do the practitioner
findings in respect of those particulars established in respect of Complaint
Four, coupled with our findings in respect of Complaint
5 (the breach of
conditions complaint), led to our findings of professional misconduct. It is
appropriate the Tribunal repeat our
conclusions which appear at [148-149] of our
Stage 1 reasons. We said:
However, our findings in respect of
Complaints Four and Five are findings of serious misconduct relating to patient
safety, (admission
of an authorised person to Chesalon failing to check and
document Patient B’s medication, failure to give appropriate medication
Patient B, self administering morphine to the potential detriment of all
patients at Chesalon, improper conduct in relation to
a fellow professional, and
lack candour with the HCCC, the Council and this Tribunal). These are
substantial matters. They are
compounded by the practitioner’s conduct in
failing to tell management at Montefiore of the conditions on his registration
on and from at least 27 September 2011, and acting in complete disregard of the
conditions either because he thought they were “unfair”
(as set out
in his correspondence to the Council), or would make it difficult to
obtain/retain his employment. Such conduct is
consistent with the
practitioner’s conduct in knowingly lying to the HCCC in November 2011
where he was working not less than five
shifts per week at the relevant time.
The matters referred to in Complaint Four as established individually are of
such a serious nature as to constitute professional misconduct.
considered with the matters found established in Complaint Five, the Tribunal
has no hesitation in finding the practitioner’s
conduct is of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration and constitutes professional
misconduct.
It is also relevant we again highlight our findings in respect of Complaints
Seven and Eight which alleged a lack of competence to
practice and impairment.
The practitioner conceded he had “doctor shopped” to obtain
Oxycontin, although he said the
drugs were not prescribed for him. The Tribunal
also found, [at 62] based on the criteria in the DSM V that the “pattern
behaviours exhibited by the practitioner involving both prescription and
illicit drugs over many years” fulfilled the criteria
of a substance abuse
his submissions [at 28] the practitioner records he accepts the matters relied
on by the HCCC at paragraph 22 to 26 of the written
submissions. That
acceptance falls short of accepting the Tribunal’s Stage 1 pivotal
findings [at 148-149].
mitigation of his conduct at Chesalon the practitioner refers to the Department
of Family and Community Services commencing care
and protection proceedings in
respect of two of the practitioner’s children in the Children’s
Court. It is submitted
“[t]hese proceedings were a source of much stress
for the Respondent as he could no longer see his children”. It is
that the Chesalon incident occurred “just over a month after the
institution of these proceedings”.
practitioner also relies on the fact that the incident at Chesalon was a
“one off” incident.
submissions also point out that the latest evidence of failure of a drug test is
the test conducted on 27 September 2012, and
that the practitioner has not
failed a drug test since that time. It is submitted on the practitioner’s
behalf “his
long term prognosis in relation to the impairment condition is
therefore very good”.
Additional evidence relied on in
the Stage 2 proceedings
prior to the Stage 2 hearing the HCCC served a further folder of documents,
including records obtained from Medicare and the
Pharmaceutical Benefits scheme,
as well as clinical notes from general practices at which the practitioner is,
or has been, a patient,
and records of drug screens from Palms Laboratories
(“Palms”). The practitioner did not object to us receiving those
practitioner annexed to his submissions pathology reports dated 28 February
2013, 1 March 2013,4 March 2013, 5 March 2013, 8 March
2013, 13 March, 2013, 18
March 2013, 20 March 2013, 25 March, 2013, 26 March 2013, 28 March 2013, 2 April
2013, 5 April 2013, 17
April 2013, 2 May 2013 and 5 November 2013. In his oral
submissions the practitioner referred to the drug screens as evidence of
abstinence from illicit drugs. The Tribunal questioned the practitioner about
why there were no drug screens in the period from
May 2013 to November 2013.
He explained this related to the difficulty he had by reason of his employment
in attending Palms, and
also explained the gap was due to lack of funds to pay
for the pathology testing.
documents produced by Palms pursuant to a Summons included two pathology reports
not annexed to the practitioner’s submissions
being screens conducted
after his submissions were filed. Those two screens raise matters of concern.
A screen conducted on 25
November 2013 notes “Chain of custody form not
dated by doctor”, although the report notes nil drugs detected. However,
the latest report, dated 4 December 2013, records “Oxycodone suspected.
Cannot be confirmed”.
practitioner in his oral submissions asserted that the Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme records which were produced for this hearing,
but only for the period up
to June 2013, demonstrated his last prescription for Oxycodone was on 2 January
2013, and if the HCCC
had summoned for production of records to the date of the
Stage 2 hearing those records would reveal he had not received further
prescriptions. That assertion does not sit comfortably with the 4 December 2013
Palms report.
his oral submissions the practitioner submitted that he now realises that he
cannot divide his recreational drug use into one category
of his life, and have
his nursing practice in a separate and discrete part of his life. He said he
now realises that the whole of
his life style must reflect his professional
practitioner relied on four references in support of his position that he should
not be de-registered, but rather that his registration
be subject to stringent
conditions.
practitioner’s submissions also annex a photograph of the practitioner
holding an award. This is said to be an award received
in 2006 for nursing
excellence for the trainee enrolled nurse of the year. The plaque is noted to
be on display at Mt Druitt Hospital.
We accept the practitioner did receive an
award. It is also submitted that during the practitioner’s nine years of
at Quakers Hill Nursing Home that he “has not been subject of
any complaint in these disciplinary proceedings”. We
accept that to be
the case. It is unfortunate that the practitioner did not provide any reference
or any independent evidence of
his nursing skills during this lengthy period of
employment from one of his supervisors.
from Dr Ky Wu, produced pursuant to a Summons, disclose that the practitioner
was seen on 6 December 2012 and 5 January 2013.
On the latter date he
complained of anxiety and back pain and was prescribed Valium.
obtained from Dr Mohammed S Asar pursuant to a Summons issued on 2 October 2013
disclose that Dr Asar received notification
from the Commonwealth Department of
Health Services (Prescription Shopping information service) on 11 December 2012.
The attached
notice sets out the number of prescriptions and repeats written for
Oxycodone Hydrochloride, Desvenlafaxine Succinate (an anti-depressant)
Amoxycillin and informs the doctor that “We recommend you advise your
patient at their next visit that you have obtained
this information from
us”. The notice advises the doctor further information may be obtained
at a web-site PSB Prescription
Shopping Program. The doctor’s records
show no consultations with the practitioner after 6 November 2012 when the
notes reveal “requesting further ix, Discussed
analgesic”.
the written submissions relied on by the HCCC it is pointed out [at 33] the
Tribunal found, in our Stage 1 reasons, that the practitioner
suffers from an
impairment being a substance abuse disorder. Further it is noted that the
Tribunal found “That abuse is demonstrated
by the practitioner’s
long standing use and misuse of prescription and illicit
Discussion and findings
our Stage 1 reasons we found that the practitioner had to cope with many
stressful situations in the period leading up to the complaint
being prosecuted,
including the tragic circumstances of his brother’s death. The Tribunal
also referred to the practitioner’s
troubled youth, his periods in
juvenile justice facilities, and incarceration in the adult prison
into account the practitioner’s background history, the attaining of his
tertiary nursing qualifications demonstrates
commitment and a genuine desire to
improve his circumstances and achieve goals. He expressed at this hearing a
desire to again
have goals to achieve and to resume the practise of nursing.
Those are commendable objectives.
Tribunal accepts that, while the primary purpose of any protective order is, and
must be, the protection of the public, the consequence
of such an order, which
precludes a practitioner from working in his or her chosen profession, is a
serious deprivation of professional
status and concomitant loss of income. It
is not surprising in such circumstances that a practitioner often perceives the
to be wholly punitive. The effect of suspension or cancellation of
registration is compounded if the order restricts a practitioner
from practising
for a period of time such that he or she is unable to maintain “recency of
practice” standing which is
now an essential pre-requisite for
registration under the National Law ( see s 52 (1) (e)).
Tribunal is also mindful of the desirability of a practitioner who can
successfully rehabilitate him or her self being restored
to the register to
serve the health needs of the public. The appreciation of the benefit of
rehabilitation and restoration to practice
is cogently explained by Kirby P (as
his Honour then was) in in
Peter Cecil Harcourt Dawson v Law Society of NSW
[1989] NSWCA 58.
His Honour said:
There is no public interest in denying forever the chance of redemption and
rehabilitation to former practitioners. On the contrary,
the public is better
served if, in appropriate cases, those who have offended, once they have
affirmatively proved reform, are afforded
a second chance ....
practitioner sought to rely on the decision of the Nursing and Midwifery
Tribunal in
HCCC v Townsend
[2013] NSWNMT 3
to support the imposition of
conditions on his registration rather than cancellation of his registration.
While some of the factual
aspects of that case bear similarities to the
practitioner’s circumstances there are several distinguishing features.
an admission by
the practitioner in
prior to the commencement of the hearing
complaints were established to the requisite civil
expert evidence
of successful rehabilitation of the practitioner from his addiction by
attendance on a psychiatrist on a two monthly
continuous basis following the
events surrounding the principal complaint with the practitioner showing no
evidence of depression
of mood or craving for any form of substance
expert evidence
from a professor of Internal Medicine and Addiction Medicine about the
practitioner; and
evidence of
clear urine tests for a period of 18 months.
determining the issue of protective orders we took into account the references
provided by the four referees on behalf of the practitioner.
Each referee
referred to the incident at Chesalon in general terms, but not the other
complaints. The practitioner placed significant
emphasis in his oral
submissions on his regular church attendance and the reference from the parish
priest of the Parish of the Good
Shepherd Plumpton, Fr Gerard O’Dempsey.
Fr O’Dempsey’s reference is dated 18 November 2013. Because of the
the practitioner sought we should place on this reference we now
reproduce the text in full:
The bearer of this letter, Andrew Simonsen, has been a regular parishioner at
Good Shepherd Catholic Church, Plumpton over the past
four years. Andrew is
known to the clergy and staff of the parish. He has a passion for nursing and
has pursued this career with
diligence and determination. I am aware that he
took some drugs from the nursing home and as a result fell asleep on the job.
the time he was upset by some family issues concerning the care of his
I believe his lapse in judgement to be a one off case and that he will ensure
this does not happen again. He has since made efforts
to address his behaviour
by participating in the Bridges counselling programme at Blacktown from April to
May in 2012. He finds
support in attending Church and draws strength and
courage from that attendance.
is implicit from the terms of the reference that Fr O’Dempsey did not have
a full and complete picture of the serious complaints
made against the
practitioner in these proceedings, including details of the events of the night
shift, the admission of Person A
into the facility, and the non compliance with
conditions on the practitioner’s registration. Those omissions mean we
accord less weight to the views expressed by Fr O’Dempsey than would
otherwise be the case. We also note that although offered
the opportunity to
tender a report of attendance at the Bridges Program the practitioner declined
to do so noting the program was
not relevant for these proceedings. We can
therefore place no weight on that program as being one which addresses the
practitioner’s
substance abuse.
the practitioner asserts we should find his substance abuse is a thing of the
past and his prognosis is now good, unfortunately
we are unable to accept that
assertion. The very recent Palms urine drug screen which indicates, although
not confirmed, the presence
of Oxycontin belies the practitioner’s claims.
Even if we afford little weight to that report, the evidence of the practitioner
still seeking prescription drugs in December, 2012 and January 2013 demonstrates
a continuing pattern of drug misuse.
reference to the criteria we identified in paragraph 19 of these reasons we
the incidents
which occurred on the evening shift at Chesalon although a “one off”
were of a very serious nature;
injection of morphine was vigorously denied by the practitioner at the Stage 1
hearing, but he now tells his parish priest
he took drugs and feel asleep that
the practitioner
expresses no contrition for his lack of care of Patient B, or his behaviour in
accusing Mr Mutafa, the Enrolled Nurse
under his supervision, of lying;
the practitioner
wilfully lied to the HCCC and was dishonest in obtaining his employment at
Montefiore without disclosing the conditions
on his registration;
practitioner now acknowledges it is inappropriate to separate his behaviour as a
health professional, and his private behaviour
so that he can use drugs
recreationally he did not demonstrate any insight into his conduct on the
evening shift during the Stage
1 hearing or in his submissions in respect of
Stage 2; and
medical records indicate a person needing significant help with anxiety and
appropriate use of medication particularly
Oxycontin. The Tribunal is satisfied
the practitioner remains impaired.
matters we have identified do not comfortably lead to a finding that the
principles to be observed in making a protective order
would be fulfilled if the
practitioner remained registered, but subject to conditions.
factors which demonstrate rehabilitation that were present in
are, unfortunately, absent in this matter. Rather, we take into account in
assessing the seriousness of the practitioner’s
conduct some of the issues
discussed by the Tribunal in
HCCC v Davies (No. 2)
[2013] NSWNMT 25.
critical importance is the role of a registered nurse working in aged care to
have the care and safety of these vulnerable patients
as his/her paramount
consideration and also in being a role model for those he or she supervises.
The practitioner’s work history is with aged, vulnerable patients,
including the patients whose safety he placed at risk at
Chesalon during the
evening shift. Further, we are not satisfied the practitioner appreciates the
importance of his role as a registered
nurse as a supervisor and role model
those for whom he had direct supervision responsibilities. These serious
matters alone may
justify cancellation of his registration.
and of equal concern to us is the practitioner’s impairment for which he
needs professional assistance if wishes to
return, with the requisite physical
and mental capacity, to practise nursing. Although there is only one incident
of compromised
patient safety as a direct result of the practitioner’s
addiction, there is a real risk if the practitioner’s substance
the underlying reason for it is not addressed, to any other patient who may be
under the care of the practitioner. The
impairment, which we are satisfied on
the evidence before us, including the recently summoned documents, currently
exists must be
addressed to enable the practitioner to be able to practise
matters are compounded by the practitioner’s wilful disregard of the
conditions placed on his registration. His past
actions in this regard do not
inspire confidence that he will fully comply with conditions in the future.
This finding militates
against registration with conditions providing the
necessary safety to the public.
do not consider that, to suspend the practitioner’s registration for a
period of time, is an appropriate order. The Tribunal
notes that neither party
seriously suggested such an order to be appropriate. The reality is that the
practitioner needs to demonstrate
insight, and to overcome his impairment before
being re-registered. Those matters, when and if achieved, can best be tested
evidence adduced at a review hearing. Accordingly, for the reasons explained
above, the Tribunal is satisfied the appropriate protective
cancellation of the practitioner’s registration.
the commencement of these reasons the Tribunal recorded that the HCCC seeks an
order that the practitioner be prohibited from applying
for a review of the
cancellation of his registration for a period of 3 years. The practitioner did
acknowledge at the end of his
oral submissions that the Tribunal may make an
order cancelling his registration, but he submitted we should not impose a three
restraint, but rather a shorter unspecified period.
Tribunal considers a constraint for a two year period to be appropriate. During
this period the practitioner should be able to
obtain professional assistance
for his anxiety and/or use or misuse of drugs such as Oxycontin from a
psychologist or psychiatrist.
He may take the opportunity to find and complete
any suitable courses that will complement or add to his nursing skills. The
practitioner
will be able to reapply within sufficient time to maintain his
recency of nursing practice for the purpose of the Recency of Practice
approved by the Australian Health Workforce Ministerial Council pursuant to the
National Law.
of the matters discussed in the previous paragraph will be of relevance on any
application made to the New South Wales Civil
and Administrative Tribunal,
Occupational Division, (Health Practitioner List) for review under s 163A of the
National Law. We take
this opportunity to point out to the practitioner that
many of the proposed conditions set out in his written submissions appear
the type of remedial action which, if acted on informally by the practitioner,
are likely to be relevant to any review application
for re-instatement of his
registration.
Costs of these proceedings
noted at the commencement of these Stage 2 reasons, the HCCC sought an order
that the practitioner pay the Commission’s costs
and that to aid
understanding of what is encompassed by the word “costs” the order
should specify costs as if awarded
under the definition provisions of the
Civil Procedure Act
(NSW) (“the
Civil Procedure
and also referred to in Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(“the rules”) (rule 42.2).
definition of costs as found in
Civil Procedure Act
, in relation to proceedings, means costs payable in or in
relation to the proceedings, and includes fees, disbursements, expenses
remuneration.
Civil Procedure Act
is not applicable in any proceeding applying the National
Law, nor are the
Civil Procedure Act
and the rules applicable under the
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW). They do, however, provide a
convenient guide, or a “shorthand” summary, as to what is
encompassed in a costs order.
It may be that when rules, in addition to the
Interim Rules, applicable in the NCAT are developed a formulation in plain
can be included obviating the necessity to rely on the
Civil Procedure
definition. In the meantime this Tribunal sees some merit in the
formulation if it aids understanding of parties before the
5D (Clause 13) of the National Law provides that the Tribunal may order one
party to pay the costs of the other party.
is no dispute about the principles applicable to the ordering of costs in
proceedings under the National Law. Ms Bennett has
of authorities in her written submissions. No issue was raised in the
practitioner’s written submissions
principles. The relevant principles having recently been reiterated in
v Philipiah
[2013] NSWCA 342
discretion to be exercised in the award of costs is one to be exercised
judicially. In the submissions filed on behalf of the
practitioner it is noted
that the practitioner conceded Complaints One, Two and Three. The submissions
also refer to the practitioner’s
difficult family and financial
circumstances.
noted in the HCCC’s submissions, unlike earlier legislation, the statutory
provision in respect of costs in the National
Law does not include a restriction
on making a costs order unless there are special circumstances. Rather, the
authorities now direct
the Tribunal to generally order that costs should
“follow the event” unless there are disqualifying circumstances from
making an order in favour of the party seeking costs. Hardship of the losing
party is not a relevant consideration. However, disqualifying
factors may
include matters such as the failure of the HCCC to establish professional
misconduct if alleged in a complaint, to establish
all the particulars of the
complaint, or if the HCCC conducts proceedings in an oppressive manner,
including taking procedural steps
which unnecessarily increase the expense of
the hearing. An early admission of a complaint may invoke the discretion (see
Health Care Complaints Commission v Rolleston
[2013] NSWMT
the matters to take into account in the exercise of the discretion are
the practitioner
conceded Complaints One, Two, Three and Five very shortly prior to the
commencement of the hearing;
the Tribunal
found the HCCC failed to establish to the requisite civil standard Complaint
not all the
particulars set out in Complaint Four were established by the HCCC although
sufficient of the particulars were established
to ground the
against those factors is the fact the HCCC established to the requisite civil
standard the complaints of both unsatisfactory
professional conduct and
professional misconduct. Further the HCCC established the practitioner suffers
an impairment which impairment
is likely to detrimentally affect the
practitioner’s physical and mental capacity to practise nursing. In
summary, the HCCC
was substantially successful in the
proceedings.
and balancing, as we must, these matters we are not satisfied that factors
favouring the practitioner displace the “usual”
Consequently, we find the practitioner should pay the HCCC’s
registration of Mr Andrew Stuart Simonsen (“the practitioner”) as a
Registered Nurse on the National Register of Health
Practitioners (“the
Register”) maintained by the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
Agency (“the Register”)
is cancelled under s 149C (1)(a) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No 86a
National Law”) and AHPRA is requested to forthwith amend the Register
accordingly.
practitioner shall not apply under s 163A of the National Law to the NSW Civil
and Administrative Tribunal, Occupational Division
(Health Practitioner List)
(“NCAT”) to be registered on the Register until the expiry of a
period of not less than 2
years from the date of this order.
practitioner shall pay the Health Care Complaints Commission’s costs (on
the ordinary basis as defined in
Civil Procedure Act
(NSW)) and in the event of a dispute about costs liberty is granted to
either party to restore the matter before the NCAT.
Schedule 5D Cl.7 of the National Law publication of the name of Person A, and
Patients B-Q inclusive set out in the Schedule
to the Amended Complaint is
prohibited.
Dated: 23 December
___________________
The Hon Jennifer Boland
Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (304 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter