URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCTTT/2013/648.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fuller v NSW Land and Housing (Social Housing) [2013] NSWCTTT 648 (17 December 2013)
Fuller v NSW Land and Housing (Social Housing)
[2013] NSWCTTT 648
(17 December
CONSUMER, TRADER AND TENANCY
Social Housing Division
APPLICATION NO:
SH 12/13286
Margaret May Fuller
RESPONDENTS:
NSW Land & Housing Corporation
19 March 2013; 17 June 2013; 26 August 2013
APPEARANCES:
Ms Tibby for the applicant
Mr O’Connor for the respondent
Repairs; Compensation; Withdrawal of Services; Costs
LEGISLATION:
Residential Tenancy Act
Consumer Trader & Tenancy
Tribunal Regulation
Civil Liability Act 2002
respondent NSW Land & Housing Corporation is to pay the applicant Margaret
May Fuller the sum of $1,404.00 immediately.
REASONS FOR DECISION
is a claim by the tenant for the following:
order pursuant to s 44(1)(b) of the Act, that rent is excessive having regard to
the reduction of services, due to the landlord’s
failure to repair;
order pursuant to s 187 of the
Residential Tenancy Act
2010 (RTA) arising
from the landlord’s breach of the residential tenancy agreement;
order for compensation pursuant to the
Civil Liability Act
order for costs.
BACKGROUND FACTS
parties entered into a residential tenancy agreement for the subject premises on
the 21 June 2006. At all relevant times the applicant
was entitled to rent at
the rebated amount in accordance with the respondent’s
tenant is a widow who is now 72 years of age and resides at the premises on her
own. The tenant’s ground floor apartment,
which was brand new when she
moved in, consists of two bedrooms, a combined lounge/dining area, a kitchen and
a bathroom.
parties agree that the repairs to the tenant’s property were completed by
the 21 October 2012.
applicant filed the application in the Tribunal on the 6 March 2012. Both
parties were granted leave to be legally
represented.
APPLICANT’S EVIDENCE
applicant’s evidence consists of a plan of the apartment, a series of
photographs (all of which were taken after April 2011)
and several bundles of
applicant said she first noticed the problem of moisture in the apartment in
2007. She said that in 2007, Paulette Manoukian,
a case worker from NSW Land
& Housing (DOH), attended at the premises and the tenant showed her the
rising damp in the bedroom.
Following that visit she was in touch with the Ryde
carpet in bedroom (1) had been wet since 2007. The bathroom floor was always wet
and the apartment was very smelly. It was her
evidence that as a result of the
dampness in bedroom (1) she moved into bedroom (2). This either in 2009 or
dampness caused her to become stressed. She said it was smelly and she used
candles, tea tree oil and incense to mask the smell.
She said that she always
took pride in her apartment and was stressed by the smell in the
DOH tradesmen had to punch two holes in the internal wall of bedroom (1) and
remove tiles from the bathroom wall, in order to
access the area where they
needed to work in the building.
tenant said these holes were made in 2011 and not rectified until October 2012.
DOH provided her with a de-humidifier which she
used until December
Paulette came to the property the first time, on 27 July 2007 to help her with
some forms she showed her the skirting board which
was coming away from the wall
Paulette returned 7 August 2007, tapped on
the bathroom wall and seemed concerned. She also said a person named Michael
came on the
7 August 2007, but it was not clear to me whether he was there at
the same time as Paulette, or another time on the same day. Both
possibilities seem unlikely, especially as Paulette could only recall going
there on one occasion.
interpolate that I formed the distinct impression that the applicant was quite
confused about the relevant chronology of events.
cross-examination the applicant accepted that she was absent from the premises a
couple of times for extended periods whilst on
holidays with a friend or caring
for her mother.
may be important to observe that the applicant applied for a transfer for
accommodation at Millers Point on 20 April 2009, to be
close to her mother and
other family support. Four months later, in support of the application for
transfer the applicant provided
a report from Melissa Ryan, an occupational
therapist. Ms Ryan visited the applicant at her home for the purpose of her
assessment,
which extended to an evaluation and suitability of her current
accommodation. Ms Ryan makes no mention of any odour due to dampness
report, although the applicant said in cross-examination that she found it
necessary to apologise to Ms Ryan for the smell
from rising
RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE
respondent relies upon the transfer application and Ms Ryan’s report and
failing to mention the damp problem. In other words
the applicant did not
request a transfer for any reason associated with dampness at the
tender bundle included a number of statements and documents. Some objections
were made to the contents of parts of some of the
statements.
Manoukian gave evidence that it was her practice to complete a form detailing
complaints and issues raised during each client
service visit. She recalled one
visit only to the applicant’s premises. She was unable to produce the form
completed following
that visit. She had no recollection of the applicant
complaining of any water in the bathroom or damp in the bedroom. Although, she
said this is the very kind of thing she would have documented, and then referred
to a technical officer for attention. The DOH provide
tenants with a 1300 number
to call for maintenance.
RESOLUTION OF FACTUAL ISSUES
am certainly satisfied on the evidence that the problem with dampness did affect
the applicant’s home. This could hardly be
doubted given the extensive
repairs which I accept were undertaken to address this problem in 2011 and
I am not satisfied on the evidence I have recounted that this was a significant
problem until shortly before the 28 April 2011
when, so far as I can tell on the
probabilities for the reasons I will now give, the applicant first made a
complaint about this
I have already observed, whilst I accept the applicant is honest and was doing
her best to give an accurate account, I believe
that she is confused with the
chronology of events and in this regard I prefer the contemporaneous records of
complaints made by
the applicant, as kept by DOH.
9 July 2006 and 28 April 2011 the applicant made twenty three calls to the DOH.
None of these calls on my reading of them
relate to this dampness problem.
Although superficially some might suggest such an issue.
3 June 2007 the applicant complained of cracks in the bedroom wall, however did
not directly raise any issue about dampness. I
do not think these cracks were
related to a dampness problem. In the same call she requested the installation
of brighter lights
because of her cataracts. On 10 December 2007 she complained
of an unspecified problem with her toilet. There is no record of an
water in the bathroom. None of the other twenty one calls up until 28 April 2011
suggest any complaints about a dampness
problem at all.
I have already said Ms Ryan makes no mention of any observation of dampness
problems in 2009, although she advances other reasons
why the applicant might
have been better off in other accommodation, namely being closer to family
the applicant’s complaint of 28 April 2011 DOH had the premises inspected
by Andrew Park on 10 May 2011. On this occasion
he noted cracks in the bedroom
and lounge room walls. I am not satisfied that the cracks in the bedroom wall
were the same as though
complained of in June 2007.
Park noticed mildew in the bedroom skirting board, but I am not satisfied that
this was present when Paulette Manoukian visited
in 2007. Had it been, I expect
it would have been much more widespread when Mr Park attended. I observe for
instance that he found
no evidence of any dampness affecting the
is little evidence about the cause of the problem and the work necessary to
rectify it, but as I have said there was undoubtedly
a problem in April 2011.
The absence of detailed evidence is probably explained by the consideration that
DOH accepted as much.
is my view that this dampness problem probably related to the inadequate
drainage in the subfloor area and drainage basin and waterproofing
building when it was constructed in 2006. The respondent’s documents make
this clear. As do the remedial works involving
punching two holes in the bedroom
wall and the removal of tiles from the bathroom to gain access to the area of
potential problem.
am also satisfied that these problems affected the habitability of the premises
adversely from around April 2011 until they were
finally rectified in October
2012. And I can well accept that such an ongoing problem constituted a reduction
or withdrawal of facilities
in the premises. For instance, she says and I
accept, that she was unable to use bedroom (1) and her use of other rooms was
with over the period I have mentioned. This is the very type of thing
likely to give rise to worry and consternation; or to put it
another way,
vexation in the sense of loss of peace of mind in a tenant.
the basis of these findings I am satisfied that between April 2011 and October
2012 the DOH was in breach of s 63 of the Act by
failure to repair.
NATURE OF THE APPLICANT’S CLAIM
applicant advances three claims for relief, as follows:
reduction under s 44(1)(b);
Compensation
for damage to clothing and effects; and
Non-Economic
loss for distress, grave inconvenience, depression and loss of enjoyment of the
premises. If this head of claim is not
available the applicant claims
“simply compensation for a breach of the residential tenancy
agreement”.
respondent disputes each of these claims and additionally contends the Tribunal
has no jurisdiction because of each of the claims
are brought out time. I think
it expedient to deal with the merits of the claims before considering the
respondent’s contentions
s 44(1)(b) Claim
: I am satisfied that “rent” as defined in the
Act, covers the rebated rent payable by a social housing tenant. From
time the rebated rent is adjusted for numerous reasons, including a change in
the market rent which could be obtained by
the social housing provider, if the
property was on the private rent market. This consideration does not change the
nature of the
payment made by the tenant. It is relevant to note that during the
period April 2011 to October 2012 the rent increased, not went
down. In other
words there was no question of an additional rebate having been provided in this
case to take into account the effect
of the identified problem on notional
market rent.
applicant claims under s 44(1)(b) for a period from 2007. Section 44(6)(a) is
very clear in limiting this remedy for a period
not exceeding twelve
limitation problem arises in respect of this aspect of the applicant’s
claim as s 44(3) permits the making of an application
at any time before the end
of the tenancy.
with this part of the claim, the period of breach extends from April 2011 to
October 2012. This is the only period during
which there was a withdrawal of
services and the rent therefore was excessive. During this period the rent rose
from $76.35 per week
to $89.00 per week. Doing the best I can, and having regard
to the rent increases, I find the tenant is entitled to a weekly reduction
$27.00 per week for the twelve month period arising out of the withdrawal of
services constituted by the breach of the landlord’s
obligation to repair.
This amounts to $1,404.00.
: The applicant put into evidence a lengthy list of personal effects
and clothing which she said were damaged by the effect of damp
at the premises.
No evidence was put before the Tribunal to substantiate the purchase costs of
any of the claimed items; nor was
any evidence put before the Tribunal about the
costs of replacement. I appreciate the applicant says that most of the items
gifts and accordingly she has no invoices or receipts to substantiate the
value. However, her estimates amount to no more than speculation
and I am not
satisfied that her list provides a reliable basis for an award of compensation.
There is, to put it simply, no evidence
in relation to this claim apart from a
handwritten list. I reject this part of the applicant’s claim.
view of this finding it is unnecessary to consider whether this part of the
claim was brought in time under s 190 of the RTA, by
reference to cl 22(9) of
the regulation or whether time should be extended under s 81 of the CTTT
Act. Had I been persuaded
of the merit of the claim I would have been disposed
to extend time. The application was filed on 6 March 2012 at a time when the
applicant was still unrepresented. Given that I have found that any claim did
not arise, until April 2011, any delay after the applicant
became aware of her
right to make a claim, must have been short and any prejudice to the respondent
Claim for Compensation for Non-Economic Loss
: This claim is supported by a
medical certificate from Dr Dianna Staniforth which is in the following
[the applicant] is very unwell with health problems-recently
requiring hospitalization, which are likely to be adversely affected
by the damp
problems in her apartment.
Additionally it was put on her behalf that by reason of the
respondent’s breach she has suffered “distress, grave inconvenience,
depression and loss of enjoyment of the premises.
submissions of the parties recognize that there is an issue about whether the
Tribunal’s power to award compensation under
s 187 of the RTA is subject
to the limitations on the recovery of damages for personal injury imposed by the
Civil Liability Act
. The two sides of the argument are
exemplified by two apparent competing decisions of the Supreme Court. The first
in time is the
decision of Barr AJ in
Flight Centre v Louw
[2011] NSWSC
- [31]. The other decision of Harrison AsJ in El-Saidey v
and Housing Corporation
[2011] NSWSC 820
AsJ held that damages for discomfort and loss of enjoyment did not fall within
the definition of personal injury in the
Civil Liability Act
. It is significant
that her Honour was not referred to Barr J’s decision or to any of the
decisions which his Honour drew on
authoritatively discussing the reach of
Civil Liability Act
; and in particular the judgment of Ipp JA in State
NSW v Ibbett
[2005] NSWCA 445
(2005) 65 NSWLR 168
anxiety and
distress” would be an “impairment”
of a person’s
mental condition in accordance with the ordinary meaning of
“impairment” as that word is used in
Civil Liability Act
that the applicant’s claim does not result from negligence it is
unnecessary to consider whether Part 3 of the 2002 Act
affects this claim (see
at [31]). But, to my mind it is clear applying
evidence I have referred to above that the applicant’s claim is one for
personal injury as defined in the
Civil Liability Act 2002
Part 2 of the 2002 Act applies regardless of whether the claim for
personal injury damages is brought in tort, contract,
under statute
otherwise. That the present claim is based upon s 187 of the
Residential
Tenancy Act
2010 makes no difference. S 11A(3) of the 2002 Act provides that
a court cannot award damages contrary to this part. And for some
purposes only
the CTTT has been held to be a court:
Krslovic Homes v Sparkes [
Burringbar Real Estate Centre Pty Ltd v Ryder
[2008] NSWSC
Campbelltown City Council v. Vegan
[2006] NSWCA 284
applicant did claim an amount equivalent to 21% under s 16 of the 2002 Act. But
in my opinion the applicant’s claim does
not justify an award of that
magnitude. Indeed, I am not satisfied that the severity of the non-economic loss
is at least 15% of
a most extreme case, the threshold for recovery under the
Civil Liability Act
my view, given that the limited period of time during which the breach occurred
according to my findings, and the consideration
that the breach has now been
remedied, and fully appreciating the nature of the consternation to which the
applicant was subject,
I would assess the degree of non-economic loss as being
in the vicinity of, but no more than exceeding 5% of a most extreme
follows from my analysis and in particular my adoption of the approach of Barr
AJ, by which I regard myself as bound, that I am
not satisfied that there is any
other basis for recovery. Had I accepted the applicant’s argument for the
reasons already given
in paragraph (39.) above I would have extended time if
: Under clause 20
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal Regulation
costs may only be awarded in this case if I am satisfied that there are
exceptional circumstances that warrant the awarding of costs.
There is nothing
in the circumstances of the present case as I have found there to be taken
individually or in combination which
justifies the description
“exceptional”. Indeed the applicant has failed on two of the three
claims. The normal rule
in the Tribunal should be applied and each party should
bear her or its own costs.
order the respondent to pay the applicant the sum of $1,404.00
immediately.
Consumer, Trader and Tenancy
17 December 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (144 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter