URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/90.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Anderson v Kincumber Nautical Village Pty Ltd [2025] NSWCATCD 90; (26 September 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Anderson v Kincumber Nautical Village Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 90
Hearing Date(s):
17 September 2024
Date of Orders:
26 September 2025
Decision Date:
26 September 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
D Robertson, Principal Member
(1) The parties are to file with the Tribunal
within 14 days of the date of publication of this decision a form of order
the respondent to refund to the applicant site fees which the
applicant has overpaid since 7 December 2023.
If the parties cannot agree on the amount to be refunded, each party
is to file and serve upon the other within 14 days of
the date of publication of
this decision any further evidence relied upon to establish the amount of the
overpayments, and submissions,
not exceeding two pages, in support of the form
of order for which that party contends.
Subject to any submissions by the parties, the Tribunal will
determine the amount of site fees overpaid by the applicant
and the appropriate
form of order, on the basis of the evidence and submissions filed pursuant to
the previous order and without
a further hearing.
Catchwords:
CONSUMER LAW — Unfair contract terms — Consumer contract
— site agreement under
Residential (Land Lease) Communities Act 2013
– whether a standard form contract — term providing for increase in
site fees by reference to multiple factors
— whether term causes a
significant imbalance in the parties’ rights and obligations —
whether term not reasonably
necessary in order to protect the legitimate
interests of the respondent — whether term excluded from the unfair
contract regime
because it sets the “upfront
LEASES AND TENANCIES — Legislation protecting
Residential (Land Lease) Communities Act 2013
increase of site fees by fixed method — remedy where term found void as
unfair contract term — whether
to order refund of fees overpaid —
whether to make order directing a refund to other home owners not party to
proceedings
Legislation Cited:
Australian Consumer Law (NSW)
Fair Trading Act 1987
Interpretation Act 1987
Residential (Land Lease) Communities
Residential (Land Lease) Communities Amendment
Residential (Land Lease) Communities Regulation 2015
Cases Cited:
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Ashley & Martin Pty
[2019] FCA 1436
Clark v Electrical Home-Aids Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP
Dialogue Consulting Pty Ltd v Instagram, Inc
(2020) 291 FCR 155
Director of Consumer Affairs v AAPT
(2006) VCAT
Director-General of Fair Trading v First National Bank plc
[2001] UKHL 52
[2002] 1 AC
Equity Financial Planners Pty Ltd v AMP Financial Planning Pty Ltd
169 ACSR 71
Karpik v Carnival plc
[2023] HCA 39
Kincumber Nautical Village Pty Ltd v Morris & Ors
[2021] NSWCATAP
Office of Fair Trading v Abbey National plc
[2009] UKSC 6
[2010] 1 AC 696
Ltd v Marron
[2016] WASC 395
Rowe v Kincumber Nautical Village Pty Ltd
Rowe v Kincumber Nautical Village Pty Ltd (No.3)
[2022] NSWSC
Texts Cited:
Explanatory Memorandum,
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law)
Bill (No.2) 2010
Jeannie Paterson, Unfair Contract Terms in Australia
(Lawbook Co, 2012)
Principal judgment
Michael Anderson (Applicant)
Kincumber Nautical Village Pty Ltd
(Respondent)
Representation:
P Batley (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Tenants’ Union of NSW Co-op Ltd
(Applicant)
Corrs Chambers Westgarth (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00111688
Publication Restriction:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
applicant in these proceedings is a resident of the Kincumber Nautical Village
(the Village) pursuant to a site agreement executed
on 3 January 2020 (the site
agreement). The Village is a residential community under the
Residential
(Land Lease) Communities Act 2013
(NSW) (RLLC Act). The respondent is the
operator of the Village. Under the site agreement the applicant agreed to pay
site fees to
the respondent each fortnight in return for the right to occupy a
specific residential site within the Village.
application filed on 19 March 2024, the applicant seeks orders pursuant to s
68(2)(a) of the RLLC Act for the refund of overpaid
site fees, pursuant to
s 68(2)(b) of the RLLC Act for a refund of overpaid site fees to other home
owners in the Village, and “such
further or alternative order as the
Tribunal thinks appropriate”.
application pleads that on 23 November 2023 the respondent gave notice to the
applicant of an increase in site fees from $229
per week to $268 per week. The
applicant asserts that the provision of the site agreement which provides for
the increase of site
fees is an unfair contract term within the meaning of s 23
of the Australian Consumer Law (NSW) (ACL) and is void.
provision which the applicant asserts is an unfair contract term (the impugned
term) provides as follows:
“Site fees will be increased each year in November, irrespective of the
commencement date of the Site Agreement.
Where a previous site fee increase has not occurred, the site fee increase to
apply will be the same that would have been applied
had a previous increase
occurred in accordance with this calculation.
Site fees shall be increased by the sum of:-
1. Any positive change in the CPI; plus
2. 3.75%; plus
3. A proportional share of any increase in costs incurred by the Operator since
the calculation of the last site fee increase calculation
for the following:-
• electricity and water (net of any amount that has been
recouped from Home Owners); plus
• gas; plus
• communication; plus
• insurance; plus
• rates; plus
• any other Government (Federal, State or Local) charges or
taxes other than company tax.
4. The effect of any change in the rate of GST or similar tax that is included
in the site fees.
5. The amount of increase resulting from the above calculation will be rounded
up to the nearest dollar.
A proportional share means that the increase in these costs will be divided by
380 (the approximate number of occupied sites) divided
by 52 (weeks in the
Positive changes in the CPI means the increase in the Consumer Price Index
– Sydney All Groups, (or any similar index that
may replace it) that is
greater than zero that has occurred between the June Quarter CPI and the
preceding June Quarter CPI;
Communication (costs) includes telephone, VOIP (Voice over Internet
protocol), internet, WiFi, TV services and distribution, and
communication or data cost.”
site agreement follows the form of residential site agreement prescribed by Sch
Residential (Land Lease) Communities Regulation 2015
regulation), as in force in 2020. That form, consistently with ss 65 to 67 of
the RLLC Act, provided for the selection
between two options for the mechanism
by which site fees might be increased: “fixed method” or
“notice (non-fixed)
method”. In the site agreement “fixed
method” was selected and the impugned term was inserted, under the heading
required by the regulation, the site agreement includes, following the impugned
term, the line:
“Note: The methods listed above are negotiable.”
site agreement also provided that the first site fee increase would be on 28
November 2020 and that the fixed method would apply
for “the duration of
your occupancy”.
Other proceedings relating to similar site
agreements in the Village
Proceedings
challenging site agreements including the impugned term (or an almost identical
term) were commenced by 52 other home
owners at the Village in 2019.
3 September 2020 a Senior Member of the Tribunal found that the impugned term
was not consistent with s 66(2) of the RLLC Act as
in force in 2020. Section 66
then provided:
66 Increase of site fees by fixed method
(1) This section applies to a site agreement that provides for the
increase of the site fees by a fixed method.
(2) A site agreement must not provide that the site fees may be increased
by more than one fixed method. If more than one method
is specified, the method
that results in the lower or lowest increase of site fees is the applicable
(3) The operator must not increase (or attempt to increase) the site fees
that are to be increased according to a fixed method otherwise
accordance with that method and this section.
Maximum penalty—50 penalty units.
(4) The operator must give at least 14 days’ written notice to the
of the increase is
specified in the site agreement.
(5) The notice must—
(a) specify the amount of the increased site fees, and
(b) specify how the increased site fees have been calculated, and
(c) specify the day on and from which the increased site fees are
payable, and
(d) include such other information as may be prescribed by the
regulations, and
(e) be in the approved form (if any).
(6) The home owner is not required to pay any increase in the site fees
until notice of the increase is given as required by this
(7) The terms of a site agreement fixing the method of future increases of
site fees cannot be challenged under this Act. However—
(a) the terms of the agreement may be varied if the parties enter
into a written agreement to do so, and
(b) this subsection does not affect any right that the home owner
has, apart from this Act and the
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
, to challenge any of the terms.
A home owner may be able to take action over unfair contract terms under
Australian Consumer Law
of the Commonwealth.
(8) A fixed method of increase may—
(a) be for a specified period or for the duration of occupancy of a
residential site by a home owner, and
(b) have effect for longer than the term of a site agreement for a
fixed term.
Tribunal held that, by increasing site fees by reference to a number of
variables, “each of [which] would on its own comprise
method”, the site agreements provided for fee increases by more than one
fixed method.
applicants in those proceedings also alleged that the impugned term was an
unfair contract term within the meaning of
of the ACL.
of the ACL relevantly provides:
23 Unfair terms of consumer contracts and small business
(1) A term of a consumer contract or small business contract is void
(a) the term is unfair; and
(b) the contract is a standard form contract.
(2) The contract continues to bind the parties if it is capable of
operating without the unfair term.
consumer contract
is a contract for:
(a) a supply of goods or services; or
(b) a sale or grant of an interest in land;
to an individual whose acquisition of the goods, services or interest is wholly
or predominantly for personal, domestic or household
use or consumption.
of the ACL governs whether a contract is a standard form contract. As in
force in 2020, it provided:
27 Standard form contracts
(1) If a party to a proceeding alleges that a contract is a standard form
contract, it is presumed to be a standard form contract
unless another party to
the proceeding proves otherwise.
(2) In determining whether a contract is a standard form contract, a court
may take into account such matters as it thinks relevant,
but must take into
account the following:
(a) whether one of the parties has all or most of the bargaining power
relating to the transaction;
(b) whether the contract was prepared by one party before any discussion
relating to the transaction occurred between the parties;
(c) whether another party was, in effect, required either to accept or
reject the terms of the contract (other than the terms referred
section 26(1))
in the form in which they were presented;
(d) whether another party was given an effective opportunity to negotiate
the terms of the contract that were not the terms referred
section 26(1)
(e) whether the terms of the contract (other than the terms referred to in
section 26(1))
take into account the specific characteristics of another
party or the particular transaction;
(f) any other matter prescribed by the regulations.
Tribunal accepted evidence from the respondent (also the respondent to those
proceedings) that the respondent “affords an
opportunity for negotiation
in respect of the agreements” and that negotiations had resulted on
occasions in amendment to the
terms of the agreement. On that basis the Tribunal
concluded that the contract was not a standard form contract as that term is
in the ACL.
Tribunal nevertheless stated that, if it had held the agreement to be a standard
form contract, it would have found the impugned
term to be an unfair contract
respondent appealed against that decision to the Appeal Panel of the Tribunal
and, on 14 September 2021, the Appeal Panel upheld
the appeal on the basis that
the impugned term involved only one fixed method for the calculation of fee
Kincumber Nautical Village Pty Ltd v Morris & Ors
NSWCATAP 275.
Appeal Panel held, at [41]:
“[T]he fact that the site fee increase clause in the site agreements
the subject of these proceedings contains a number of
components or
integers is irrelevant, so long as the calculation is ‘fixed’,
that is, is definitely ascertainable. The
clause in question provides a
calculation from which the site fee increase in any given year can be calculated
or ascertained definitely
and is ‘a fixed calculation’ and
therefore ‘a fixed method’ for increasing site
Appeal Panel noted, at [45], that, although there had been “some
discussion during the hearing of the appeal of the Tribunal’s
whether the site fee increase term is an unfair term under the ACL”, that
issue did not arise on the appeal. The applicants
in those proceedings had not
filed any cross appeal or document in the nature of a notice of contention
seeking to maintain the Tribunal’s
decision at first instance on the basis
that it was wrong to conclude that the site agreements were not standard form
Appeal Panel’s decision was upheld by Garling J in the Supreme Court on
further appeal:
Rowe v Kincumber Nautical Village Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWSC
Rowe v Kincumber Nautical Village Pty Ltd (No.3)
[2022] NSWSC 1701.
applicant in these proceedings was not a party to the earlier proceedings and is
not bound by any finding in those proceedings,
although Mr Hochroth of counsel,
who appeared for the respondent, submitted that the decision at first instance
was authority for
the proposition that the site agreement was not a standard
form contract.
The hearing
hearing of the application took place in Gosford on 17 September 2024. Mr
Batley, of counsel, appeared for the applicant. Mr Hochroth,
of counsel,
appeared for the respondent.
applicant’s evidence in chief consisted of a statutory declaration of the
applicant made on 8 May 2024, including annexures
MA-1 to MA-9, which became
exhibit A, and a bundle of documents including a copy of the residential site
agreement of one other resident
of the Village and the pages incorporating the
term governing site fee increases from the residential site agreements for six
sites in the Village. That bundle became exhibit B.
applicant also provided a chronology.
respondent’s evidence in chief consisted of:
(1) An affidavit affirmed by Kelly Mona Langker-Ferguson on 31 March 2024 with
annexure KLF-1, which was marked Exhibit 1
(2) An affidavit affirmed by Theodore Powers Whitmont on 19 June 2024, including
annexures TPW-1 to TPW-6, which was marked Exhibit
(3) An affidavit of Emily Anne Brownlee sworn on 11 September 2024 with
annexures EAB-1 and EAB-2, which was marked Exhibit 3.
(4) A letter dated 29 November 2018 from the respondent to Mr James Moore, a
resident of the Village, which became Exhibit 4. This
letter was produced by Ms
Langker-Ferguson in the course of her oral evidence in chief.
applicant sought to tender, as evidence in reply, three statutory declarations
from residents of other residential land lease
communities in New South Wales.
The tender of those documents was objected to, and they were not admitted into
evidence. They were
marked for identification, MFI C, D and E. An affidavit from
the applicant’s solicitor, Mr Paul Francis Smyth affirmed on 12
2024, including annexures PFS-1 to PFS-11 was also tendered in reply, and became
of the applicant and Ms Langker-Ferguson gave oral evidence and was
cross-examined.
Whitmont, who was a director and secretary of the respondent, had passed away
suddenly on 4 July 2024. Although his affidavit was
received in evidence, the
fact that Mr Whitmont was not available for cross examination affects the weight
to be accorded to it.
TPW-3 to Mr Whitmont’s affidavit was a letter dated 18 June 2024 from Mr
Martin Booth, a partner of Pitcher Partners,
a firm of accountants, to which was
attached a “Statement by Expert” dated 12 February 2020 signed by Mr
David Staples,
also a partner of Pitcher Partners. Mr Staples’ statement
did not refer to the Tribunal’s Procedural Guideline 3 regarding
evidence. The conclusion expressed in the last paragraph of Mr Staples’
statement was:
“7. I have reviewed the Fixed Calculation Method by
which KNV calculates site fee increases. In my professional opinion,
is appropriate having regard to the long-term nature of its' relationships with
industry including legislative restraints
and is reasonably necessary to protect the interest of KNV.”
Booth in his letter stated that Mr Staples was now retired and that he agreed
with the contents of the letter, including the conclusion
in paragraph 7. Mr
Booth stated:
“[T]he site fee increase term remains reasonably necessary as at
Mr Staples nor Mr Booth was made available for cross examination. Mr
Booth’s letter and Mr Staples’ statement
were admitted in evidence,
although the fact that neither was available for cross examination affects the
weight that may be attached
The evidence
The applicant’s evidence
applicant’s evidence described the circumstances in which he came to
purchase his home and execute the site agreement. He
stated that he was provided
with a disclosure statement in November 2019, after he had negotiated the
purchase of the home situated
on the site and completed a form seeking approval
from the respondent. The applicant stated that on 3 January 2020 he was handed
document containing the terms of the site agreement pre-signed by Ms
Langker-Ferguson, which he executed in front of Ms Langker-Ferguson.
fees specified in the agreement were $242 per week.
applicant stated that he was not told that there was any ability or opportunity
for him to negotiate any of the terms of the site
agreement, in particular the
method for site fee increases.
3 January 2023 the applicant and Ms Langker-Ferguson also executed a document
headed “Temporary Reduction of Site Fees by
Mutual Agreement - 12 Month
Agreement”. That document stated that the respondent agreed to reduce site
fees for the property
the applicant had agreed to lease to $229.25 per week
until 11 March 2020.
applicant asserted that he had not been informed of the proceedings in the
Tribunal brought by other site owners, which had been
on foot at that time. The
applicant also stated that he had received some financial advice but no legal
advice in relation to the
site agreement before entering into it.
applicant stated that the date on which the site fees would first be increased
was amended by hand from 11 March 2020 to 28 November
2020 on 28 November 2020.
The applicant stated that the alteration had been initialled by himself and Ms
Langker-Ferguson at that
applicant attached, as annexure MA-7, four letters from the respondent, signed
by Mr Whitmont, each of which extended the “temporary
reduction” of
site fees: to 27 May 2020, to 10 June 2020, to 4 November 2020 and to 27 January
applicant stated that, on 15 November 2023, he received a notice of site fee
increase advising that his new site fee would be
$296 per week. The notice, part
of annexure MA-8, stated that the increase had been calculated by reference to
the change in the
CPI Sydney All Groups since November 2018, plus 3.75%, rounded
up to the nearest dollar. The applicant stated that he received notice
November 2023 that the previous notice of site fee increase was withdrawn and
that his new site fee would be $268 per week
from 7 December 2023. That notice,
also part of annexure MA-8, stated that the new site fee had been
calculated:
“[B]y applying to the current site fee, the change in the CPI Sydney All
Groups in the way provided in the agreement between
us. CPI increased by 6.6%.
To the CPI increase was added 3.75%. The resultant sum has been rounded up to
the nearest dollar.”
applicant stated that thereafter he had made enquiries and sought advice. On 20
February 2024, Mr Smyth, the applicant’s
solicitor from the Tenants Union
NSW Co-op Ltd, sent a letter on the applicant’s behalf to the respondent
seeking a refund
of all extra site fees paid by the applicant since the increase
took effect on 7 December 2023. The letter asserted that the site
fee increase
term, that is the impugned term, is void because it is an unfair term within the
meaning of s 23 of the ACL.
cross-examination, the applicant accepted that the impugned term had been set
out in the disclosure statement which he had received
in November 2019, together
with some worked examples. The applicant stated that he had run the disclosure
statement, including the
impugned term, past his financial advisor who had
stated that it was very confusing but had nevertheless recommended that he enter
into the site agreement. The applicant’s evidence was that the financial
advisor had said that he was going to have to pay
wherever he went and, given
his financial circumstances at that time, he should “go for it”.
applicant asserted that he did ask Ms Langker-Ferguson if there was any
possibility of movement in the size of the site fee but,
when challenged on that
evidence, appeared to accept that that might have occurred in an earlier
discussion with Ms Langker-Ferguson.
The applicant also appeared to accept that
he was not under any pressure to sign the site agreement on 3 January
Ms Langker-Ferguson’s evidence
Langker-Ferguson’s evidence was that she is the manager of the Village and
is based on-site. Ms Langker-Ferguson stated that
she was responsible for
preparing site agreements for the Village and that her practice was to use a
template provided by the Industry
Association and fill it in with terms specific
to each homeowner. She stated that she would apply her “DocuSign”
electronic) signature to the site agreement at the time she printed out the
site agreement so that there was an automatically generated
electronic record of
the issue of site agreements and, because site agreements were printed on green
paper, she was not delayed,
during an appointment for the execution of a site
agreement by a prospective purchaser, by the need to change paper in her
Langker-Ferguson suggested that the handwritten change to the date of the first
increase in site fees was made at the meeting on
3 January 2020, when the
applicant executed the agreement. I note this evidence conflicts with that given
by the applicant and that
the applicant was not cross-examined on the
discrepancy, nor was Ms Langker-Ferguson. Neither party appeared to place any
significance
upon the date of the change.
Langker-Ferguson gave evidence that:
“10 If a prospective homeowner wishes to negotiate a
term in their site agreement, either before, during or after their
agreement appointment, I ask them to put their request in writing. My role is to
then pass along that request to the village
operator, who considers all such
requests and is responsible for approving or rejecting them. I am then
responsible for communicating
the operator's response to the prospective
re-negotiated
Langker-Ferguson gave, as an example of that process, an instance in May 2024,
when a prospective homeowner indicated that they
had already lived in a
residential community, and knew how they worked and that he was concerned that
his proposed fees were “slightly
too high”. Ms Langker-Ferguson
stated that she asked that prospective homeowner to put his request in writing
and that the
Village operator had agreed to offer a lower starting site
Langker-Ferguson stated:
“12 If Mr Anderson had sought to negotiate any terms in
his site agreement, I would have taken the same approach and asked
his request in writing, and then passed it along to the village operator for
13 In the about 12 years that I have worked at Kincumber, I
have never experienced a time when the village operator was not willing
consider or discuss an amendment to a site agreement.”
Langker-Ferguson gave evidence of her practice in relation to the execution of
site agreements which she stated was by appointment
at the Village. She stated
that she tells prospective homeowners to take as much time as they need to go
through the site agreement
and to ask any questions they have.
Specifically
in relation to the applicant, Ms Langker-Ferguson gave evidence of having issued
the disclosure statement on 19 November
2019 and having received a call from the
applicant on that date, in respect of which she had made a note, which
“Michael rang –
question jump in fees re: current and proposed. Explained Market rent
Discussed increase due
He has put on hold for now.”
Langker-Ferguson stated that she recalled the applicant attending her office for
the site agreement meeting but that she did not
recall every detail of the
meeting. She stated that she did recall that there was nothing unusual or odd
the applicant had mentioned a back injury.
the commencement of her oral evidence Ms Langker-Ferguson produced the document
which became Exhibit 4 which, as noted above, was
a letter dated 29 November
2018 to a different resident of the village, Mr James Moore, by which the
respondent agreed to “temporarily”
reduce any rent increase for the
first five years of Mr Moore’s tenancy such that the rent payable will
increase by no more
than $10 each year for those five years. The letter stated
that, after those five years, “the rent will increase to the compounded
amount calculated over time”.
Langker-Ferguson stated that she had overlooked that letter in preparing her
evidence for these proceedings in May 2024.
cross examination, Ms Langker-Ferguson indicated that, within the Village, there
are about 160 homeowners whose site agreements
provide for fee increases by the
notice method, and about 200 homeowners who have site agreements incorporating
the fixed method
for fee increases. Ms Langker-Ferguson indicated that the
Langker-Ferguson indicated that, during her 12 years at the Village, she was not
aware of any instances where a person had sought
to negotiate for fee increases
to be by the notice method rather than the fixed method.
Langker-Ferguson also acknowledged that her involvement in the financial affairs
of the Village was limited to arranging the execution
of site agreements and
obtaining a direct debit authorisation for the payment of site fees. She had no
knowledge of the revenues
or expenditures involved in the operation of the
Ms Brownlee’s evidence
Brownlee is a solicitor employed by the respondent’s solicitors. Her
evidence merely dealt with the identity of the directors
of the respondent since
Mr Whitmont’s passing. That evidence was that, until Mr Theo
Whitmont’s death, the only two directors
of the respondent had been Mr
Theo Whitmont and his father Norton Whitmont. Mr Norton Whitmont was 87 years
old and had not personally
been involved in day-to-day management or
negotiations with homeowners in relation to site agreements for many years.
Whitmont’s death, he has been replaced as director and
secretary of the respondent by Mr Mark Schneider, who lives overseas
and has had
no historical involvement in managing the affairs of the respondent. Ms Brownlee
was not required for cross examination.
noted above, Mr Smyth is the applicant’s solicitor. Mr Smyth’s
affidavit annexed correspondence relating to the filing
of evidence and other
procedural issues. Relevantly to the matters to be determined at the hearing, Mr
Smyth gave evidence of communications
with the respondent’s solicitors
relating to the question whether the respondent intended to lead further
evidence in substitution
for the evidence given by Mr Theo Whitmont, on which he
was no longer able to be cross-examined. That correspondence included
confirmation
that the applicant would object to the respondent’s reliance
upon Mr Whitmont’s affidavit. Mr Smyth was not required
examination.
Mr Whitmont’s evidence
noted, despite the fact that Mr Whitmont was not available for cross
examination, his affidavit was received in evidence, subject
Relevantly,
Mr Whitmont’s evidence was:
“11 It is not uncommon for a site agreement to remain in
place for upwards of 15 years.”
“12 It is also not uncommon that homeowners may wish to
negotiate the terms of their site agreement, either before or after
the agreement.”
If a homeowner wished to negotiate a term of their agreement, they would be
asked to put their request in writing so it could be passed
to Mr Whitmont. Mr
Whitmont would instruct Ms Langker-Ferguson to either accept, reject or counter
the proposal and a written response
would be provided to the homeowner,
“so that there is a record of the negotiation, and any agreement reached,
between the parties.”
“14 I am aware of, or have personally been involved in,
the negotiation of numerous site agreements at the community. This
includes many
instances where terms in a site agreement have been negotiated and ultimately
changed – such as terms providing
for a reduction in the site fee amount,
a change in the duration of a term, and additional terms concerning repair
Whitmont provided “by way of example” two documents which Mr
Whitmont asserted evidenced the respondent negotiating
the terms of a site
agreement with a prospective homeowner.
first was a letter dated 18 September 2020, apparently responding to a request
that the duration of the fixed method of fee increase
be reduced from 10 years
to 5 years, by counter-offering to reduce the term to 7 years. Although the
signature on the letter has
been redacted, it is apparent that the counter-offer
was accepted.
second document is an extract of a site agreement entered into in February 2020
which includes an additional term concerning repairs
and refurbishments to the
dwelling on the site the subject of the site agreement.
note immediately that if, as Mr Whitmont suggested, all requests for negotiation
of site agreements were recorded in writing, this
is a signally limited
collection of examples. I infer that, apart from the document constituting
Exhibit 4 (which Ms Langker-Ferguson
acknowledged she had previously
overlooked), these are the only examples of occasions when prospective
or otherwise, to negotiate changes to the
site agreement presented by the respondent.
Whitmont stated in respect of the impugned term:
“20 Kincumber designed this formula to align site fee
increases in the community with actual operating cost increases, while
ensuring it is robust enough to future proof its business.”
Whitmont asserted that he held the same belief as expressed by Mr Booth, that is
that the impugned term is “reasonably necessary
to protect the
interest” of the respondent. He stated that Pitcher Partners had been the
respondent’s tax agent and accountant
for more than 20 years.
Whitmont stated that he had inspected the accounting records of the respondent
and that, based on that review, he estimated that
the operating expenses
attributable to the categories of expense “identified in the third
integer” of the impugned term
(electricity, water, gas et cetera) comprise
only around 30% of the respondent’s overall operating expenses
the costs of capital and depreciation”. Mr Whitmont
identified a number of categories of operating costs not included in the
integer, including:
advertising and
accounting and
administration costs;
maintenance and upgrade works;
equipment; and
salaries and
superannuation contributions.
Whitmont described the second integer, 3.75%, as a “buffer” to
ensure the impugned term is “sufficiently robust”
to provide the
respondent with “a sustainable stream of revenue at the community”
“a. increases in operating costs not captured by the
third and fourth integers [ie increases in the specific identified operating
costs and changes in GST] ...;
b. depreciation;
c. planned capital works; and
d. unforeseen operating costs.”
Whitmont also suggested that, if the respondent were to alter its operating
practices and use debt to fund its operating expenses,
the second integer would
also need to cover the costs of that debt capital.
Whitmont stated that the respondent anticipated carrying out upgrades to the
road and plumbing networks in the community in coming
years and that, based on
his previous experience, he estimated those works would cost at least $3
million. In respect of unforeseen
operating costs, Mr Whitmont suggested that
the installation of solar panels would require upgrade works to distribution
communications capacity and that the respondent would need to replace
the electricity cables in order to ensure smart electricity
metres could be
installed at the Village.
Whitmont did not seek to provide any explanation of why the first integer, that
is increases by reference to increases in the consumer
price index, was also
necessary in addition to the other three integers.
Whitmont also gave evidence in relation to the site fees charged to the
applicant from the commencement of his site agreement in
January 2020. Mr
Whitmont stated that the applicant’s site fees were maintained at $229.25
per week until 15 December 2022,
when they were increased to the amount stated
in the site agreement, that is $242 per week. Mr Whitmont confirmed that the
letter sent to the applicant on 15 November 2023 incorporated a
miscalculation of the intended increase and that the applicant had
charged the “correct amount” pursuant to the letter issued on 18
November 2023, that is $268 per week, which
was what the applicant had been
paying up to the time that Mr Whitmont made his affidavit.
Whitmont explained that the reason for the offer to residents at the Village of
“temporary site fee reductions” was:
“a. to maintain a level of consistency in the site fee
increases payable by homeowners across the community; and
b. due to the Covid 19 pandemic to assist in keeping site fees
Whitmont suggested that the site fee reductions were a consequence of the
outcome of proceedings brought in 2017 by homeowners
with site agreements which
utilised the “notice method” of increase, which had been resolved by
consent with increases
in site fees of $10 in 2017, $9.50 in 2018 and $9.25 in
2019. Mr Whitmont suggested that, as a gesture of goodwill, the respondent
offered homeowners on the fixed method temporary site fee reductions, so that
their site fees would not increase by more than the
increases consented to in
the “By Notice” proceedings.
The evidence from Messrs
Staples and Booth of Pitcher Partners
have set out above, at [
], paragraph 7, the final conclusion, to Mr
Staples’ “Statement by Expert”. The balance of that document
“1. I have been responsible for the preparation of all
formal and statutory reporting for KNV [the respondent] and its business
operations for more than 20 years.
2. It is my experience, in relation to KNV, and all other
commercial enterprises with which I am involved that the Consumer Price
(CPI) does not reflect the changing costs of operating a business and is an
inadequate measure on which to base business forecasts
or budgets.
3. The CPI does not meet the commercial needs of KNV even in
the short term; it does not reflect economic shocks, the requirement
meet exigencies, maintenance projects, and the impacts of Government policy on a
its industry.
4. I am firmly of the view that any business that consistently
adjusted its prices based only on the CPI would ultimately fail.
5. To survive, a business needs to recognise the risks inherent
in the environment in which it operates and establish prices that
account for
those risks. For a business to survive, it must cover the cost of all exigencies
whether foreseeable or not.
6. Managers of enterprises have the responsibility of
recovering all costs, including the cost of maintaining the capital of the
business in real terms.”
The Relevant Statutory Provisions
is convenient to set out the statutory provisions relevant to the determination
of these proceedings which have not already been
extracted above.
65 of the RLLC Act as in force in 2020 provided:
65 How site fees may be increased
(1) Site fees payable under a site agreement can be increased only if the
increase is made in accordance with this Division.
(2) A site agreement may provide that site fees payable under it may be
increased in accordance with either of the following procedures—
(a) at specified intervals (or on specified dates) by a fixed method,
which may be either—
(i) by fixed amounts, or
(ii) by a fixed calculation that does not use more than 1 element to
calculate the increase,
• the increase is calculated using Consumer Price Index
• the increase is calculated using the variation in the age
(b) by notice (otherwise than by a fixed method).
68 of the RLLC Act provides:
68 Refund of overpaid site fees if increase not
(1) A home owner under a site agreement may apply to the Tribunal for an
order directing the refund of overpaid site fees on the
ground that the increase
of site fees did not comply with a requirement of this Division.
(2) The Tribunal may make any of the following orders—
(a) an order directing a refund to the home owner,
(b) an order directing a refund to any other home owner in the
community who the Tribunal becomes aware also had a non-compliant
increase of
substantially the same kind,
(c) any ancillary order that the Tribunal, in the circumstances,
thinks appropriate.
(3) An application under this section must be lodged no later than 12
months after notice of the increase was given to the home
24 to 26 of the ACL provide:
24 Meaning of
(1) A term of a consumer contract or small business
contract is
(a) it would cause a significant imbalance in the parties’ rights and
obligations arising under the contract; and
(b) it is not reasonably necessary in order to protect the legitimate
interests of the party who would be advantaged by the term;
(c) it would cause detriment (whether financial or otherwise) to a party if
it were to be applied or relied on.
(2) In determining whether a term of a contract is unfair
under subsection (1), a court may take into account such matters as it
thinks relevant, but must take into account the following:
(a) the extent to which the term is transparent;
(b) the contract as a whole.
(3) A term is
transparent
if the term is:
(a) expressed in reasonably plain language; and
(b) legible; and
(c) presented clearly; and
(d) readily available to any party affected by the term.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (1)(b), a term of a contract
is presumed not to be reasonably necessary in order to protect the
interests of the party who would be advantaged by the term, unless that party
proves otherwise.
25 Examples of unfair terms
Without limiting section 24, the following are examples of the kinds of
terms of a consumer contract or small business contract that
(a) a term that permits, or has the effect of permitting, one party (but
not another party) to avoid or limit performance of the
(b) a term that permits, or has the effect of permitting, one party (but
not another party) to terminate the contract;
(c) a term that penalises, or has the effect of penalising, one party (but
not another party) for a breach or termination of the
(d) a term that permits, or has the effect of permitting, one party (but
not another party) to vary the terms of the contract;
(e) a term that permits, or has the effect of permitting, one party (but
not another party) to renew or not renew the contract;
(f) a term that permits, or has the effect of permitting, one party to vary
the upfront price payable under the contract without
the right of another party
to terminate the contract;
(g) a term that permits, or has the effect of permitting, one party
unilaterally to vary the characteristics of the goods or services
supplied, or the interest in land to be sold or granted, under the contract;
(h) a term that permits, or has the effect of permitting, one party
unilaterally to determine whether the contract has been breached
or to interpret
its meaning;
(i) a term that limits, or has the effect of limiting, one party’s
vicarious liability for its agents;
(j) a term that permits, or has the effect of permitting, one party
to assign the contract to the detriment of another party without
party’s consent;
(k) a term that limits, or has the effect of limiting, one party’s
right to sue another party;
(l) a term that limits, or has the effect of limiting, the evidence one
party can adduce in proceedings relating to the contract;
(m) a term that imposes, or has the effect of imposing, the evidential
burden on one party in proceedings relating to the contract;
(n) a term of a kind, or a term that has an effect of a kind, prescribed by
the regulations.
26 Terms that define main subject matter of consumer contracts or
small business contracts etc. are unaffected
(1) Section 23 does not apply to a term of a consumer contract or
small business contract to the extent, but only to the extent,
(a) defines the main subject matter of the contract; or
(b) sets the upfront price payable under the contract; or
(c) is a term required, or expressly permitted, by a law of the
Commonwealth, a State or a Territory.
upfront price
payable under a contract is
the consideration that:
(a) is provided, or is to be provided, for the supply, sale or grant under
the contract; and
(b) is disclosed at or before the time the contract is entered into;
but does not include any other consideration that is contingent on the
occurrence or non‑occurrence of a particular event.
66 of the RLLC Act, as in force in 2020, is extracted at [
] above. The relevant
parts of ss 23 and 27 of the ACL are set out at [
The Issues for determination
was not disputed by the respondent that the site agreement was a consumer
contract as defined in s 23(3) of the ACL.
issues which the parties have raised and which I am required to determine
(1) Is the contract a standard form contract?
(2) If so, is the impugned term an unfair contract term? This issue raises three
sub-issues:
(a) Whether the term would cause a significant imbalance in the parties’
rights and obligations arising under the contract;
(b) Whether the term was not reasonably necessary in order to protect the
legitimate interests of the respondent, in respect of which
issue the onus of
proof falls on the respondent;
(c) Whether the term would cause detriment to the applicant. It was not in
dispute that the term, if valid, would cause detriment
to the applicant.
(3) Whether the application of s 23 of the ACL to the impugned term is excluded
by s 26(1)(b) of the ACL, that is whether the impugned
term sets the
“upfront price” payable under the site agreement.
(4) If the impugned term is an unfair contract term, what orders should the
Tribunal make?
applicant relied upon a written outlines of submissions filed on 10 May 2024.
The respondent relied on written submissions filed
on 21 June 2024.
Additionally, both parties’ representatives made oral submissions at the
is convenient to deal with each issue in turn.
Standard form
to s 27(1) of the ACL, the site agreement is presumed to be a standard form
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submitted that the site agreement was not a standard form contract
for a number of reasons.
in respect of s 27(2)(a), the respondent submitted that it does not have or did
not have “all or most of the bargaining
power” relating to the
transaction.
respondent referred to “numerous provisions” in the RLLC Act
“designed to protect the interests of homeowners
and ensure operators do
not have unfair bargaining power when entering into a site agreement.” The
specific provisions referred
to by the respondent were:
Section 12,
which prohibits contracting out;
Section 23,
which provides a 14 day cooling off period;
Section 28,
which prohibits additional terms inconsistent with the terms prescribed in the
standard form;
Section 29,
which provides for regulations to identify prohibited terms; and
Section 109,
which provides that an operator may not unreasonably delay or refuse to enter
into a site agreement and provides that
the site fees under a new site agreement
must not exceed “fair market value”.
note that “fair market value” in respect of the site fees payable
under a new site agreement is defined in s 109 (6)
as the greater of the site
fees paid by the current owner and “the site fees currently payable for
residential sites of a similar
size and location within the
community”.
respondent submitted:
“5.5 These provisions provide powerful constraints on the
bargaining position that an operator can adopt in relation to the
site agreement. Regardless of market conditions, an operator is not able to
present terms to a prospective home owner
on a "take it or leave it" basis.
Negotiation must take place against the backdrop of the regime set by the RLLC
Act. Consistent
with that, the evidence is that the respondent did not in this
case, nor is its practice to, present terms to the home owner on the
they could not be negotiated. Rather, the respondent made every effort to ensure
that the applicant had sufficient time
to read, consider, understand and accept
the terms of the site agreement, including the site fee increase term.”
the respondent accepted that it had entered into multiple site agreements in the
village on substantially similar terms,
but submitted:
“This does not, however, reflect the degree to which the material terms of
the site agreement could be negotiated as between
the parties. Rather, it
reflects that the majority of the terms of the site agreement are required by
the Regulations. The respondent,
when requested to amend or negotiate terms by
someone in the applicant's position, has been open and willing to do so.”
note that the respondent’s submissions referred to s 27(2)(ba) of the ACL
in this context. That provision was not included
in the ACL in 2020 when the
applicant’s site agreement was entered into, but I consider that,
independently of that provision,
the fact that the respondent had entered into
around 200 site agreements incorporating similar terms providing for the
increase of
site fees, is a relevant factor which may be taken into account in
determining whether the site agreement is a standard form agreement.
in respect of s 27(2)(b), the respondent submitted that the site agreement was
not prepared by the respondent prior to any
discussion relating to the
transaction. The respondent referred to Ms Langker-Ferguson’s evidence
that, in accordance with
her usual practice, she had only filled out the
applicant’s details and the initial site fee and printed out the site
after the applicant indicated that he wished to enter into a site
agreement on the terms indicated in the disclosure statement.
in respect of s 27(2)(c), the respondent submitted that the applicant was not,
in effect, required either to accept or reject
the terms of the site agreement
in the form in which they were presented to him. The respondent
“Rather, the applicant was provided with ample opportunity to negotiate or
seek to vary the terms of his site agreement (including
during the 6 weeks
between receipt of the disclosure statement and entry into the site agreement
and during the applicant’s
appointment to review and sign his site
agreement).”
the respondent submitted that the applicant was given an effective opportunity
to negotiate the terms of the site agreement.
The respondent pointed to the fact
that the site agreement itself stated that the impugned term was negotiable. The
respondent submitted
“The respondent’s usual practice is to negotiate over the terms of a
site agreement if a prospective home owner wishes
respondent further submitted that the applicant had taken no step to indicate
that he wished to negotiate the impugned term and
had entered into the site
agreement after taking independent advice from his financial advisor.
respondent relied upon the finding of the Tribunal at first instance in the
earlier proceedings:
“27 I accept that the Operator's evidence that it affords
an opportunity for negotiation in respect of the agreements, The
themselves state that the site fee increase provisions are negotiable. The
Operator produced evidence of occasions on
which negotiations had resulted in
amendment to the terms of the agreement. In practice residents may have felt
unable to negotiate
but I am not satisfied that this makes the agreements
standard form agreements.
28 I am therefore not satisfied that provisions of the ACL in
respect of unfair contract terms apply to the subject agreements.”
respondent submitted:
“It was entirely correct of the Tribunal to place weight on the statement
in the site agreement that the site fee increase
provisions are negotiable; the
evidence suggests that (in the case of the respondent) that was a true and
accurate statement.”
in respect of s 27(2)(e), the respondent submitted that the terms of the
contract take into account the specific characteristics
of the transaction. The
respondent suggested, without identifying any evidence to that effect, that the
initial site fees of $242
a week, fixed by the site agreement, were referable to
the specific characteristics of the size and location of the site. The
submitted that the site agreement does not otherwise take into
account specific characteristics of the applicant, but only because
applicant did not seek to negotiate the terms of the site agreement at the time
it was made. The respondent pointed to evidence
that the applicant had sought
approval to perform works to improve access at his site for his motorbikes,
which had been agreed to
by the respondent.
Applicant’s
submissions
applicant’s written submissions emphasised that the onus of establishing
that the site agreement was not a standard form
contract lay upon the
respondent. The applicant submitted that the applicant’s site agreement
had the following “hallmarks
of a standard form contract”:
“35.1. the operator had all or most of the bargaining
power relating to the transaction (Mr Anderson as the purchaser of
a home at KNV
had limited ability to negotiate any terms of the site agreement);
35.2. the contract was prepared by the operator before there
was any discussion about the transaction between parties;
35.3. Mr Anderson was in effect required either to accept or
reject the terms of the contract in the form in which they were presented;
35.4. Mr Anderson was not given an effective opportunity to
negotiate the terms of the contract;
35.5. terms of the contract do not take into account the
specific characteristics of Mr Anderson.”
applicant submitted that the Tribunal should not follow the finding of the
Tribunal in the earlier proceedings.
Consideration
consider that the applicant’s site agreement is a standard form
am not persuaded that the applicant had any bargaining power in respect of the
site agreement. If the applicant wished to acquire
the home within the Village
which he had agreed to purchase, he was required to enter into a site agreement
with the respondent.
The requirements of the RLLC Act did not impose any
substantial constraint upon the respondent’s capacity to require
prospective
site owners to accept the impugned term, as the outcome of the
earlier litigation demonstrated.
is clear, in my view, that the site agreement was prepared by the respondent
before there was any discussion about the transaction
between the parties. The
fact, that Ms Langker-Ferguson printed off a site agreement in the usual terms
(differing from other site
agreements only in the particulars specific to the
applicant and the initial site fee) only after the applicant had made an
appointment
to come and execute the agreement, does not overcome the clear
evidence that the impugned term was incorporated into the draft agreement
before the applicant engaged in any discussions with the respondent.
in this context does not mean inserting a counter-party’s details and
printing out a copy.
am not satisfied that the applicant had any real capacity or opportunity to
negotiate the terms of the site agreement, in particular
the impugned term. I
draw the inference, from the absence of evidence of any instance where a
prospective site owner had negotiated
a variation of the impugned term, as
opposed to a short term reduction in site fees or suspension of the operation of
the impugned
term, that the respondent was not open to negotiating in respect of
the impugned term. The fact that, as required by the regulations,
agreement presented to the applicant for signature included a note, following
the impugned term, that “the methods
listed above are negotiable”,
does not negate or override that inference.
noted above Mr Whitmont’s evidence was that all requests for negotiation
were recorded in writing. The fact that the respondent
was only able to produce
two examples of even the most inconsequential variation of the terms relating to
increases in site fees
clearly indicates that the respondent was not open to
negotiation in respect of the impugned term.
conclusion of the Tribunal in the earlier proceedings that the respondent did
offer an opportunity for negotiation was founded
upon the evidence before the
Tribunal in those proceedings. The Tribunal recorded that the respondent had
produced evidence of occasions
on which negotiations had resulted in amendment
to the terms of the agreement. I was not informed whether all of the evidence
had been before the Tribunal on the previous occasion (on the basis of
which the Tribunal had reached the conclusion that there had
been examples of
negotiations resulting in amendment to the site agreement) was included in the
evidence before me.
regardless of whether I have the same evidence before me, I am not bound to
follow the Tribunal’s earlier decision,
and in my view, if that decision
were founded upon the same evidence as was placed before me, it is plainly
proposition in the earlier decision (in the last sentence of [27]) that the
possibility, that “in practice residents may
have felt unable to
negotiate”, did not make the agreements standard form agreements, fails,
in my view, to acknowledge that
the onus of establishing that an agreement is
not a standard form agreement falls upon the respondent, and, moreover, elevates
over substance.
accept that the applicant was, in effect, required either to accept or reject
the terms of the contract in the form in which they
were presented. Ms
Langker-Ferguson’s suggestion that, if the applicant had sought a
variation to those terms, she would have
passed that request to Mr Whitmont
carries no weight in the determination of the question what would have happened
if the applicant
had done so.
Whitmont’s untested evidence, that he would consider any request for
variation of the terms of the agreement, likewise does
not carry any weight in
circumstances where Mr Whitmont, despite referring to “many instances
where terms in a site agreement
have been negotiated and ultimately
changed”, produced only one example of an agreement where the impugned
term was varied
and then only by the shortening of the term during which the
impugned term would operate from ten years to seven years.
suggestion that the site agreement in any way takes into account characteristics
specific to the applicant does not warrant serious
consideration. I do note,
however, that the only respect suggested by the respondent in its submissions
site fee, which, whatever might be the case in respect of
the provisions for the
of the site fee, clearly constituted
“the upfront price payable under the contract” (ie, a term referred
to in s 26(1))
and accordingly was excluded from consideration under
s 27(2)(e).
Unfair contract term
(a) Significant imbalance in the parties’ rights
and obligations
Applicant’s submissions
onus on this issue lies upon the applicant.
applicant submitted:
“44. Mr Anderson has no rights under the site fee
increase term. The operator has all the rights.
45. It is significant that the operator is in control of
decisions about its expenditure and any increases in its costs of electricity,
insurance, and communication. It is already comfortably cushioned against
increases in costs by the provision for a fixed amount
increase of 3.75% plus
any increase in the CPI. On the other hand, it is reasonable to assume that
residents of KNV, including Mr
Anderson, have relatively limited capacity to
absorb price increases because they rely on fixed income in the form of pensions
superannuation benefits.
46. Mr Anderson's financial capacity to absorb an increase is
not relevant to the question of imbalance. The High Court confirmed
Karpik v Carnival plc
[2023] HCA 39
“The relevant inquiry in s 24(1)(a) is whether the term "would cause a
significant imbalance in the parties' rights and obligations
arising under the
contract" (being a standard form contract), not whether a particular party is
personally able to cope with such
an imbalance.”
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submitted that the applicant’s submissions in this regard were
limited to two arguments:
response to the submission that the respondent is in control of decisions about
its expenditure and increases in its cost of electricity,
insurance and
communications, the respondent submitted that a similar argument had been
rejected by the Supreme Court in
at [48]-[49].
response to the submission that it is reasonable to assume that residents of the
village, including the applicant, have “relatively
limited capacity to
absorb price increases”, the respondent submitted that the applicant had
conceded in par 46 of his submissions
that that was irrelevant to the question
of imbalance.
respondent cited
Dialogue Consulting Pty Ltd v Instagram, Inc
[2020] FCA 1846
“[344] Further, one has to be precise as to what is meant
by whether a term causes a significant imbalance in the parties’
and obligations. Significant imbalance relates to the substantive unfairness of
the contract, and requires consideration of
the relevant term, together with the
parties’ other rights and obligations arising under the contract. Whether
a term causes
significant imbalance is a question of fact. The word
“significant” means significant in magnitude or sufficiently large
to be important. A significant imbalance may exist if the term is so weighted in
favour of one party as to tilt that parties’
rights and obligations
significantly in its favour. This may be by granting to that party a beneficial
option or discretion or power.
But a term does not cause a significant imbalance
if there is a meaningful relationship between the term and the protection of a
party, and that relationship is reasonably foreseeable at the time of
contracting. And that is the case with the arbitration agreement
[Emphasis by respondent].
respondent also referred to
OPR WA Pty Ltd v Marron
[2016] WASC 395
. That paragraph stated:
“45 Whether or not there is a significant imbalance is a
question of fact, and the requirement of a ‘significant imbalance’
directs attention to the substantive unfairness of the contract.”
respondent submitted:
“6.7 In the present case:
(a) the site fee increase term was agreed between the parties
at the date of entry into the site agreement, and cannot be amended
respondent unilaterally,
(b) as the Supreme Court held in
, each integer of
the site fee increase term may be definitely ascertained by reference to
objectively determinable inputs, and does
not involve the exercise of any
discretion by the respondent;
(c) on its face, the site fee increase term bears a rational
relationship to the subject matter of the site agreement. The applicant
provided access to a site, including a supply of water, electricity,
telecommunications and other utilities. He receives, in addition,
the benefit of
services performed by the respondent in maintaining the residential community in
the long term. The site fee agreement
reflects that the site fee is to increase
in proportion to anticipated increases in the operator's costs of providing the
which it is required by the site agreement and under the RLLC Act to
provide, while ensuring that the operator remains economically
6.8 There is no substantial unfairness in a contract akin to a
lease which provides that the rent will increase at regular intervals
in a manner proportionate to increases in the landlord's costs, not subject to
any discretion of the landlord, according
to a formula fixed at the
respondent did not address the applicant’s submission that the respondent
“is already comfortably cushioned against
increases in costs by the
provision for a fixed amount increase of 3.75% plus any increase in the
Consideration
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v CLA Trading Pty
[2016] FCA 377
CLA Trading
), Gilmour J stated, at
“(d) the ‘significant imbalance’ requirement
is met if a term is so weighted in favour of the supplier as to
parties’ rights and obligations under the contract significantly in its
favour — this may be by the granting
to the supplier of a beneficial
option or discretion or power, or by the imposing on the consumer of a
disadvantageous burden or
risk or duty ...;
(e) significant in this context means ‘significant in
magnitude’, or ‘sufficiently large to be important’,
‘being a meaning not too distant from substantial’ ...;”
[Citations omitted].
meaning of “significant” was also considered
Director of Consumer Affairs v AAPT
(2006) VCAT 1493.
that case Morris J observed at [33]:
“The word “significant” simply means “important”
or “of consequence”. It does not mean
“substantial”. It
is not a word of fixed connotation and besides being elastic is somewhat
indefinite. However, in its
context, it is designed to identify an imbalance, to
the detriment of the consumer, which should be regarded as unfair. In this sense
the definition is circular. But it is impossible to avoid the notion of
fairness in determining whether a term causes significant
imbalance, even though
this exercise is designed to ascertain whether a term is unfair.”
my view there is clearly a significant imbalance between the rights and
obligations of the parties arising from the impugned term.
This is demonstrated
in practical terms by the fact that it does not appear that the respondent has
at any time sought to increase
the applicant’s site fees by the full
amount calculated pursuant to the impugned term. The site fee increase notified
applicant in 2023 incorporated only the increase in the consumer price
index and the fixed amount of 3.75%. There was no adjustment
by reference to any
increase in the specified costs.
practice, it would appear, the impugned term operated to give the respondent a
substantial degree of discretion in fixing site
fees. Mr Whitmont’s
evidence explaining the reasons why site fees had not been increased for a
number of years tends to support
that conclusion.
decision of Garling J in
concluded that each of the integers
incorporated in the calculation set out in the impugned term was objectively
determinable and
not subject to adjustment at the respondent’s discretion.
His Honour did not determine that the respondent had no capacity
to influence
the amount expended on the items listed in the third integer.
High Court in
Karpik v Carnival plc
[2023] HCA 39
) stated, at [53]-[54]:
“53 The first element requires the court to
consider whether the class action waiver clause would cause
significant imbalance
in the parties’ rights under the
contract. On its face, it did. The class action waiver clause was not for the
benefit of Mr
Ho. The class action waiver clause operated as one of a number of
constraints in cl 15 on Mr Ho, not on Princess. The whole of cl
15, on its face,
is stated to be “for the benefit of the Carrier and certain third party
beneficiaries [defined] in Section
1”. And the class action waiver clause
(cl 15(C)) is particularly one-way in its terms because it operates to impose
limitations
on passengers but in no way restricts the options of the carrier.
Put in different terms, without the class action waiver clause,
there is already
an imbalance as between Princess and Mr Ho concerning vindication of their
respective rights under the contract,
in that there are various other limits in
cl 15 upon the consumer but not upon Princess.
54 It can be accepted that the class action waiver clause
impede or affect the
Ho’s individual right to sue, or his
to exercise
that right. But the class action waiver clause had the effect of preventing or
discouraging passengers from vindicating
their legal rights where the cost to do
so individually was or may be uneconomical. Mr Ho paid a ticket price of
CAD1,796.17 for
the voyage. The cost of commencing and prosecuting a typical
claim arising out of the 13-day cruise holiday, brought as an individual
proceeding, may well not be economically viable. This is so regardless of the
individual circumstances of Mr Ho and the nature of
his particular claims. The
relevant inquiry in s 24(1)(a) is whether the term “would cause a
significant imbalance in the parties’
rights and obligations arising under
the contract” (being a standard form contract), not whether a particular
party is personally
able to cope with such an imbalance. And the answer is that
statements may be adapted to the circumstances of this case. Clearly the
impugned term is not for the benefit of the applicant.
As noted above, the
applicant had no capacity to resist a demand by the respondent for any increase
in site fees up to the full amount
calculated in accordance with the formula.
The respondent on the other hand, had the capacity to fix any increase in site
sought, provided it was less than or equal to the full amount calculated
in accordance with the formula.
formula permits the respondent to increase site fees in two ways reflecting the
general level of inflation. Mr Hochroth resisted
the suggestion that the
respondent was “triple dipping”, but, in my view, it is indisputable
that the formula set out
in the impugned term does involve “double
dipping”, in the sense that it provides for cumulative increases by
to two integers designed to allow for the effects of inflation.
consider that I can take into account the common understanding and experience of
inflation which recognises that, even though the
consumer price index is merely
a general measure of price increases, and individual prices will not rise or
fall by the consumer
price index, there is some correlation between increases in
prices of different goods and services across the economy.
it would be expected that, if the consumer price index increases substantially,
the price of electricity, water, gas, communications,
insurance and rates will
also increase substantially. The fact that the specified costs reflect only 30%
of the total operating costs
of the village, does not mean that, if the
respondent increased site fees by the full amount calculated pursuant to the
the impugned term, it would not be receiving an increase in site fees
incorporating a double measure of inflation. The formula does
not provide for
only 70% of the increase in the consumer price index to be brought into the
equation and, in any event, there is,
on top of the two measures of inflation,
the further fixed percentage increase.
that it is not relevant whether a particular party is
personally able to cope with the imbalance in rights arising from the relevant
term is directed to the proposition that it is the impact of the relevant term
on consumers as a whole, rather than the individual
claimant in a particular
case, which is relevant. The respondent’s submission, suggesting that the
applicant had conceded that
the relative capacity of the respondent on one hand
and the residents on the other to absorb price increases is irrelevant to the
question of imbalance, misconstrues the applicant’s submissions. The
capacity of the applicant personally to meet any increase
in site fees is not
relevant to the question whether there is a significant imbalance in the
parties’ rights and obligations.
The capacity, to meet increased site
fees, of the general class of site holders in the Village who are subject to
site fee increases
in accordance with the impugned term, is a relevant factor in
determining that question.
comment in the last sentence of [344] of the judgment in
suggests there is overlap between the question whether there is
significant imbalance and the question whether a term is reasonably
for the protection of a party’s
(b) Reasonably necessary
noted above, the onus of proving that the impugned term is reasonably necessary
in order to protect the legitimate interests of
the respondent falls upon the
respondent.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submitted that:
“The respondent has a legitimate financial interest in ensuring that it
remains profitable and viable as the operator of the
community in which the
applicant lives. The site fee increase term is reasonably necessary to protect
that legitimate interest, by
ensuring that the respondent receives sufficient
revenue referable to the applicant's site to meet its obligations as an operator
to ensure the long-term financial viability and well-being of the
community.”
respondent noted that the impugned term has five components and that the fourth
and fifth, that is changes in GST and rounding
up to the nearest dollar, should
be self-explanatory and not controversial.
respect of the first to third components, the respondent submitted:
“6.11 ... The first component, CPI, serves to ensure that
site fees adjust with inflation and thus, are not eroded in real
time. The third component, a proportional share of any increase in costs of
electricity, water and other specified utilities,
is appropriate to protect the
respondent from increases in those costs, in circumstances where the respondent
on-supplies those services
for the benefit of the applicant. The applicant is
required to pay his proportional share of any increase.
6.12 That leaves the second component, 3.75%. That component is
reasonably necessary to protect the respondent's financial position
increases in its cost base, aside from provision of utilities and general
inflation. Utilities and taxes comprise only
operating costs. Other costs of the respondent include wages (increases in which
are subject to labour
market conditions which may not be captured by CPI
inflation), costs of repairs and maintenance of community assets, capital works
and upgrades, and unforeseen operating costs.
6.13 By way of example, the respondent anticipates undertaking
upgrades to the road and plumbing networks in the community in the
coming years,
which are anticipated to cost around $3 million (of which $627,000 has already
been incurred). Such works, when completed,
will benefit the whole community
including the applicant. Unforeseen works include works required to upgrade
electricity meters at
sites in the community to smart meters, as required by a
recent decision of the Australian Energy Regulator, and upgrading infrastructure
for solar panels.
6.14 The operator is obliged under the RLLC Act to act for the
long term benefit of the community. It is legitimate for an operator
agree site fee increase terms which provide a reasonable assurance of revenue to
meet community needs and maintain the
financial viability of the community. An
operator must be prepared to meet unforeseen expenses, such as pandemics and the
requirements of government policy and planning controls. In
considering the question of whether a term is reasonably necessary to
the respondent's legitimate interests, the Tribunal should be mindful that the
site agreement is (at least potentially) a
long term contract of indefinite
duration. It is not uncommon for site agreements to be in place for fifteen
years or more at this
community.”
respondent further submitted that the fact that the respondent has been able to
provide temporary reductions in site fees does
not detract from the proposition
that the impugned term is reasonably necessary to protect the respondent’s
legitimate interests.
The respondent suggested that, for the Tribunal to
conclude that the respondent’s conduct in offering temporary reductions
compelled the conclusion that the impugned term itself was unfair, “would
only disincentivise operators from offering temporary
reductions where
appropriate.”
Applicant’s submissions
applicant’s written submissions on this issue, filed before the applicant
had seen the respondent’s submissions, were:
“[I]f the [respondent’s] argument is that it is legitimately
interested in the profitability of its operations, it would
have to bring
evidence of its costs of running the business and its existing profitability. It
may also be necessary to show that
its profit margins on the KNV operation are
comparable with industry standard profitability. Without access to financial
of the operator it is difficult to guess what it might show but it is
striking that, when the term is applied, the operator is enabled
to recover any
increase of its costs caused by general inflation, plus any increase in rates,
taxes and communications costs, plus
a flat rate 3.75%. On its face, this more
than secures a profit margin; it enables it to increase.”
Consideration
do not consider that the respondent has established that the impugned term is
reasonably necessary in order to protect the respondent’s
evidence relied upon by the respondent does not establish the factual
propositions upon which the respondent’s submissions
on this issue rely.
Neither of the witnesses whose untested evidence is relied upon stated that all
of the first three elements or
integers in the calculation were necessary. Mr
Whitmont only referred to the second and third elements. He did not seek to
the additional inclusion of the first element, CPI. Mr Staples said no
more than that price adjustments based on CPI alone would
not ensure that the
respondent receives sufficient revenue to “cover the cost of all
exigencies”.
conclusion in par 7 of Mr Staples’ statement is not supported by any form
of reasoning or explanation. I accord it no weight.
Mr Booth’s adoption of
Mr Staples opinion likewise warrants being given no weight.
the applicant’s submissions pointed out, it would be expected that, to
establish that the impugned term was reasonably necessary
to protect the
respondent’s legitimate interests, the respondent would have led evidence
of its financial position, including
detailed evidence disclosing revenue and
expenditures, and the extent to which the respondent was operating
profitably.
the extent the respondent suggests that potential future capital works might
require increases in site fees well in advance of
the general level of inflation
(which, as I have outlined above, is an obvious consequence of the application
of the impugned term),
the respondent might have been expected to have disclosed
evidence of its capital resources, including its capacity to borrow, and
borrowing costs likely to be incurred. The generic statement by Mr Whitmont
that, as at June 2024, the respondent had incurred
roads within the Village and that upgrades to the road and plumbing networks
would cost at least $3 million,
provides no assistance to the Tribunal in
determining whether the impugned term is reasonably necessary to protect the
respondent’s
legitimate interests. There is no evidence where that money
was expected to come from or the extent to which the expenditure of that
would increase the expenses incurred by the respondent.
Ultimately,
the respondent’s submissions on this issue amounted to the proposition
that, in order to provide “reasonable
assurance of revenue to meet
community needs and maintain financial viability of the community”, the
respondent needed the
capacity to increase site fees every year by an amount
significantly in excess of the general level of inflation.
establish that proposition, significantly more evidence was required than the
respondent adduced. As noted, the weight of the evidence
in Mr Whitmont’s
affidavit and Mr Staples’ statement was significantly diminished by the
fact that neither witness was
available to be cross-examined. In any event, as
also noted above, even if accepted without question, Mr Whitmont’s
and Mr Staples’ statement would be insufficient to establish
that the impugned term was reasonably necessary to protect the
interests of the respondent.
fact, that the respondent has not found it necessary at any time to increase
site fees by the full amount calculated in accordance
with the impugned term,
reinforces the conclusion that the term is not necessary to protect the
respondent’s interests. Relying
on the fact that the respondent has not
demanded the full amount it might have claimed would not, contrary to the
respondent’s
submission, disincentivise operators from offering temporary
reductions where appropriate. It rather should encourage any operator
defend such a term to provide the detailed evidence of its financial position
which would demonstrate (if it were possible
to demonstrate) that the granting
of concessions by the operator arose from particular circumstances and not from
the fact that the
site fees calculated in accordance with the term were well in
excess of the amount necessary to ensure the financial stability of
Transparency and the contract as a whole (s 24(2) of
24(2) of the ACL requires me, in determining whether a contract term is an
unfair contract term, to have regard to the extent
to which the term is
transparent and the contract as a whole.
CLA Trading
, Gilmour J stated at [54]:
“(f) the legislation proceeds on the assumption that some
terms in consumer contracts, especially in standard form consumer
contracts, may
be inherently unfair, regardless of how comprehensively they might be drawn to
the consumer’s attention ...;
(g) in considering ‘the contract as a whole’, not
each and every term of the contract is equally relevant, or necessarily
at all. The main requirement is to consider terms that might reasonably be seen
as tending to counterbalance the term in
question” [citations omitted]
respondent submitted:
“6.17 The site agreement as a whole tells against the
site fee increase term being unfair. It specifically stated that the
negotiable. It also provides the applicant with the right to sell his home free
of interference by the operator (cl 26),
and with the right to terminate the
site agreement on 30 days' written notice to the operator (note 1 and s 117 of
the RLLC Act).
In other words, if the applicant does not wish to continue
paying site fees at the level provided for by the site agreement, he is
sell his home or move it to a different community.”
submission ignores both the transaction costs involved in seeking to sell a
have on the sale price, and
the cost of moving a transportable home.
my view there is nothing in the site agreement as a whole that might reasonably
be seen as tending to counterbalance the impugned
term or the capacity of the
respondent to increase site fees substantially in excess of the general level of
High Court confirmed in
that the transparency of a term may affect
the evaluation of the satisfaction of each of the elements of the statutory
of “unfair”. The High Court observed (at [32]):
“The requirement to consider the transparency of an impugned term is
relevant to, and may affect, the analysis of the extent
to which the term is
unfair as assessed against each of the elements in s 24(1)(a) to (c). That is,
the inquiry as to transparency
is not an independent and separate inquiry from
whether a term is unfair pursuant to s 24(1). The greater the imbalance or
inherent in the term, the greater the need for the term to be
expressed and presented clearly; and conversely, where a term has been
available to an affected party, and is clearly presented and plainly expressed,
the imbalance and detriment it creates may
need to be of a greater
magnitude.”
the applicant’s evidence was that his financial advisor had found the
impugned term confusing, I do not consider that
the term is not reasonably
transparent. The term may not be as transparent as it might have been and there
are elements, in particular
the passages appearing in parentheses, which could
be confusing, particularly to a prospective site owner who is not familiar with
accounting concepts.
do not consider that the extent to which the term is transparent overcomes the
imbalance and detriment which the term causes to
site owners such as the
note that s 25 of the ACL includes a non-exhaustive list of examples of the
kinds of terms of a consumer contract that may be unfair.
Neither party
suggested that any of those examples was relevant to the determination of
whether the impugned term is an unfair contract
Respondent’s submissions
respondent submitted that the impugned term is excluded from the unfair contract
regime because it sets the “upfront price”
payable under the site
respondent referred to the decision of Banks-Smith J in
Competition and Consumer Commission v Ashley & Martin Pty Ltd
, where his Honour, after referring to the UK House of Lords
and Supreme Court decisions in
Director-General of Fair Trading v First
National Bank plc
[2001] UKHL 52
[2002] 1 AC 481
Office of Fair Trading v Abbey
National plc
[2009] UKSC 6
[2010] 1 AC 696
, and noting that the UK legislation was
not identical, held:
“80 Regardless, useful aspects of the reasons
Abbey National
(a) it is important to recall that the provision excludes an
attack on fairness only insofar as the relevant charges comprise the
remuneration and only insofar as the attack relates to the adequacy or
appropriateness in amount of the price or remuneration:
it does not exclude an
attack on the terms on other grounds ...;
(b) not every provision for payment is rendered immune from
scrutiny. There can be monetary consideration that does not constitute
price or remuneration of goods or services provided in exchange, an example
being the charges considered in
First National Bank
(c) care should be taken not to exclude price or remuneration
from the application of reg 6(2) on the basis that it is
‘ancillary’,
‘incidental’, ‘subordinate‘ or
the like. Such descriptions may be of some assistance but ‘it is
in considering provisions which apply across an extraordinarily wide
range of consumer contracts, to treat them with caution‘
(d) nor do the expressions ‘core term’ or
‘essential term’ substitute for considering the content of
(a) and (b) of reg 6(2) .... A supply of services may be simple or
composite. There may be no principled basis upon which to assess
components are more ‘essential’ than others, and it may be that the
main subject matter must be described in
general terms. Similarly, it may be
difficult to ascertain which price components are ‘essential’. The
regulation is
not concerned with the ‘essential price’ but any
consideration that falls within its language ... .
81 It goes without saying that what might define the main
subject matter and set the upfront price payable for the purpose of s
ACL will always depend upon the particular contract being construed. Delineation
of terms by taxonomy or hierarchy will
not necessarily assist with the
application of s 26. Instead, it is important to steadily bear in mind the terms
of the provision
itself and its object, being to protect the ‘basis for
the existence of the contract‘ ... whilst otherwise leaving open
challenge the terms of a contract that might be unfair.” [Citations
respondent identified three elements involved in determining whether a term sets
the upfront price payable under a contract:
(1) The term fixes the consideration provided or to be provided for the supply
sale or grant under the contract;
(2) The consideration must be disclosed at or before the time the contract is
entered into;
(3) The consideration must not be contingent on the occurrence or non-occurrence
of a particular event.
respondent submitted that, in respect of the first element, the site fees were
“akin to” the rent fixed under a lease,
and that, that is “a
paradigm example of consideration paid over time”. The respondent
submitted: “[p]lainly, the
consideration for the right to occupy a site is
not limited to the initial weekly site fee payable.” The respondent
that, if that were not the case, “application of the provision
could have capricious results, and might vary according to the
form but not
substance of a term”.
respect of the second element, the respondent submitted that the consideration
was disclosed at or before the time the contract
was entered into, in that both
the disclosure statement provided to the applicant, and the site agreement
itself “set out and
disclose the site fees and how they will be
increased”.
respect of the third element, the respondent’s submissions addressed the
five elements of the impugned term separately, submitting
“(a) positive change in the CPI - this is not the occurrence or non-
occurrence of an event, but rather the linking of the
site fee increase to a
well-known index;
(b) 3.75%-this does not involve the occurrence or non-occurrence of an event;
(c) a proportional share of any increase in specified costs of the operator -
again this does not involve the occurrence or non-occurrence
of an event but
rather ties the site fee increase to increases in costs incurred by the
(d) change in the GST - not an event but rather an increase in tax applicable to
the site fees;
(e) rounding up - does not involve the occurrence or non-occurrence of an
respondent also submitted that the impugned term could be considered “in
contradistinction” to, for example, default
interest applicable to a
consumer credit contract upon the debtor missing a payment.
respondent referred to relevant paragraphs of the Explanatory Memorandum to the
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian Consumer Law) Bill (No 2) 2010
“5.63 Consideration includes any amount or thing provided as consideration
for the supply of a good, service, financial service,
financial product or a
grant of land. It would also include any interest payable under a consumer
5.64 The exclusion of upfront price means that a term concerning the upfront
price cannot be challenged on the basis that it is unfair.
Having agreed to
provide a particular amount of consideration when the contract was made, which
was disclosed at or before the time
the contract was entered into, a person
cannot then argue that that consideration is unfair at a later time. The upfront
a matter about which the person has a choice and, in many cases, may
5.65 The upfront price covers the cash price payable for a good, service,
financial service, financial product or land at the time
the contract is made.
It also covers a future payment or a series of future payments.
5.66 The definition also requires that the upfront price must be disclosed at or
before the time the contract was entered into by
the parties. In the case of
most transactions this is reasonably straightforward, as a key pre-condition of
the transaction occurring
is an understanding of the price to be paid.
5.67 A key consideration for a court in considering whether a future payment, or
a series of future payments, forms the upfront price
may be the transparency of
the disclosure of such a payment, or the basis on which such payments may be
determined, at or before
the time the contract is made.
5.68 In the context of non-financial services contracts, another relevant
consideration is compliance with section 53C of the TP
Act (which commenced on
25 May 2009), which imposes specific obligations in relation to the disclosure
of a single price in many
5.69 Other consideration (that is, further forms of consideration which are not
part of the upfront price) under the consumer contract
that is contingent on the
occurrence or non-occurrence of a particular event, is excluded from the
determination of the upfront price.
5.70 Terms that require further payments levied as a consequence of something
happening or not happening at some point in the duration
of the contract are
covered by the unfair contract terms provisions. Such payments are additional to
the upfront price, and are not
necessary for the provision of the basic supply,
sale or grant under the contract.” [Emphasis by the respondent]
respondent submitted that the policy behind the exclusion of the “upfront
price” from the unfair contracts regime,
as disclosed by the Explanatory
Memorandum, was that:
“[I]t is inequitable for a person to enter into a contract for a price
which is transparently disclosed and then turn around
and claim that the price
is unfair, thus leaving the counterparty bound to the contract but without the
benefit of the essential
consideration payable.”
respondent submitted that is what the applicant was seeking to do.
respondent further submitted:
“4.12 There are important policy considerations as to why
the unfair contract regime excludes the upfront consideration payable
contract. As the Federal Court observed in
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v CLA Trading Pty Ltd
[2016] FCA 377
underlying policy of unfair contract terms legislation respects true freedom of
contract and seeks to prevent the abuse of
standard form consumer contracts".
4.13 The ACL regime does not, therefore, provide consumers with
a mechanism to avoid their responsibility to pay an agreed-upon
price under a
consumer contract.
4.14 The policy of the RLLC Act reinforces the same conclusion.
The objects of the RLLC Act have been referred to above. Those
objects "reflect
that the RLLC Act seeks to strike a balance between the rights of homeowners and
operators":
NSWCATAP 128
4.15 It would be inimical to the objects of the RLLC Act to
permit homeowners to challenge a site fee increase term as unfair under
The whole point of s 65 in permitting site fees to increase by a "fixed method"
is to create certainty for operators and
that will be payable. Operators need such certainty to plan for and protect the
financial viability
of a residential community. This concern is particularly
acute where, as with the applicant's site agreement, the site agreement
expire (s 31 of the RLLC Act) and a mechanism for ensuring site fees increase
over time is therefore a core (and agreed)
component of the price
the course of his oral submissions, Mr Hochroth also referred the Tribunal to
Jeannie Paterson,
Unfair Contract Terms in Australia
(Lawbook Co, 2012)
at [4.180] where the learned author states:
“[4.180] Terms providing for a variable interest rate payable under a
credit contract are terms to which the UCTL [Unfair Contract
Terms Law] does not
apply, on the ground that these terms set the upfront price under the contract.
Variable interest rates are payable
for the of credit under the contract and are
disclosed at the time the contract grant is made. Terms providing for a
variable interest
rate might also be characterised as defining the main subject
matter under the contract; the main subject matter of the contract
being a loan
with a variable interest rate determined by the lender. It is the very substance
of the contract, understood by consumers,
that the interest rate will be
variable. For this reason, a term providing a credit provider with the power to
set a variable interest
rate is not analogous to the type of term discussed
above to which the [UK legislation] will apply, which provides a trader with
power to vary an already agreed upfront price.”
Applicant’s submissions
applicant submitted that it was inimical to the policy underlying part 2-3 of
the ACL to exclude from the operation of its provisions
all potential mechanisms
for increasing the price paid for an ongoing service over the term of a contract
to provide that service.
The appellant submitted that that would be the effect
of acceptance of the respondent’s submissions in respect of s 26.
applicant referred to the judgement of Banks-Smith J in
ACCC v Ashley &
Martin Pty Ltd,
at [82]-[84]:
“[82] Section 26 is drafted to protect from
assessment a term ‘but only to the extent’ that it defines the main
subject matter or sets the upfront price. The inclusion of the words ‘but
only to the extent’ indicates that there is
no generalised protection of
any term that happens to touch upon obligations to supply goods or services.
[83] Further, the provision is drafted with precision. It does
not utilise general drafting expressions that are often used to
connection. That is, it does not refer to terms that ‘relate to‘ or
‘concern’ supply or price. It
is more specific. It addresses terms
that ‘define’ the main subject matter or ‘set’ the
upfront price.
[84] Such level of precision does not lead to a task that is
necessarily complicated. One would expect that in many cases identifying
main subject matter and the upfront price (with the assistance of the
definition) will often be possible with little more than
the application of
common sense. Indeed, one would hope that is generally the case with consumer
contracts. However, there is no
doubt there will be cases where more complex
questions may arise, for example as to whether particular charges or payments
are contingencies
or part of a package that comprises an upfront payment.”
applicant submitted that the calculation contained in the impugned term did not
fix an upfront price, but rather determined a
process by which the fees payable
over time would be increased.
applicant further submitted that all elements of the calculation other than the
fixed 3.75% increase were contingent on the occurrence
or non-occurrence of a
particular event.
Consideration
the reasons which follow, I am not satisfied that the impugned term is excluded
from the operation of s 23 of the ACL by s 26.
do not consider that the characterisation of the provision for annual increases
in site fees by reference to five separate elements
or integers, as setting the
upfront price payable for the right to occupy the applicant’s site, is as
clear as the respondent
accept that an upfront price may include periodic payments made during the term
of an agreement. But it is not clear to me why terms
providing for the
adjustment of those periodic payments, in ways which cannot be predicted with
confidence at the time of entry into
the agreement, should constitute part of
the upfront price.
my view, it would be stretching the meaning of the words “disclosed at or
before the time the contract is entered into”
to interpret them so as to
cover a price increase which cannot be quantified at the time of entry into the
Nevertheless,
I am satisfied that, even if the impugned term could properly be described as
specifying a consideration disclosed at
the time the contract is entered into,
all substantial elements of the calculation, other than the fixed percentage
increase, constitute
consideration that is contingent on the occurrence or
non-occurrence of a particular event.
may be common experience that prices tend to rise, but deflation is not an
unknown phenomenon. Hence, it cannot be said that a
positive change in the
consumer price index is inevitable or that increases in the costs incurred by
the respondent in relation to
electricity, water, gas, communications,
insurance, rates or other government charges or taxes are inevitable.
term providing for site fees to increase by reference to positive changes in the
consumer price index is contingent upon there
being a positive change in the
consumer price index.
term providing for site fees to increase by a proportion of the increase in
costs incurred by the respondent in respect of the
specified items is contingent
upon the costs incurred by the respondent in respect of those items increasing.
Unquestionably,
in my view, the term providing for site fees to increase by reference to the
effect of any change in the rate of GST
is contingent upon there being a change
in the rate of GST.
(a) a positive increase in the CPI;
(b) an increase in the costs incurred by the respondent in respect of the
specified items; and
(c) a change in the rate of GST
are a “particular event” within the meaning of s 26(2) of the
the rounding provision might be described as contingent upon the site fees
otherwise calculated not being a whole dollar figure,
but it is not necessary to
explore that issue.
do not agree with the proposition expressed in
Unfair Contract Terms in
at [4.180] relied upon by Mr Hochroth. As Mr Batley pointed out,
that conclusion was not accompanied by any deeper analysis or reasoning.
do not agree that variable interest rates are disclosed at the time the contract
is entered into. Nor do I agree that variable interest
rates define the main
subject of the contract, or that variable interest rates are not contingent on
the occurrence or non-occurrence
of a particular event. There are many reasons
why most loan contracts providing for variable interest rates will not be unfair
but the frequent use of such contracts is not reason to exclude them
from the regulation of unfair terms. It seems inconsistent with
the objective of
the unfair contract terms laws that a contract which provided a lender with
unfettered discretion to vary interest
rates should not be susceptible to being
challenged as an unfair contract on the basis that the capacity of the lender to
vary interest
rates was disclosed at the time of entry into the contract.
also note that
Unfair Contract Terms in Australia
also states, at
“[4.170] A power to vary the price payable under a
contract that has already been agreed between the parties will be subject
review under the UCTL. Such powers do not ‘set’ the upfront price
payable under the contract. Moreover, the list of
examples of the kinds of terms
that may be unfair under the UCTL include the example of ‘a term that
permits, or has the effect
of permitting, one party to vary the upfront price
payable under the contract without the right of another party to terminate the
contract’.”
author does not explain how the proposition set out at [4.180] can be reconciled
with that statement.
any event, regardless of the position with loan agreements providing for
variable interest rates, in my view the adjustment of
site fees by reference to
positive changes in the CPI and increases in the respondent’s operating
costs clearly fall within
the exclusion from the definition of “upfront
price” provided by the closing words of s 26(2) of the ACL.
recognise that in
Equity Financial Planners Pty Ltd
v AMP Financial
Planning Pty Ltd
[2023] FCA 741
169 ACSR 71
Moshinsky J at [695] concluded
that a deferred payment did not fall within the concluding words of s 26(2) of
the ACL, because “[w]hile
the amount of the Deferred Payment can be
adjusted, liability to pay the Deferred Payment is not contingent”, but
also because
“the deferred payment does not fall within the words
‘other consideration’”. I do not consider that that
has any relevance in the context of these
proceedings.
reason of the foregoing conclusions, I find that the impugned term is void as an
unfair contract term pursuant to s 23 of the ACL.
respondent correctly pointed out that the Tribunal has no power to declare a
contract term void pursuant to s 23 of the ACL.
the Appeal Panel held in
Clark v Electrical Home-Aids Pty Ltd
NSWCATAP 63
, at [102]:
“The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to declare contracts (or terms of
contracts) void. However the Tribunal, being a “court”
purposes of Part 2-3 of the ACL (s 23 – 28 incl of the ACL) – see
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW) (“FTA”) -
is able to make a finding that a term of a contract is unfair, and then grant
relief in the nature of
restitution pursuant to
of the FTA.”
[Footnote omitted]
respondent accepted that the Tribunal has power to provide monetary relief in
respect of the unfairness of the impugned term.
However, the respondent disputed
that the Tribunal has power to grant a remedy “predicated on the
(as opposed to the unfairness) of a contractual term”. The
respondent submitted that, if the applicant otherwise succeeded,
the Tribunal
should “mould” relief to fit the circumstances of the
“Rather than finding that the site fee increase term was completely
inoperable, the Tribunal could form a view as to what a
‘just’ site
fee increase term would look like, and require a refund only of site fees paid
over and above a just amount.”
respondent suggested that both
Fair Trading Act
s 157(1)(d) of the RLLC Act would empower the Tribunal to make such an
disagree that the Tribunal does not have the power to grant a remedy predicated
on the voidness of a contractual term.
respondent’s submission is contradicted by the passage from
Electrical Home-Aids Pty Ltd
cited above.
the note to
Fair Trading Act
of the ACL provides that an unfair term in a consumer contract that
is a standard form contract is void, although the contract continues
to bind the
parties if it is capable of operating without the unfair term. If a contract
claim in relation to a consumer contract
containing such an unfair term is
brought before a court or tribunal (such as the Civil and Administrative
Tribunal) having jurisdiction
to deal with the claim, the court or tribunal will
be required to treat the term as being void.
note is not part of the
Fair Trading Act
but may be taken into
account to confirm the meaning of the text or to resolve ambiguity in
interpreting
Fair Trading Act
Interpretation Act 1987
limits the circumstances in which the Supreme Court
may make a declaration pursuant to s 250 of the ACL that a contract term is
but subs (3) provides:
(3) This section does not—
(a) limit any other power of the Supreme Court to make declarations,
(b) prevent a party to a consumer contract that is a standard form
contract from bringing proceedings in a court or tribunal of
because it is unfair.
site agreement is capable of operating without the impugned term and thus
continues to bind the parties:
of the ACL.
68 of the RLLC Act provides that the Tribunal has power to order a refund to the
applicant of overpaid site fees on the ground
that the increase of site fees did
not comply with a requirement of Div 3 of Pt 6 of the RLLC Act. Division 3 of Pt
6 of the RLLC
Act includes s 65, which provides that site fees may be increased
only in accordance with that Division. Section 65(2) provides that
agreement may provide for site fees to be increased. In the absence of the
impugned term, the site agreement did not provide
for site fees to be increased
and any demand by the respondent for increased site fees was not in accordance
with Division 3 of Part
Accordingly,
the notice of increase of site fees issued to the applicant by the respondent on
18 November 2023 was invalid and the
increase in site fees demanded in that
notice did not comply with the requirements of Div 3 of Pt 6. It follows that
all increased
payments made by the applicant since that date were
“overpaid site fees” and the Tribunal has power, pursuant to s 68
the RLLC Act to order a refund of those overpaid site fees.
would be the case even if it were concluded that part of the impugned term (eg
the fixed percentage increase) was not an unfair
contract term and remained
valid. Because the notice of increase served on the applicant calculated the
increase by reference to
at least one invalid element, the notice was wholly
invalid and ineffective.
service of the notice on 18 November 2023, the applicant’s site agreement
required him to pay fees of $242 per week.
Whitmont’s affidavit annexed a statement of the applicant’s account
up to 13 June 2024. That discloses that the applicant
had, since 7 December 2023
been paying $268 per week. The overpayment made by the applicant between 7
December 2023 and 13 June 2024
was $702 (27 weeks at $26 per week).
Tribunal does not have the evidence necessary to calculate the amount the
applicant has overpaid since 13 June 2024.
note that the
Residential (Land Lease) Communities Amendment Act 2024
(NSW) (the Amendment Act) amended s 65(2)(a)(ii) to provide that a fixed
calculation may not use more than one element to calculate
the increase. That
amendment came into effect on 25 September 2024 but does not apply to
pre-existing site agreements.
transitional provisions, inserted into Sch 2 of the RLLC Act by the Amendment
Act, provide for existing site agreements, which
do not comply with the amended
s 65, to continue until replaced by an agreement complying with the amended s 65
or varied so as to
comply with the amended s 65, or until the “transition
day”, which is 12 months after the transitional provisions came
effect. If an existing site agreement is not replaced or varied so as to be
compliant with the amended s 65 by the transition
day, cl 23(2) of Sch 2
provides that site fees may only be increased by notice, in accordance with
the transitional provisions came into effect on 11 December 2024, the transition
day will be 11 December 2025.
would not be appropriate to speculate concerning how those provisions will
operate in respect of the applicant’s site agreement.
will direct the parties to file orders incorporating the correct calculation of
overpayments made by the applicant up to the date
of this decision. If the
parties are unable to agree they should each file evidence and short submissions
concerning the calculation.
Subject to any submissions by the parties, the
Tribunal will determine the amount of site fees overpaid by the applicant on the
of the submissions and without a further hearing.
the applicant sought an order pursuant to s 68(2)(b) of the RLLC Act directing a
refund of overpaid site fees to other home
owners in the Village, I do not
consider it appropriate to make such an order in this case.
significant question would arise concerning whether the Tribunal could determine
that the site agreements of any of the home owners
who were party to the earlier
proceedings contained a term relating to increases in site fees which was void
as an unfair term pursuant
to s 23 of the ACL. There is a finding, binding
upon those homeowners, that their site agreements are not standard form
have not been made aware of any other home owners in the Village who have
“also had a non-compliant increase of substantially
the same kind”.
The evidence of Ms Langker-Ferguson that there were around 200 home owners in
the Village with site agreements
containing fixed notice fee increase terms
suggests that there would be around 150 home owners who were not party to the
proceedings who might be in that position. But I have no direct or
specific evidence concerning any of them. In particular, I have
no evidence
concerning whether notices of fee increase were sent to other home owners at the
same time as the applicant, nor any
evidence concerning what fee increases might
have been notified.
orders are:
(1) The parties are to file with the Tribunal within 14 days of the date of
publication of this decision a form of order requiring
the respondent to refund
to the applicant site fees which the applicant has overpaid since 7 December
(2) If the parties cannot agree on the amount to be refunded, each party is to
file and serve upon the other within 14 days of the
date of publication of this
decision any further evidence relied upon to establish the amount of the
overpayments, and submissions,
not exceeding two pages, in support of the form
of order for which that party contends.
(3) Subject to any submissions by the parties, the Tribunal will determine the
amount of site fees overpaid by the applicant and
the appropriate form of order,
on the basis of the evidence and submissions filed pursuant to the previous
order and without a further
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (500 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter