URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC V DAVIS (NO 2) [2013] NSWNMT 25 (5 December 2013)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Matter No: 028/2013
CITATION: HCCC V DAVIS (NO 2)
[2013] NSWNMT
INQUIRY INTO A COMPLAINT AGAINST A
Complainant
Health Care Complaints Commission
Andrew James DAVIS
O’Neill (Deputy Chairperson)
Kathleen Dixon (Nurse Member)
Constable (Nurse Member)
Sandra Everett (Lay Member)
Date and Place
2 December 2013, Sydney
Date of Order
December 2013
Date of Reasons for Decision
Representation
Complainant Ragni Mathur, barrister, instructed by Monica Richmond,
solicitor, for the Health Care Complaints Commission.
Respondent Not present. Not represented
Complaint against a nurse – conduct towards
residents of an aged care facility - unsatisfactory professional conduct –
professional misconduct – non-publication order – stage two hearing
- protective orders – prohibition order - costs
Legislation
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Procedure Act 2005
HCCC v Davis (No 1)
[2013] NSWNMT 17
HCCC v Pearsall
[2012] NSWNMT 10
REASONS FOR DECISION
Nature of this hearing and these reasons for decision
hearing is the second stage of the Tribunal’s inquiry into the Complaint
dated 30 April 2013 made by the Health Care Complaints
Commission (HCCC) against
Andrew James Davis. In that Complaint, the HCCC alleged that he was guilty of
unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct. In its reasons
for decision dated 19 September 2013, the Tribunal found that Complaint was
The Tribunal was comfortably satisfied that the subject-matter of the
complaints of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct in
the Complaint were proved.
this hearing, as a consequence of those findings, the Tribunal dealt with the
applications by the HCCC to make protective orders,
a prohibition order and a
costs order in relation to Mr Davis.
What the Tribunal
Tribunal cancelled the registration of Andrew James Davis on the register of
health practitioners, in relation to nurses, kept
by the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia and maintained by the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (AHPRA).
Tribunal ordered that at least four years elapse, from the date of the order in
this matter, before Mr Davis may apply (make an
application for a review under s
163A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
) to the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New South Wales (NCAT)
to be registered as a nurse on the register of health practitioners
Tribunal ordered that Mr Davis be prohibited, for a period of four years from
the date of the orders in this matter, from providing
the health services,
whether as private, public or volunteer services, that fall within the
definition of a health service set out
Health Care
Complaints Act 1993
Tribunal continued the non-publication order it made in this matter on 19
September 2013.
Tribunal ordered that Mr Davis pay the costs of the HCCC in this matter on the
ordinary basis as defined in
Procedure Act 2005
. If agreement cannot be reached, either
party may have the matter re-listed for assessment by
Issues arising at the commencement of the
Davis did not attend the hearing. Ms Mathur advised the Tribunal that her
instructing solicitor had made numerous attempts to contact
Association’s solicitor who acted for Mr Davis in order to obtain Mr
Davis’ contact address and details. The HCCC
did not have those details.
Last week the Association’s solicitor advised that she had been in contact
with Mr Davis and that
he had given strict instructions to her that she was
not permitted to pass on his contact details including his place of address
residence. Further she advised that Mr Davis had told her that he was happy for
her to indicate to the HCCC that he did not wish
to receive any correspondence
attending the stage 2 hearing.
He also advised that he did not wish to take
part in these proceedings in any manner or form.
Mathur also noted that, at the further directions hearing in these proceedings
held on 11 November 2013 Mr McGee advised the Deputy
Chairperson of two matters.
First that Mr Davis was aware that the HCCC may make a submission at this stage
2 hearing that his registration
as a nurse be cancelled. Second, that Mr Davis
was aware that the HCCC was contemplating making a submission that a prohibition
order be placed upon him.
Mathur submitted that the Tribunal should proceed with the stage 2 hearing
because Mr Davis had given a very clear indication that
he did not wish to
partake in the proceedings, that procedural fairness had been achieved with
respect to all that could be done
in relation to him receiving the material she
proposed to tender in the stage 2 of the hearing.
Tribunal accepted Ms Mathur’s submissions and was satisfied that Mr Davis
had decided not to take part any further in these
proceedings, that he had taken
steps that ensured that it was either impossible or very difficult to serve him
with further documentation
in this case and that, as at 11 November 2013 at
least, he was aware that the HCCC was likely to seek orders that his
registration
as a nurse be cancelled and that a prohibition order be made
against him.
Consequently,
the Tribunal decided to proceed with the hearing.
sources of the evidence
addition to the documentary evidence put before the Tribunal during stage one of
the hearing in this matter, the Tribunal considered
paragraphs 62 to 75 of Mr
Davis’s statement (RE 1).
the commencement of stage 2 of the hearing, Ms Mathur tendered a bundle of
documents. These were marked Complainant’s Exhibits
Volume 3, 1 – 9.
Ms Mathur also tendered Mr Davis’ current registration of practitioner,
which was marked Complainant’s
Exhibit Volume 3, 10. This document showed
that Mr Davis was currently registered, but that his registration was subject to
the conditions
imposed by the Tribunal on 5 September 2013. No oral evidence
was given to the Tribunal at this hearing.
Mathur assisted the Tribunal by providing it with a chronology of relevant
events and a draft of the orders sought by the HCCC.
The HCCC did not press its
suggestion that Mr Davis be reprimanded.
The evidence
and the submissions on behalf of the HCCC
Mathur took the Tribunal through the material she had tendered to it at the
commencement of this stage of the hearing. She submitted
that the gravity of the
proven behaviour in the Complaint needed to be seen on a background of Mr
Davis’ behaviour between
the year 2000 and 2009. On 12 September
2000 Sydney Illawarra Health Service conducted an investigation into the use by
him of inappropriate
and offensive language to his Nursing Unit Manager,
admittedly not a patient. Mr Davis received a warning for his
inappropriate
behaviour. On 5 November 2006 there was a complaint against
Mr Davis because he commented to another member of staff within earshot
a patient that the patient was a "stupid bitch". After that incident, the
patient discharged herself, without medical clearance,
as a result of Mr
Davis’ comment. Mr Davis admitted the allegation.
2008 four complaints were proven against Mr Davis. They related to
incidents on the night of 17-18 May 2008. The first of these
was that he
touched a patient's toes for no clinical reason. He denied that allegation but
the fact finding interview found the
patient to be a credible and reliable
witness. Ms Mathur submitted that this was a telling case because it has a
ring of similarity
with the compliant with respect to Patient D that was
proven in this case.
second allegation was that Mr Davis repeatedly told the same patient she
was beautiful. The patient described his repeated comments
as similar to
“pick up lines that might be used in a pub”. Mr Davis denied saying
those words and claimed that he may
have said words to the effect of "You're a
beautiful person". The Professional Practice Unit of the relevant hospital found
the comment was "You are beautiful".
next allegation was that on the same day, Mr Davis said to the same patient,
while washing her that the reason she had six kids
was because she liked sex.
Mr Davis admitted to this allegation and to a further allegation that he
said to another staff member,
within earshot of the patient, that the reason she
had six kids was because she was a Catholic.
relation to all these allegations, the NSW Nurses Association (the Association)
said in a letter dated 15 July 2009 that it was
instructed to say that;
“Mr Davis accepted that he made inappropriate remarks in the past, however
with the benefit of hindsight
he acknowledges that it is not acceptable and he
has benefitted from the opportunity to reflect on his conduct”.
a letter dated 26 August 2009, the HCCC advised the Association that it had
finalised its investigation of a complaint in relation
to Mr Davis. It also
advised that, in consultation with the then NSW Nurses and Midwives Board (the
Board), that he should attend
counselling under the provisions of the
Care Complaints Act 1993
The HCCC advised that the purpose of the counselling was to address the
established pattern of inappropriate behaviour and comments
over an eight year
Davis attended the Counselling Committee of the Board on 5 November 2009. The
Committee advised that its main purpose was to inform
and remind nurses of their
professional responsibilities and to assist them in finding ways to enhance and
improve their practice.
its report to the Board, the Committee noted the following
Mr Davis agreed that he had been reprimanded in 2002, 2006 and 2008 and
that he has now learned to be very mindful of what he says
and does as his
actions and words can be misread.
Mr Davis further stated that he
has seen the errors in his ways.
The Committee advised Mr Davis that it was satisfied that he understood
the seriousness of the matters raised.
The Committee further counselled Mr Davis to have a good knowledge of
professional boundaries and to make himself familiar with the
website where relevant information is available.
The Committee also counselled Mr Davis that he is a role model for
others working with him and that it is essential that he look after
professional safety.
The Committee advised Mr Davis that it would recommend to the Board that the
matter be finalised and the file closed.
The Committee came to this conclusion as Mr Davis had provided the
Committee with an insight into the circumstances of the incident
and the context
in which he was working at the time.
Tribunal notes that the subject-matter of the complaints proven before the
Tribunal occurred after these comments made by the
Counselling Committee.
However it is possible that some of what Mr Davis did to Patient B occurred
around the time the Committee
made its remarks about him.
Mathur submitted that the complaints proven before the Tribunal raised serious
doubts about whether Mr Davis had really learned
to be very mindful of what he
said and did as his actions and words could be misread. She also submitted that
at the time all of
the allegations that were proven against him arose, Mr Davis
was the only registered nurse on duty. All the other staff were Assistants
Nursing and they looked to him for their supervision and guidance in relation to
all matters including treatment of patients.
Although he was reminded in
November 2009 that he was a role model, he still went on to behave in the manner
that he did in relation
to Patients A, B, C and D, sometimes in the presence of
staff he had responsibility to be the role model for.
Mathur noted the Committee’s final comment above about Mr Davis’
insight and submitted that, because of what had been
proven before the Tribunal,
Mr Davis’ insight must come under serious question.
Tribunal notes that Mr Davis attended a Counselling Committee on 5 November 2009
and that the minutes of that meeting show that
the chairperson of the Committee
confirmed with Mr Davis that he understood that the Board considered the issues
of inappropriate
communication and non-adherence to appropriate professional
boundaries to be very serious. As already noted, Mr Davis told the
that he has seen the errors in his ways. The Board wrote to him on 19
January 2010 advising that since counselling had been successful
the Committee
recommended that the matter be finalised and the file closed. Nevertheless,
matters proven against Mr Davis occurred,
in relation to Patient B, between
February 2009 and March 2011 and in relation to Patients A, C and D between 2010
and March 2011.
Tribunal notes, as Ms Mathur submitted, Mr Davis did not disclose two
factors to Bupa when he sought employment with them in 2009.
disclose that there had been prior complaints against him nor did he disclose
that he was under investigation at that
time. Ms Mathur submitted that this
spoke to his credit and in particular whether he was a candid individual and
further, in her
submission, whether he could be trusted in the community as a
registered nurse, even with conditions on his registration.
Davis was summarily dismissed from Bupa on 18 March 2011. He moved to Maclean in
early 2011 to take up his position with Mareeba
Aged Care Facility and saw a
General Practitioner who referred him to Ms Maggie Hutchings, a counsellor. She
reported back to the
General Practitioner in the following
Thank you for referring Andrew Davis who has multiple
issues in regard to his Mental Health. Andrew is facing some ongoing serious
difficulties with behaviour but on interview, despite the possible long term
consequences of these behaviours, he does not appear
to want to change. I felt
on interview that he attended counselling more from a “damage
control” perspective. I am
of the opinion that Andrew presents with a
personality disorder. He lacks empathy for others and finds it
and “entertaining” to taunt others. There is
no remorse but there is regret for the impact the possible consequences
have for himself.
I am not sure that counselling would enable change but have asked that Andrew
think seriously about why he is presenting to counselling.
One condition would
be that he have a psychiatric assessment. ....
Davis’ General Practitioner then referred him to psychiatrist Dr Peter
O’Brien. He reported on 15 November 2012 that
he could find no evidence of
bipolar illness, psychosis and no major anxiety symptoms. He continued that from
a “diagnostic
perspective” he would concur that the issues were
within the personality spectrum and that if Mr Davis was to commit to therapy,
significant improvements could be achieved.
his report dated 7 December 2012, Dr O’Brien states that; “it would
appear that the death of his close female support
was a major contributor in the
behaviour which has now led to restrictions being placed on his nurse’s
registration and further
investigation is being undertaken”. The Tribunal
notes that the person referred to died in 2005.
psychologist, Peter Jenkins saw Mr Davis on 10 occasions between 7 Dec. 2012 and
18 July 2013. He expressed the view that:
“Mr Davis has developed
personally and professionally as a result of his consultations.”
The principles to be applied when making orders
provides that: “In the exercise of functions under a
NSW provision, the protection of the health and safety of the public must
paramount consideration”. As the Tribunal is exercising functions under a
NSW provision of the
, it must comply with the requirements of that
noted in the
Pearsall Case
and well established in the case law, one of
the principal functions of the Tribunal is to promote and maintain the highest
of professional conduct and ethics in the nursing profession. Further
the ultimate role of the Tribunal is to protect the public
and that, in certain
circumstances, this may require that the registration of a nurse be cancelled.
Also the case law establishes
that the public must be assured that:
(i) it will be protected from the risk of the nurse in question
repeating the misconduct,
(ii) the orders will have a deterrent effect on others that might be tempted
to fall short of the high standard required of them,
(iii) the orders will have the effect of encouraging the maintenance of high
standards in the nursing profession, and
(iv) the orders will have the effect of maintaining public confidence in the
nursing profession,
(v) the orders will not unnecessarily deprive the public of the services of
Tribunal took these requirements and considerations into account when it made
its findings and orders set out below.
The Tribunal’s
findings and orders
Tribunal considered that its findings in relation to Mr Davis’ behaviour
toward Patients A, B, C and D in this matter revealed
serious examples of
professional misconduct. This is because his proven professional misconduct
occurred from 2009 to 2011 - a period
of two years. It involved four
patients. The conduct was disgracefully disrespectful of the patients in his
care. He abused them
by taunting them for his amusement and entertainment. The
four elderly patients were particularly vulnerable, as Ms Mathur submitted,
because each one of them was suffering from dementia and could not defend
themselves against his conduct.
Tribunal notes Ms Mathur’s submission that a protective order that only
placed conditions on Mr Davis’ registration
would be insufficient to
protect the public. The Tribunal notes and adopts her reasons for making that
submission namely that all
patients are vulnerable by virtue of the fact that
they are in an environment that is unfamiliar, for example a hospital or a
setting. They are ill and that, of itself, produces vulnerability.
Also, and this is a factor that resonates with the matters the
Tribunal found
proved in this case, a patient has little control over their surrounding
circumstances. When in a hospital, a clinic
or an aged care facility, indeed in
any place are present to receive health care services, a patient has little
control as to who
enters or exits their room or the space in which they are
located. Consequently, conditions on his registration which would preclude
Mr Davis from treating or being in the company of elderly patients or
patients with dementia would be insufficient to protect the
public because all
patients are vulnerable in effect.
Tribunal accepts Ms Mathur’s submission that the psychologist Mr Jenkins
is unable to speak of Mr Davis' development personally
and professionally.
He gives no examples of where there has been a shift in Mr Davis’ thinking
or behaviour so as to provide
a factual basis for that opinion. Mr
Jenkins’ opinion was also inconsistent with the Tribunal’s
understanding of the
facts of the case. Mr Davis has claimed on a number of
occasions to have seen the error of his ways, but has continued to conduct
himself seriously inappropriately towards people in his care.
Tribunal accepts Ms Hutchings’ views about Mr Davis’ attendance upon
health professionals like herself as being “damage
control”. Her
opinion was consistent with his presentation before the Tribunal and the
Tribunal’s views of his attitudes
exhibited during the hearing and
apparent from the documentary evidence.
these reasons, the Tribunal considered necessary the protection of the health
and particularly the safety of the public and to
achieve the considerations
referred to in the
Pearsall Case
and set out above, to cancel Mr
Davis’ registration as a nurse. The Tribunal also considered it necessary
to preclude him from
applying to NCAT for a review of the order deregistering
him for a period of four years. The Tribunal considers that Mr Davis needs
least that period of time to develop the insight into the nature of his conduct
and to demonstrate that he has obtained the ability
to act appropriately towards
of its findings of professional misconduct and the other considerations set out
above that led it to cancel Mr Davis’
registration as a nurse, the
Tribunal was satisfied that Mr Davis poses a substantial risk to the health of
members of the public.
This was because of the way he mistreated and abused
patients in his care as proven in this case and apparent from other documentary
material before the Tribunal.
a consequence, the Tribunal ordered that Mr Davis be prohibited, for a period of
four years from the date of the orders in this
matter, from providing the health
services, whether as private, public or volunteer services, that fall within the
definition of
a health service set out in
Health Care
Complaints Act 1993
Mathur sought an order for Mr Davis to pay the HCCC’s in this matter. She
submitted that the HCCC had done nothing in this
matter to disentitle it from
its full costs in this matter. The Tribunal ordered Mr Davis to pay the
HCCC’s costs in this
matter on the ordinary basis as defined in
Procedure Act 2005
Tribunal made its orders accordingly.
December 2013
_____________________
Nick O’Neill
Chairperson
_____________________
Kathleen Dixon - Nurse
_____________________
Mark Constable - Nurse Member
_____________________
Sandra Everett - Lay Member
HCCC v Davis (No 1)
[2013] NSWNMT 17.
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
[2012] NSWNMT 10
Matter No: 028/2013
INQUIRY INTO A COMPLAINT AGAINST A
Complainant
Health Care Complaints Commission
Andrew James DAVIS
O’Neill (Deputy Chairperson)
Kathleen Dixon (Nurse Member)
Constable (Nurse Member)
Sandra Everett (Lay Member)
Order and Reasons for Decision
3 December 2013
The Tribunal was satisfied that the complaints of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct in this matter were
proved. As a
consequence, the Tribunal made the following orders:
Tribunal cancelled the registration of Andrew James Davis on the register of
health practitioners, in relation to nurses, kept
by the Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia and maintained by the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (AHPRA).
Tribunal ordered that at least four years elapse, from the date of the order in
this matter, before Mr Davis may apply (make an
application for a review under s
163A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
) to the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New South Wales (NCAT)
to be registered as a nurse on the register of health practitioners
Tribunal ordered that Mr Davis be prohibited, for a period of 4 years from the
date of the orders in this matter, from providing
the health services, whether
as private, public or volunteer services, that fall within the definition of a
health service set out
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Tribunal continued the non-publication order it made in this matter on 19
September 2013.
Tribunal ordered that Mr Davis pay the costs of the HCCC in this matter on the
ordinary basis as defined in
Procedure Act 2005
. If agreement cannot be reached, either
party may have the matter re-listed for assessment by
Dated: 3 December 2013
Deputy Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (270 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter