URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPYT/2013/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:10:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v MR TRAC QUANG HA (No. 2) [2013] NSWPYT 1 (1 May 2013)
PHYSIOTHERAPY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
CITATION: HCCC v MR TRAC QUANG HA (No. 2)
[2013] NSWPYT
An Inquiry pursuant to the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law
as to Protective Orders
consequent upon a finding by the Tribunal on 28 August 2012, that the Respondent
was guilty of Professional
Misconduct: see
HCCC v Trac Quang HA
Complainant
: NSW Health Care Complaints
t: MR TRAC QUANG HA
Diane Robinson, Chairperson
Dr. Elizabeth Ellis, Physiotherapist Member
Professor Darren Rivett,
Physiotherapist Member
Ms Margaret Knibb, Lay Member
Suppression Order Applies
Date and Place of Hearing
: 20 November 2012 at
Date of Decision
: 1 May 2013 (Orders)
Representation
Complainant: Ms B Tronson of Counsel, instructed by Ms Ragini Lewis,
Respondent: Mr R Chia of Counsel, instructed by Mr Michael Tran,
Physiotherapist - professional misconduct - false and
misleading claims to insurance company – destruction of original clinical
records – inadequate record keeping –appropriate protective orders
Legislation Cited
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(NSW) No 86a
Cases cited
HCCC v Trac Quang HA
[2012] NSWPYT 2
; HCCC v Vu
; HCCC v Duong
[2010] NSWPYT 2
; HCCC v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
HCCC v Margiotta
[2007] NSWPYT 1
; HCCC v Harper[2009] NSWCHT 2; HCCC v Rutner
[2009] NSWDT 2
; Lee v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2010] NSWCA 80.
REASONS FOR DECISION
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
Physiotherapy Tribunal conducted an Inquiry on 12, 13 and 26 June 2012 into two
Complaints made by the Health Care Complaints
Commission (HCCC) in relation to
Mr Trac Quang Ha. On 28 August 2012 the Tribunal delivered its decision
concerning those Complaints
and found Mr Ha guilty of professional
misconduct.
Tribunal reconvened on 20 November 2012. This Inquiry was conducted to consider
further evidence and submissions in relation to
what orders, if any, should be
made consequent upon the Tribunal’s finding of professional
misconduct.
Tribunal determined to reprimand Mr Ha and to suspend his registration for a
period of 12 months from the date of this order.
The Tribunal also required Mr
Ha to undertake further education and imposed a number of conditions upon Mr
Ha’s registration
to take effect at the end of the period of suspension.
These conditions relate to supervision, continuing professional development
an audit of his clinical records. In addition, an order was made that Mr Ha pay
the costs of the HCCC.
Tribunal refers to its decision in
HCCC v Trac Quang HA
[2012] NSWPYT 2.
The findings made in relation to the Complaints against Mr Ha are set out in
that decision, as is the background material in relation
to this matter.
addition to the documents considered at the hearing in June 2012, the Tribunal
received a written statement from Mr Ha, dated 12
October 2012; written
submissions from the HCCC, dated 30 October 2012 and written submissions on
behalf of Mr Ha, dated 15 November
Ha also gave oral evidence.
Evidence of Mr Ha
Ha made false and misleading claims to nib health fund for the purpose of
obtaining a benefit in circumstances where no physiotherapy
service was
rendered. Mr Ha admitted he had made false claims for non attending family
members and told the Tribunal that he had
stopped this practice and would not do
it again. He said that he was sorry for what he had done. In his written
statement he said,
"To this day I maintain that I have done a terrible thing and
misled the trust, not just of NIB but also the public and that I am
fully responsible for what I have done."
asked why his past claiming behaviour was wrong, Mr Ha said it was wrong because
he was not allowed to claim for a non-attending
family member. He had some
difficulty explaining why his behaviour constituted a breach of trust.
Q. You also said at paragraph 7 that you've misled the
trust not just of NIB but also the public. So can you tell us what you
or what you meant when you wrote that, how have you misled the trust
of the public?
A. If you like, the NIB also the - I mean, if I again do that to
NIB that's mean I have done - misled the public as well.
Q. Sorry, you're going to have to say that again, just a little bit more
slowly and a little bit more clearly.
A. Because when I misled to the NIB, so they also, it may all have been
misled to the public when I doing that.
Q. And in what way? Can you explain how?
A. Because I charging the not attend a family where I should not allow to
doing that.
Q. And if I could just clarify, does that mean you didn't tell the family
members? When you say you misled the trust of the public--
A. I really mean that because NIB also the public.
(Transcript, 20/11/12, pp 2-3)
asked about the implications for the physiotherapy profession, Mr Ha said that
his behaviour could make the public lose trust
in the profession.
Mr Ha also acknowledged that his record-keeping had been deficient. He told the
Tribunal that he had called the Australian Physiotherapy
Association to enquire
instead he has been rereading
his university lecture notes on record keeping.
When asked how his record-keeping had changed Mr Ha said that he asks more
and documents more answers.
Mr Ha said that he has lost patients because he had ceased the practice of
billing for non attending family members. He said that
sometimes patients still
ask him to swipe the card of a family member and he refuses. He said that he
feels good in himself when
he does this even though it means he may lose that
patient. Mr Ha said that he is a Catholic and he felt very upset and reluctant
When he had heard of other professionals, such as dentists
and optometrists
doing the same, he had felt he should too, but now he is happy to have stopped
this practice.
The Tribunal asked Mr Ha how it could be confident that he would not repeat
these fraudulent practices. He said that he had not done
it again and would not
do it in the future. Mr Ha was asked about his comment in his written
statement, dated 12 October 2012,
at paragraph 20:
"The fact that NIB, HCF, CBHS and possibly other health funds
have de-recognised me from HICAPS means that even if the Tribunal does
believe that I have stopped making false claims, it is not possible for me to do
He said that all he could really say was to assure the Tribunal that he would
not repeat the behaviour. He stated that on some occasions
some family members
do attend together, possibly if they are a couple, and there may still be times
when he is charging family members
on the same day. However he said that what he
had done had been a very stressful experience for himself and his family and he
that if he did it again he would not be able to work and would be
“out of the profession”.
Mr Ha told the Tribunal he was intending to enrol in educational courses and to
commit to ongoing professional development. When
asked about whether he had a
specific course in mind, he referred to a lecture given by an orthopaedic
surgeon at Liverpool Hospital
discussing trends in post-operative
rehabilitation.
He stated that he had not looked at the Physiotherapists Code of Conduct or the
other standards/policy documents referred to during
the earlier hearing.
Mr Ha indicated that he had arranged for a colleague, Mr Tu Hoan Tran to act as
his mentor and supervisor should he be allowed to
continue to practice. He
submitted a letter from Mr Tran, dated 18 September 2012, in which Mr Tran
indicates his support for Mr
Ha, states that they became good friends while
studying at Sydney University and undertakes to volunteer to assist Mr Ha in
restructuring
his physiotherapy practice and documentation methods. Mr Tran
“I understand that I would have to devote several hours of
physical and mental work, as well as one to one consultations for
completed.”
HCCC submissions
The HCCC submission states,
“The Commission submits that an
appropriate order would be to cancel Mr Ha’s registration.
Such an order would be justified on the following bases:
a. the nature and seriousness of the misconduct described in Particulars 1
to 4, particularly in light of the period of time involved;
b. the limited insight show by Mr Ha into the seriousness of the
misconduct described in Particulars 1 to 4 and the nature of the
inadequacies of
the conduct described in Particulars 5 to 61, to the extent those particulars
were found to be proved;
c. the lack of any positive steps taken by Mr Ha to address the issues
raised; and
d. the need for general deterrence, especially in the light of Mr Ha's own
evidence that conduct of this nature may be widespread.
The Commission further submits that any application for re-registration
should be considered by the Tribunal.”
The HCCC stresses that Mr Ha’s conduct is very serious. Mr Ha’s
assertion that his motives were sometimes altruistic
is not in itself sufficient
to abrogate the seriousness of his conduct. Although it is not possible to know
precisely the quantum
of the overpayment made on the basis of Mr Ha’s
claiming practices, the HCCC contends that overpayments made in relation to10%
to 15% of claims is not an insignificant amount. The HCCC notes that even if Mr
Ha derived no direct financial benefit, he did gain
a financial advantage in the
sense that he maintained his client base.
The HCCC accepts that the conduct described in Particulars 5 to 61 is less
serious than the conduct described in Particulars 1 to
4 and that Particulars 5
to 61 would not be grounds for an order that Mr Ha’s registration as a
physiotherapist be cancelled.
The HCCC accepts that Mr Ha has made admissions as to his misconduct, however,
notes that Mr Ha’s admissions were limited.
Full admissions were made only
in respect of Particulars 2 and 3 and a partial admission was made in relation
to Particular 1. Mr
Ha did not admit his conduct amounted to unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct and no admissions were made
relation to the balance of the Particulars. The HCCC acknowledged that Mr Ha
expressed remorse, but contends that in the circumstances
Mr Ha’s insight
is limited.
The HCCC submits that Mr Ha’s insight into the inadequacy of his
record-keeping is very limited. While claiming to understand
the issues which
need to be addressed in relation to his record-keeping, Mr Ha made little
attempt to obtain guidance and did not
review or read relevant Standards or
Codes of Conduct issued by the Australian Physiotherapy Association. The HCCC
asserts that Mr
“has little insight into or awareness of what the
inadequacies are or the steps he needs to take to improve his
record-keeping.”
The HCCC referred the Tribunal to the decision in
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Vu
[2012] NSWPYT 1
which it says is similar to the present case
in relation to the nature of the Complaints made and proved, the cultural and
pressures and expectations both practitioners indicated were at play
and a failure to participate in professional development activities
of an intention to do so in the future. The HCCC also referred the Tribunal to
Health Care Complaints Commission v Duong
[2010] NSWPYT 2.
HCCC asserts that while it may be true that other physiotherapists have engaged
in similar behaviour, the standard against which
Mr Ha is to be measured is the
standard to be reasonably expected of a physiotherapist of an equivalent level
of training or experience,
not the conduct of “the delinquents in the
profession”.
HCCC submitted that the Tribunal should have regard to other similar cases but
that even if a pattern is apparent, the Tribunal's
discretion must be exercised
on the basis of the facts of this particular case.
submissions
Mr Ha’s written submission states,
“The respondent seeks appropriate orders allowing him to
continue practising on formal reprimand and on condition that he attend
ethics and continuing professional education courses, and be mentored and
supervised or, alternatively, orders suspending
his registration for a period of
6 months and then allowing him to continue practicing on these
The decision in
HCCC V Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
was noted as
authority for the proposition that even if a finding of professional misconduct
is made, a Tribunal is not bound to
cancel a practitioner’s
registration.
Mr Ha’s written submission raised the manner in which the Tribunal should
compare other similar cases in the exercise of its
discretion to make protective
Reference was made to
Health Care Complaints Commission v Margiotta
where a practitioner was found guilty of professional misconduct
after being convicted of five offences relating to making false statements
respect of claims under the
Veterans Entitlements Act 1986
. The Tribunal in that
matter suspended the Practitioner’s registration for 6 months with a
reprimand and certain conditions.
Health Care Complaints Commission v Harper[2009] NSWCHT 2
Chiropractors Tribunal found a practitioner guilty of professional misconduct
for making false claims through the HICAPS system
and ordered suspension for 6
months and conditions. In
Health Care Complaints Commission v Rutner
, a dentist found guilty of professional misconduct for making false
claims through the HICAPS system was suspended for a period of
The Respondent referred to the decision in
where the guilty
practitioner had had his registration cancelled and argued that it should be
distinguished from the present case
on its facts.
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Vu
[2012] NSWPYT 1
, it was argued, should also be distinguished
on its facts given the extent of the false claiming and the Tribunal’s
Mr Vu was not a suitable person to hold registration as a
physiotherapist.
Counsel for Mr Ha submitted that cases such as
Margiotta, Harper
indicate that the Tribunal’s objective of protection of the
public can be achieved not only by excluding a practitioner from
practice but
also by facilitating rehabilitation and education. It is only in extreme cases
where claiming practices were a pretext for
making money and the practitioners had psychological problems and character
flaws making
them unsuitable to practice, that cancellation of registration is
In relation to the seriousness of his conduct, Mr Ha’s written submission
“Though it can be accepted that Mr Ha’s conduct was
serious, irrespective of any altruistic motives, there is a qualitative
difference between using the HICAPS system for the sole or dominant purpose of
extracting money from health funds, as was the case
in Vu, and making false
claims to relieve patients from paying the gap between cost of and benefits paid
in respect of the Respondent’s
treatment.”
Counsel for Mr Ha urged the Tribunal to accept that Mr Ha made significant
admissions and expressed his deep remorse and regret for
The Tribunal’s Decision
Mr Ha has been found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
professional misconduct. He made a series of deliberately
false and misleading
claims to nib health insurance, he rewrote clinical records in circumstances
where an inference can be drawn
that the rewriting was undertaken for the
purpose of attempting to conceal his fraudulent conduct and he failed to keep
clinical records.
In submissions, counsel for the HCCC and counsel for Mr Ha engaged in some
debate about whether and how the Tribunal should consider
similar cases and the
applicability of specific orders other Tribunals have made in such cases.
This Tribunal accepts that similar cases can be regarded as a means of giving
guidance, however, the Tribunal as an expert panel,
is exercising its discretion
in relation to orders which are both protective and disciplinary in nature.
Accordingly the Tribunal
must have regard to the facts of the individual case
before it, in light of the overarching need to protect the public.
Lee v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2010] NSWCA 80
, the Court of
Appeal considered an appeal from a decision of the Medical Tribunal.
Barrett JA dealt with the question of “the utility of attempts at
comparison in cases of this kind” and urged extreme
care be taken in
assuming that disciplinary orders in one case should be regarded as indicating
what disciplinary orders should be
made in another case. His Honour stated,
“Just as the characterisation of conduct as professional
misconduct entails the exercise of judgement by a specialist tribunal,
it seems to me, does a decision about the order that should be made where such
conduct is proved......................In
cases of the present kind... this
Court should proceed on the basis that:
(a) comparison with the outcomes in earlier cases may be useful if those
earlier cases show some discernible range or pattern;
(b) such a range or pattern, even when discernible, cannot be regarded as a
precedent indicating what is “correct”;
(c) the range or pattern is, at best, a reflection of the accumulated
experience and wisdom of decision-makers;
(d) the range pattern will potentially be of value only if it is possible to
gather from it and appreciation of some unifying principle;
(e) since the predominant consideration is the protection of the public, a
decision can only be made by reference to the facts of
the particular case and
by considering what measures are needed to ensure that the future behaviour of
the particular practitioner
is shaped in a way that is consistent with that
protection; and
(f) the Medical Tribunal, as a specialist tribunal, brings special skill and
experience to the task of formulating protective orders.
In terms of the seriousness of Mr Ha’s conduct, the Tribunal has found
that Mr Ha behaved in a dishonest and reprehensible
manner. His dishonest
conduct was considered by the Tribunal to be deliberate and intentional. Rather
than evidencing a series of
random acts, Mr Ha’s conduct demonstrated a
systemic approach to fraudulent claiming and was characterised by the Tribunal
as improper and unethical. Mr Ha’s conduct also demonstrated a significant
breach of trust in circumstances where the community
places substantial trust in
physiotherapists and accordingly his conduct reflects poorly on the
physiotherapy profession.
it is the case that Mr Ha made some admissions, the Tribunal considers that his
level of understanding and his insight into
his behaviour is limited. His
failure to undertake professional development activities over recent years and
his lack of a clear
plan in relation to future educational activities, combined
with his proposal that a friend (who arguably has an inadequate appreciation
what is required) act as his supervisor, indicates that Mr Ha has a limited
understanding of what he needs to do to address the
issues which have been
identified in these Complaints.
Tribunal has come to this view after carefully considering Mr Ha’s own
evidence. Other than mere assertions, Mr Ha relies
on external constraints (the
fact he is banned from the HICAPS system) to reassure the Tribunal in relation
to his future conduct.
He is not a person who has demonstrated an ability to
effectively regulate his own behaviour in accordance with professional
Even after the Complaints were made by the HCCC, his attempts at
understanding his professional obligations and improving his record
keeping can
be described, at best, as meagre.
For the above reasons the Tribunal reprimands Mr Ha in the strongest possible
Nevertheless, Mr Ha has demonstrated some remorse and appears to have a keen
appreciation of the impact of further fraudulent conduct
on his participation in
the physiotherapy profession. The Tribunal considers that Mr Ha can be
rehabilitated and that the protection
of the public can be achieved through such
rehabilitation, even though it will need to be a lengthy and carefully managed
Tribunal considers that a period of suspension for 12 months is appropriate and
will provide Mr Ha with the opportunity to reflect
on his conduct and undertake
further education in physiotherapy professional ethics and standards of
Tribunal also considers that a period of supervision is essential to ensure,
once Mr Ha resumes practice, that he has the support
he needs to manage ethical
and practical issues. This supervision should be provided by a practitioner who
is a principal of a practice
currently accredited by the Australian
Physiotherapy Association and must not be a personal friend or close
professional associate
of Mr Ha. As well as extensive supervision, with
mentoring, the Tribunal considers that conditions which require continuing
professional
development and an audit of Mr Ha’s clinical records are
necessary and appropriate.
The Tribunal acknowledges that the obligations which these Orders place on Mr Ha
are extensive. The Tribunal gave serious consideration
to whether or not
cancellation of Mr Ha’s registration was appropriate but determined in the
circumstances that a period of
suspension, enriched by further education and
followed by rigorous support and supervision, would allow Mr Ha to continue to
in a manner which both protects the public and safeguards the
reputation of the profession.
The HCCC sought an order that the respondent pay the HCCC's costs. Counsel for
Mr Ha made no submissions in relation to costs, although
it was suggested that
proceedings were unnecessarily extended due to difficulty with an HCCC witness.
Counsel for the HCCC noted
that the proceedings were originally set down for 4
days and concluded in 3 days.
The Tribunal orders that Mr Ha pay the costs of the
The Tribunal makes the following orders:
1. Reprimand
Quang Ha is reprimanded in the strongest terms.
2. Suspension
Mr Trac Quang Ha’s registration as a
physiotherapist is suspended for a period of 12 months from the date of this
order, being
1 May 2013.
3. Education
the period of suspension, Mr Ha is to enrol in and satisfactorily complete a
comprehensive program of study of physiotherapy
professional ethics and
standards such as the post graduate entry level course – Professional
and Scientific Practice (PHTY
5196) - in the Physiotherapy programme at the
University of Sydney or equivalent as approved by the Physiotherapy Council of
must provide evidence to the Physiotherapy Council of NSW that he has
satisfactorily completed the course. This must be provided
prior to the end of
the period of suspension.
Ha is to bear the costs associated with undertaking the course.
When Mr Ha’s suspension is lifted his
registration will be subject to the following conditions:
A. Supervision
is to nominate a supervisor at least four weeks prior to resuming practice, to
be approved by the Physiotherapy Council of NSW.
nominated supervisor must be a Principal of a practice currently accredited by
the Australian Physiotherapy Association and must
not be a personal friend or
close professional associate of Mr Ha.
supervisor is to be provided with a copy of the Tribunal’s decision by the
Physiotherapy Council of NSW.
the purpose of improving Mr Ha’s patient documentation, clinical record
keeping and billing practices and for the management
of ethical issues, the
supervision is to include direct observation:
the first three months after Mr Ha resumes practice, Mr Ha is to observe the
supervisor’s clinical practice, for at least
one half day, twice each
calendar month.
the first three months after Mr Ha resumes practice, the supervisor must observe
Mr Ha’s clinical practice, for at least
one half day, twice each calendar
the first three months, Mr Ha is to observe the supervisor’s clinical
practice, for at least one half day, once each calendar
the first three months, the supervisor is to observe Mr Ha’s clinical
practice, for at least one half day, once each calendar
e. This supervisory arrangement remains in place
for 12 months, with the supervision period being extended if upon consideration
the supervision reports received, the Physiotherapy Council of NSW deems such
extension necessary.
f. The supervisor is also, from time to time, to undertake a mentoring role.
The nature and frequency of contact for the purpose of
mentoring is to be
determined by the supervisor. However, mentoring should include discussion of Mr
Ha’s personal and professional
development and the issues highlighted in
the Tribunal’s decision.
g. At quarterly intervals the supervisor is to provide a report to the
Physiotherapy Council of NSW detailing the dates of observation
Ha’s progress.
h. At quarterly intervals Mr Ha is to provide a report to the Physiotherapy
Council of NSW detailing the dates of observation, what
he has learnt as a
result of supervision and his plans for implementing changes to his practice. He
should make specific reference
to, but not restrict his report to, the
documentation and clinical record keeping
for ethical practice
i. Mr Ha is to ensure that the supervisor reviews this report and
makes written comments on its content and authenticity.
j. The supervisor is authorised to inform the Physiotherapy Council of NSW
immediately if there are any concerns in relation to Mr
Ha’s compliance
with the supervision requirements, clinical or ethical issues or if the
supervision relationship ceases.
k. In the event that the supervisor is no longer willing or able to continue
to provide supervision as required, details of a replacement
supervisor are to
be forwarded for approval to the Physiotherapy Council of NSW within 21 days of
the cessation of the previous supervisory
relationship.
l. Mr Ha is responsible for any costs associated with supervision, including
observation and any reporting requirements.
B. Continuing Professional Development
Mr Ha resumes practice, he is to provide written evidence of his continuing
professional development activities, to the Physiotherapy
Council of NSW.
the first two years after resuming practice, such reports are to be provided at
six monthly intervals. Thereafter, such reports
are to be provided as determined
by the Physiotherapy Council of NSW.
six months of having resumed practice Mr Ha is to submit to an audit of his
practice with particular attention to his record
keeping, patient documentation,
accounting and billing practices, as appropriate to his current practice
conditions.
auditor/s will be nominated by the Physiotherapy Council of NSW. The auditor/s
may inspect any clinical records and observe patient
consultations and billing
procedures.
Ha is to authorise the auditor/s to provide the Physiotherapy Council of NSW
with a report of the audit findings. On the basis
of this audit report the
Physiotherapy Council of NSW may determine if further audits are
is to bear all costs associated with the audit/s and any
The Physiotherapy Council of NSW is the appropriate review body for the
purposes of Division 8 of Part 8 of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National
Law. Conditions may be varied, amended or removed at the discretion of the
The Respondent is to pay the Health Care Complaints Commission’s
7. Publication
A copy of these Orders is to be forwarded by the Registry to:
Respondent and his legal advisor,
2) The Health Care Complaints
Commission,
3) The Physiotherapy Council of New South Wales,
Physiotherapy Board of Australia,
5) As the Council and Board see fit.
Date: 1 May 2013
____________________
Diane Robinson
Chairperson
_____________________
Dr. Elizabeth Ellis
Physiotherapist
____________________
Professor Darren Rivett
Physiotherapist
_____________________
Margaret Knibb
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (304 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter