URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDRGC/2012/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:56:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Partridge [2012] NSWDRGC 2 (25 July 2012)
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation
R v Partridge
[2012] NSWDRGC 2
Hearing Dates
18 July 2012
Decision Date
His Honour Senior Judge Dive
Mackie Partridge is an eligible offender.
Meaning of "usual place of residence" for the purposes of determining
eligibility for Drug Court program. Usual residence at time
of arrest was " one
crucial and relevant point in time" to determine "usual place of
residence".
Legislation Cited
Drug Court Act 1998
Drug Court Act 1998
Drug Court Regulation 2010
Cases Cited
[2001] NSW DRGC 5
[2005] NSWDRGC 2
Chandler v DPP
[2000] NSWCA 125
[2000] 113 A Crim R 196
Bull v Attorney-General of New South Wales
[1913] HCA 54
R v Uong [20014] NSWDRGC 12
[2005] NSWDRGC 1
[2005] NSWDRGC 2
[2010] NSWDRGC 1
Principal judgment
Regina (Crown)
PARTRIDGE, Mackie (Offender)
Representation
E. Gadsby, Director of Public Prosecutions (Crown)
P. Bartels, Legal Aid
Commission (Offender)
File Number(s)
101 of 2012
1 Mr Mackie Partridge is before the Drug Court today, seeking the opportunity
of a Drug Court program.
2 The Crown has raised with the Court the
question of his eligibility for the program. A hearing was conducted on 18 July
2012, evidence
was called, and a decision reserved until today.
eligibility issue in relation to Mr Partridge is as to whether his
place of residence"
is within the catchment area of the Drug Court.
The issue as to what defines "usual place of residence" was before the Drug
Court in the matter of
[2001] NSWDRGC 5
His Honour the
late Judge Neil Milson, who heard that matter, set out the legislation and the
regulation which governs this issue:
"The offender before the Court is seeking entry to a Drug Court program.
Before he can be sentenced and released to a program by the
exercise of
Drug Court Act 1998
, the Drug Court must firstly be satisfied that he is an
eligible person. To be an eligible person he has to meet the criteria set
and so far as that is concerned, the relevant part is
"satisfies such other criteria as are prescribed by the regulations." Clause 5
Drug Court Regulation 1999
sets out criteria that "a person must satisfy
in order to be an eligible person within the meaning of the Act..." The first of
is "(a) the person's usual place of residence must be within one of the
following local government areas, namely...." and a number
are listed."
The relevant section is now s 7A, and the regulation is now clause 4 of the 2010
edition, however the relevant contents thereof
are the same.
, Judge Milson noted that the
Drug Court Act
is beneficial
legislation, and should be interpreted accordingly. There has now been a long
history of authorities in this jurisdiction
to that effect, and I gathered those
authorities together in the matter of
[2005] NSWDRGC 2:
"There can be no doubt that the
Drug Court Act
is beneficial legislation, and
it has long been established that it should be interpreted accordingly. The
concept of legislation
having beneficial purposes was referred to in
[2000] NSWCA 125
[2000] 113 A Crim R 196
, which in turn referred to
Attorney-General of New South Wales
[1913] HCA 54
[1913] 17 CLR 356
, where the concept was
explained (at page 384) in the following way;
"The correct way of reading legislation where there is such an ambiguity is
to construe them generously. Not that the true signification
of the provision
should be strained or exceeded, but that it should be construed to give the
fullest relief with which the fair meaning
of its language will allow."
The matter of
involved a prisoner who had been recently residing,
albeit involuntarily, in the custody of Corrective Services at Silverwater and
Parramatta. Both of those locations are within the defined boundaries of clause
5 of the regulations. In
, Judge Milson held:
"I am satisfied that the time at which I ought to be considered where a
person's place of residence was, is at the time immediately
before they came
into custody, that is immediately before they reached that status where they had
no choice as to where they were
8 In the matter of
[2001] NSWGRGC 12, Her Honour Judge Helen Murrell dealt with a man who
had moved from his family home at Bonnyrigg (within area)
to live primarily at
Campsie (out of area) to be closer to his place of work. He was arrested in
Cabramatta apparently. In that case
Judge Murrell accepted the Crown's
contention that
"usual place of residence"
within the meaning of the
regulations:
"is the place where a person chooses to spend most of their time during the
daytime, in terms of sleeping requirements, to eat and
to keep most of their
belongings, i.e. the person's "home base".
9 Her Honour also held
"It is quite clear on the uncontested facts that, from August to October
2001, the offender chose to make his home base at Campsie.
unfortunate that, because of this unlucky turn of events, the offender is
precluded from placement on a Drug Court program."
10 Mr Partridge's
circumstances are somewhat unusual. He described himself as "a drifter", and
agreed that he had "no fixed place
of abode" as lawyers are fond of saying. He
has lived at a variety of addresses since he was 14 years old, and first ran
11 He gave evidence of living with his grandparents in Adelaide and
with his mother in Melbourne in his early teens. He was reported
as a missing
person in Melbourne, and was placed in both residential care and foster care. He
later moved in with a friend of the
family, who he regarded as an aunt, in
Adelaide, and had some successful months there, getting away from alcohol and
drugs for a
number of months.
12 That placement however collapsed, and he
returned to an address with friends in Melbourne, before moving to his
grandparents' home
at Glenthorne, near Taree. His mother moved there too. These
are the same grandparents who had previously lived in Adelaide. His
Glenthorne was initially successful, and he began work as an apprentice pest
controller.
13 Sadly, Mr Partridge returned to alcohol and drugs, and he
lost his driver's licence. After an incident when he took drug paraphernalia
into the kitchen of his grandparents' home, he was required to leave. He headed
for Central Station in Sydney, with a plan to return
to Adelaide. Unfortunately
however, at Central Station, he was befriended by a man named Kerry McKenzie. He
firstly stayed with Mr
McKenzie at a half-way house near Central Station, and
then at Mr McKenzie's address in Merrylands.
14 Together they committed a
number of serious crimes, and Mr Partridge was arrested at the Merrylands
address on 29 November 2011,
and remained bail refused for a number of months.
The Merrylands address is within the catchment area of the Drug Court.
Mr Partridge was granted conditional bail on 11 January 2012, and he was bailed
to reside at his grandparents' home at Glenthorne.
Mr Partridge tells the court
that his lawyer nominated that address without any inquiries being made with the
grandparents, and,
whilst he was released to that conditional bail, he was not
allowed into their home. So instead he went to live with friends at
16 Mr Partridge remained at the Tuncurry address until he
committed some traffic and other offences on 29 January 2012, and was dealt
by way of fines at the Taree Local Court on 31 January 2012. The fact that he
was not residing at the address to which he was
bailed was discovered, and he
has remained in custody since then.
The submissions
17 Ms Gadsby, for the Crown, has submitted that the relevant point in
time to determine his
"usual place of residence"
is when Mr Partridge
last came into custody, i.e., the Tuncurry address. This has been, in the
Crown's submission, the long-term
test applied by this Court in determining
eligibility. Further, the Crown submits that if Mr Partridge is a homeless
person, he is
not a homeless person within the geographical drawing area of the
Drug Court. The Crown acknowledges that it is an arbitrary test,
and that is
very unfortunate for Mr Partridge.
18 Mr Bartels, for Mr Partridge, notes
that the clientele of the Drug Court are rich in variety, and often have chaotic
backgrounds.
Mr Bartels has argued that Mr Partridge is an itinerant young
person, who has been a street kid since he was 14 years of age. He
was staying
at an address within the Drug Court geographical limits, and committed offences
nearby, before being arrested at that
address. He was then, some months later,
bailed to reside outside the area. Whilst he did not remain at that address
(because he
was not allowed to) he did remain nearby at Tuncurry. Mr Bartels
argues that Mr Partridge was lucky to be at an eligible address
committed the crimes, but that is his good fortune, and he should have the
benefit of it.
19 Quoting again from what I said in
"I think it would also be fair to say that Parliament, in creating such new
and innovative jurisdiction, may not have anticipated
the complexity and variety
of situations offenders, especially drug offenders, can get themselves into. The
Drug Court has to deal
with offenders who have multiple offences in different
revoked. Participants may be on good behaviour bonds, or have breached such
orders, or may be doing Community Service Orders, Periodic
Detention or Home
Detention. Or perhaps they have breached those orders as well. Any one offender
may have multiple sentencing complications.
There are many twists and turns
before eligibility, appropriateness, and even availability can be determined, so
it would be understandable,
indeed inevitable, that not all situations were
fully anticipated in the drafting of the legislation."
observations are relevant again in Mr Partridge's case. It is quite
understandable that the regulation should include the
sensible phrase
person's usual place of residence"
so as restrict the geographical reach of
the program. However the particular clientele in this jurisdiction challenge the
notions of many community norms. Assumptions are easily made as to
people having a home, and of sleeping at a home address. However
the clientele
of this Court have been found to be sleeping in parks, under bridges or in cars
(so do not have any place of "residence"
by any ordinary definition). They may
not even sleep anywhere at all for days on end when consuming large amounts
amphetamines, and
may be in many different locations in the days leading up to
custody. So both the notion of residence and even sleeping somewhere
challenged.
21 The decision in
is a very sensible
one, and has provided this court with a test for residential eligibility for
many years. Mr Duggan was a prisoner,
and came from outside the geographical
limits of the jurisdiction. If every prisoner from across the state who
compulsorily lived
in a gaol within area was eligible, the resources of the
court would be stretched beyond limits, as the program would, as they progressed
on program, need to try and provide resources in the community to treat such
offenders within their far-flung community addresses.
22 The argument
before the Court is a miserable one, in the true sense of the word. A person may
not be eligible because they live,
literally, on the wrong side of a street
which is the boundary between Local Government Areas. I do not for a moment
suggest the
Crown takes up the issue with any passion, but is providing the
court with the professional assistance it needs with the hundreds
of referrals
made to this jurisdiction each year.
23 In my view however, Mr Partridge
is a man who did have a "usual place of residence" within the geographical
limits of the Drug
Court when he was arrested for the offences before the court.
He was not a prisoner from elsewhere. He was then ordered, by virtue
bail, to live at another address at Glenthorne, which is out of area. He could
not live there, so found yet another address
in Tuncurry. After that, he has
again become a prisoner, and has remained in custody for many months. It is
interesting to note that
one of his bail conditions was "not to associate with
Kerry McKenzie", who was the man he had resided with at the Merrylands address.
So there were many reasons why he could not, and did not, ever get to return to
the address in Merrylands.
24 I am satisfied that, for the purposes of
clause 5, his "usual place of residence"
at one crucial and relevant point in
- i.e., when arrested for the crimes referred to this court, was an
address within area. Indeed, was it not for the grant of conditional
January 2012 there would have been no doubt he was eligible in terms of
residential address.
25 To determine otherwise would produce a remarkable
result, whereby for the period 29 November 2011 to the 11 January 2012 he was
eligible offender, and then, by virtue of the good fortune of bail and the
ensuing court mandate, he managed to lose that status.
The fact that he was an
eligible offender did not, in my opinion, disappear with the intervening event
of a grant of bail.
26 Accordingly, I am satisfied that he is an eligible
or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment
or decision. The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment or
decision to ensure that the
intended use of that material does not breach any
such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of
Court or Tribunal in which it was generated.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (36.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (103 KB)
Plain text (ASCII) (15.1 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter