URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v Menai Civil Contractors Pty Ltd [2025] NSWIC 8 (19 August 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v Menai Civil Contractors Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 8
Hearing Date(s):
12 August 2025
Date of Orders:
19 August 2025
Decision Date:
19 August 2025
Paingakulam J
(1) I convict Menai Civil Contractors Pty Ltd of the offence as
(2) I impose a fine of $69,750.
(3) Menai Civil Contractors Pty
Ltd is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of the proceedings as agreed or
(4) Pursuant to s 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is
to be paid to the prosecutor.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW — work health and safety — offences —
category 3 — fall from height — formwork —
worker not wearing
a harness — low range of objective seriousness
— relevant factors on sentence — De Simoni principle — Amended
Statement of Facts included an element
of a more serious charge — sentence
tender bundle included documents that could lead the Court to De Simoni error
facts tendered on sentence should not contain any facts that
would have rendered the offender liable to a more serious penalty —
material relevant to the incident should, to the extent that it is relevant to
the Court’s sentencing exercise, be included
in the Agreed Facts, unless
that material contains relevant facts that are in
SENTENCING — relevant factors on sentence
—objective seriousness — deterrence — mitigating factors
appropriate penalty
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Fines Act 1996
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety
Regulation 2017
Cases Cited:
Barton v The Queen
[2009] NSWCCA 285
Baumer v The Queen (1988) 166 CLR
51; [1988] HCA 67
BW v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 176
Makarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd; Attorney General for
New South Wales v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd [2017] NSWCCA
[2009] NSWCCA 102
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA
[2002] NSWCCA 381
R v Thomson; R v Houlton (2000) 49 NSWLR
[2000] NSWCCA 309
R v Wilkinson (No 5)
[2009] NSWSC 432
R v Youkhana
[2005] NSWCCA 231
Ruge and Cormack v The Queen
[2015] NSWCCA 153
Civilbuild Pty Ltd v SafeWork New South Wales
[2023] NSWCCA 261
The Queen v
(1981) 147 CLR 383
[1981] HCA 31
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
Veen v The Queen (No 2) (1988) 164 CLR 465;
Principal judgment
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Menai Civil Contractors (Offender)
Representation:
A Sivanathan (Prosecutor)
Solicitors:
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Gillis Delaney
Lawyers (Offender)
File Number(s):
2024/416180
Publication Restriction:
Civil Contractors Pty Ltd (Menai Civil) was engaged as principal contractor by
Stockland Development Pty Ltd (Stockland) to
perform works at a construction
site in Huntley, New South Wales. Menai Civil contracted with Bridgeworks (Aust)
Pty Ltd (Bridgeworks)
to assist with construction works at the site, and
Bridgeworks contracted with Topdeck Formwork Services Pty Ltd (Topdeck) for the
supply of workers for the site. On 11 November 2022, Mr Michael Bagnato, a
contractor employed by Topdeck, suffered a fall while
stripping formwork at the
Civil appeared for sentence after pleading guilty to an offence charged in a
Further Amended Summons filed on 16 June 2025,
that as a person who had a work
health and safety duty pursuant to
Work Health and Safety Act
) it failed to comply with that duty contrary to
s 33 of the
risk particularised at paragraph 12 of Annexure A to the Further Amended Summons
is as follows:
“The risk was to the health and safety of workers, in particular Mr
Bagnato, as a result of falling from a height while undertaking
stripping at the Site.”
its plea of guilty, Menai Civil accepts that it could have taken the following
reasonably practicable steps to eliminate or at
least minimise the reasonably
foreseeable risk:
“a) Require subcontractors, in particular Bridgeworks, to develop,
implement and enforce a site-specific safe system of work
for the stripping of
formwork, which:
i. Accurately specified the methodology for the safe dismantling of formwork
with adequate fall prevention;
ii. Required Bridgeworks to obtain and use an elevated work platform at the
iii. Required that workers, in particular Mr Bagnato, must not climb to the top
of abutments at all, particularly without fall prevention.
b) Verify that subcontractors, in particular Bridgeworks, were following safe
systems of work.”
maximum penalty for this offence at the relevant time was a fine of 5,770
penalty units ($620,101.90).
The evidence
NSW tendered an Amended Statement of Facts with the consent of Menai Civil. That
Amended Statement of Facts included a paragraph
(paragraph 19) which addressed
the “serious injuries” sustained by Mr Bagnato as a consequence of
his fall. The exposure
of a worker to a risk of serious injury or death is an
element of the more serious charge under s 32 of the
prosecutor accepted that the Court could not have regard to that evidence, as it
would contravene the principle in
The Queen v De Simoni
(1981) 147 CLR
[1981] HCA 31
) and it was withdrawn. As Gibbs CJ makes
clear at 392 of
, and as repeatedly stated by the New South
Wales Court of Criminal Appeal, where the prosecutor has accepted a plea of
an offence less serious than the facts warrant, the agreed facts
tendered on sentence should not contain any facts that would have
rendered the
offender liable to a more serious penalty, and this may result in a degree of
artificiality in the fact finding exercise:
[2002] NSWCCA 381
per Howie J at [21] (Hidden and Levine JJ agreeing at [1]–[2])
R v Youkhana
[2005] NSWCCA 231
per Howie J at [19]
(Spigelman CJ and Hunt AJA agreeing at [30]–[31]);
Barton v The
[2009] NSWCCA 285
per Howie J at [18];
Ruge and Cormack v The
[2015] NSWCCA 153
per Hamill J at [39]–[40] (Leeming and Simpson
JJA agreeing at [1]–[2]).
prosecutor also tendered an extensive Agreed Tender Bundle which contained the
following material relevant to the incident giving
rise to the charge in
addition to the Further Amended Summons and the Amended Statement of
(1) ASIC Search for Menai Civil;
(2) Incident Report;
(3) Incident Cause Analysis Method (ICAM) Investigation Report by George
Poursanidis, HSEQ Manager for Menai Civil;
(4) Factual Inspection Report of Inspector John Patton;
(5) 19 photographs taken by Inspector John Patton on 11 November 2022 with photo
(6) Menai Civil Contractors SWMSs prepared by Bridgeworks;
(7) Menai Civil Contractors – Project Safety Plan – prepared by
Bridgeworks;
(8) Menai Civil Contractors – SWMS Review Checklist;
(9) Menai Civil Contractors – Site Inductions – Michael Bagnato;
(10) Menai Civil Contractors – Daily Prestarts (15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 26,
27, 28 & 31 October 2022; 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10 &
11 November 2022);
(11) Site Inspection Checklists completed by James Scott;
(12) Menai Civil Contractors – Revised Construction Methodology –
Removal of Formwork Shutters – prepared by Bridgeworks;
(13) Menai Civil Contractors – Construction Methodology – Erection
and Removal of Work Platform – prepared by Bridgeworks;
(14) Menai Civil Contractors – Daily Prestarts;
(15) Menai Civil Contractors – Toolbox Talks;
(16) Menai Civil Contractors – SWMS Review Checklist;
(17) Site Inspection Checklist completed by James Scott;
(18) Menai Civil Contractors – SWMS Monitoring and Task Observation
(19) Menai Civil Contractors – Lessons Learnt;
(20) High Level Breakdown of Incident completed by George Poursanidis (Menai
Civil Contractors);
(21) NSW Government Code of Practice –
(22) Safe Work Australia –
General Guidance for Formwork and
(23) Safe Work Australia –
Formwork and Falsework Information
(24) Safe Work Australia –
Guide to Formwork
(25) AS 3610-1995 –
Formwork for Concrete
apart from the fact that the consideration of some of the material contained in
these further documents would result in
error, much of it was
unnecessary for me to be able to exercise the sentencing discretion
appropriately in this matter. The prosecutor
withdrew the tender of items 2 and
3 above in order to avoid a breach of the principle in
Ultimately, the prosecutor took me to only a very small number of the 316 pages
in the Agreed Tender Bundle. The tender of large
amounts of material in addition
to agreed facts creates undue burden for the Court, particularly where, as was
the case in this matter,
there is very little point of difference between the
parties on matters material to the sentencing exercise. As stated by Howie J
at [21] immediately after addressing the inclusion of material in
agreed facts that is in breach of the
“ ... If it purports to be an agreed statement of facts so that it is
intended to provide the factual basis upon which the
parties wish the court to
sentence the offender, the facts should be sufficient to permit the court to
exercise its discretion and
the Crown should not tender other material which
might supplement or contradict the facts set out in the agreed statement. If
material is placed before the court which relates to the facts of the
offence, then the parties should understand that the court
is not bound by the
tendered statement of facts or any agreement made between the parties as to the
basis upon which the offender
is to be sentenced ...”
accept that the tender of a small amount of photographic evidence will often be
of assistance to the Court in matters of this nature.
There may also be matters
where it is expedient to tender the entirely of a guidance document rather than
extract the relevant portion(s)
of it in agreed facts. However, other material
relevant to the incident in question and particularly material found in incident
investigation reports should, to the extent that it is relevant to the
Court’s sentencing exercise, be included in the Agreed
Facts, unless that
material contains relevant facts that are in dispute.
coming to an appropriate sentence, I have had regard to the evidence before the
Court, except for that material which expressly
states or permits an inference
that Mr Bagnato was exposed to a risk of serious injury or death. What follows
is a summary of the
evidence relevant to the offence to permit an understanding
of the sentence imposed.
Civil undertakes the delivery of large-scale projects and heavy civil works
across both the public and private sectors.
Civil was engaged by Stockland as the principal contractor for the construction
of the “Forest Reach Stage 2” project
at 399 Bong Bong Road,
Huntley, New South Wales (the site). Menai Civil contracted Bridgeworks to
assist in the construction of the
Reed Creek Bridge at the site. Bridgeworks
engaged Topdeck to supply workers for the construction, erection and removal of
on an “ad hoc” basis by way of text or email.
Michael Bagnato was engaged by Topdeck to undertake formwork stripping at the
site. Mr Bagnato had approximately eight years of
experience in the construction
and formwork industry and commenced working at the site in around August
workers at the site included Mr George Poursanidis, who had been the HSEQ
Manager at Menai Civil since May 2022. Mr Poursanidis
has approximately 20
years’ experience and his responsibilities at the site included developing
Menai Civil’s health
and safety system and undertaking ISO/OFSC
accreditation and recertification. Mr Tobias Buchanan, Site Manager at
Bridgeworks, was
also present at the site. He had been working at the company
for 16 years and his responsibilities included organising and managing
Bridgeworks undertook in building the bridge. Finally, Mr Jake Mather had been
contracted to Topdeck since about November
2021 and was performing formwork at
The incident
Bagnato arrived at the site on the morning of 11 November 2022 and signed onto
both the Menai Civil and Bridgeworks sheets. He
was told that the task for the
day was to strip the south side of the bridge’s abutment. He had a
conversation with Mr Mather
before commencing this task.
Bagnato accessed the top of the southern abutment, from where he attached wire
chains between a 26t excavator and the form soldiers,
using an extension ladder.
He was not wearing a harness, as the steel to anchor a harness was on the other
side of the abutment.
Mr Scott Raybould was operating the excavator while Mr
Bagnato was loosening the main screws, and Mr Mather remained at the bottom
the abutment.
2.20pm, Mr Bagnato fell backwards off the southern abutment of the Reed Creek
Legal obligations and guidance material
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2017
(NSW) (WHS Regulation) requires
a person conducting a business or undertaking (PCBU) to manage the risk of a
fall in the vicinity
of an edge over which a person could fall. Regulation 79 of
the WHS Regulation requires a PCBU that cannot eliminate the risk of
minimise it by providing adequate protection, including by use of a fall
prevention device such as a temporary work platform.
was also a significant amount of guidance material available to Menai Civil.
SafeWork NSW’s
Code of Practice – Formwork
(March 2021)
contains information about how to manage the risks associated with formwork. It
relevantly provides the following guidance
material to PCBUs:
(1) The WHS Regulation outlines a “hierarchy of control” when
managing risks associated with construction work, ranking
control measures from
the highest level of protection and reliability to the lowest. Where it is
reasonably practicable, hazards
must be eliminated. If elimination is not
reasonably practicable, PCBUs must minimise the risk as far as reasonably
practicable by
substituting hazards for a safer alternative, isolating the
hazard from people, and/or using engineering controls such as handrails
protection to prevent falls from heights. PCBUs must implement administrative
controls and then use personal protective
equipment (PPE) to minimise any risks
that remain. Duty holders must ensure control measures are maintained and
regularly reviewed
so that they remain effective.
(2) The principal contractor has a statutory duty imposed by the
to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the health and safety
of workers and others is not put at risk from work carried
out by the PCBU.
Before formwork operations start, the principal contractor should check that the
formwork design complies with AS
3610 series and must undertake at least the
following steps:
(a) use the information from the designer’s safety report to identify
hazards specifically affecting formwork;
(b) assess the risks involved in carrying out the work;
(c) identify the most appropriate methods to control any risks;
(d) provide suitable and safe access to and from the construction site; and
(e) ensure that all workers have received appropriate training, information and
instruction.
(3) Alongside consulting with the principal contractor, any contractor altering
and stripping/dismantling formwork should carry out
at least the following:
(a) assess the risk involved in doing the work;
(b) identify how to prevent the risk of injury;
(c) provide a documented Safe Work Method Statement (SWMS);
(d) assess hazardous manual handling tasks;
(e) consider the level of a worker’s experience when allocating tasks;
(f) minimise the working heights for persons erecting and stripping/dismantling
(g) strip/dismantle formwork in accordance with certified formwork and
structural engineer’s guidance or with guidance from
AS 3610 series;
(h) strip/dismantle formwork in a safe manner.
(4) Information, training and instruction must cover the nature of the work,
associated risks and control measures to be implemented.
A PCBU must ensure that
anyone undertaking construction work has completed general construction
induction training. A person who
dismantles formwork should be provided with all
necessary information, training and instruction to ensure they are competent to
the work safely.
(5) The risk of falling should be managed before, during and after workers are
on site. In the formwork context, hazards such as
loose materials, unidentified
penetrations and void areas, incomplete formwork decks and inadequate training
increase the risk of
falling. Measures such as handrails, edge protection,
perimeter protection screens and temporary catch platforms can minimise the
of falling.
(6) It is recommended to use guardrails and handrails that have been designed
and engineered as edge protection systems in accordance
with AS 4994.1:
Temporary Edge Protection – General Requirements.
(7) Stripping and dismantling formwork should be carried out in an orderly,
systematic and progressive manner so the deck is gradually
removed. Fall hazards
and manual task hazards should be minimised as much as possible.
Work Australia’s
General Guide for Formwork and Falsework
2014) contains further information on how to manage formwork and falsework risks
at a workplace. It states that when dismantling
formwork and falsework, PCBUs
should, among other things, maintain working platforms at least 450 mm wide at
the level of dismantling,
maintain a full working platform below the dismantling
level and remove any fall protection components at the last possible stage
the dismantling progresses.
Safe Work Australia’s
Formwork and Falsework Information Sheet
(July 2014) also contains information regarding how to manage risks associated
with formwork and falsework activities.
SafeWork NSW’s
Code of Practice – Managing the Risk of Falls at
(August 2019) contains information about falls from heights
generally. It advises PCBUs that the first step in the risk management
is to identify all fall hazards in the workplace. It then outlines how adequate
protection against risk is provided if PCBUs
maintain a safe system of work,
including by providing fall prevention devices, work positioning systems or fall
arrest systems.
If a risk remains after considering these measures, it must be
minimised as far as is reasonably practicable by implementing administrative
controls. It also outlines the correct use of guardrails, required load
resistance and examples of permit systems.
Systems of work prior
to the incident
the time of the incident, Menai Civil had in place the following systems of
(1) A site induction process for all workers who attended the site. Mr Bagnato
was inducted on 18 October 2022. As part of his induction,
he provided Menai
Civil with his construction induction card and NSW driver licence and signed the
relevant SWMSs. The induction
process with Mr Bagnato included a discussion
(2) Maintaining copies of the relevant SWMSs for all high-risk work being
undertaken by subcontractors. A copy of SWMS No 3,
Substructure
Construction
, dated 2 August 2022, was obtained from Bridgeworks. It did not
identify an elevated work platform (EWP) as required plant or equipment
site. However, when it came to addressing what it identified as a high-risk task
of removing formwork from shutters, the
SWMS expressly contemplated the use of
an EWP and specified both the means of access to it and the manner in which it
was to be maintained.
(3) Reviewing the relevant SWMS using a checklist and approving it for use on 18
October 2022.
(4) Providing a site supervisor on site every day. Mr Jeff Stewart was the site
supervisor at the time of the incident. However,
he was attending to other
workers when the incident occurred, having “checked in” with
Bridgeworks workers earlier that
(5) Holding prestart meetings daily to discuss the work to be done that day,
everyone’s role and any particular hazards or
issues to be aware of. On
the day of the incident, formwork was identified as a hazard when the planned
work activity included Bridgeworks
continuing work on the bridge.
(6) Having its site engineers carry out SWMS observations by walking around the
site and observing the work being carried out by
contractors, including
Bridgeworks, as against the contractors’ SWMS.
(7) Having its site engineers carry out weekly site inspections.
Systems of work after the incident
the incident, Menai Civil undertook the following:
(1) reviewed the SWMS;
(2) conducted an ICAM investigation;
(3) increased its supervision for high-risk work activity;
(4) commenced regular spot checks during high-risk work activities; and
(5) engaged a site engineer to perform SWMS observations during every task phase
while working at heights.
Offender’s case on sentence
Civil read and relied on the affidavit of Mr Lee Martin Fahey, Managing
Director, sworn 6 August 2025. The following is a summary
of his evidence in
addition to matters already set out in the Amended Statement of Facts.
Fahey is the director of Menai Civil. He has been involved in the civil
construction industry for over 30 years, with experience
ranging from plant
operation and logistics to project and business
leadership.
Expression of remorse and contrition
Fahey stated, on behalf of Menai Civil, that he sincerely regretted the incident
and took responsibility for it. He stated that
he was committed to upholding
safety, integrity and continuous learning across the
Civil has been operating since 1978, with its current operating entity and
leadership structure being established in 2002 when
it was registered as a
company. Its work involves a broad range of civil construction services
including bulk earthworks, road and
pavement construction, sewer and stormwater
infrastructure, utility relocations and complex remediation and demolition
maintains clients from both the public and private sector in
metropolitan and regional NSW. Menai Civil has significantly grown from
subcontracting business with 13 staff to a “medium level player” in
the NSW civil construction industry that
primarily delivers projects as a
principal contractor, with clients such as Sydney Water, Stockland, Mirvac and
Civil currently employs approximately 100 staff across a broad range of
disciplines, including project managers, civil engineers,
estimators, safety
officers, site supervisors, machine operators, labourers, surveyors and
administration and pre-construction support
Fahey became Menai Civil’s Managing Director in 2002. As Managing
Director, Mr Fahey oversees all aspects of the business,
including strategic
decision-making, operational oversight, financial governance and safety. He is
hands-on with key projects and
frequently engages in site-level safety
walkthroughs and project reviews.
Civil is a member of the Civil Contractors Federation (CCF). Mr Fahey has been
on the board of CCF NSW for the past 14 years,
was the NSW representative on the
board of CCF Australia for two years and has been the President of CCF NSW for
four years.
Civil holds the following accreditations:
(1) OFSC Accreditation – Office of the Federal Safety Commissioner under
the Australian Government Building and Construction
WHS Accreditation Scheme;
(2) ISO 45001 – Occupational Health & Safety Management Systems;
(3) ISO 9001 – Quality Management Systems; and
(4) ISO 14001 – Environmental Management Systems.
Civil supports numerous local initiatives and charitable causes, including
participation in the i98FM Illawarra Convoy raising
funds for children and
families facing life-threatening illnesses. It also makes ongoing contributions
to mental health awareness,
including support for initiatives such as MATES in
Construction. In addition, Menai Civil has a strong focus on reconciliation and
meaningful Indigenous engagement, encouraging participation from Indigenous
suppliers and fostering cultural awareness within its
Civil also demonstrates its strong family and community values by supporting
youth employment, including through work experience
placements and
apprenticeships across regional New South Wales.
Systems of work
prior to the incident
Civil’s Safety Management System is aligned with ISO 45001 and its
accreditation under the Federal Safety Commissioner’s
WHS Scheme. It
maintains comprehensive SWMS for all high-risk work, site-specific safety plans
and a proactive approach to hazard
identification and risk mitigation.
Safety measures on the Bridgeworks job
Fahey gave unchallenged evidence of the following systems of work in place at
the time of the incident, in addition to those set
out in the Amended Statement
(1) clearly defined exclusion zones;
(2) designated spotters for high-risk activities;
(3) comprehensive site inductions;
(4) task-specific SWMSs; and
(5) a fall assist system installed in relevant high-risk areas to reduce fall
related hazards.
Systems of work after the incident
Fahey also gave unchallenged evidence, supplementing the Amended Statement of
Facts, that after the incident Menai Civil immediately
initiated a review from
which it responded by implementing measures to improve existing systems and
prevent recurrence as follows:
(1) strengthened exclusion zone controls;
(2) held refresher safety training for all site personnel involved in high-risk
activities;
(3) updated safety information, developed and communicated in consultation with
workers and made readily accessible across all worksites;
(4) deployed visual alarms to improve real-time hazard awareness; and
(5) enhanced near-miss reporting protocols to support early intervention and
continuous improvement.
Consideration
have had regard to the objects of the
set out in s 3 and the
purposes of sentencing set out in
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
have taken into account the maximum penalty for this offence:
Makarian v The
(2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25 at [31] per Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Hayne and Callinan JJ (
seriousness
proportionality principle requires that a sentence should neither exceed nor be
less than the gravity of the crime having regard
to the objective circumstances:
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465;
[1988] HCA 14
485–6, 490–1 and 496. At common law, the term “objective
circumstances” was used to describe the
circumstances of a crime. The
gravity of the offence was assessed by reference to its objective circumstances:
R v McNaughton
(2006) 66 NSWLR 566
[2006] NSWCCA 242
task requires the Court to consider where the conduct of Menai Civil falls in
the range of conduct covered by the offence:
Baumer v The Queen
166 CLR 51; [1988] HCA 67 at 57. As Whealy JA said in
BW v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 176
(Hulme and Harrison JJ agreeing at
[75]–[76]):
“This assessment will generally indicate the appropriate range of
sentences available which will reflect the objective seriousness
of the offence
committed, and set the limits within which a sentence proportional to the
criminality of the offender will lie.”
objective seriousness of an offence is to be determined by reference to the
nature of the offending without reference to matters
personal to a particular
offender or class of offenders:
Muldrock v The Queen
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2011] HCA 39
sentencing judge should take into account not only the conduct which actually
constitutes the crime, but also such of the surrounding
circumstances as are
directly related to that crime and are properly regarded as circumstances of
aggravation or mitigation:
R v Wilkinson
[2009] NSWSC 432
Court arrives at the appropriate sentence through a process of
“instinctive synthesis” in which the sentencing judge
identifies all
the factors that are relevant to the sentence, discusses their significance and
then makes a value judgment as to
the appropriate sentence given those factors:
Court of Criminal Appeal examined the sentencing process with regard to the
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
General for New South Wales v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
NSWCCA 96. Under the heading “Assessment of Risk”, Basten J
“[34] The sentencing judge commenced his consideration with the
proposition that ‘[g]reater culpability attaches to the
failure to guard
against an event the occurrence of which is probable rather than an event the
occurrence of which is extremely unlikely’.
However, the truth of that
proposition depends upon other considerations including (a) the potential
consequences of the risk, which
may be mild or catastrophic, (b) the
availability of steps to lessen, minimise or remove the risk, and (c) whether
such steps are
complex and burdensome or only mildly inconvenient. Relative
culpability depends on assessment of all those factors.”
NSW submitted that this offence falls within the lower range of objective
seriousness, having regard to the following factors
which it asked the Court to
consider in making its assessment:
(1) The risk of a worker falling from height whilst conducting formwork
stripping at the site was known to Menai Civil. Such a risk
was identified
within SWMS No. 3,
Substructure Construction
, which defines removing
formwork shutters as a “working at heights high risk work activity”.
It states that elevated
working platforms are to be encapsulated by barriers and
harnesses are to be worn and tied off when working at heights.
(2) Menai Civil had overall responsibility for reviewing and approving
Bridgeworks’ SWMSs. On 18 October 2022, it reviewed
and approved
Bridgeworks’ SWMS entitled
Substructure Construction
(3) Also on 18 October 2022, Menai Civil conducted a site induction with Mr
Bagnato where “fall protection” and “scaffold”
discussed as “high risk items”.
(4) On the day of the incident, Menai Civil conducted a “Daily
Prestart” administered by the site supervisor Mr Jeff
(5) Menai Civil had its site engineers carry out SWMS observations by physically
walking around the site and observing the work being
carried out by Bridgeworks,
comparing it to the SWMS. It also had its site engineers carry out weekly site
inspections.
(6) On 11 November 2022, Mr Stewart had checked in with Bridgeworks prior to the
incident occurring but had not observed that an
EWP was not being used.
(7) It was obvious to Menai Civil that Bridgeworks was working at heights while
constructing the Reed Creek Bridge. Any person stripping
formwork is necessarily
working at height and could fall if safe systems of work are not developed,
implemented and enforced by subcontractors,
including Bridgeworks.
(8) The mitigation of the risk by properly verifying that Bridgeworks were
following safe systems at work was a straightforward task
for Menai Civil. Its
failure to do so was inconsistent with a proactive or systematic approach to
Saunders Civilbuild Pty Ltd v SafeWork New South Wales
(Walton J).
(9) Menai Civil was the principal contractor on the site, therefore holding the
obligations imposed on all principal contractors
by the WHS Regulation. It is
experienced in the construction industry such that it should not have completely
relied on Bridgeworks’
expertise to ensure safety while stripping
(10) It was Menai Civil’s duty to ensure subcontractors, including
Bridgeworks, were following safe systems of work.
Civil also submitted that the objective seriousness of the offence was in the
lower range of matters that come before the Court.
It pointed to the layers of
safety that it had in place to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that
work on the site was
done safely. Mr Fahey’s evidence was that he believed
that the controls that Menai Civil had in place would be sufficient.
In light of
the systems they had in place, Menai Civil submitted that the Court should
accept that Mr Fahey’s opinion was held
on a reasonable basis.
measures which Menai Civil accepts that it could have taken to prevent the
incident which occurred are set out at [
] above. I accept the submission of Menai Civil that
this is not a case where no attention was paid to safety, nor is it one where
safety was spoken about but not adhered to. I agree that the evidence
demonstrates that the defendant was intent on having and maintaining
systems of work. The gravamen of this offence is that, notwithstanding the
safety systems and controls that Menai Civil had
in place, including inspecting
the work of subcontractors to ensure that they were complying with the safe work
methods identified
in the relevant SWMSs, it failed either to require
Bridgeworks to obtain and use an EWP or to verify that Bridgeworks was following
safe systems of work.
is an agreed fact that Mr Stewart had “checked in with Bridgeworks”
earlier in the day. Beyond the daily prestart meeting,
it is unclear what that
involved. It would have been obvious, even on a cursory examination of the work
being undertaken by Bridgeworks,
that no EWP was being used, as provided for in
its SWMS. Plainly, Bridgeworks was nonetheless permitted by Menai Civil to
to undertake formwork stripping at the site. Further, the need to
prevent a worker from climbing to the top of an abutment at any
certainly without any sort of fall prevention mechanism, was also obvious.
measures upon which the prosecutor relies were basic steps that Menai Civil
could easily have taken and should have taken. Nonetheless,
what occurred ought
rightly to be characterised as a failure to maintain what should have been an
effective safety system. Taking
all the above matters into account in the manner
indicated, I accept the position of both parties that the objective seriousness
of the offence falls within the low range.
penalty imposed in relation to this offence must provide for general
deterrence.
accept that, at the time of the incident, Menai Civil, through the efforts of
Mr Fahey, was a company which was concerned to meet
responsibilities. This is reflected in Menai Civil’s absence of prior
convictions over its almost 23 years of operation with
its current operating
entity and the significant safety systems and control measures in place at the
time of the incident. Accordingly,
I find that there is a reduced need for the
sentence imposed upon Menai Civil to provide specific deterrence. I am fortified
view by the measures taken by Mr Fahey since the incident, set out at
] above, to implement
company wide safety reforms.
Aggravating factors
with the concession made by SafeWork NSW, I find that there are no aggravating
factors as contemplated by s 21A(2)
Civil has no prior convictions: s 21A(3)(e)
Civil is otherwise of good character: s 21A(3)(f)
. Both the steps
which it took after the incident and its significant history of community
involvement demonstrate this. Further,
Menai Civil was registered in 2002, a
period of more than 20 years without any prior convictions at the time of the
of the safety systems and control measures that Menai Civil had in place at the
time of the incident, its cooperation with
SafeWork NSW’s investigation
and the steps that it has taken to improve its systems since the incident, I
find that Menai Civil
is unlikely to reoffend (s 21A(3)(g)
has good prospects of rehabilitation (s 21A(3)(h)
Civil has shown remorse for the offence: s 21A(3)(i)
provided evidence that it has accepted responsibility for its actions and has
acknowledged failure on its part.
Civil entered a plea of guilty on 16 June 2025 to the charge particularised in a
Further Amended Summons filed in Court on that
date. The plea of guilty was
entered at the third mention of proceedings, which commenced with the issue of a
summons on 8 November
2024. Menai Civil is entitled to a discount on penalty
that reflects the utilitarian value of that early plea:
R v Thomson; R v
(2000) 49 NSWLR 383;
[2000] NSWCCA 309
[2009] NSWCCA 102
. The prosecutor conceded that the
defendant should be afforded a discount on sentence of 25% in recognition of its
early guilty plea.
I accept that a discount of 25% is appropriate in the
circumstances: ss 21A(3)(k) and 22
Capacity to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW) requires the Court to have regard to the
means of Menai Civil before imposing a fine.
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
the Court of
Criminal Appeal recognised that a fine which may be crippling to a small
business may have virtually no impact on the
financial operations of a large
corporation and that the maximum penalty for the offence was
“undoubtedly” set having
regard to that circumstance.
was no evidence before the Court concerning the financial position of Menai
Civil and no submission was made that Menai Civil
had a reduced capacity to pay
appropriate fine is $93,000, which will be reduced by 25% to reflect the plea of
make the following orders:
(1) I convict Menai Civil Contractors Pty Ltd of the offence as charged.
(2) I impose a fine of $69,750.
(3) Menai Civil Contractors Pty Ltd is to pay the prosecutor’s costs of
the proceedings as agreed or assessed.
(4) Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be
paid to the prosecutor.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (310 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter