URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2017/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Island [2017] NSWMHRT 7; (8 August 2017)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO ISLAND AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
TRIBUNAL ON
15 JUNE 2018
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2017] NSWMHRT 7
s 46(1) Review of forensic patient
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Ms Maria Bisogni
Deputy President
Dr Janell Miller
Psychiatrist
Mr Peter Bazzana
Other Member
DATE OF HEARING:
20 April 2017
Forensic Hospital
APPLICATION:
Own motion tribunal review
Order of 7 April 2017 confirmed
1. This is the XX review under
section 46(1)
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(“the Act)” of George Island.
2. Mr Island is currently detained at the Forensic Hospital on an order of
the Mental Health Review Tribunal, dated XXX.
DOCUMENTARY
3. The Tribunal considered the documents listed in the Forensic Patient
Exhibit List.
4. Mr Island attended the hearing accompanied by his lawyer. Also in
attendance were:
Psychiatrist
Director of the Hospital
Psychologist
Director of
Forensic Mental Health
Hospital Statewide Clinical Director
Hospital lawyer
representatives of the NSW Nurses & Midwives
Association.
5. This was a Tribunal initiated review of Mr Island who is currently
detained in the Forensic Hospital. The review was conducted
in April 2017. Two
weeks earlier, the Tribunal had reviewed Mr Island and ordered as
“Mr Island is to be removed from seclusion and is to be given care
and treatment as determined by Mr Island’s treating
psychiatrist or
her/his delegate.”
6. Between the two reviews, Mr Island’s lawyer, advised the Tribunal
that Mr Island had not been released in accordance with
the Tribunal’s
order made after the earlier review.
7. Some years before, Mr Island had been found not guilty by reason of mental
illness on charges of assault occasioning actual bodily
harm and sexual
intercourse without consent.
EVIDENCE AND SUBMISSIONS
8. In evidence was an email from the Forensic Hospital Medical Superintendent
to staff. It was sent between the two reviews and noted
that SafeWork NSW and
the NSW Nurses & Midwives’ Association had visited the Forensic
Hospital on that day raising work
health and safety issues concerning the order
that Mr Island be removed from seclusion. The Medical Superintendent advised
work health and safety risk assessment would be completed regarding Mr
Island’s staged exit from seclusion. Questioned by Mr
lawyer about Mr Island’s non-removal from seclusion, the Forensic Hospital
referred to a risk management plan
and a provision of resources and assistance
to enable Mr Island’s movement from seclusion in a gradual and safe manner
accordance with the risk management plan and directions from SafeWork
NSW and to adjust that plan if necessary” to accommodate
Mr Island’s
ongoing progression.
9. The Medical Superintendent asked that the Tribunal order be amended to
“when seclusion is ceased” that it be made subject
assessment and management” of the unit. The Medical Superintendent gave
evidence of attempted compliance with
the orders in good faith but it had been
challenging. The Medical Superintendent had received legal advice and had been
working with
the treating team to transition Mr Island out of seclusion.
10. Representatives of the union gave evidence that it was concerned about
the safety of its members and trying to ensure that no
further serious injuries
were experienced by them. Its members had “a right to a safe
workplace.” The witness acknowledged
that it was a complex case involving
balancing of the rights of Mr Islands and obligations to staff.
11. Mr Island’s Treating Psychiatrist was concerned about
non-compliance with the Tribunal’s order and raised the issue
“management plans were being formulated by non-clinicians without the
support of the treating team”. Mr Island’s
Treating Psychiatrist
noted that Mr Island’s was becoming frustrated by the change of plans and
developing a sense of hopelessness.
Mr Island’s Treating Psychiatrist
expressed the opinion that Mr Island was being “harmed on a daily
basis” by the
protracted seclusion. A SafeWork NSW report stated that Mr
Island should not be released from seclusion until consultation with workers
a finalised risk assessment plan including an assessment of risk of assault or
aggression towards nursing staff. There was an
improvement notice specifying
safe systems of work and other actions. The Treating Psychiatrist expressed the
opinion that Mr Island
should come out of seclusion and that Mr Island’s
“risk of imminent violence is low” and that the Treating
Psychiatrist
plan would identify triggers.
12. Mr Island’s lawyer emphasised that the Tribunal’s former
order should be complied with and given immediate effect
and that the risk
assessment management forms were inconsistent with the Tribunal’s order.
The current detention was unlawful.
13. The Forensic Hospital’s lawyer emphasised the legal obligations
that the facility had to meet regarding work health and
safety issues and the
improvement notices. All efforts were being made to comply with the work health
and safety notices. He proposed
that the Tribunal amend its order and make it
subject to “the risk plan being undertaken”. He emphasised his
“competing duties including work health and safety issues
and common law duties to make sure everyone is safe” presenting
complicating the transition of Mr Island from seclusion.
CONSIDERATION
14. Mr Island’s case has been challenging for management and Justice
Health who understandably wished to protect staff and comply
obligations under work, health and safety legislation as well as abide by the
Tribunal’s order. However, the Tribunal
has specific obligations under the
legislation to consider the nature of care, treatment and detention of Mr
Island, having regard
to his continuing condition, his response to treatment,
including any likely deterioration and the effects of any such deterioration
whether treatment and control was necessary for his protection or the protection
of others from serious harm.
15. At the previous review, Mr Island’s case had required an
examination of the Tribunal’s role at
reviews and the
AMO’s role under section190(2) of the
Mental Health Act
Tribunal in its previous decision considered that its review of Mr Island was
triggered by section 46 and section 47 of the
Act, having regard to the specific
matters in section 74 and the purpose, objects and aims of the governing
legalisation. The Tribunal
then determined, after having considered the
extensive evidence from Justice Health management and Mr Island’s treating
led by Treating Psychiatrist, that Mr Island no longer posed a threat of
serious harm to others (staff and Mr Islands) due to his
more settled condition;
and that his care, treatment and detention should not occur in seclusion. The
Tribunal’s order required
that he be removed from seclusion in accordance
with a treatment plan by Treating Psychiatrist or her delegate.
16. Events since that last hearing reveal that Mr Island’s management
out of seclusion is being significantly affected by WHS
officers, Safework NSW
and the N & MWA. Attempts to effect Mr Island’s removal from seclusion
have been delayed by various
industrial demands (referred to in the Notices)
including by risk assessments undertaken by WHS officers who have refused to
Mr Island in accordance with the Treating Psychiatrist’s
transition plan. This is most unfortunate as Mr Island’s risk
of self-harm
and sense of hopelessness have increased to the point that his treating team
have found it difficult to engage him and
he is on observation to guard against
17. At this review, the Tribunal considered that the Medical Superintendent
had not put forward any persuasive reason as to why the
Tribunal should alter
its previous order in the manner suggested by him. The Tribunal had
comprehensively considered Mr Island’s
circumstances and found that his
detention in seclusion was not necessary for the protection of others. Moreover,
the Tribunal concluded
that Mr Island’s treating team were best placed to
transition him out of seclusion according to their transition plan. At this
hearing, the Tribunal accepted the evidence of the Treating Psychiatrist that
the core group of staff identified at the previous
review continued to want to
work with Mr Island and that his risk of serious harm to staff and other Mr
Islands in the HDU was low.
There was a sensible and comprehensive plan to
manage him effectively and safely.
18. The Tribunal was concerned that its order had not been given effect as
was intended and as a result Mr Island remained in seclusion
with evident
ongoing harm. Mr Island’s sense of frustration and hopelessness had
increased because of the failure to transition
him out of seclusion according to
the plan that had been discussed with him by Treating Psychiatrist. The Tribunal
accepted that
Mr Island’s prolonged seclusion was increasing his risk of
19. The rewording of the order as requested by the Medical Superintendent had
the potential of further prolonging Mr Island’s
seclusion, based on
considerations that were not relevant to his personal circumstances. It was not
suggested the Medical Superintendent
or Clinical Director that Mr Island would
pose a risk of serious harm if the deficits were not attended to.
20. The Tribunal’s order made after the earlier review is clear. It
requires Mr Island’s removal from seclusion in a timeframe
accordance with the directions of the Treating Psychiatrist, or her delegate,
and staff working with her. Since the Tribunal
has determined that there should
be no variation to Mr Island’s care, treatment, and detention, the
Tribunal notes that a formal
order is not required to be issued on this occasion
and confirms that the order made after the earlier review remains in force.
21. The Tribunal makes an order under section 151(4) of the
Mental Health
prohibiting the publication or broadcasting of Mr Island’s name to
protect his private health information.
22. The Tribunal determined that the next review will be held within six
Maria Bisogni
Dated this day 2017
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (301 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter