URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/76.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workcover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector George Hyland) v The Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Parramatta [2006] NSWCIMC 76 (1 June 2006)
CHIEF INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
New South Wales
Authority of New South Wales (Inspector George Hyland)
Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Parramatta
Case Number:
20358966/05/2
3 April 2006
Date of Decision:
Legislation:
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
Magistrate:
Representation:
Solicitor for the Prosecutor: Ms T Kim, Shaw
McDonald Solicitors
Solicitor for the Defendant: Mr A Kohn, Makinson
d’Apice Solicitors
Reasons For Decision
1. The Defendant pleads guilty to a breach of
Occupational
Health and Safety Act 2000
2. The prosecution arises out of an incident on
22 March 2004 at St Paul’s Catholic College, situated at Greystanes in the
of New South Wales. The prosecutor provided the Court with a statement of
facts document, photographs, a factual inspection report,
a number of records of
interview concerning the incident and written submissions. On behalf of the
defendant detailed written submission
were provided including submissions
concerning issues of fact that were not agreed matters between the defendant and
the prosecutor.
I do not propose, in these reasons for decision, to canvass all
of the background facts and circumstances in this matter. They are
well known to
the parties.
3. It is sufficient to note that on 22 March 2004 the defendant
conducted educational services at St Paul’s Catholic College
which was one of a number of schools conducted by the defendant in the area of
the Roman Catholic Diocese of Parramatta.
On that day a seventeen year old year
12 student at St Paul’s Catholic College, Mr Martin Sultana, suffered
injuries to the
fingers of his left hand whilst operating an electrically driven
circular drop saw whilst attending a design and technology class
as part of his
year 12 studies at the school.
4. The precise cause of the accident is
uncertain. It is clear that whilst using the drop saw to cut off the end of a
piece of timber
which was approximately 20mm thick the student reached towards
an area immediately adjacent to the rotating saw blade and caused
the fingers of
his left hand to come into contact with the blade. The classroom teacher on the
day was Mr Rowan Dray who stated in
his record of interview that he had been
approximately two to three metres away and observing what the student was doing
no reason for the student to move his hand to the dangerous position
near the blade. Following the incident another student from
the same class
apparently reported that he had observed the incident and that he could see no
reason for Mr Sultana to put his hand
near the blade.
5. The evidence
available from Mr Sultana and available to the Court is not entirely
satisfactory. On the one hand there is evidence
of the injured student providing
a verbal description of what had occurred on the day immediately after the
incident when he was
receiving treatment at Westmead Hospital. On that occasion
Mr Sultana had said:-
“I made the cut and lifted the saw up. The Guard
wouldn’t drop down so I tried to close with my hand. I slipped and the
blade caught my hand and dragged it in.”
6. It is not clear whether, at
that point in time, Mr Sultana was stating that his hand had slipped on the
guard of the machine or
whether his whole body had moved because his foot had
slipped on the floor. In any event, I am not satisfied that the circumstances
which the discussion took place were ideal. On the day following the incident
the young man would almost certainly still have
been experiencing shock and was
possibly heavily sedated with pain killing medication. I would be reluctant to
place substantial
weight on what he said to Mr Proctor, the Studies Co-ordinator
for the Technological and Applied Studies Department of the School,
after the incident.
7. On 7 April 2004 approximately two weeks after the
incident Senior Inspector George Hyland of the WorkCover Authority of New South
Wales spoke to Mr Sultana at the school in the presence of the Deputy Head
Master. At that time Mr Sultana made no reference to slipping
but he repeated
his allegation that the guard on the drop saw had not retracted properly and had
stuck. Further he confirmed his
previous allegation that this was not the first
time that the guard on the drop saw had stuck. He recalled telling other
that the guard on the machine was faulty but could not remember which
teacher he had approached about the matter but he recalled
telling a teacher.
8. The full interview with Mr Sultana took place on 19 August 2004, some
five months after the incident, in circumstances where Mr
Sultana had been back
at the school for some three months or so.
9. On the one hand the injured
student has consistently asserted in March, April and August 2004 that the guard
on the machine was
faulty and that it had been faulty on previous occasions. On
the other hand the defendant denies that any teacher including Mr Proctor
Dray had been informed by anyone else including Mr Sultana that there was a
problem with the guard on the drop saw. The evidence
of Mr Dray when interviewed
was that he had used that saw earlier the same day without any problem with the
guard being evident and
that another student had used the saw as well that day
again without any malfunction of the guard being noticed. Further, following
incident the defendant’s staff had checked the machine and found no
problem with the guard whatsoever.
10. Following the incident it was open to
the prosecutor to have the machine fully tested and for an expert report to be
to the Court noting any mechanical or other faults found in the
mechanism of the machinery. No such evidence was provided to the
Court. In those
circumstances I can only conclude that either the drop saw was in perfect
working order and that the incident arose
through operator error and for no
other reason or alternatively that the machine had a defect that was not
detectable which effected
the operation of the guard in an entirely intermittent
way. Further, in either case, I am unable to conclude that a regular and
servicing of the machine would necessarily have detected any such
defect in the design or in the condition of drop saw in question.
circumstances of this case I do not find that the degree of foreseeability of
risk to safety was particularly high. I accept
the evidence put forward on
behalf of the defendant which suggests that neither Mr Proctor nor Mr Dray had
any reason to believe
that any fault existed in the guarding mechanism on the
drop saw. Further, the student was a year 12 student who had at least two
experience in Design and Technology as well as relevant experience in another
subject that he was undertaking as part of his
HSC studies namely Construction.
It is clear from the evidence that Mr Sultana was a particularly competent and
proficient student
who had used the drop saw on many previous occasions both in
design and technology and in construction classes and that he had received
significant training in the safe use of the machine and that he had readily
understood and retained the instruction he had received.
12. On 19 August
2004 when interviewed by Senior Inspector Hyland the injured student had been
asked the following question:-
“Please describe what operating
procedures, in relation to actually using the drop saw, were in place at the
time of incident?”
13. Mr Sultana was able to provide the following
“First you have to check you have proper PPE, like goggles,
leather shoes and an apron, also checking signage and then you have
to check if
the saw is working good, its not in any harm and for example that the cords are
not frayed and any maintenance to make
sure the saw is in working order. Make
sure the switch is turned on, the saw is within the lines about a metre and only
the operator
is within the lines, put the wood down and then start the saw
before touching the wood, cut on the line that you have drawn on the
holding the wood on the far side. The wood has be held before commencing any
cutting, then press the safety button for
the guard to lift up and press the
trigger and lower the saw and make sure the blade is cut through the whole piece
of wood and then
raise the saw releasing the trigger and the safety guard and
then taking the wood out when the blade stops spinning.”
14. From that
response it is clear that Mr Sultana had received substantial training and
instruction concerning the safe use of the
drop saw. In the view of the Court,
his response could have been improved if he had included reference to the
appropriate procedure
to be adopted in the event of any malfunction in the
equipment being noticed by him.
15. Following the incident the defendant was
issued improvement notices and these, together with the development of the
OnGuard system
schools operated by the defendant have taken up new improved
standards of the provision of equipment schools following from a Department
Education project that began in about 2001 and which began to impact at the
classroom level in schools in 2003 and 2004. The new
system involves substantial
improvement firstly ensuring that only appropriate equipment is purchased for
use in woodworking and
in other classes, that care is taken to ensure that
equipment is properly selected for the age level of students in question and
that there is formal and documented risk assessment and training in occupational
health and safety standards to ensure that both
the staff and the students at
the school are provided with occupational health and safety training of high
16. It is clear from the evidence that at the time of the
incident, namely 22 March 2004, the defendant did not have in place at St
Paul’s Catholic College Greystanes, the formal and documented systems for
risk assessments and maintenance service which is
now in place. Whilst it is
clearly unfortunate that these improvements were not yet in place a the time of
Mr Sultana’s accident
in March 2004 the Court notes that substantial
progress has been made in this regard following the incident itself.
accept however the submission made by Mr Kohn on behalf of the defendant to the
effect that, whilst the defendant acknowledges
that the system in place on 22
March 2004 was inadequate and required improvement, it is by no means certain
that the injury to Mr
Sultana would have been avoided if these improvements had
already been in place as at 22 March 2004. Given the uncertainty as to
specific cause of the accident such a proposition is speculative and I accept
that considerations which are essentially speculative
should not be relied upon
in such a fashion as to increase the penalty imposed on a defendant as part of
the sentencing process.
Rather, the defendant is entitled to the benefit of any
doubt that exists in that regard.
18. I am satisfied that both a general and
specific deterrence factor should be included in any penalty imposed by the
defendant remains a substantial employer with more than 5000
employees and remains responsible for the safety of non employees including
excess of 42,000 children who are enrolled in its schools. Many of these
students and staff are involved in the teaching of woodworking,
technology, construction and other subjects which involve, of necessity, the use
of potentially dangerous equipment and
machinery. The defendant cannot abandon
the teaching of such subjects as there is a fundamental social need for the
education system
to produce young people with the requisite skills to perform
work in these fields. In those circumstances and notwithstanding the
appropriate
conduct by the defendant in adopting new and improved programs, such as the
OnGuard program it is necessary to take into
account the ongoing nature of the
defendant’s undertakings and include a specific deterrence factor in the
penalty imposed
by the Court. This does not mean however that the defendant
herein should be the subject of any particular criticism concerning its
attitude to occupational health and safety matters. On the contrary, I am
satisfied that the defendant has, since 2001, embarked
on a journey of constant
self improvement in this field in a fashion which parallels a similar exercise
which has been carried out
by the NSW Department of Education. Given the size
and scope of the defendants undertakings its task in this regard is substantial
and the Court must take into account this reality. Within a relatively short
period of time the Court has found it necessary to consider
two separate
prosecutions relating to schools operated by the defendant and it is clear that
it is appropriate for the Court to include
a specific deterrence factor for this
19. There are a number of subjective factors which mitigate in
favour of the defendant. There can be no doubt as to the genuine remorse
contrition of the defendant, including its Occupational Health and Safety
Co-ordinators and in particular the staff at St Paul’s
Catholic College
Greystanes. The Court notes that both Mr Proctor and Mr Dray are highly
experienced teachers in their field, each
with more than twenty years
experience. Both of them held Mr Sultana in high regard as a proficient and
competent student and it
is clear that both were shocked and remorseful
following the incident. The defendant has cooperated fully with WorkCover and
moved quickly, following the incident, to take appropriate steps to ensure
that its occupational health and safety procedures have
been scrutinized for
areas where improvement was necessary and when detected, such improvements have
been made without delay. It
is contended on behalf of the defendant that
notwithstanding prior convictions including the conviction recorded in March
2006 concerning
and incident in December 2003 at McCarthy Catholic College, the
defendant’s record is a good one when the size and scope of
defendant’s operations are taken into account. I accept the
defendant’s submission in this regard. In the view of
the Court it is
entirely appropriate for the prior convictions to be seen in the context of the
size of the operations of the defendant
and that notwithstanding the existence
of prior convictions the defendant has a good industrial record.
March 2006 when the defendant was sentenced in relation to the McCarthy Catholic
College incident a substantial fine of $32,250
was imposed. I am satisfied that
the culpability of the defendant in the present matter is of a lesser degree of
seriousness taking
into account the specific circumstances of the case. In this
case the injured student was considerably older, he had substantial
experience in the use of the equipment in question, the level of supervision was
much higher with a teacher student ratio of
approximately 1:5 and the degree of
foreseeability of risk to safety was somewhat less evident.
legislation provides for a maximum penalty of $825,000 where the defendant is
incorporated and has prior convictions. This
Court has jurisdiction to impose a
maximum penalty of $55,000. Having taken into account the objective seriousness
of the offence
as well as the subjective matters in mitigation I find that
penalty of $28,000 would be appropriate in this case. The defendant is
to a discount of 25% in circumstances of an early plea of guilty was entered.
Consequently the penalty is discounted to
$21,000. There will be a moiety of the
fine to the prosecutor.
22. The defendant is ordered to pay the prosecutors
professional costs and disbursements in the sum of $2,875.00.
23. The fine
and the costs are to be paid within 28 days at the Level 4, Registry of the
Court, Downing Centre 143-147 Liverpool Street
Chief Industrial Magistrate
1 June 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (43.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter