URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2013/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Maendel (No 2) [2013] NSWMT 10 (22 May 2013)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Maendel (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWMT 10
Hearing Date(s):
Decision Date:
22 May 2013
Elkaim SC DCJ
Dr K Ilbery
Ms A Collier
See paragraph 19
Catchwords:
Treatment by practitioner of his mother, putting patient into palliative
care instead of referring her for further investigation.
Protective orders
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) 86a
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Dr Christopher Maendel
(Respondent)
Representation
P M Strickland SC (Applicant)
M Lynch (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Hicksons Lawyers
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Amended Notice of Complaint brought by the Health Care Complaints Commission
(the "HCCC") was heard by this Tribunal from 4 to
7 March this year. The
Decision was delivered on 8 March (
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr
Maendel [2013] NSWMT 3
Tribunal reached the following conclusions:
(a) Complaints One and Two of the Amended Notice of Complaint are found to be
established.
(b) Complaint Three is found not to have been established.
(c) The matter is stood over for the consideration of protective orders to 22
(d) The costs of the hearing to date are reserved.
facts of the matter are set out in the above decision.
Tribunal reconvened on 22 May 2013 to consider what protective orders should be
made consequent upon the above conclusions.
respondent provided some further material for this stage including a statement
he made on 10 April 2013. The material is included
in Exhibit 3. In his
statement the respondent records that he has returned to America where he
to practice medicine in an established group practice setting in New
York with four other doctors
." He has no present intention of returning to
was sought from the Tribunal for the respondent not to return from New York
provided he made himself available to give
evidence by telephone. The Tribunal
granted this request. Ultimately the respondent did not give further evidence at
all. The respondent
had given oral evidence in March when the Tribunal had been
able to observe him in the witness box under cross-examination. The Tribunal
notes this observation from its earlier decision:
The respondent was an honest witness. This was conceded by the HCCC.
(Paragraph 9).
the members of the Tribunal were not unanimous in all of their ultimate
conclusions they were unanimous in finding that:
Despite a number of failings in the treatment of his mother, the Tribunal
accepts that the respondent acted at all times in a manner
that he perceived was
in the best interests of Mrs Maendel. The HCCC also conceded this point.
(Paragraph 9)
Tribunal also expressed this view:
"The conduct which was wrongful was carried out in a context in which the
doctor at all times acted in accordance with his perception
of the best
interests of his patient as the prime consideration."
(Paragraph 26)
his recent statement the respondent refers to his remorse in failing to have one
of his colleagues in Inverell involved in his
mother's care. He describes the
strains that were imposed upon him by falling out with his brother, James, and
by the nature of the
media coverage of the case. He says, in paragraph
"I now acknowledge my errors and failures. I completed an intensive
Medical Ethics course through Monash University and there has
not been a day in
the last three years when I have not reflected on the treatment I gave my
new material also indicates that the relevant American authorities have been
informed of the Tribunal's substantive decision and
will be informed of the
outcome of this hearing. The Tribunal is mindful that these authorities will be
able to act in accordance
within their own requirements and procedures.
the Tribunal recognises that its orders may be of little consequence if the
respondent does not return to Australia, the
Tribunal thinks it appropriate to
deal with the matter, subject to practical considerations, as if the respondent
had remained in
Australia. This is because the purpose of the orders is to
provide some guidance to the medical profession and also to assure the
that the failings of the respondent have received proper consideration. They
also of course cater for the return of the respondent
to Australia, should that
occur some time in the future.
definition protective orders are designed for protection, not punishment. The
protection is both of the public and the medical
profession.
new material provided by the respondent includes a Risk assessment Report
conducted on behalf of Avant, the respondent's medical
indemnity insurer. The
report concludes:
Overall I found Dr Maendel to be a caring practitioner with an empathetic
manner. I formed the impression that his practice was patient
centred and that
patients would value the care he administer because of his communication skills
and his style of involving patients
in their treatment.
conclusion is consistent with the impression the Tribunal formed of the
respondent. The Tribunal is also satisfied that the errors
made by the
respondent are unlikely to be repeated. Firstly the circumstances were unique in
that they involved the treatment of
his mother in an isolated community.
Secondly the Tribunal is satisfied that the respondent has 'learned his lesson'
from the events
in March 2010. The Tribunal notes this passage from the
respondent's statement:
I have not treated any family member since the initiation of the HCCC
complaint. I do not plan to do so except in emergencies until
another provider
is available. I will continue to abide by the NSW Medical Council's policy
regarding treating family members."
(Paragraph 7)
Notwithstanding
the subjective matters set out above the Tribunal is also mindful of the
severity of the conduct displayed by the
respondent. After stabilising his
mother's condition he continued to treat her in circumstances where he should
have arranged a CT
Scan, he should have obtained specialist opinion, he should
have involved a local general practitioner, he should have kept more
clinical notes. In addition he should not have been the prime medical adviser to
his father and he should not have signed
the death certificate.
HCCC submitted draft practice conditions for the Tribunal's consideration. The
respondent indicated, by his counsel, that the
conditions were
appropriate.
draft submissions, with slight amendment, accord with the view of the Tribunal.
In reaching this view the matters set out above
have been taken into account
together with the various observations and findings made by the Tribunal on 8
March 2013.
Tribunal does however think that in addition to imposing practice conditions the
respondent should be reprimanded. No opposition
was submitted against this
course. The respondent also accepted that he should pay the costs of the
proceedings.
Tribunal makes the following orders:
(1) The respondent is reprimanded.
(2) If the respondent returns to practise in Australia he is to be subject to
the conditions set out in the Annexure to these reasons
for a period of one year
from the commencement of such practise.
(3) Pursuant to Section 163(1)(a) of the
National Law
the Medical Council
of NSW is the appropriate review body of the conditions set out in the Annexure.
(4) If the practitioner resides in Australia but in a State other than New South
Wales Sections 125 to 127 of the
National Law
are to apply, so that a
review of the conditions in the Annexure may be conducted by the Medical Board
of Australia.
(5) The respondent is to pay the HCCC's costs of these
proceedings.
Dr Maendel - Medical Tribunal of New South Wales
Practice Conditions (to be imposed for a period of 1 year after the
practitioner returns to practise in Australia)
1 Upon returning to medical practice in Australia the practitioner is to
practise only in a Medical Council of New South Wales approved
group practice
(group practice is defined as at least three medical practitioners), with one
other medical practitioner always on
site or available to consult by way of
2 The practitioner is to obtain Medical Council of New South Wales approval
prior to changing the nature or place of his practice.
3 Within 28 days of the date of resuming clinical practice in Australia he
is to provide for approval by the Medical Council of New
South Wales, the name
and professional address of a registered medical practitioner who has agreed to
act as his professional mentor.
The nature and frequency of contact with the
mentor is to be determined by the mentor in accordance with the Council's
for Mentors. The mentor is to be provided with a copy of the
guidelines and a copy of this Tribunal's decisions dated 8 March 2013
(a) He is to authorise the mentor to report, in an approved format, to the
Council every three months about the fact of contact,
and to inform the Council
if there is any concern about his professional conduct, or personal
(b) He is to authorise the mentor to notify the Council of any failure to
attend, termination of the mentoring relationship against
the advice of the
mentor, or any other matter the mentor considers
appropriate.
(c) He will meet with the mentor for a period of 12 months after resuming
clinical practice in Australia.
(d) In the event that the approved mentor is no longer willing or able to
continue as mentor, he is to nominate another mentor for
approval by the Council
within 28 days of the cessation of the original mentor
relationship.
(e) He is to be responsible for any costs associated with the mentoring
(f) The meetings should include discussion of his personal and professional
development as a registered medical practitioner and
issues highlighted in this
Tribunal's Decisions dated 8 March 2013 and 22 May 2013,
and any personal
and/or medical practice issues that may arise.
4 The practitioner is to submit to an audit at his premises 6 months
following resumption of practise in Australia, of a random selection
medical records by a person or persons nominated by the Medical Council of New
South Wales ("the Council") to assess his compliance
with the relevant
provisions of the Health Practitioner Regulation (New South Wales) Regulation
2010 (Part 4 and Schedule 2) and
the RACGP's Standards for General Practices
(4th edition), in particular Standard 1.7 'Content of Patient Health Records'
with particular
attention to his assessment of patients, and treatment plans, or
such conditions as exist at the time of the practitioner's return
to Australia.
5 The audit is to occur 6 (six) months after resumption of practise in
Australia or as required by the Council. The practitioner is
to authorise the
Auditor/s to provide the Council with a report on their findings. The
practitioner is to meet all costs associated
with the audit/s and any subsequent
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (90.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter