URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPHT/2011/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC V SAYEGH. John [2011] NSWPHT 1 (21 June 2011)
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Matter No: PH05/2010
PHA0000958710
HCCC v SAYEGH, JOHN
[2011] NSWPHT 1
into a Complaint against a pharmacist pursuant to
Pharmacy Practice Act
Sections 114
Complainant
: NSW Health Care Complaints
: Mr. John Sayegh
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
Mr. Peter Dwyer (Chairperson)
Mrs. Virginia
Bear (Pharmacist Member)
Mr. Jonathan Chen (Pharmacist Member)
Greenaway (Lay Member)
HEARING DATES:
22, 23, 24 & 25, February 2011
DECISION DATE:
21 June 2011
Pharmacist—Professional Misconduct—Unsatisfactory Professional
Conduct—Failure to comply with statutory requirements
concerning Drugs of
Addiction and Restricted Substances—Supply of Restricted Substance / known
drug of abuse, to & self-prescribed
by, a Medical Practitioner whose
Authority concerning Drugs of Addiction was withdrawn—failure to make
adequate enquiries before
dispensing;
Legislation cited
Pharmacy Practice Act 2006
; Schedule 6, Clause 6;
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
, Clauses 38, 39, 53, 54,
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No. 86A.
Cases cited
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
60 CLR 336.
HCCC v Tran
[2010] NSWPHT 4
HCCC v A Medical
Practitioner
[2001] NSWCA 158
Skinner v Beaumont
v NSW Bar Association
[1992] HCA 24
176 CLR 239.
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
Clyne v NSW Bar
Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186.
Law Society of NSW v
[1997] NSWCA 185.
Law Society of NSW v Foreman
HCCC v Larden
[2009] NSWPHT 1
Ex Parte Tziniolis
Re Medical Practitioners Act
67 SR (NSW) 448.
APPEARANCES:
Mr. P. Ginters of Counsel (instructed by Ms. P. Hook,
HCCC) for the Complainant;
Mr. P. Rooney, of Counsel (instructed by Ms. F. Dransfield, Guild Lawyers)
for the Respondent.
Tribunal finds the complaints of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
as particularised in Complaints 1 and 2 of the
Complaint dated 7 June 2010 as amended, proved;
Tribunal finds the Respondent guilty of
professional misconduct
Respondent is cautioned and severely reprimanded;
Respondent’s registration as a pharmacist is suspended for a period of
three (3) months to commence upon the expiration
of thirty (30) days following
the date of these Orders; and upon expiration of the above period of suspension,
the Respondent’s
registration is to be subject to the conditions in the
Orders which follow, below.
the expiration of the above period of suspension, the Respondent is to accept a
, appointed by the NSW Pharmacy Council (“the
Council”), to advise and assist him in the management of his pharmacy
including his obligations pursuant to the
Poisons and Therapeutic
(“PTG Act”) and the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation 2008
(“ PTG Regulation 2008”). Such
is to continue for a period of twelve (12) months from the date
of the Council’s appointment of the
and the costs thereof
are to be met by the Respondent. The appointed
shall report to the
Council as and when required by it during the twelve (12) month period of
a period of three (3) years commencing upon the expiration of the above period
of suspension, the Respondent is required to complete
annually, not less than
forty (40) continuing professional development (CPD) credits acquired from Group
Two or Group Three Continuing
Professional Development activities as defined in
the Pharmacy Board of Australia
Guidelines on Continuing Professional
Development
; and the Respondent is to provide to the Council at the end of
each year in the three-year period, evidence of those CPD activities
throughout the year;
Respondent is to complete within twelve (12) months commencing upon the
expiration of the above period of suspension, the ‘distance
learning’ Course to be offered and administered by the Australian College
of Pharmacy (ACP) entitled
Drug Use and Misuse
; and the Respondent is to
provide evidence from the ACP of his completion of such Course, to the Council
within thirty (30) days
of the Respondent’s receipt of such evidence.
Auditor appointed by the Council, is to attend the Respondent’s pharmacy
Chemist situated at Emu Heights (“current
pharmacy”) and / or at any other pharmacy or pharmacies in which the
acquires a pecuniary interest, to conduct an audit at approximately
six (6) monthly intervals, for a period of three (3) years commencing
expiration of the above period of suspension, of the Respondent’s
compliance with and procedures concerning, the PTG Act
and PTG Regulation
2008 relevant to the receipt, possession, recording, storage, supply and
inventory checking requirements for Drugs of Addiction and
for the supply and
recording of Restricted Substances; the first such audit is to be undertaken
within three (3) months of the expiration
of the above period of suspension; and
the auditor’s report of each such audit is to be provided to the Council
(1) month thereof.
a period of three (3) months commencing upon expiration of the above period of
suspension, the Respondent is to deliver to
a panel of pharmacists selected by
the Council, a presentation on a pharmacist’s obligations concerning the
receipt, possession,
supply and recording of Restricted Substances and Drugs of
Addiction pursuant to the PTG Act and the PTG Regulation 2008;
a period of five (5) years commencing upon expiration of the above period of
suspension, the Respondent is to maintain membership
Pharmaceutical
Society of Australia
whilst a registered pharmacist and to maintain
membership of the
Pharmacy Guild of Australia
whilst the proprietor of
his current pharmacy or of any other pharmacy; and evidence of each such
membership is to be provided to
the Council annually.
a period of twelve (12) months commencing upon expiration of the above period of
suspension, the Respondent is to obtain accreditation
in respect of his current
pharmacy at Emu Heights, in the
Quality Care Pharmacy Program
by the Pharmacy Guild of Australia and thereafter to maintain such accreditation
for a period of three (3) years; and evidence
of such accreditation and of each
annual Standards Maintenance Assessment, is to be provided annually to the
Respondent is to meet the costs of compliance with the above Orders.
Respondent is to pay the costs of the Complainant as agreed, or, if agreement
cannot be reached, either party may have the matter
of costs re-listed for
assessment by the Tribunal.
names of persons named in prescriptions and any other related patient
documentation in evidence in this matter together with the
name of the person
identified in the Schedule to the Complaint as “Dr. X” and the
Schedule, are suppressed from publication
in any medium, to anyone other than
the parties to this matter and their legal advisers.
Date of Orders
: 21 June 2011
REASONS FOR DECISION
Complaint of the Health Care Complaints Commission (“the
Complainant”) before the Tribunal, comprised two parts each
described as a
“complaint”—the first, that the Respondent pharmacist was
unsatisfactory professional conduct
as defined in
Pharmacy Practice Act 2006
(“the Act”) and the second,
that he was guilty of
professional misconduct
as defined in
the Act. The particulars of the Complaint relied on by the Complainant are the
same for each.
Complaint was referred to the Tribunal prior to the commencement on 1 July 2010,
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No. 86A
(“the National Law”) and accordingly, was dealt with pursuant to
the first day of the Inquiry the Tribunal granted leave to the Complainant to
amend its Complaint there being no objection by the
Respondent’s Counsel.
, is that the Respondent, a person registered under
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct within the
meaning of section 37 of the Act, in that the pharmacist:
(i) has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or
judgement possessed, or care exercised, by the pharmacist
in the practice of
pharmacy is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist
of an equivalent level of training
or experience;
(ii) has engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice
of pharmacy.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
At all relevant times the pharmacist was the sole
proprietor of Xtreme Chemist, 33-35 Burwood Rd, Burwood, New South Wales 2134
Chemist”) and Metro Pharmacy Burwood.
Dr X had her
authority as a medical practitioner to possess, supply and prescribe drugs of
addiction within the meaning of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
(“drugs of addiction”) withdrawn with effect from 14
February 2002. Her authority was still withdrawn as at March 2007.
On 15 August 2006 at Xtreme Chemist, the pharmacist dispensed 10 packets (200
tablets) of Mersyndol Forte on a prescription presented
and issued by Dr X in
her own name, in circumstances where he had supplied 5 packets (100 tablets) of
Mersyndol Forte to Dr X on
8 August 2006.
19 September 2006 at Xtreme Chemist, the pharmacist agreed to dispense 50
packets (1000 tablets) of Mersyndol Forte to Dr X on
a prescription presented
and issued by Dr X in her own name.
15 August 2006 and/or 19 September 2006, the pharmacist supplied Mersyndol Forte
to Dr X in quantities and/or for a purpose that
did not accord with the
recognised therapeutic standard of what is appropriate in the circumstances,
contrary to clause 53 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
8 and/or 15 August and/or 19 September 2006, the pharmacist accepted the
explanation provided by Dr X for the self-prescription
of large quantities of
Mersyndol Forte and failed to make further appropriate enquiries.
8 and/or 15 August and/or 19 September 2006, the pharmacist supplied Mersyndol
Forte in the name of one patient (Dr X) for on-supply
to unknown patients,
without ensuring:
(i) that the
medication was appropriate for the needs of the intended patients;
(ii) that it
was labelled with adequate directions; and/or
(iii) that the
patients were counselled.
15 August 2006, the practitioner amended the quantity of Mersyndol Forte tablets
self-prescribed by Dr X by adding the words “x
2 as per Dr
Approval”, and filled the prescription
(i) when it was
not appropriate to do so; and/or
(ii) contrary
to clause 38 and/or 39 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
19 September 2006, the practitioner amended the date on the prescription and the
quantity of Mersyndol Forte tablets self-prescribed
by Dr X by adding the words
“x 50 as per Dr Approval”, and filled the
prescription
(i) when it was
not appropriate to do so; and/or
(ii) contrary
to clause 38 and/or 39 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
October 2006 and August 2007, the pharmacist failed to make an inventory of
drugs of addiction stock for Xtreme Chemist during
the prescribed period,
contrary to clause 117 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation 2002
23 October 2006 and May 2007 other than the week ending 26 November 2006, at
Xtreme Chemist, in relation to the supply of
a drug of addiction, namely
methadone, the pharmacist failed to ensure that the name of the prescriber and
the prescription number
was recorded in the drug register, contrary to clause
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
pharmacist did not keep dispensing or other records to account for at least 490
packets of Mersyndol Forte ordered by Xtreme Chemist
between August 2006 and
January 2007.
30 October 2006 and 15 August 2007, the pharmacist failed to make entries in the
drug registers for Xtreme Chemist and Metro
Pharmacy in relation to the receipt
and supply of drugs of addiction, contrary to clause 112 of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of
professional misconduct within the meaning of
of the Act, in that the
pharmacist:
(i) has engaged in conduct that demonstrates that the knowledge, skill or
judgement possessed, or care exercised, by the pharmacist
in the practice of
pharmacy is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a pharmacist
of an equivalent level of training
or experience;
(ii) has engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice
of pharmacy
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
Particulars 1-11 above are
to the Complaint reproduced below, identified the medical
practitioner referred to therein as “Dr. X” which description
used in these Reasons for decision and in those parts of the transcript of
evidence quoted in these Reasons, where it is substituted
for her real name.
to Clause 6 of Schedule 6 of the Act, the Chairperson directed that the names of
persons identified in prescriptions and
in any other related patient
documentation in evidence in this Inquiry together with the name of the medical
practitioner appearing
in any documentation described as “Dr. X” and
identified in the above Schedule to the Complaint, are not to be published.
period of relevance to the Complaint is limited to
August 2006 to August
2007, inclusive
Categories of conduct addressed by the Particulars of
Particulars of Complaint
1 to 7 inclusive
, concern the
Respondent’s dispensing of
Mersyndol Forte
(“MF”) to Dr. X according to a prescription written by her for
herself and with her home address on each of three
occasions: 8 and 15 August
and 19 September, 2006 (Particulars numbered 1 to 5); and the Respondent’s
amendment of the quantity
of the above medication on each of the prescriptions
presented by Dr.X on 15 August and 19 September 2006 and on the latter
prescription,
amendment of the date thereon (Particulars numbered 6 and 7).
is and was at the relevant time, a
Restricted Substance
pursuant to the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
(“PTG Act”) and
Poison & Therapeutic Goods Regulation
(“PTG Regulation”)
and available only by prescription.
Particulars
in numbered paragraphs
8, 9 and 11
, address inventory
and other recording requirements for
Drugs of Addiction
pursuant to the
PTG Act and Regulation.
Particulars
in numbered paragraph
address a failure to keep
dispensing or other records, for at least 490 packets of MF (each packet
containing 20 tablets) ordered
by the Respondent from his suppliers.
the second day of the Inquiry, by his Counsel, the Respondent made some
admissions concerning the Particulars of the Complaint
[TS Pages 76-79] but did
not at that time, concede that such admitted conduct could amount to
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional
the fourth and final, day of the Inquiry following completion of his evidence
before the Tribunal, the Respondent through his Counsel,
conceded that each of
the particulars of the Amended Complaint demonstrate
unsatisfactory
professional conduct
but did not amount to
professional
. Counsel told the Tribunal that the Respondent
now fully accepts both the facts as they did occur and what we
concede they mean in a legal sense.
Respondent’s
Counsel did however, refer (in submissions) to evidentiary issues concerning the
quantity of MF tablets as particularised
in Paragraph 10 of the Complaint. This
will be further addressed, below.
Notwithstanding
the Respondent’s admissions, the Tribunal must consider the evidence in
determining whether the Complaint has
been proved. In considering the Complaint,
the Tribunal needs to be satisfied to the standard articulated in
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
, that is, comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities,
but that having regard to the serious nature of the Complaints and
consequences, the satisfaction cannot be produced by “
inexact proofs,
indefinite testimony or indirect references
Complainant’s evidence
following documents tendered by the Complainant, were admitted, without
documents admitted as
Exhibit C-1
an Index to which appears at the
conclusion of these Reasons [TS 5];
Drug Register
admitted as
Exhibit C-2
Document with
first page headed “
” admitted as
Exhibit C-3
[TS 56] formerly marked for identification as “MFI-1” [TS 17]
Settlement & Release
admitted as
Exhibit C-4
Introduction from Guild Lawyers dated 14 December 2010, to Mr. John Bell,
Registered Pharmacist, who gave evidence before
the Tribunal and whose report
was admitted into evidence as part of the materials tendered by the Respondent),
admitted as
Exhibit C-5
Bruce Battye,
Acting Chief Pharmacist, Pharmaceutical Services, NSW Health
Department (“PSB”) called by the Complainant, gave evidence
the Tribunal relevant to investigation of the subject matter of the Complaint
and of Dr. X [TS 22-39].
Francis Payne
, Registered Pharmacist, called by the Complainant, gave
evidence relevant to his ‘peer review’ report, part of Exhibit
(at tab 37), [TS 39-50].
, Acting Principal Pharmaceutical Adviser, PSB and registered
pharmacist, whose evidence before the Tribunal addressed investigation
related aspects of the Complaint [TS 51-57].
Sandra Jones
, Customer Services Operations Manager, Sigma Pharmaceuticals
Ltd. (“Sigma”) whose evidence was given to the Tribunal
telephone, relevant to the Particulars in Paragraph 10 of the Complaint
concerning Sigma’s supply of MF to the Respondent’s
pharmacy and
related issues [TS 63-75]; relevant documentation is part of Exhibit C-1 (at
Tabs 26 & 27).
Respondent’s Evidence
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal [TS
70-137; TS 141-225].
undated Statement
made by the
was admitted without
objection as
Exhibit R-1
[TS 80]; and which is also included in
Complainant’s Exhibit C-1 (at Tab 32);
Supplementary Statement
dated 5 November 2010,
was admitted without objection, as
Exhibit R-2
Code of Professional Conduct
of the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia
(“PSA”) was admitted without objection as Respondent’s
Exhibit R-3
Mr. John Bell
, Registered Pharmacist, dated 1 February 2011,
tendered by the Respondent, was admitted without objection, as
[TS 101]. Called by the Respondent, Mr. Bell’s evidence
addressed his visit on 30 December 2010, to the Respondent’s current
pharmacy at Emu Heights (“Emu Heights pharmacy”) when he interviewed
the Respondent and conducted an audit of the procedures
and protocols then in
place at the pharmacy [TS 101-105].
Additional Evidence:
conclusion of the Respondent’s case, the Tribunal invited his Counsel to
consider given the absence of any testimonial-type
evidence concerning the
Respondent including from colleagues or others, not unusually given in
professional disciplinary proceedings—whether
he wished to have an
opportunity to consider any such evidence [TS 228].
Respondent accepted the Tribunal’s invitation and the Complainant did not
object to an opportunity being given to the Respondent
provided it was given
copies of any such character evidence and an opportunity to respond in writing
to the Tribunal [TS 285-286].
Accordingly,
the Tribunal set a timetable for the provision of any such evidence to the
Tribunal and to the Complainant and for any
response in writing by the
Complainant to the Tribunal [TS 287]. It was anticipated that the Inquiry would
not need to reconvene
unless otherwise indicated.
compliance with the Tribunal’s timetable the following documents were
received at the Tribunal Registry, from the Respondent’s
solicitors, each
of which was accompanied by a copy of the solicitors’ letter requesting a
character reference together with
a copy of the Complaint. All documents were
then provided to Tribunal Members:
Letter dated
2 March 2011
Mr. Peter Panos
, Registered Pharmacist, to the
Respondent’s solicitors, concerning his employment of the Respondent as a
“casual pharmacy
student” for 15 months from
4 June 1997 to 20
September 1998
; accompanied by a copy of letter dated
21 September
written by Mr. Panos, to the same effect concerning such period of
employment—admitted as
Exhibit R-5
Letter dated
2 March, 2011
Fr. Antonios Kaldas
, Parish Priest, Archangel
Michael & St. Bishoy Coptic Orthodox Church, Mount Druitt, concerning his
association with the Respondent,
admitted as
Exhibit R-6
Letter dated
2 March 2011
Mr. Magdy Andrawes
, concerning his association
with the Respondent as a friend and church associate, admitted as
e-mailed letter
dated 1 March 2011
Dr. Atef Gabrael
Registered Medical Practitioner and friend of the Respondent’s family, who
had known the Respondent from childhood, admitted
Exhibit R-8
Complainant
responded to the above documents by letter from Ms. Karen Mobbs,
Director of Proceedings, Health Care Complaints Commission, dated
, received at the Tribunal Registry and provided to Tribunal Members.
The letter included submissions as to how the Tribunal should
approach and
consider character evidence and cited authority as to the use of such character
evidence in disciplinary proceedings:
admitted as
Exhibit C-6
Respondent graduated in 1999 with a Bachelor of Pharmacy degree from the
University of Sydney and was registered in New South
Wales as a Pharmacist on 29
November 1999—
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
(“AHPRA”): Confirmation of Registration Status, dated 14 February,
2011 (Exhibit C-1 / Tab 2).
2000 and 2002 the Respondent practised as a ‘pharmacist in charge’
in a total of seven pharmacies in the Sydney
metropolitan area (Exhibit
the period 2002 to 2010 the Respondent at various times, held a pecuniary
interest in a total of nine (9) pharmacies of which he
was the sole proprietor
of four of them:
Xtreme Chemist
, Blacktown;
Xtreme Chemist
Toongabbie; and the Pharmacies relevant to the Complaint,
Burwood (“Xtreme Burwood”) and
, Burwood (“Metro Burwood”).
in the above nine pharmacies is the Respondent’s Emu Heights pharmacy, of
which he is the sole proprietor, which commenced
as a new pharmacy, in December
(although the Respondent’s evidence was
“...the first day of August... [TS 200 / L 16; C/F also, “...opened
August” [TS 199 / L40]) the Respondent as sole proprietor, opened a new
pharmacy, Xtreme
Burwood, also referred to elsewhere by the Respondent as
“Xtreme Superstore Pharmacy” e.g. at Paragraph 27, Statement,
Exhibit R-2. When opened, it did not have an
under relevant Commonwealth legislation and was therefore, not authorised to
supply medications prescribed on the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
November 2006
, the Respondent became the sole proprietor of Metro Burwood
purchased initially with a view to closing it down and amalgamating
both pharmacies and relocating Metro’s approval number
...[for PBS
approval purposes]...
to the Xtreme Superstore Pharmacy
(Respondent, Supplementary Statement, Exhibit R-2 at [27]).
Respondent closed Metro Burwood in about
June-July 2007
. In the period
between the purchase of Metro Burwood and the allocation of a PBS Approval
Number to Xtreme Burwood, any prescriptions
for PBS items presented to Xtreme
Burwood were taken according to the Respondent’s evidence, to and
dispensed by, Metro Burwood
and delivered to the respective patients, a process
the respondent described as “...
a nightmare
...” [TS 205].
is not apparent from the evidence, how, where and by whom, any PBS prescriptions
presented to Xtreme Burwood were dispensed in
the approximately three to four
month period between its opening and the Respondent’s purchase of Metro
November 2006
Respondent purchased the majority of stock for Xtreme Burwood from Sigma, the
initial (“opening”) order being delivered
in July 2006
(Supplementary Statement: Exhibit R-2 at [11]). A protracted dispute between the
Respondent and Sigma followed, concerning
Respondent’s claims of short
supply of ordered items by Sigma. Ultimately, the $1.9 Million debt Sigma
claimed as owing to
it by the Respondent, was reduced by approximately $1.3
Deed of Release & Settlement
between the parties was
executed on 17 April 2007 by which Sigma agreed to accept the Respondent’s
payment (of approximately
$600,000) made without admission of liability, in full
settlement and final satisfaction of the dispute: (Supplementary Statement:
Exhibit R-2; Deed: Exhibit C-4).
above dispute was raised during the Tribunal’s Inquiry, relevant to the
Particulars in Paragraph 10 of the Complaint, concerning
quantity and relevant
records, of MF received by the Respondent from his suppliers.
Respondent sold Xtreme Burwood in
September 2007
. During his ownership of
Xtreme Burwood (August 2006 to September 2007) and Metro Burwood (November
2006-June /July 2007) he maintained
ownership of the
Xtreme Chemist
Xtreme Chemist Toongabbie
until December 2008 when he
sold them. (Supplementary Statement: Exhibit R-2 at [6].
Particulars Paragraphs 1 to 5 inclusive,
relate to the Respondent’s
dispensing of MF on three occasions, to Dr. X who presented on each occasion, a
prescription written
by her, for MF (and other items) on her practice
letterhead, with herself named as patient and her private (home) address.
to his evidence, the Respondent accepted the medical
practitioner’s assurance that the MF was for her (and eight to 10 other
practitioners in the practice) to hand out to patients at a pain clinic, which
she claimed, was conducted at her Concord practice.
Particulars 6 and 7
concern two of the above prescriptions Dr. X presented
to the Respondent (on 15 August 2006 and 19 September 2006) on each of which
quantity she originally ordered, was amended (increased) by the Respondent whose
evidence was that each amendment was made by
him at the prescriber’s
request (Statement: Exhibit R-1 at [22] and [26]), “...
to save her
” (Exhibit R-2 at [22]). Respondent also amended the date on the
latter prescription.
Particulars 8, 9 and 11
relate to breaches of certain clauses of the PTG
Regulation with respect to inventory and other recording obligations upon
pharmacists
for Drugs of Addiction.
Particulars 10
, concern Respondent’s failure to keep dispensing and
other records in respect of “...at least...” 490 packets of
ordered by the Respondent between
August 2006 and January 2007
dispute between Sigma and the Respondent has already been described, above, in
relation to these Particulars.
in Exhibit C-1, (at Tab 2), is the AHPRA confirmation of the Respondent’s
registration status, admitted into evidence
without objection. It includes a
notation concerning “
Undertakings
the Respondent’s registration was subject from 29 August 2007, requiring
Respondent to complete a specified
number of hours of professional education
yearly, for each of three years: 2007-2009; and also required him to hold
membership of
the PSA for at least three years. The Tribunal sought assistance
from the parties as to how if at all, it should address these
Undertakings
(C/F TS 58, 59; 140-141; 187-189). In response to questions
from his Counsel, the Respondent told the Tribunal of the genesis of
Undertakings and assured it that he had complied with them according to their
terms (C/f TS 189-190). The subject matter of the
Undertakings is not relevant
to the Complaint before the Tribunal and accordingly, the Tribunal does not take
them into account in
any way in reaching its conclusions. The Complainant made
no submissions on this matter.
from what was in evidence before the Tribunal relevant to the Complaint, there
was no evidence concerning the Respondent before
or since, the relevant period
of the Complaint, August 2006 to August 2007.
has been made above, to Exhibit R-4, a report of an assessment of the
Respondent’s Emu Heights Pharmacy by Mr. John
Bell, on 30 December
Investigation by Pharmaceutical Services Branch
in Exhibit C-1 (Tabs 13 to 23A inclusive) describe the PSB investigation of Dr.
X, of her prescribing of MF and other medications
and of other matters relevant
to the Complaint.
PSB became aware in 2002 that Dr. X was obtaining large amounts of
100mg ampoules (classified as a Drug of Addiction) for the
purpose of self-administration. Her authority as a registered medical
practitioner, to possess, supply and prescribe Drugs of Addiction was
subsequently withdrawn pursuant to the
Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Act
1966 effective from 14 February 2002. The PSB referred her to the
Medical Board
(“the Medical Board”), her registration was
temporarily suspended and she was placed on the Medical Board’s
Impaired Practitioners’ Program
X was added to a list of those practitioners whose authority concerning Drugs of
Addiction had been withdrawn. In the usual way,
this list was made available to
registered pharmacists in New South Wales. Dr. X was listed as at 4 August
2002, a Burwood pharmacist notified PSB that Dr. X was self-prescribing
tablets and MF after that pharmacist noted the appearance of Dr.
X’s name on the list of medical practitioners whose Drug of
authority had been withdrawn. This information was referred by PSB to the
Medical Board. In 2004, another Burwood pharmacist
notified PSB that Dr. X was
self-prescribing MF after noticing her name on the above list of withdrawn
authorities. Again, the PSB
notified the Medical Board.
is and was in the relevant period of the Complaint, a
pursuant to the PTG regulation. MF is and was not at the relevant
Drug of Addiction
. MF tablets each contain and did at the
relevant time,
codeine phosphate
30mg (which as a single ingredient is a
Drug of Addiction), together with
paracetamol
2007, a community pharmacist notified PSB that Dr. X was presenting
prescriptions for MF. On further investigation PSB found that
Dr. X was visiting
multiple pharmacies in the Burwood, Epping and Carlingford areas during
2006-2007 and obtaining large quantities
of MF by presenting prescriptions made
out in her own name as the ‘patient’. Following PSB informing the
Medical Board
of this information, Dr. X’s registration was suspended in
its investigation in March 2007, PSB found that MF was dispensed to Dr. X by
Xtreme Burwood and that Dr. X was obtaining MF
from other pharmacies although in
lesser quantities that that dispensed at Xtreme Burwood.
4 May 2007, Dr. X voluntarily removed her name from the Register of Medical
Practitioners for New South Wales. Counsel for
the Complainant informed the
Tribunal that
Dr. X was now deceased
part of its investigation of the Respondent, PSB obtained prescriptions written
by Dr. X for MF and presented to Xtreme Burwood
in the period August 2006 to 20
January 2007; other materials relevant to the Complaint before the Tribunal
included documentary
materials of two suppliers—Sigma and
Sanofi-Aventis—from each of whom the Respondent / Xtreme Burwood had
ordered MF.
Before the Tribunal the Respondent disputed having received the
quantities appearing on the Sigma invoices. All of these materials
were admitted
without objection and form part of Exhibit C-1.
PSB materials included in Exhibit C-1 are those obtained by Ms. Kim Dolan
together with statements made by Mr. Battye (PSB)
and Ms. Dolan, each of whom
gave evidence to the Tribunal.
Evidence of Mr. Battye (PSB)
Battye interviewed Dr. X on two occasions in 2002 and again in 2007 at which
final interview he and his PSB colleague, were concerned
at her appearance and
Battye confirmed that PSB had become aware that Dr. X had presented during 2006
to 2007, to a number of pharmacies in the Burwood,
Epping and Carlingford areas
seeking supplies of MF; and that the pharmacies at Concord were checked by PSB
as Dr. X then practised
at Concord.
to Mr. Battye’s recollection, the Concord pharmacies investigated by PSB,
had not supplied Dr.X with anything “...
because they were very much
aware of her status, having her Schedule 8
...[i.e. Drugs of
Addiction]...
authority withdrawn and they made that very clear when I called
.” [TS 26].
Respondent’s
Counsel sought Mr. Battye’s view as to the reasonableness of the
Respondent’s acceptance of what Dr.
X told him was the purpose of the MF
for which she had written the prescription and presented it to him:
Q. Mr Sayegh's position in essence is that it was
reasonable for him to accept every word that the doctor said. Do you have a
view about that?
A. I'd have to say first of all that she
was obviously not telling the truth to me on a number of occasions and I know
from 2002 when I approached her at that stage, as is often the case,
it took a while to break through to get her to admit that she
Pethidine herself. Then when I saw her also in 2002, when she told me that
Mersyndol Forte that she was obtaining was
for her son for the treatment of his
migraines, I did not believe that either and after seeing her in 2007 again I
did not believe
what she was saying so unfortunately because of her addiction
she was wont to not tell the truth.
Battye described to the Tribunal a certain ‘culture’ amongst some
pharmacists that a doctor must never be queried,
which the PSB “...
into all the time and...it is an issue for the pharmacy profession as a
” but despite this, he was surprised that other pharmacists
dispensed medications to Dr. X, but “...
on the other hand she went to
some pharmacists who straight away recognised it as an issue
these numbered “...
at least probably about half a dozen
were concerned enough to contact the authorities. He was uncertain how many
pharmacists Dr. X had approached “...
it might have been 30...I
don’t know...
what we do know is there was handful of
pharmacists where...
...was able to obtain quantities, not 1,000 or
800 but she was able to obtain 100 or 200 at a time
was Mr. Battye’s view that even with the first prescription
wrote and presented to the Respondent, for five (5) packets of MF (i.e.100
tablets) [Particulars, Paragraph.1] he should have
been suspicious immediately
and he gave his reason as follows:
First of all, the doctor is self-prescribing, which is
contrary to the policy of the New South Wales Medical Board. Their policy
quite clear. It has been published in their newsletters that GPs, any
registered medical practitioner, should have their own
GP to look after their
own health care requirements and self-prescribing as far as the Board is
concerned, I can tell you that was
their view. It is not appropriate. When you
add in the fact that these medications are subject to abuse and dependency that
another dimension.
Battye rejected the Respondent’s explanation put to him by his Counsel in
the context of what Dr. X said to the Respondent,
that the “9 or 10”
doctors working at her practice would appropriately dispense the MF to patients
of the practice. It
was Mr. Battye’s view in effect, that the Respondent
should not have accepted the explanation given by Dr. X even with such
as the Respondent claimed to have had, as to the nature of the practice and the
number of doctors working at it. In response
to Counsel’s request to
Mr.Battye to explain his reasons, Mr. Battye said:
A. Well, my knowledge of Mersyndol Forte and I saw the
implication that this was for pain relief and there was a number of doctors
there, indicates to me a lack of knowledge of treatment of pain by pain
clinics, even if there was a pain clinic there, which I
doubt, in the first
place. To hand out a card of 10 tablets or so to patients, presumably free of
charge, is not the way pain
clinics operate. What a pain clinic does, pain
clinics resolve chronic pain and provide advice generally back to GPs on the
of this pain. There is a comprehensive plan to address this. If
medication is going to be prescribed, it is prescribed generally
long-term, not
just for three or four or five days of treatment, or two or three days of
treatment. It is given long-term. There
would be no reason why even if it was
a pain clinic, why they wouldn't write a prescription for a patient. To have a
doctor handing
out a strip of tablets unlabelled presumably - I think she told
him she handed them out without proper records, is contrary to good
practice and doesn't make sense. For a doctor to be actually purchasing drugs
to hand out to patients for no charge, how
often does that happen in pharmacy
The only occasions that I am aware of is where there has been something
underhand going on by the doctor concerned. Doctors don't
buy drugs to hand
out to patients. They issue prescriptions to patients.
asked about a “
” (of medications) sometimes
given to patients by doctors where such a bag has been received by doctors from
manufacturers,
without the name of a patient on it and whether in effect, a
comparison could be drawn between such an item and the dispensing of
medications
to Dr. X for un-named patients of her (and colleagues’) practice, Mr.
Battye responded:
A. Certainly they are for a particular purpose and they are
used as a starter pack which is labelled correctly. It is in TGA approved
packaging. It comes to the doctor free of charge, so the doctor is not paying
for it and it begs believability that doctors go
around spending almost $1,000
of their own money. It just doesn't work like that.
” referred to by Mr. Battye,
is the Commonwealth Government
Therapeutic Goods Administration.
Battye was referring to evidence that Dr. X paid the Respondent in cash, in
varying amounts according to quantity of MF dispensed
Battye was asked about the calculation of the period for which the quantities of
MF dispensed by the Respondent would last when
the patient for whom it was
prescribed, given the recommended daily dose of eight (8) tablets—in
particular, whether that calculation
would change if it was accepted that there
were “several doctors at the pain clinic”. Mr. Battye
A. If the assumption was that those
tablets were dispersed amongst a number of doctors then I suppose yes, you
would change that.
However, I mean when I spoke to Mr Abdul Malek at that
time, what I was relating to was his supply of 200 tablets on 1/12 and pointing
out to him that with the assumption that when a prescription is made out it has
a patient's name on it, if the patient is taking
those tablets and that's the
intention of the law when the patient's name is on the prescription, if the
patient was taking those
tablets and 1,000 tablets were dispensed on 19/9 then
at a rate of 250 tablets per month, which is the maximum dose, recommended
of eight tablets per day, that should last until 19 January 2007.
Q. Mr Battye, Mr Sayegh's version is basically what I have
already suggested to you before lunch which is that he was told that
worked at a particular pain clinic where there were 9 to 10 doctors. I can't
find the reference exactly. The question is,
if you accept - if Mr Sayegh
accepted what he was told by a doctor, in other words if Mr Sayegh
accepted that the doctor worked
in a pain clinic with 9 to 10 other doctors
supplying Mersyndol?
A. Supplying
Q. If a doctor had obtained the Mersyndol from
the chemist and was going to on-supply it to other doctors to go to other
then isn't the point when that supply ran out
irrelevant?
A. Well, if that's what was the proposition,
yes, that would be correct, yes.
Mr. Malek, mentioned above by Mr. Battye, was a pharmacist employed at
Xtreme Burwood.
channelling
” of prescriptions—whereby in
effect, as the Tribunal understands it, a medical practitioner sends off or
directs, a prescription
to a particular pharmacy for dispensing—was raised
by Respondent’s Counsel during his cross-examination of Mr.Battye
referred to it as a “doctor issue”, not one for the PSB given the
particular legislation it administers. Mr. Battye
told the Tribunal of some
complaints that had come to the PSB from patients of the Respondent’s
father (a medical practitioner)
sent to one of his son’s pharmacies for
dispensing of the father’s prescriptions. But as this issue was not
to the PSB, the complaints were referred to the Medical Board. [TS 30]
later evidence to the Tribunal, the Respondent referred to this issue of
“channelling” as a matter relevant to his
decision to dispense the
MF prescriptions to Dr. X. Having been told of Dr. X’s intention to use
the dispensed MF to give directly
to patients, he was apprehensive that by
receiving individual prescriptions directly from Dr. X, he would be involved in
‘channelling’,
re-examination of Mr. Battye, Complainant’s Counsel referred to questions
put to him by Respondent’s Counsel concerning
the relevancy how long the
amount of MF supplied would last, where it was to be on-supplied by Dr. X and
her practice colleagues,
Q. What do you say to
that question in circumstances where the script was not made out to 9 or 10
doctors but made out to one doctor?
A. Well, that's the
point of whole thing. A prescription by law is made out and it is in the
regulation that the patient's name
is on the prescription, so the only
assumption by a pharmacist should be that the patient's name on the
prescription is the person
who is going to take those tablets. A pharmacist
handling a prescription is not wholesaling drugs for disposition by some other
person. I mean, if this was allowed to continue, this sort of situation, it
would be absolutely chaotic. You wouldn't know which
patients were getting
what. Furthermore, the doctor, if it was...
who was then
dispersing tablets to other doctors, again she would be wholesaling. Again,
she is not a licensed wholesaler. She
never was. Doctors can obtain drugs
from wholesalers. Almost certainly a clinic of that size would have a
wholesale account with
one of the wholesale companies. There are companies
that specialise in supplying doctors surgeries such as Evos, Vital Medical
Supplies. That's what they do. If there was a genuine need for a doctor to
obtain medications to supply patients, even in the
circumstances allegedly
explained by
...[Dr. X]...
the proper course would be for those doctors
to obtain those drugs by wholesale, not from a retail pharmacist.
to a question from Complainant’s Counsel about the assumption put to him
by Counsel for the Respondent, that he accepted
and believed what Dr. X. told
him, Mr. Battye told the Tribunal that “...from his position...”
this was not satisfactory
for a pharmacist, to meet their legal and / or ethical
obligations. When asked why, Mr. Battye responded:
A. Well, as I just said before, the prescription is made out
very deliberately under the regulation in the patient's name so the
has always got to be by the pharmacist that a prescription presented at a
pharmacy, any such dispensing based upon that
prescription is for the patient.
Battye told the Tribunal that if a pharmacist is told something differently
(that is, such as Dr. X told the Respondent) when
the person presents a
prescription, further inquiries definitely need to be made.
answer to a question from the Chairperson, Mr. Battye confirmed that the PSB was
not given access to relevant records of the regimen
by the Medical Board.
Chairperson raised with Mr.Battye, aspects of the “pain clinic” and
what according to the Respondent’s statement,
Dr. X told him about it
prior to dispensing of the MF to her:
Q. And there were, I think, on one report or one statement
from the Respondent, this was at tab 32 of exhibit C1, where
[(sic.)]...
employed eight other general medical practitioners and
then today I think it has been mentioned perhaps in the same vein 9 or 10
doctors. Was there ever any evidence obtained by your department about the
actual practice and who was there?
A. I can say this that when I
first saw...
in 2002 at Parramatta Road, Burwood, she was just
one of a number of GPs in that practice. Before I spoke to her I did speak to
another senior doctor in the practice. I think he might have been the practice
manager or the senior doctor in the practice and
I haven't got it documented
but I can recall that at that time she was just an employed GP at that
Later on when I visited the Concord Medical
Practice in 2002 and again in 2007, without knowing - I knew nothing about this
clinic until I read these papers - I would have gained the view that this
was just simply a GP practice and she was a number of
doctors working there.
There was no - by speaking to the staff there, there was no impression that I
got that she was owning the
practice and running the practice. The impression
I got was she was just simply one of the people who was employed there.
the Complainant nor the Respondent, provided any confirmatory, factual evidence
concerning the issue of the ‘pain clinic’
to the Tribunal during the
Evidence of Ms. Dolan (PSB)
Dolan confirmed the origin of those documents included in Exhibit C-1, relevant
to her role in the investigation of the matters
the subject of the Complaint
(C/F documents at Tabs 17, 18, 18A, 20, 21 and 22 of the Exhibit C-1).
Dolan told the Tribunal she compared the series of 10 Tables (Exhibit C-3)
prepared by the Complainant with the Respondent’s
Drug Registers (for
recording relevant particulars of Drugs of Addiction—also known as
“Schedule 8” or “S8”
drugs) reproduced in Exhibit C-1
(at Tab 21 [Xtreme Burwood] and Tab 21 [Metro Burwood]); she was satisfied that
the above Tables
(Exhibit C-3) accurately reflected the anomalies identified in
the Drug Registers. These anomalies relate to the Particulars in Paragraph
the Complaint.
to admission of the above 10 Tables into evidence (Exhibit C-3),
Complainant’s Counsel responding to a question from Respondent’s
Counsel, assured him that these materials were tendered in support of the
Particulars in Paragraph 11 of the Complaint and emphasised
in effect, that for
a breach of Clause 112 of the PTG Regulation, purpose is not relevant; if Clause
112 is not complied with then
this constitutes a breach of the Regulation.
response to a question from Respondent’s Counsel concerning what he
described as the “Sigma issue” (relevant
to Particulars 10 of the
Complaint) which “...
according to Mr. Sayegh
that he was not provided with all the stock that he was anticipating when he
sent away for it
” and what if any, regard Ms. Dolan had to this
particular issue during her investigations, she responded:
A. I simply contacted the two suppliers that I knew of, which
was Sanofi-Aventis and Sigma, and obtained the invoices for those
products, to
find out what the total supply of that drug in question, Mersyndol Forte, was
for that pharmacy. There was a credit
for, I think, 40 boxes, off the top of my
head that was given on, it looks like 23/8 and my total obtained from those
summary, based on the records she had obtained, Ms. Dolan concluded that in the
period from 18 August 2006 to and including, 22
December 2006 (and allowing for
a credited amount of 40 packets on 23 August 2006) the Respondent purchased 570
packets of MF from
Sigma and 200 packets from Sanofi-Aventis making a total of
770 packets purchased.
Dolan ascertained that in the period commencing on 8 August to and including 20
January 2007, Xtreme Burwood dispensed a total
of 122 packets of MF.
Ms. Dolan concluded, based on her investigations, that 648 packets of MF
remained unaccounted for by any records maintained by the
Respondent / Xtreme
Evidence of Ms. Jones (Sigma Pharmaceuticals
Jones gave evidence to the Tribunal by telephone during which she referred to
her Statement (Exhibit C-1, Tab 26) and described
the system currently used by
Sigma concerning supply and credit procedures and referred also to past
procedures.
reference to invoices (Attachment A, to her Statement) Ms. Jones confirmed the
amount of MF ordered from and delivered by, Sigma
to Xtreme Burwood between
August 2006 and January 2007 relevant to invoices dated 18 August 2006 up to and
including 22 December
2006, as 610 packets less a credited amount of 40 packets
(Credit Note # 1413665, 23 August 2006) as a net figure of 570 packets.
figure is the same as that calculated by Ms. Dolan (PSB).
paragraph 11 of her Statement Ms. Jones described how in the second half of 2006
and in early 2007, the Respondent lodged a claim
“damaged...[and]...short sent...[stock]...” totalling $265,000. At
paragraph 12 (Ibid.) five invoices were listed
relating to the
Respondent’s claim for “short sent” MF, two of which relate to
the relevant period in paragraph
10 of the Complaint—August 2006 to
January 2007, the first invoice is dated 16 August 2006 (60 packets MF short
sent) and the
second, 24 November 2006 (60 packets MF short sent), making a
total of 120 packets short sent.
her Statement (at paragraph 13) Ms. Jones indicates that 490 packets would be
the number of packets “...actually delivered...”
in the relevant
period. The Tribunal assumes that Ms. Jones deducted the figure of 120 packets
from the total of 610 packets delivered,
leaving her net figure of 490 packets
but it seems, without taking into account the credited amount of 40 packets of
MF to which
she refers at paragraph 10 of her Statement.
asked by Respondent’s Counsel to describe the normal process for ensuring
that the “tear off credit slips”
(given by a pharmacy customer to
the Sigma driver who delivers ordered items) are actually passed on to
Sigma’s Credit Department,
Ms. Jones responded:
A. It is our normal process for paperwork that is handed back
to a driver to be given to our credit department. That is normal
and, sorry, I
am telling you that is the normal protocol that happens. I can't tell you what
- I can't tell you the information
that I don't have the proof of. In
Mr Sayegh's case I don't have proof to say that he definitely handed
those documents to the
driver and that the driver definitely handed them on. I
can only tell you what the process is as a whole.....
...The normal process is, or what we do advise our customers is, if they
have not heard back that their credit has been processed
within a couple of
weeks - sorry, I will step back a little bit. Our normal credit process is the
customer applies for a credit
within five days of receiving the stock. The
credit process would be by returning the tear off section in your invoice which
have stated in my statement. Once that documentation is provided to our
credit department, they work through that documentation.
If there is an
instance that they need to do a stock check based on a short send, and they do
that stock check, as part of the
investigation and if there is a credit, the
credit is processed. From a perspective of a customer we always educate our
to follow up on a regular basis if anything hasn't been processed and
we do an investigation at that point to see if there is anything
outstanding
with our credit department.
reference to paragraph 15 of her Statement, Ms. Jones was asked by
Respondent’s Counsel what she meant by her saying that
Respondent’s claims for short-sent items “...were vigorously
investigated by Sigma...” she responded:
A. The reason I put that in there is because I was unable to
find proof of delivery for all of those items. In our normal process,
have stated earlier in my document that when a driver does the delivery he gets
a signature from the customer. Obviously,
given the time that had passed since
this, since 2006 until when I looked at it in 2009, and I'm sure when they were
doing the credit
processes they were unable to provide a proof of delivery in
each instance with regard to every box. Therefore I cannot state
Mr Sayegh received every single box, because I haven't seen those proofs of
the outstanding 490 packets, Respondent’s Counsel put the following
question to Ms. Jones to which she responded:
Q. Can you say whether it is possible that any of the
outstanding 490 Mersyndol boxes were not delivered?
say that. I can't say that 100 percent.
Q. You can't say that 100 percent but can you say it is
A. It is possible. Our normal process would be that - not would
be - our normal process is if we have a complaint or a query from
customer, the Sigma process is, as part of our credit, should we have a
complaint from a customer with regards to a particular
product, then we always
undertake stock checks on that particular product. We do regular stock checks
on our stock levels and stock
counts to maintain as accurate as possible stock
levels on all of our lines.
re-examination, Complainant’s Counsel referred to Attachment
“B” of Ms. Jones’ Statement, specifically
paragraph 14, and
asked the following question to which Ms. Jones responded as follows:
Q. Importantly, what you have done at annexure B, and this is
referred to in paragraph 14, you have attached the spreadsheets which
the claims made by Mr Sayegh for short sends, correct?
is correct, yes.
Q. And they are a representation of all the claims that Mr Sayegh
submitted to Sigma?
A. Sigma, yes.
Q. For alleged short
A. That's correct.
Q. Which would presumably then include all the claims made by
Mr Sayegh for short sends of Mersyndol Forte?
Q. And as a result of that process, and you don't need to get into the
minutiae of it, that was the - I withdraw that - those were
the documents
against which Sigma worked in terms of ascertaining the veracity or otherwise
of the claims for short sends; correct?
A. That's correct.
Q. The ultimate outcome of the proceedings was that an agreement was
reached between Mr Sayegh and Sigma that was the subject of
A. That's correct.
Tribunal notes in this context, that the Respondent did not challenge the total
quantity of 200 packets of MF supplied to Xtreme
Burwood by Sanofi-Aventis.
Evidence of Mr. Francis Payne (Registered
Pharmacist)
Payne’s Report (undated), received by the Complainant on 29 December 2010,
was admitted without objection, as part of Exhibit
C-1 (at Tab 38). The
Complainant’s letter of request to Mr. Payne, forms part of Exhibit C-1
(at Tab 37). Mr. Payne appeared
before the Tribunal. Apart from Mr.
Payne’s evidence there was no other independent, ‘peer review’
evidence before
the Tribunal.
Payne is a registered and practising pharmacist with over 40 years experience as
a community pharmacy owner. He currently practises
and as an accredited pharmacist conducting Medication Reviews.
Complainant asked Mr. Payne to review the materials provided to him and to
comment on the alleged conduct set out in the Complaint.
He was specifically
requested in answering questions about the alleged conduct to tell the
Complainant as to:
The standard
reasonably expected of a pharmacist of an equivalent level of training or
experience at the time of the alleged conduct;
Whether the
conduct in relation to each issue met the standards or was below or
significantly below the standard reasonably expected;
conduct was significantly below
the standard reasonably expected, whether
the conduct invited Mr. Payne’s criticism and to what degree.
respect of the Particulars of Complaint numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10, Mr.
Payne’s view was that the conduct in each, was
significantly below the
relevant standard and invited his strong criticism.
respect of the Particulars of Complaint numbered 6 and 7 (each concerning the
Respondent’s amendment of Dr. X’s prescription),
Mr. Payne’s
assessment was the conduct in each, fell below the relevant standard but that
the conduct did not attract his criticism
as the amendment of the prescriptions
“...was apparently done at the doctor’s direction.” (Report,
to Particulars of Complaint numbered 8, Mr. Payne’s view was that the
conduct fell below the relevant standard and attracted
his strong criticism.
Payne expressed the view that the conduct in paragraph 9 of the Particulars of
Complaint fell below the relevant standard and
attracted his criticism.
Payne also assessed the relevant conduct by reference to the PSA
Professional
Practice Standards 2006
(admitted as part of Exhibit C-1, Tab 40) and
concluded that the conduct in Particulars of Complaint numbered 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
a departure from the standards therein—Comprehensive Pharmacy
breaches of the PTG Regulation were noted by Mr. Payne in his report. He also
expressed the view that the requested supply
of a large quantity of MF
a product...capable of causing addiction...should alert a
...[who]...
should make every effort to determine the validity
of the request
...[which]...
in this case it appears...this was not
.” (Report, page 10).
also included in his report a view that “...
the fact that the doctor
had had her authority to prescribe Schedule 8 drugs withdrawn should have raised
alarm bells.
” (Report, page 10) He expressed his opinion that despite
the Respondent’s claim that he did not know of such withdrawn
he should have known.
Respondent’s
Counsel asked a question of Mr. Payne concerning Dr. X’s withdrawn
authority to which he responded:
A. Well, the sheer quantity of the tablets would have aroused
suspicion and would have led to looking at the list of those doctors
disqualified, but it is my view that a pharmacist should be aware of doctors
who are practising in the close vicinity of the pharmacy,
whether they are on
the list or not.
Q. I'm not expert exactly in the Burwood area but I understand that
there are over 400 or so, 430 doctors in the two to three kilometre
around Burwood. Is it your point that you would expect a pharmacist to know
which out of all of those doctors were on this
list of people with withdrawn
authorities?
A. Yes. It doesn't take very long to scan the list
which is supplied regularly.
Q. Mr Payne, you mentioned that the sheer quantity of medication should
have aroused suspicion?
also your position where a doctor walks into a pharmacy and asks for five packs
of Mersyndol, in other words 100 tablets?
A. On the presentation of
a prescription I take it?
A. Yes, but
it's an unusual amount and would require further thought before
dispensing.
Q. Is it your view, Mr Payne, that 100 tablets is an unusual
A. Of Mersyndol Forte, yes.
Q. Because I understood that when you spoke about large quantities you
were talking about the large quantities referred to in your
report. I withdraw
that. I understood you to be talking about the latest or the last presentation
by Dr X when she, in September
2006, was seeking the amount of 50
A. Well, there were several occasions. The
five packets on 8 August, which is 100 tablets, while of concern would not be
much concern as the 10 packets supplied on 15 August, only about a week
later. That would have certainly aroused my suspicion.
Q. Thank you. Mr Sayegh will indicate to the Tribunal that the
doctor informed him that she worked at a particular pain clinic
where there were 9 to 10 doctors or so working in that practice and
Mr Sayegh will indicate that he was aware of the
particular clinic in
Concord. The question for you, Mr Payne, is in that circumstance when a doctor
arrives at a pharmacy, makes
representations to that effect, whether they
should be suspicious of any of the numbers of Mersyndol that were being
A. I'm sorry, what's your point?
My point is why can't a pharmacist rely on the doctor when the doctor says that
she works at a particular pain clinic in Concord
that he knows of and therefore
he has some understanding of
where she is coming from, why he can't
rely on what the doctor says. That's the first
A. Because the pharmacist is supplying this
medication to unknown patients. He has no way of knowing whether they are
the proper instructions of pharmaceutical care. Many times
pharmacists dispense prescriptions which are collected by friends, neighbours,
relatives, but the pharmacist has the name and address of the patient and can
Payne was asked and responded to, the following question:
Q. Do you agree then, Mr Payne, that it was acceptable for
Mr Sayegh to accept at face value what the doctor said on the first
A. Possibly, but that's discounting the
situation that the doctor had had her authority to prescribe drugs of
addiction withdrawn.
Respondent’s
Counsel asked Mr. Payne a series of questions (commencing at TS 43) about the
Respondent’s concern to avoid
“channelling” if in the
circumstances of Dr. X’s presentation and her declared intention for use
of the prescribed
MF, he had in effect, required each individual patient to come
to his pharmacy and whether this was “...an appropriate concern”
Payne responded:
A. Yes, it is of concern. I mean, if you take the term
channeling in its broadest sense, supplying of large quantities of medication
to a doctor who is going to on-supply it to other patients is in fact a form of
channeling.
re-examination by Complainant’s Counsel, Mr. Payne was asked the following
questions on “channelling” to
which he responded:
Q. Could I ask you your view on this: if Mr Sayegh's
concern was one of potential script channeling, what do you say as to the
solution simply being a refusal on the part of Mr Sayegh to fill the script
or dispense the script that had been issued by Dr X?
that was always - that course was always open to him but the fact that the
doctor was presenting herself on the prescription
as the patient and was in
fact not the patient would have been cause for concern.
Q. And one could have avoided any concerns about script channeling
simply by saying I'm not prepared to dispense this script?
Payne expressed his view that the relevant prescriptions for MF being
self-prescribed (by Dr. X) would concern him as a pharmacist;
and that if the MF
was declared as being for her “pain clinic” he would have expected
the clinic’s address to be
on the prescription, not her private, home
Complainant’s
Counsel questioned Mr. Payne about instructions for the medication prescribed by
Q. Would it be of concern to you that a script such as this is
presented to you where there are no instructions as to use of Mersyndol
identified?
A. Well, yes, but given the fact, you know,
that on the face of it, it is for the doctor's own use I can perhaps
understand no
directions.
The Tribunal notes however, that
each of the three prescriptions (Exhibit C-1, Tab 7) for MF presented by Dr. X
and dispensed by
the Respondent, in fact did have directions for use written on
” signifying ‘one tablet to be
taken when necessary’. Mr. Payne addressed this aspect in response to a
from the Tribunal (at TS 49).
Respondent’s evidence
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal and was cross-examined over a
considerable period.
Respondent’s two statements were without objection from the Complainant,
in evidence as Exhibits R-1 (undated) and R-2
(5 November 2010).
Essentially,
the Respondent admitted the supply of MF to Dr. X in the amounts and on the
dates particularised in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3
of the Particulars of
Complaint, self-prescribed in her own name as patient on each of the relevant
prescriptions bearing her private
(home) address. The Respondent did not concede
that the supply of MF on 15 August and 19 September 2006 breached Clause 53 of
PTG Regulation as particularised in Paragraph 3 of the Particulars.
Respondent conceded the particulars in
paragraph 4
of the Complaint, that
he had accepted the explanation Dr. X gave him for the self-prescription of such
large quantities of MF but
he did not concede that he had failed to make further
appropriate enquiries.
Respondent conceded the particulars set out in paragraph 5 of the Complaint.
Respondent conceded as particularised in
paragraphs 6 and 7
Complaint, that the amendments were made to each prescription and that each such
amendment amounted to a breach of Clause
38 and / or 39 of the PTG Regulation.
However, he did not concede that it was not appropriate to make such
amendments.
failures particularised in
paragraphs 8 and 9
of the Complaint were
conceded by the Respondent as were the breaches of the PTG Regulation described
in these particulars.
paragraph 10
of the Complaint, the Respondent conceded that he did not
keep dispensing or other records to account “...
...” of MF ordered by Xtreme Burwood between August 2006 and
January 2007 but the Respondent did not admit to the quantity of
least 490 packets
...” as particularised.
Respondent admitted the particulars in paragraph 11 of the Complaint.
the Complaint, prior to the numbered paragraphs setting out the particulars, is
what was described by Complainant’s Counsel
” addressing the withdrawal of
Dr. X’s authority—to possess, supply and prescribe, Drugs of
Addiction (also known
as Schedule 8 or S8, drugs)—had been withdrawn,
effective from 14 February 2002 and remained withdrawn as at March 2007, an
issue addressed by Mr. Battye during his evidence to the Tribunal. Asked about
this aspect, the Respondent told the Tribunal that
although he took a photocopy
Poisons Schedules
from his Blacktown pharmacy to Xtreme Burwood,
he did not photocopy the list of doctors whose authorities had been withdrawn.
Accordingly,
at the time of the relevant dispensing of MF to Dr. X, he did not
have the list at Xtreme Burwood. The list is now apparently, available
pharmacists ‘online’ when at the relevant time of the conduct of the
Complaint it was provided by other means, to
pharmacists twice yearly.
Tribunal notes that the authority withdrawn from Dr. X, related specifically to
Drugs of Addiction
and did not apply to MF which is not a Drug of
Addiction (also known as a Schedule 8 Drug), but is a
(also known as a Schedule 4 or S4, drug). It is also relevant to
note in this context, that at paragraph 23 of the Statement of
(Exhibit C-1, at Tab 24) a pharmacist employed by the Respondent at
Xtreme Burwood, who when presented by Dr. X with her prescription
for 50 packets
of MF on 20 January 2007, considered whether it was appropriate to dispense the
prescription and checked whether her
authority had been withdrawn even though MF
was not a Dug of Addiction. He described how in his search, he omitted by
mistake, the
first part of Dr. X’s hyphenated surname and found no
reference to the second part of her name and therefore, assumed that
she was not
listed. He checked the list notwithstanding that MF was not a Drug of Addiction.
The Tribunal notes from Mr. Michael’s
Statement, that the list consulted
by him was available at Xtreme Burwood on 20 January 2007.
Michael also stated (at paragraph 18, Statement) that he had noted the four
earlier occasions on which MF had been dispensed to
Dr. X but in the light of
information given to him by a pre-registration (Pharmacy) graduate it seemed
reasonable to him to assume
such information was correct. That information was
that Dr. X was “...
well known to the Pharmacy as she is a local general
medical practitioner who operates a pain clinic and that the
was to be handed to patients in the pain
was therefore not for her own use
.” (Paragraph
17, Statement). Mr. Michael was not called to give evidence at the Inquiry.
pharmacist employed by the Respondent at Xtreme Burwood,
Mr. Victor Malek
whose Statement appears (at Tab 25) in Exhibit C-1 noted (at paragraph 12 of his
statement) that if presented with a self-prescribed
prescription for a Schedule
8 drug he would first check to see whether the prescriber’s authority was
withdrawn. As MF was
not such a S8 drug, it “...
would not have
...mind to check...
” the list when he was
presented with Dr. X’s prescription for 10 packets of MF on 1 December
2006, which he subsequently
dispensed to Dr. X. Mr. Malek said (at paragraph 13,
Statement) that had he known that Dr. X’s authority had been withdrawn
would have raised concerns about dispensing it; and he would possibly, have
denied supplying her with the medication. According
to his statement (Paragraph
21) he would normally check “...
more recent prescribing history for the
...” but he could not recall if he did this for Dr. X’s
prescription; had he noticed an earlier dispensing of 50 packets
tablets) he would have contacted the Respondent. He thought he
mistaken it
...[the 1000
tablets]...
for 100 tablets...or might have thought that it was a typing
.” (Paragraph 23, Ibid.)
Tribunal remains somewhat puzzled by what Mr. Malek stated (at paragraph 19,
statement, above) to the effect that he had “...
no reason to
...[Dr. X]...
was abusing medication. Had she
on a series of occasions
would have been
more suspicious
.” Earlier dispensing of Dr. X’s prescriptions
for MF would have been recorded as demonstrated by Annexure ‘2’
his statement and to which he refers at paragraph 11 thereof as the
” which include the details of the
dispensing to Dr. X of her prescriptions for MF dated 8 and 15 August and 19
September, 2006.
Mr. Malek was not called to give evidence at the Inquiry.
Particulars
of Complaint in
paragraphs 1 to 5 inclusive
, concern the
Respondent’s acceptance of the declared intention of Dr. X’s
prescribing of MF—although the prescriptions
were in her own name, the MF
would be issued by her and her colleagues at her ‘pain clinic’ at
Concord to their patients.
Once the Respondent accepted this intention, he
dispensed the medications on 8 and 15 August 2006 (Particulars, paragraph 1) and
agreed, on 19 September 2006, to dispense the medication (Particulars, paragraph
Respondent gave the following account in response to questions concerning Dr.
X’s initial presentation at the pharmacy:
Now, when she told me where she was and she told me she had a
big practice, 8 to 10 doctors, I knew some of the doctors in there
because obviously I was in the area and I got scripts from them. I confirmed
that by calling the actual practice and I
spoke to the secretary and I confirmed
Dr X was the owner.
She told me about the pain clinic. She told me about her practice. She
told me about a number of doctors working because I asked
for all of that
information and as a health professional and as a person that wants to care for
the patient, and again I refer to
the Professional Code of Practice For
Pharmacists Principle Number 6, which we all swear by and it states that we
respect the skills
and expertise of other health care professionals and we
work cooperatively with them to attain optimal care for the patients.
...[Dr. X]...
came I believed her story. She came in and
asked for a script for five boxes of Mersyndol. I believed her story. It all
made complete
sense. I asked as much questions and as much inquiries as
possible at the time, to justify me handing that medication to that doctor.
dispensed the medication and then I gave it to
...[Dr. X]...
I counselled
thoroughly about that medication and I told the doctor directions, even though
I knew she was a doctor, but I'm fulfilling
my duty of care and in my mind I
had two options, either to accept it, give it out, or do what my peer review
said, where she should
have come in with 50 prescriptions with individual
patients and me handing it out.
above reference to “...50 prescriptions...” concerned his perceived
need to avoid any “channelling’. This
practice was also mentioned
generally, during the evidence of Mr. Battye, Mr. Payne and Mr. Bell. The
Respondent told the Tribunal
of past complaints by pharmacists in another area
when his father a Medical Practitioner, was directing patients to the
Respondent’s
pharmacy. He therefore wanted to avoid any complaints from
other pharmacists about such a practice especially as he was new to the
area. To avoid any such complaints he had devised a form of
“consent” for a patient to consent to their prescription
directed to his pharmacy at Blacktown and to his current pharmacy at Emu
Heights. He did not use this form at Xtreme Burwood
as he did not know the local
doctors nor did their patients know him, being new to Burwood. In effect, this
“channelling”
issue was on the Respondent’s mind when first
approached by Dr. X.
The Respondent sought to draw a similarity between his supply of MF to Dr. X for
on-supply to her patients and “sample packs”
of medications given by
pharmaceutical manufacturers to medical practitioners to issue to patients. In
effect, according to the Respondent’s
evidence, if “sample
bags” were acceptable, then his supply of MF to Dr. X was, acceptable.
asked about the labelling of the MF he dispensed to Dr. X, the Respondent told
the Tribunal it included her name but he left
sufficient space on the label for
her to write the name of the patient to whom she would issue it together with
directions for the
patient’s use “...
like a sample
.” [TS 216-217]. The Respondent told the Tribunal that the number
of doctors working in Dr. X’s practice was “...
approximately
eight to 10
.” [TS 148]. Other than a “
could not recall the names of the other doctors at the clinic; and he had never
been inside the clinic “...
as there was no reason for me to go
” [TS 222].
his evidence, the Respondent maintained his primary position to dispensing the
MF in the quantities particularised in the
Complaint as he saw no problem in
doing so there being in his assessment, no suspicion. He believed then that he
acted honestly and without any intention and...wanted the best care
for the patient.
” [TS 99]. He did concede that today his position
would be different in light of what he learnt about Dr. X from Mr. Battye.
Respondent was impressed by Dr. X and with her appearance; and
could not fault her
.” [TS 94]. He trusted her.
Respondent’s Statements (Exhibits R-1 and R-2) included the enquiries he
made about the ‘pain clinic’ and how
he was reliant on what Dr. X
told him including her practice and that of the other doctors, to hand out one
or two days supply of
he had no suspicion about Dr. X’s intentions, he did not consider the
option of simply refusing to dispense the MF prescribed
Respondent was asked by Complainant’s Counsel about the increasing
quantity of MF prescribed by Dr. X as an indicator of
suspicion, as
Q. It begs the question, the fact that the
doctor walks in with a prescription for 100 tablets and then requests that it
1,000 tablets, so going from 5 packets to 50 packets, you are inviting
this Tribunal to accept that is not a matter that would arouse
suspicions in
the mind of a pharmacist?
A. Under those circumstances, no. What
other inquiry should I have done other than the PSB and the other doctors?
inquiry could I have done at the time that I didn't do?
Q. Could you have got on the phone and called the pain clinic and asked
one of the other doctors at the pain clinic?
A. Other than the PSB
and the other doctors, what else could I do? I called up and confirmed she was
the owner and had 10 doctors
working for her. One needs to be realistic and
logical sometimes. At the time I did the best of my ability to gain as much
as possible. Nothing was done intentionally. I did all this for the
care of the patient. I mean, $500 or $600 if you are running
four stores and
you are trying to do the best of your ability to optimise patient care and I did
ask as many questions as I could
to find out as much information that I can and
I couldn't fault her.
Paragraph 5
of the Particulars of the Complaint, the
Respondent distinguished the situation with Dr. X from dispensing medication to
an individual
patient. With the latter he would comply with his obligation to
ensure the appropriateness of the medication for the patient; that
labelled with adequate directions; and he would counsel the patient. But he
relied on Dr. X. to perform these obligations
as a medical practitioner, for her
Respondent admitted amending the prescriptions particularised in
Paragraphs 6
of the Complaint; when invited by Complainant’s Counsel to
explain why he amended them, he responded:
With the amending of the script, when I graduated in 1999 from
the pharmacy school at Sydney University it was accepted practice
pharmacist, and I have a lot of my peers and colleagues that would vouch for
that, that if a pharmacist called a doctor,
or saw a doctor, or got approval
from a doctor, that he has made a mistake or made the wrong date or the wrong
strength, he can
initial make the amendment, initial as per doctor approval,
sign and date and put BPharm on it. That was the practice when I graduated
1999. What I was taught.
He told the Tribunal he had not made any similar amendment of a prescription
during his time at Xtreme Burwood. He agreed that having
Dr. X before him would
have made it easier for her to amend each prescription “...
didn’t think it was a big deal
.” [TS 111] He now accepted
these admitted amendments were contrary to the PTG Regulation but he was
unaware of this at the
relevant time. He accepted before the Tribunal that
ignorance is no excuse.
admitting his failure to comply with Clause 117 of the PTG Regulation by failing
to make an inventory of Drugs of Addiction as
particularised in
of the Complaint, he blamed the stress of his then ongoing dispute with
Sigma and described it as ‘...
human error. I missed doing one check,
through my 10 year career
...” [TS 156]
Complainant’s
Counsel questioned the Respondent about some anomalies detected in his (Drugs of
Addiction) Register to which
he responded to the effect, that there will always
be anomalies due to human error, and he pointed to the obligations of employed
pharmacists personally, to comply with relevant requirements for Drugs of
Addiction. He accepted however, that there should not be
any discrepancies or
inaccuracies even if they were not caused by the Respondent’s personal
Paragraph 9
of the Particulars of Complaint, the Respondent
told the Tribunal that notwithstanding his signed
undertaking
Exhibit C-1, Tab. 18, Document 18A, dated 3 July 2006) that
buprenorphine
) would be handled and administered at Xtreme
Burwood, in accordance with Guidelines TG 201/1, he was unaware of the
obligations demanded
undertaking
. He rejected that such
non-compliance reflected adversely on his capacity to practise as a pharmacist
and described Complainant’s
Counsel’s suggestion as
...” which description he withdrew when Counsel
invited him to do so. [TS 116-117]
Respondent admitted failure to keep dispensing and other records as
particularised in Paragraph 10 of the Complaints as to the
“...at least
490 packets...” of MF but disputed the documents detailing the products of
which MF formed part, which according
to Ms. Jones’ (Sigma) evidence, the
Respondent had claimed Sigma had not delivered to Xtreme Burwood. These products
were listed
in Attachment “B” to Ms. Jones’ Statement (Exhibit
C-1, at Tab. 26). Respondent told the Tribunal he had had a
chance to go through
the Sigma documents but only “...
roughly, roughly
...” however
having done so, such documents did not reflect in his mind, the nature of the
claims he had made on Sigma for “short
sends”. The Respondent
invited Complainant’s Counsel to show him “...
proof of deliveries
which actually went into my pharmacy
.” [TS 165]
Deed of Release
’ between Sigma and the Respondent (C/F
Exhibit C- 4) was relied on by the Respondent as demonstrating in effect, that
reliance could be gained from Sigma’s assertion evident in Ms.
Jones’ evidence, in particular, “Attachment ‘B’”
to her Statement. He claimed that by entering the
Deed of Release
obviously knew that the medication was not arriving at the pharmacy
and I disagreed with any amount the 490, that came in, completely
” [TS 88]. He agreed with Complainant’s Counsel that
the evidence given by Ms. Jones and Ms. Dolan (PSB) comparing invoices
supplied, with amounts of MF dispensed demonstrated a significant disparity
between them based on the records of MF dispensed
at Xtreme Burwood in the
relevant period. However, the Respondent’s answer to such disparity was
that the amount Sigma claimed
to have been delivered to Xtreme Burwood was not
in fact, delivered.
Respondent was unable to produce “...
...”other than one document indicating a ‘short
send’ and noted that “...
we are talking five years ago...it is
very difficult.
” [TS 170]. This led to the following exchange:
Q. Let me ask you to pause there. It might be five years ago
now but this investigation has been going on for a number of years,
A. Correct.
Q. Not only has this investigation been going on for a number of years,
at about the time you had these concerns about short sends
you were in
negotiations with Sigma, correct?
A. Correct.
Q. So it would be not unrealistic to assume that if you had retained
documents yourself which recorded the short sends, such as
the document at tab
31, you would have made it available - I withdraw that - such as the document
behind tab 33, would have made
them available and/or kept them?
I kept to the best of my ability all the paperwork, not just Mersyndol Forte and
that's how I came up with the figure that I
think was willing to pay for that
amount. It wasn't specific Mersyndol Forte, it was all the credits. Like,
it's all I could have
got and it is very hard to go through four or five
invoices out of - the pharmacy is 600 squares and has already $500,000 or
worth of products.
Earlier, evidence was given to the Tribunal by Ms. Jones concerning the 490
packets of MF; when asked whether she could say it was
possible that any of the
outstanding 490 MF were not delivered to Xtreme Burwood she responded:
I can’t say that. I can’t say that 100 percent ...but
it is possible
” (TS 71). When taken to Ms. Jones’ evidence that
in the relevant period there were only two claims by the Respondent
‘short sends’ of MF totalling 120 packets, he repeated his claim
that not all of the MF had been received. He was
unable to say how much MF he
did receive as “...
I’m not able to because of the amount of
paperwork and the time factor
...” [TS 172].
Respondent agreed he could provide only one document as evidence to dispute
Paragraph 10
of the Particulars—a Sigma invoice dated 24 November
2006 (Exhibit C-1, Tab 33) referred to above in the extract of evidence.
document under its column / heading “
noted a quantity of 60 packets of MF claimed as a credit by the Respondent in
accordance with the system in operation at the
relevant time, about which
evidence was given by Ms. Jones.
Respondent challenged Ms. Jones’ evidence to the effect, that apart from
the Sigma Invoices there was no proof of actual
delivery of MF to Xtreme
Burwood. Tribunal (Pharmacist) Member Mr. Chen asked the Respondent the
following question:
Q. Did you order Mersyndol Forte in quantities similar to
A. Yes, I did but they never come in like 100.
They never came in?
A. Never come in, with not just Mersyndol with
Q. Why would you order Mersyndol Forte in quantities of
A. Because I never received the medication complete. I always
had half the stock missing, or quarter of the stock missing, or
three quarters
of the stock missing. It never came in and for me to function I needed the
stock in the pharmacy, plus I was also
supplying Metro.
Q. Why would you order a quantity of 100?
A. Because the
stock never came. If I ordered five I would get nothing. If I ordered 10 I
would get nothing. That was how serious
Did you ever receive quantities close to 100 boxes from any
A. From any suppliers? I can't - you mean for Mersyndol
A. I can't recall. I can't
recall. I don't know. It's a very long time ago. I really can't recall. I
didn't focus on this
medication by itself. I would be lying to you if I said
yes and I would be lying to you if I said no.
The Tribunal
notes from Ms. Dolan’s evidence (Exhibit C-1, Tab. 18, Attachment
“E”) that MF purchased by Xtreme
Burwood between 18 August and 22
December 2006, includes two purchases from Sanofi-Aventis each of 100 packets,
the first on 3
October and the second on 12 December, 20006. The Respondent did
not dispute these purchases or the quantities ordered.
The Respondent admitted the Particulars in
Paragraph 11
of the Complaint
and breach of Clause 112 of the PTG Regulation. He attributed such conduct as he
told the Tribunal, to the delay
...” in receiving approval for the transfer of the PBS Approval
Number held at Metro Burwood to Xtreme Burwood; had a “wholesale
account” been set up at Metro, his admitted failure would not have
occurred, but he did not know of this measure at the time
Tribunal notes relevant to this
Particular 11
and the Respondent’s
evidence above, that the Respondent’s failures to make relevant entries in
the (Drugs of Addiction)
Registers of the above pharmacies were described in Ms.
Dolan’s Statement (Exhibit C-1, Tab 18, Para. 14); Attachment
to the above Statement of Ms. Dolan dated
, also includes advice given to the Respondent by Mr. Battye (PSB) on
10 April 2007
, that the apparent practice detected in the Drug Register,
of transfer of Drugs of Addiction (S8 Drugs) from Xtreme Burwood to other
pharmacies owned by the Respondent must cease immediately as it was not
permitted under the Poisons & Therapeutic Goods legislation
considered “wholesaling” (C/F ‘Introduction’).
Dolan’s statement (17 January 2008, referred to above) describes how at a
further inspection on
27 August 2007
, at Xtreme Burwood, the pharmacy was
still transferring Therapeutic Goods including Schedule 8 Drugs to other
pharmacies owned by
the Respondent. Ms. Dolan records Mr. Battye’s note
that a NSW Pharmacy Board inspector had visited the pharmacy the week prior
Mr. Battye’s visit on 27 August 2007 during which the Inspector advised
against this practice. During Mr. Battye’s
second visit an employed
pharmacist Mr. Michael, explained that “...
they were trying to figure
out where in the legislation...it says that if one person owns a number of
pharmacies they cannot purchase
from one pharmacy and distribute to the
.” Mr. Michael was then shown the specific part of the
legislation that explained this situation (Statement, Ibid).
telling the Tribunal of his reliance on the three to five pharmacists he
employed at Metro Burwood at the relevant time and
his instructions to them to
record received items appropriately, the Respondent accepted ultimate
responsibility to ensure that the
Drugs of Addiction Register was and is,
maintained accurately.
accepting Dr. X’s declared intention for on-supply of the MF to patients
at the clinic and therefore not having knowledge
of the patients to whom it
would be issued at the clinic, the Respondent sought to liken this as noted
above, to supply to nursing
or even, one pharmacy borrowing medication from another when the lending
would not know whether the borrowing pharmacy dispensed it
appropriately, such being “...
commonly practised
.” [TS 136].
Complaint’s Counsel challenged the Respondent as follows:
Q. Can I suggest to you it would have been open to you at all
times to have an expert or a peer come to this Tribunal and indicate
was common practice, but you haven't done so?
A. I have all my
peers that acted that same way. That happened real time. That is the accurate
peer review.
Q. None of these people have given evidence in these
proceedings?
A. Tell me the names of them. They are all listed in
Mr Battye's report. I don't know that. This is my first time. Hopefully
I will never come back here again but I don't know what, if a peer reviewer is
required to come. There are peer reviewers that
did exactly the same thing and
the same situation and only one called the PSB.
Q. I don't wish to
be overly repetitious, sir, but you accept that it would have at all times been
open to you to put the series
of propositions which you have just put to me as
a series of instructions to appear and ask them to prepare a report for you;
A. No-one told me to do that.
seems in the Respondent’s reference above, to Mr. Battye’s report
and to “...
all my peers
...” the Respondent had in mind the
earlier evidence of Mr. Battye when he told the Tribunal from his
investigations, “...
there might have been 30 pharmacists
approached, I don’t know...but we do know there was a handful of
pharmacists where she was able to obtain quantities, not 1,000
or 800 but she
was able to obtain 100 or 200 at a time
.” [TS 30]. Mr. Battye’s
letter to the HCCC dated 16 October 2008 (Exhibit C-1 tab 15, at paragraphs 6 -8
inclusive) described
the investigation by visits to eight (8) different
pharmacies in the Burwood, Concord, Epping and Carlingford areas from which Dr.
X had obtained MF by self-prescribing.
The Respondent continued the above theme, when asked about the ‘peer
review’ evidence of Mr. Payne:
Q. Your position is, as I understand it, whilst you respect Mr
Payne's view and the criticisms he has made, you don't agree with
them, is that
A. I don't agree with them because having a report done now
with all the information accessible, past and present, and with the
time, and with when writing the report the mentality that each and every word
written in that report will be cross-examined
in a Tribunal matter and
comparing that to a review done by my other peers, who I have no affiliation
with, approximately 30, and
they all gave it out bar one, bar one.
in his evidence, the Respondent sought to rely upon the “30...
peers” in responding to a question from Complainant’s
concerning the dispensing to Dr. X:
and here I am with
the limited time when the doctor walks in and I'm on the hot seat. I asked as
much questions and I got as much
answers that I could at the time. How can you
compare? Here we are I'm trying to explain that not just myself, all my other
up to 30, according to Mr Battye, gave it out, except one
pharmacist. I keep coming back to that. One notices a trend. One notices
big trend and one should ask why. Why is that? Why did all these pharmacists
give it? It is not just 100 or 200. In the report
of Mr Battye there was
up to 900 tablets that were given.
I can only speak because I only know two of my peers, Mr Edmon Michael
and Mr Victor Abdel Malek, who mentioned in his report that
he was unaware even
though, even though Victor - and I can only speak this is the on information I
know, Victor had my dispensing
records, knew that I gave out that. He asked
the questions and he was still of the impression that he could not fault this
asked by Complainant’s Counsel whether “...
he respectfully
disagreed with
...[Mr. Payne’s]...
Respondent answered:
A. That's correct. I respectfully disagree with Mr Payne back
then. Now, having seen the whole issue, I agree with him and this
occur again because I will be calling PSB and I will make sure this never
happens again. At that time in the hot spot
if he thinks that way I
respectfully disagree with him.
his evidence the Respondent took the Tribunal to Exhibit R-3, the PSA
Professional Conduct
but when asked by Complainant’s Counsel about the
Professional Practice Standards
published 1 January 2006 (Exhibit
C-1, tab. 40) the Respondent told the Tribunal he was not familiar with it but
he questioned its
relevance in his supply of MF to Dr. X because
you see, all these points
...[in the PSA Standards, above
are invalid because there is no patient. This medication was given
to the practice, so these criteria do not become valid
.” [TS 145]
to questions from Tribunal (Pharmacist) Member Mr. Chen, the Respondent
confirmed his current membership of the PSA, commenced
four years ago. He
described how he does “...
rigorous amounts of CPE
I love CPE...love doing tutorials
.” [TS 182];
and that he was a member of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia (PGA) in 2002 but is
no longer a member. He told the
Tribunal he has enrolled his current pharmacy at
Emu Heights for accreditation in the PGA
Quality Care Pharmacy Program
but which is yet to be completed.
Respondent currently has one staff member at his pharmacy, a pharmacist, who
works on Saturdays and Mondays, when the Respondent
is not working. Responding
to a question from the Chairperson, he confirmed that in a period of eight years
he had interests in about
nine pharmacies. He was the sole proprietor of Xtreme
Burwood, Metro Burwood, Xtreme Toongabbie and Xtreme Blacktown pharmacies during
the relevant period of the Complaint. He was asked by Tribunal (Pharmacist)
Member Mr. Chen, about possible purchase of other pharmacies:
Q...Do you have any desire to purchase any more
pharmacies?
A. Maybe, maybe down the track, but I would like only to
keep one or two maximum and small ones. I don't want to go that size.
Q. So you don't discount the fact that you may own more than one
pharmacy at one time?
A. Yes. But then again all the procedures
will be spot on.
in his evidence he told the Tribunal that he knew how to identify drug addicts
mostly by visual appearance, he now concedes
that with his experience of Dr. X,
visual appearance cannot be relied upon.
Significantly,
in response to questions from the Chairperson, the Respondent confirmed that at
the relevant time of his supply of
MF to Dr. X, he was aware it was a
‘drug of abuse’ and knew the basis of its capacity for abuse and its
attraction to
those who might abuse the medication.
to questions from the Tribunal, the Respondent accepted the paramount role of
the pharmacist to protect the community no
matter the financial cost; and the
pharmacist’s obligations to comply with the law especially the
& Therapeutic Goods
legislation. He assured the Tribunal that his past
unawareness of aspects of that legislation would not again happen. He accepted
that such ignorance cannot ever, be claimed as an excuse for non-compliance.
to a question from Tribunal (Pharmacist) Member Mrs. Bear whether he ever
suggested to Dr. X that perhaps she could have
“set up a wholesaling
account” given that according to his evidence, another local pharmacy
charged Dr. X excessively
for MF, the Respondent told the Tribunal that he had
not suggested this to Dr. X. During his evidence to the Tribunal, Mr. Battye
described how if there was a genuine need for a doctor to obtain medications for
supply to patients, even in the circumstances of
Dr. X as told by her to the
Respondent “...
the proper course would be for those doctors to obtain
those drugs by wholesale, not from a retail pharmacist
.” [TS 36] He
told the Tribunal that there are and were, companies that specialise in
supplying doctors’ surgeries especially
if a practice was of the nature
and size the Respondent claimed Dr. X conveyed to him about her practice.
Complainant’s submissions—an outline
The Complainant provided a written outline of submissions to the Tribunal and
shortly before commencing his oral submissions, Counsel
for the Respondent
conveyed his instructions to the Tribunal that the Respondent conceded that
all of the Complaints 1-11 amount to unsatisfactory professional
.” [TS 228] and provided a written outline of
Respondent’s submissions.
Complainant’s
Counsel accepted that the Respondent’s concessions (above) would impact on
his (Complainant’s) submissions.
significant element amongst others, in the Complainant’s submissions, was
whether the Respondent had demonstrated sufficient
insight into his admitted
conduct. Any insight demonstrated by his concessions was Counsel submitted,
related more to his apprehension
of the Tribunal’s findings, having regard
for the evidence before the Inquiry. Such concessions were only made he
at the heel of the hunt.
referred to the Respondent’s evidence during cross-examination, in effect
denying that his conduct in 2006 and 2007
could amount to unsatisfactory
professional conduct. He questioned whether the concessions now made,
demonstrate adequate insight
and a true appreciation of the seriousness of the
situation confronting the Respondent.
accepted that it is not incumbent upon a Respondent to make any concessions on
an ultimate finding such as that in Section
37 of the Act, which remains for the
Tribunal to determine.
the supply of MF to Dr. X, Counsel referred to the Respondent’s
evidence—that it was her fault; that he did
nothing wrong; Dr. X had
misled him; as to the amount of MF supplied to him by Sigma, their invoices were
wrong and he had not received
such quantities; that in order to obtain at least
some items from Sigma, he had to order amounts higher than he needed, such
described by Counsel for the Complainant as “...beggars
belief...” [TS231]. Counsel accepted that a
Deed of Release
(Exhibit C-4) was executed by the Respondent and Sigma, to conclude their
dispute concerning stock received or not received, by Xtreme
emphasised that the Respondent did not dispute the amount of MF received by
Xtreme Burwood from Sanofi-Aventis, another supplier—100
packets on 3
October 2006 and 100 packets on 12 December, 2006; and submitted there was
sufficient evidence to satisfy the Tribunal
that the Respondent was ordering MF
in significant quantities during the relevant period of the Complaint as
particularised.
Respondent’s failures to comply with the PTG Regulation as particularised
in the Complaint, Counsel submitted that
in his evidence the Respondent blamed
others for not having taught him at university or during his pharmacy practice,
thereby Counsel
submitted, demonstrating an abrogation of personal
responsibility as a pharmacist to be aware of and to comply with, statutory
requirements.
referred to Mr. Payne’s evidence and to the professional experience of the
two Registered Pharmacist Members of the
Tribunal, when it considers the issues
relevant to a determination as to unsatisfactory professional conduct and
professional misconduct;
and noted the absence of any ‘peer review’
report from the Respondent to contradict the evidence of Mr. Payne; noting
that Mr. Bell when inspecting and assessing the Respondent’s current
pharmacy at Emu Heights was specifically instructed
by Respondent’s legal
representatives, not to address the conduct particularised in the Complaint.
Counsel submitted that in
the absence of any evidence contrary to the opinions
expressed by Mr. Payne, largely unaffected by cross-examination, it would be
difficult for the Tribunal not to accept his evidence as persuasive.
described as “astonishing” the Respondent’s evidence that he
had not taken a copy of the list of medical
practitioners whose relevant
authority concerning Drugs of Addiction had been withdrawn, from his Blacktown
pharmacy to Xtreme Burwood;
noting that the Respondent apparently regarded it as
important to have it available at his other pharmacy but not so at Xtreme
He referred to the Respondent’s evidence that his current
pharmacy did not have a ‘hard copy’ of the list in the
but he was able to readily access it, as it was now ‘on line’.
Counsel referred to the absence of such ‘hard
copy’ at his current
pharmacy as relevant to the question of the Respondent’s insight. Counsel
submitted that although
such list related only to Drugs of Addiction—in
which category MF was and is, not included—it would nonetheless be
appropriate
for a pharmacist to consult the list where a large quantity of MF
was self-prescribed thereby raising concerns given the properties
and features
of MF and its acceptance as a ‘drug of abuse’.
response to the Chairperson’s question, Counsel referring to Mr.
Battye’s evidence, agreed that it was not suggested
that self-prescribing
was contrary to any legislative prohibition but rather, it was a policy of the
NSW Medical Board that self-prescribing
should not be undertaken.
submitted concerning Particulars of Paragraph 2 of the Complaint that the
prescription presented by Dr. X on 19 September
2006 for five packets of MF
subsequently amended by the Respondent to 50 packets at the request of Dr. X
according to the Respondent,
taken together with the prescription being from a
different pad, with hand-written practice address changes and incorrect
yet again, with the prescriber’s residential address on the
prescription—should have alerted the Respondent.
addressing the Respondent’s admitted breach of Clause 53 of the PTG
Regulation particularised in Paragraph 3 of the Complaint,
Counsel submitted
that beyond making some attempt to identify the building where the relevant
‘pain clinic’ was located—that
Dr. X owned the practice and
that there were a number of others also practising there—the Respondent
failed to take adequate
steps to be independently satisfied that the intended
on-supply of MF to patients would be in and for an appropriate quantity and
purpose. Rather, he submitted, the Respondent relied on and accepted, the
prescriber too readily. Counsel submitted that there were
other signs that
Respondent should have acted upon describing them as “
catalysts for
”. Counsel submitted in similar terms to the conduct
particularised in Paragraphs 4 and 5 of the Complaint, referring also to
“power dynamic” between a doctor and pharmacist; and noted that the
Respondent’s parents were medical practitioners.
emphasised Mr. Payne’s evidence concerning Particulars in Paragraphs 6 and
7 of the Complaint, to the effect that the
Respondent’s conduct fell below
the accepted standard but of which conduct Mr. Payne was not critical, for
reasons expressed
in his evidence. Counsel submitted that such conduct taken in
isolation, would not completely satisfy the Tribunal of the Orders
sought by the
Complainant. Rather he submitted, when this particular conduct is considered
within the totality of all the circumstances
in evidence before the Tribunal, it
is the combined seriousness of the Complaint that attracts a finding of
professional misconduct.
to the Respondent’s admitted breach of the ‘inventory making’
mandate within Clause 117 of the PTG Regulation
applicable to Drugs of
Addiction, particularised in Paragraph 8 of the Complaint, Counsel submitted
that whether intentional or not,
this breach attracts ‘strict
liability’ in order to achieve the legislative intention concerning the
control of Drugs
of Addiction. Referring to the only evidence before the
Tribunal being that of the Respondent to the effect that at the relevant
was in the midst of his ongoing dispute with Sigma, Counsel did not suggest that
the breach was intentional. He also noted
that the Respondent did not advance
such evidence as an excuse but rather, as an explanation.
described the Respondent’s evidence of his obligations to comply with the
recording requirements for
particularised in Paragraph 9 of the
Particulars of Complaint as “...beggars belief...” in circumstances
where he gave
a signed undertaking to comply with the NSW Health Guidelines TG
210/01. He reminded the Tribunal of the Respondent’s description
cross-examination, of this failure as “...
...” but from
which description he soon resiled and instead, categorised it as
just a clerical error
.” Counsel submitted that such
descriptions pointed to a disturbing lack of insight.
Complainant’s
Counsel submitted that the Particulars in Paragraph 10 of the Complaint were the
most factually complex of the
entire Complaint. He cited Clause 54 of the PTG
regulation requiring such relevant records to be maintained for at least two
He submitted that the evidence of Ms. Jones (Sigma) and Ms. Dolan (PSB)
and the documents upon which they relied, were reliable;
and according to their
calculations the quantity unaccounted for in terms of Paragraph 10, was
“...at least 490 packets...”
referred to the Respondent’s evidence concerning the unaccounted-for
MF—firstly that the quantities described
in the Sigma invoices were never
received at Xtreme Burwood. Counsel emphasised that although there was a
between Sigma and the Respondent, it did not particularise the MF
issue; and that the only document produced by the Respondent in
support of his
position (above) was a Sigma invoice upon which there is a note claiming a
credit for 60 packets of MF (C/F Exhibit
C-1, Tab 33). Counsel submitted that
the Respondent’s further proposition that some MF had been transferred to
Metro Burwood
was unsupported by any other evidence. He anticipated that
Respondent’s Counsel would rely on Ms. Jones’ evidence—to
effect that she could not say with 100 percent definitiveness that the MF was in
fact supplied to the Respondent and that she
could not assist with evidence
enquiries about them.
submitted with respect to Paragraph 10 of the Complaint, that the best evidence
before the Tribunal was Sigma’s documentary
evidence referred to above.
Responding to the Chairperson’s question as to whether any
‘stocktake’ was undertaken
when the Respondent sold Xtreme Burwood
(in September 2007) and if so, whether any relevant records were available to
indicate the
amount of MF if any, sold as stock to the purchaser, Counsel was
unable to identify any document in the evidence that confirmed such
‘stocktake’ was done; but he submitted that such matter had not been
part of the Respondent’s case, namely, that
any of the outstanding
quantities of MF as particularised, were transferred to the new owner of Xtreme
submitted that the Respondent in admitting the Particulars in Paragraph 11 of
the Complaint, accepted these as his ultimate
responsibility even though as his
evidence noted, his employed pharmacists at Metro Burwood had omitted making
necessary entries
for the receipt and supply of Drugs of Addiction.
Tribunal’s protective jurisdiction was emphasised by Counsel within which
is an objective of deterrence both for the Respondent
and to the profession
generally, together with a need to ensure that public confidence in the
profession was maintained lest professional
privilege be lost through failure to
comply with legal and ethical obligations.
Counsel submitted that the seriousness of the Respondent’s admitted
conduct should be considered in the totality of the Complaint
as particularised
and in light of the Respondent’s demonstrable lack of insight into his
failures. He submitted that following
a finding of professional misconduct as
the Complainant sought, an order of suspension was insufficient and that the
Respondent should
be deregistered and brought back to the Tribunal when
appropriate, for its review, to demonstrate insight into his past behaviour
an appreciation of his legal and ethical responsibilities.
noted that if the Tribunal were to consider a suspension order, it would have
regard for Section 25 (5) of the Act allowing
a pecuniary interest in a pharmacy
to be maintained provided a suspension order was not in excess of six months.
Counsel submitted
this was not a reason for the Tribunal not to order suspension
in excess of six months, but it was a matter that may “...weigh
mind of the Tribunal.”
to the Chairperson’s question, Counsel for the Complainant confirmed that
he did not object to the evidence of Mr.
Bell, nor during cross-examination did
he challenge the duration of Mr. Bell’s visit to the Respondent’s
current pharmacy,
nor his assessment and opinion of the Respondent’s
current practice as a pharmacist. Accordingly, he submitted, the Tribunal
not draw any inference concerning the duration of such visit and assessment.
answer to a further question from the Chairperson, Complainant’s Counsel
confirmed that the Complainant had not sought the
Respondent’s permission
to conduct an inspection of his current pharmacy, and accepted that this was a
measure that had always
been available to the Complainant.
to a further question from the Chairperson, Counsel confirmed that there was no
evidence before the Tribunal of anything
untoward concerning the Respondent in
relation to the period January 2007 to February 2011. Counsel later (following
the Respondent’s
submissions) addressed this “...
...” and assured the Tribunal that it is accepted by the
Complainant “...
...” that the absence of any
untoward conduct between the period of the Complaints and the present day
is a matter which would weigh in
Respondent’s]...
...”. Counsel submitted that this would
be simply one of many in the “...
overall mix of factors
for consideration by the Tribunal.
response to the Chairperson’s question, Counsel confirmed Mr.
Battye’s evidence as to the fact or otherwise, of the
clinic’ was “...reasonably indeterminate...” but in any event,
he submitted, it was up to the Respondent
to justify before the Tribunal, the
existence of the ‘pain clinic’.
Complainant’s
Counsel responding to the Chairperson’s invitation to make submissions on
the question of the Tribunal’s
possible imposition of any conditions on
the Respondent’s registration similar to those ordered by the Tribunal in
[2010] NSWPHT 4
, sought and was granted leave, to
provide written submissions on this aspect, to the Tribunal following conclusion
of the Inquiry
on the basis that any such submissions were to be provided to the
Respondent’s legal representatives who would be given an
opportunity to
respond to them by submissions to the Tribunal.
Tribunal subsequently received a letter from the Complainant to the Tribunal
Registry dated 1 March 2011, which repeated its earlier
submissions concerning
the need for deregistration given the seriousness of the Respondent’s
admitted conduct short of which,
it did not consider that
appropriate conditions could be crafted...to provide sufficient
protection to the Public interest.
” Accordingly, the Complainant
declined the opportunity to propose any conditions but sought a further
opportunity to be heard
on any conditions the Tribunal might propose.
further written submissions invited by the Tribunal in response to the
Respondent’s ‘
testimonial’
evidence referred to above,
dated 10 March 2011, the Complainant advised it did not require the authors of
the relevant testimonials
to attend for cross-examination. It submitted that
little weight could be given such testimonials; noting that only one of them
from a pharmacist whose contact with the Respondent was over 11 years ago
when he was a “...
casual pharmacy student...
” working with
the author and to which in such circumstances, the Tribunal could give little
Complainant submitted that the balance of the (above) Respondent’s
testimonial evidence would not assist the Tribunal; and
they do not
address the issues and deficiencies raised by the
Complainant
...[nor]...
the insight if any
now has into his
...”. In relation to the use of such ‘character’
evidence in disciplinary proceedings, the Complainant relied on
the NSW Court of
Appeal decision in
HCCC v A Medical Practitioner
[2001] NSWCA 158
at [47] per
...It is plain that the Tribunal is not entitled to take
character into account when considering whether a practitioner is guilty
unsatisfactory professional conduct. It is difficult to see, given the
admission of careless conduct by the Respondent...what
probative force such
evidence would have. It had no relevance to the consequences which might flow
from the inadvertent error. It
could, of course, be relevant to credit. But the
mistake made by the practitioner involved no issue of credibility. The
evidence was, by its very nature, relevant to penalty, should the
Tribunal get to that issue.
The Tribunal notes respectfully, that ‘
matter for consideration given its protective jurisdiction.
Respondent’s submissions—an outline
Respondent’s Counsel provided a written outline of submissions and made
the concessions on behalf of the Respondent, referred
to above. Counsel
challenged the Complainant’s assertion that these concessions were made
at the heel of the hunt
...” and submitted that the
cross-examination of his client was lengthy; and that his concessions came soon
after its conclusion;
accordingly, the Tribunal should not accept the
Complainant’s Counsel’s categorisation of such concessions.
submitted that his client “...
strongly accepted...that each and every
one of the particulars of the Amended Complaint raises serious and significant
to the Complainant’s submissions, Counsel agreed with the inherently
difficult task of assessing whether a person
has truly shown insight; and
submitted that the Respondent has accepted his failings and omissions now
conceded before the Tribunal,
and into which he had demonstrated insight and the
Tribunal could now be assured accordingly.
submitted that the Respondent had accepted certain aspects of the Complaint
prior to the Tribunal’s Inquiry and made
certain admissions concerning the
particulars of the Complaint including statutory breaches, shortly before giving
his evidence at
the Inquiry.
submitted that the “...
primary explanations
...” for the
Respondent’s past conduct in respect of what he described as the
“dispensing issues” in Paragraphs
1 to 5 inclusive, of the
Complaint, as that he was essentially acting at all times with the care of the
patient in mind; that he
was concerned that the unknown (to the Respondent)
patients of the prescriber Dr. X were in pain; that he had no reason to be
of Dr. X who he believed “...
could not be
...” and that as a doctor he was “...
permitted to
trust all of her actions
”. Counsel referred to Mr. Battye’s
evidence that “...[there
a certain culture among a number
of pharmacists that you must never query a doctor
submitted also that the Respondent believed that what he was doing in supplying
Dr. X with the MF was with “...
the provision of optimal patient care
through cooperation with a medical practitioner
also submitted there was “
support for the proposition
other pharmacists were approached by Dr. X and that the Respondent was not the
only pharmacist who dispensed the medication
to her, presumably referring to the
evidence of Mr. Battye to the Tribunal and to his documentary evidence, part of
the PSB investigation
(within Exhibit C-1). With respect to particulars 1 to 5
inclusive, Counsel submitted that relevant to the Respondent’s decision
dispense the MF to Dr. X, was his apprehension of “channelling” of
prescriptions had he required Dr. X to write an
individual prescription for each
of her patients. He had wanted to avoid this.
amendment of the relevant prescriptions particularised in Paragraphs 6 and 7 of
the Complaint, Counsel submitted that the
Respondent was
...[Dr. X’s]...
” and that he
was assisting her “...
given that she was extremely busy
the “inventory and record” issues in Complaint Paragraphs 8, 9, 10
and 11 Counsel submitted that the Respondent
was at the time unaware of certain
relevant and important statutory provisions of the PTG Regulation; but that the
Respondent maintains
that he will comply with such requirements
from now on.”
submitted with respect to the unaccounted-for MF the subject of Paragraph 10 of
the Complaint, that it was the Respondent’s
position that it was not
delivered by the supplier. Referring to the evidence of Ms. Jones, Counsel
submitted “...
there is support for the proposition that it is at least
‘possible’ that
of the outstanding 490 packets
of...[MF]...
were not delivered
” (Emphasis added). Counsel did
not take the question of quantification of MF beyond the description
...” of the medication. He submitted that the
Complainant could not prove with 100 per cent certainty, what quantity of MF was
in fact, delivered; and that the Respondent cannot prove beyond what documents
he has, what amount of MF was in fact, received by
him. Counsel submitted that
the Respondent accepted the requirement that he had to keep sufficient records
in order to not have 490 packets demonstrated as
outstanding
submitted that the Respondent had gained insight into his past conduct and
that he now has a fulsome appreciation of the legislative and
ethical responsibilities that are inherent to practice as a community
.” Counsel pointed to Mr. Bell’s evidence concerning
the Respondent’s current practice and his compliance with relevant
legislative requirements and with the PSA
Professional Practice
and submitted that such evidence will provide additional
assurance to the Tribunal that his conduct will now be different. Counsel
in his submissions, that Mr. Bell’s evidence was “...
unchallenged
...” by the Complainant.
submitted that it was relevant to the Tribunal’s consideration of the
question of the Respondent’s “...
reformation of
...” that the conduct the subject of the Complaint occurred
over four years ago; and accordingly, he is capable of proper practice
pharmacist.
Respondent’s
Counsel noted the Tribunal’s protective jurisdiction and submitted that
deregistration as sought by the Complainant,
would have significant impact on
the Respondent professionally and upon his wife and young family. Counsel
submitted that rather
than deregistration, the Tribunal should consider that if
appropriate conditions were to be imposed on the Respondent’s
registration,
he could continue to practise as a pharmacist. Counsel had
considered with his client, the conditions ordered by the Tribunal on
pharmacist in the matter of
(cited above) and saw merit in
some of those conditions.
response to the Chairperson’s question concerning the Respondent’s
various pecuniary interests in nine pharmacies in
just under 10 years and the
activities necessarily involved in achieving and transferring such interests in
this period, Counsel
submitted that this was a matter of concern shared by him
and the Respondent. He submitted however, that the Respondent’s evidence
concerning his current pharmacy and intentions, should reassure the Tribunal as
to his future professional practice. From his evidence,
the Respondent’s
pharmacy-ownership activity seems to have given way to a smaller scale
professional practice at his current
pharmacy, but the Tribunal notes his
attitude to ownership of other pharmacies in the future. It seems to the
Tribunal in all the
circumstances, that the Respondent’s new approach
adopting a smaller scale of professional practice has merit.
noted above, in considering whether the complaints are proved, the Tribunal
needs to be satisfied to the standard articulated in
comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities, but that having regard to
the serious nature of the complaints and
the consequences, the satisfaction
cannot be produced by “...
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony or
indirect references.”
Respondent admits the Complaints as particularised and submits that the Tribunal
should find his admitted conduct constitutes
unsatisfactory
professional
as defined in s. 37 of the Act, and that it
does not amount to
professional
as defined in s. 36 of
the Act which includes the availability of suspension or cancellation of
registration. The Complainant submits
that the appropriate finding should be
professional
and seeks an Order that the
Respondent be deregistered.
Notwithstanding
the Respondent’s admissions and concessions, the Tribunal must itself,
determine by applying the
standard to the evidence, whether if
proved, the complaint constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct
professional misconduct
as defined in the Act.
conduct particularised in the Complaint is admitted by the Respondent but for
the quantity “...
at least 490 packets
...” of MF (C/F
Paragraph 10, Complaint Particulars).
Complaint relates to fundamental and significant, aspects of a
pharmacist’s accepted, proper professional practice, essentially
community’s custodian of potentially harmful medications, significantly in
the context of this inquiry, those with addictive
properties, known to be
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
legislation is intended to strictly control
the possession and supply of certain drugs including those relevant to the
Complaint—Restricted
Substances (of which MF was and remains, so
categorised) and Drugs of Addiction—essentially to protect the community
their propensity for harm if misused or abused.
Pharmacists
and medical practitioners are recognized by this legislation and play a pivotal
role in achieving its intended legislative
purpose. Accordingly, pharmacists
have no alternative but to comply strictly, with the legislation as part of
their legal and ethical
obligations. As observed by
Skinner v Beaumont
(1974) 1 NSWLR 106
at 109 “...
public has an interest in the maintenance of ethical standards
requires]...
not kindness but hardness, not flexibility but
intransigence
the evidence before the Tribunal there is no reasonably available, alternative
explanation other than given her history of drug
abuse described by Mr. Battye,
Dr. X sought MF from the Respondent for her personal use. The legislative
intention described above,
demanded in all the circumstances of her presentation
and the prescriptions she had written for MF, the Respondent’s awareness
and application of his legal and ethical obligations. He was not new to the
practicing profession and at the relevant time, held
pecuniary interests in a
number of pharmacies. The Respondent acknowledged that he was aware at the
relevant time, that MF was a
‘drug of abuse’ given its composition
and the pharmacological basis of its attraction to those who would abuse it.
Respondent’s enquiries about the “pain clinic” and its size
and number of practitioners were at best, superficial
in the circumstances,
especially with the quantities of a known drug of abuse, self-prescribed by Dr.
X. No evidence was placed before
the Tribunal, to confirm such a “pain
clinic”. Mr. Battye presented his impressions about the subject medical
from visiting it, to the effect that it did not appear to be other than
a normal type of general medical practice.
times referring to Mr. Battye’s evidence that some other pharmacists had
also supplied MF to Dr. X, the Respondent proposed
that such evidence in effect,
constituted ‘peer review’ and therefore, he was not alone in having
supplied her. This
was proffered by the Respondent it seems to the Tribunal, as
in some way off-setting the fact that he had not obtained any ‘peer
review’ evidence to place before the Tribunal such as the Complainant had
by Mr. Payne’s evidence. The Tribunal accepts
Mr. Payne’s
‘peer review’ evidence. It seems to the Tribunal that even during
its inquiry, the Respondent (as was
later submitted by the Complainant) had
failed to achieve adequate acceptance of and insight into, his aberrant conduct.
were a number of features about Dr. X’s presentation of her prescriptions
to the Respondent that should have alerted the
Respondent to the potentially
inappropriate supply of MF, a drug of abuse, well described in the evidence.
These were appropriately
described by Complainant’s Counsel as
catalysts for concern
...’’ and by Mr. Battye as
alarm bells
...” which he should have recognised and acted
Tribunal finds the Respondent’s failure to ensure at Xtreme Burwood at the
relevant time, the availability of the list of
medical practitioners whose Drugs
of Addiction authority was withdrawn, denied an opportunity for him to check
whether Dr. X was
entered on the list. His explanation for not having such an
important document available at the pharmacy, demonstrates a lack of
appreciation of its purpose and the reason for its dissemination to pharmacists.
The Tribunal has already noted that an employed
pharmacist at Xtreme Burwood,
Mr. Michael, in January 2007, when presented with a prescription by Dr. X for MF
consulted the list
which clearly was then available at the pharmacy but
unfortunately, misinterpreted her hyphenated name and hence, did not see Dr.
X’s name on the list. On the other hand, another employed pharmacist did
not consult the list as the prescription called for
MF a Restricted Substance,
not a Drug of Addiction.
Respondent’s reasons for acceptance of Dr. X and her prescribing
intentions, were ultimately also acted on later, by the
employed pharmacist Mr.
Michael, who according to his statement, was advised by a pharmacy graduate
employed at the pharmacy, about
Dr. X’s “pain clinic”. This
clearly demonstrates how consequential events could and did, occur following the
Respondent’s
failure to heed the “...
catalysts for
...” and “...
alarm bells
...” upon Dr.
X’s presentation of her prescriptions to the pharmacy.
Tribunal finds the Respondent’s reliance upon a fear of “channeling
of prescriptions” to justify his failures
as less than persuasive. Indeed,
Mr. Payne observed that by providing the medication to Dr. X for
“on-supply’ to patients,
this could itself be regarded as a form of
“channeling”. It was always open to the Respondent to require
individual prescriptions
or to refuse to dispense any MF to Dr. X.
to that part of the Complaint particularised in Paragraph 10 thereof—the
failure to keep dispensing or other records to account
for at least 490 packets
of MF ordered by Xtreme Burwood between August and January 2006—the state
of the evidence before the
Tribunal does not allow the Tribunal to be
comfortably satisfied of the quantity of “...
at least 490
.” The Respondent’s explanations concerning his claim to
have not received the amount claimed by Sigma as provided to
Xtreme Burwood are
not persuasive, especially the absence of any documentation beyond a single
invoice, to challenge the Sigma documents
in evidence including
“Attachment B” to Ms. Jones’ Statement which is based on the
claim made by the Respondent
against Sigma, for all stock not received by him.
not disputed are the 100 packets of MF ordered by the Respondent and received
from Sanofi-Aventis on each of two occasions
within the relevant period of the
Complaint, a total of 200 packets. When on 20 January 2007, Dr. X presented a
prescription to the
employed pharmacist Mr. Michael, for 50 packets, he found
only 40 packets were in stock. Deducting the (not disputed) 122 packets
dispensed in the relevant period from the 200 packets received from
Sanofi-Aventis, 78 packets remain; from which, deducting the
40 packets in stock
as at 20 January 2007, 38 packets remain unaccounted for and without records as
to their disposition. The Respondent’s
submissions on the “
” issue have already been referred to, including his acceptance
of the requirement that sufficient records had to be kept “...
not to have 490 packets demonstrated as outstanding
Tribunal is therefore, comfortably satisfied that in respect of some of the 490
packets—those MF not disputed as received
from Sanofi-Aventis based on the
above evidence and the Respondent’s admissions as to
...”—the Respondent failed to keep dispensing
or other records of MF in the relevant period.
The Respondent’s admitted failures to comply with statutory obligations,
his amendments of the quantity of MF on two prescriptions
written by Dr. X and
amendment also, of the date on the second—despite the prescriber’s
presence before him—and
his failures regarding the recording requirements
concerning Drugs of Addiction including Methadone dispensing, taken together
his flawed judgment concerning supply to Dr.X, are regarded by the Tribunal
as extremely serious. In this context the Tribunal also
notes in Mr.
Malek’s statement (Exhibit C-1 / tab 25) his observation as a pharmacist
employed by the Respondent that “...
the Schedule 8
...[i.e. Drugs of
Addiction]...
drug register wasn’t kept up to date
Tribunal also notes the testimonial provided by Dr. Gabrael (Exhibit R-8)
includes his assessment: “
It is as a result of his naiveté that
he has come to the Complaints Commission. He had only opened his pharmacy
week earlier and naturally, he was keen to do well by serving local
Tribunal concludes that the Respondent’s failures demonstrate an
inherently deficient attitude to the Respondent’s
legal and ethical
responsibilities as a registered pharmacist. His failures are all the more
serious in one who was registered as
a pharmacist in 1999 and who has held a
pecuniary interest in nine pharmacies (including his current pharmacy at Emu
Heights) in
just under 10 years, four of which pharmacies (including the two at
Burwood) were held by the Respondent as sole proprietor, during
the relevant
period of the Complaint.
The Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite standard, that Complaints numbered 1
and 2 of the Complaint have been proved.
Accordingly,
given the nature and seriousness of his failures, the Tribunal finds the
Respondent guilty of
professional
found the Respondent guilty of
professional misconduct
, the Tribunal must
consider what Orders are appropriate, including suspension or cancellation of
the Respondent’s registration
and / or any conditions on his registration.
The Complainant seeks cancellation of registration as necessary.
Wentworth v New
South Wales Bar Association
176 CLR 239
at 250-251). Professional disciplinary proceedings are
intended for the protection of the community, to maintain proper and ethical
professional standards and to protect the good standing and reputation of the
profession of pharmacy. Deterrence is another important
element in the exercise
of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction both as to the Respondent personally and
with respect to the profession
observed by
Prakash v HCCC
[2006] NSWCA 153
The purpose of any order consequent upon a finding that a
complaint has been proved, is said to be protective of the interests of
public at large, but more particularly patients or potential patients of the
practitioner concerned. However the public interests
include indirectly, the
standing of the medical profession and the maintenance of public confidence in
the high standards...of
practitioners. There is also an element of deterrence
or, to put it more positively, encouragement to other practitioners to
the importance of complying with professional standards and the risks
of failing to do so. The powers of a Tribunal having two members
of the medical
profession should, at least in relation to professional standards be accorded a
degree of flexibility which might
not necessarily be accorded to a Tribunal
differently constituted.
the above words addressed the medical profession and the Medical Tribunal, they
are apposite to pharmacists and to the Pharmacy
Tribunal. When an order for
suspension or removal is made, its purpose is “...
from the public point
of view, for the protection of those who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order
that abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
104 CLR 186
, at 201-202.
Law Society v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
at pp 33-34, are also apposite to the Respondent, where Her Honour referred
with approval, to a passage from the judgment of
Society of New South Wales v Foreman
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
“Whilst a practitioner’s expressed intention not
to re-offend is relevant to mitigation, it will have little weight unless
accompanied by an understanding of the wrongfulness of the conduct which was
the subject of the disciplinary charge.”
As noted by the Tribunal in
[2009] NSWPHT 1
, it is the
Respondent who bears the onus to establish that there is no risk of recurrence
or an acceptable risk. The mere passage
of time since the misconduct has
occurred during which there is no evidence of any other instance of anything
untoward, is insufficient:
C/F observations of
Tziniolis; Re medical Practitioners Act
67 SR (NSW) 448
his evidence before the Tribunal especially during lengthy cross-examination,
the Respondent’s demeanour was at times, argumentative
and evasive; and
included attempts in effect, to deflect blame from himself to others, as noted
in Complainant’s submissions
and described above, rather than accepting
personal responsibility for his conduct; an approach which causes the Tribunal
some concern.
Ultimately, towards the end of the Inquiry, the Respondent seemed
to accept personal responsibility given his concessions.
Tribunal is mindful of the Respondent’s registration as a Pharmacist in
November 1999 and also of the number of pharmacies
in which he has held a
pecuniary interest in the last approximately, 10 years. Accepting the
Tribunal’s invitation after the
closing of his evidence, to obtain any
testimonial evidence he might wish to place before the Tribunal, the Respondent
provided only
one testimonial from a Registered Pharmacist, Mr. Peter Panos, by
whom he had been employed as a ‘casual pharmacy student’
period during 1997 and 1998. The Tribunal can give little weight to such
testimonial.
the exercise of its protective jurisdiction and mindful of the objectives of
Orders available to it, the Tribunal is not satisfied
on the evidence before it,
with the assurances given by the Respondent as to his future practice conduct
and acceptance of the wrongfulness
of his admitted failures. Nor is it satisfied
that the Respondent has demonstrated sufficient insight into his behaviour. The
must ensure by appropriate Orders, that the Respondent’s practice
standards will be maintained.
Tribunal does not accept as submitted by the Complainant, that the
Respondent’s registration should be cancelled. Rather,
the Tribunal
considers that a period of suspension is needed to be followed by conditions
imposed on his registration including continuing
professional education /
development, a mentoring process, auditing of his compliance with and procedures
concerning, requirements
relevant to Restricted Substances and Drugs of
Addiction pursuant to the Poisons & Therapeutic Goods Act and Regulation;
requirements for professional memberships.
Accordingly
the Tribunal made its Orders and a Suppression Order.
Peter Dwyer
Chairperson
PHARMACY TRIBUNAL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION v JOHN
[2011] NSWPHT 1
(21 June 2011)
AMENDMENT OF ORDERS
Introduction
Pharmacy Council of new South Wales (“the Council”) has advised the
Tribunal that
numbered 5 and 9, cannot be fulfilled; and
accordingly, the Respondent pharmacist Mr. Sayegh, cannot comply with either of
The Tribunal now amends these Orders by application of the “
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
, Reg. 36.17) to
correct each of them in order to give effect to the Tribunal’s
intentions;
an assurance from the
Australian College of Pharmacy
prior to the Tribunal’s decision and
, dated 21 June 2011,
that its distance-learning course ‘
Drug Use and Misuse
specified in
5, would be available, the Council advises that the
course has not been and will not be, offered. Accordingly, the Order cannot be
complied with;
Council has advised the Tribunal that following Council’s investigation
and consideration, another course it considers to
be equivalent in content and
relevance to that formerly offered by the ACP, is
available—‘
Prescription Drug Misuse Module’
‘online’ by the
Royal Australasian College of Physicians’
(RACP) Australasian Chapter of Addiction Medicine
(“RACP “). The
Council advises that the course was developed by a Module Working Group
comprising experienced specialists
in addiction medicine;
Accordingly,
the Tribunal as advised by the Council and having considered the RACP course to
replace that originally named in Order
5, orders such replacement.
originally formulated,
5 required that the relevant course be
completed within a period of twelve (12) months commencing upon expiration of
the relevant
period of suspension in
2 of the Orders. Given that
the Order of suspension dated
21 June 2011
was not to commence until
thirty (30) days following the date of the Order, namely on
21 July 2011
the (three month) suspension period would therefore expire on
upon which date the 12 month period for completion of the designated
ACP course, would begin.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal
Order 5 as originally provided and
the above described, RACP course is to be completed by the Respondent within the
period of twelve (12) months commencing on
23 January 2012
and that the
Respondent is to provide evidence from the RACP of his completion of such
course, to the Council within thirty (30) days
of the Respondent’s receipt
of such evidence.
Council has advised the Tribunal that this Order also, cannot be fulfilled and
hence, cannot be complied with as the Respondent’s
current pharmacy at Emu heights...
’ (“Emu Heights
Pharmacy”) in respect of which the Tribunal made its Order on 21 June
20011, is no longer owned
by the Respondent who has disposed of his pecuniary
interest in it.
Council advised the Tribunal that the Respondent provided it with a
Disposal of Pecuniary Interest
in respect of his Emu
Heights Pharmacy. Further it advised, the Respondent’s
Application for
New Pharmacy
in respect of the
Watson’s Bay Pharmacy
approved by the Council at its meeting held on
13 April 2011
. It follows
from the above chronology, that on the date of the Tribunal’s decision and
21 June 2011
the Respondent had already disposed of
his pecuniary interest in the Emu Heights Pharmacy.
advised and confirmed, by the Council, at no time since the Tribunal’s
decision on 21 June 2011 to the present, has the Respondent
communicated with
the Council, concerning compliance with Order 9 given the sale of his Emu
Heights Pharmacy. Nor did the Respondent
advise the Tribunal of such disposal,
when the Tribunal’s decision was handed down on
21 June 2011
since then;
originally provided in Order 9, the Respondent was to obtain accreditation in
Quality Care Pharmacy Program
(“QCPP”) conducted by the
Pharmacy Guild of Australia
(“PGA”), within twelve (12)
months commencing upon expiration of the relevant period of three (3) months
suspension in Order 2,
as noted above, on
21 October 2011
Accordingly, in effect, the
accreditation was to be obtained by not
21 October 2012
making an Order in terms of Order 9, the Tribunal has had regard to relevant
evidence during the Inquiry into the Complaints against
the Respondent, the
hearing of which, took place on 22, 23, 24 and 25 February, 2011.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal
Order 9 as originally provided, to reflect the
disposal of the Respondent’s Emu Heights Pharmacy and
within a period of twelve (12) months commencing on
23 January 2012
Respondent is to obtain accreditation of his
Watson’s Bay Pharmacy
and of any other pharmacy in which he acquires a pecuniary interest, in the
Quality Care Pharmacy Program
conducted by the Pharmacy Guild of
Australia (NSW Branch) and thereafter to maintain such accreditation for a
period of three (3)
years; and evidence of such accreditation and of annual
Standards Maintenance Assessment, is to be provided annually, to the
making the amendments to Orders 5 and 9 as above, the Tribunal grants leave to
the Respondent and to the Complainant, to advise
the Tribunal Registry of any
objection to these Orders or the terms thereof, in writing; and any such
objection is to be received
not later than, 16 January 2012
absence of any objection the above Orders will become effective on and from
23 January2012
Tribunal orders accordingly
For the Tribunal,
........................................................
Chairperson
19 December 2011.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (670 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter