URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMPSC/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vickery, Graham, John Pierre [2023] NSWMPSC 1 (6 March 2023)
QM2022/13714: 138439/22
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE INQUIRY
Constituted under Part 8 of
the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
to hold an Inquiry into a Complaint in relation
Dr Graham John Pierre
MED0001005456
Date of Inquiry:
8 December 2022
Committee members:
Ms Diane Robinson (Chair)
Dr Simon Cowap
Dr Catherine Berglund
Dr Elsa Bernardi
Appearance for Health Care Complaints Commission:
Ms Joan Lee and Ms Hannah Boxall, Legal Officers
Appearance for Dr Graham John Pierre Vickery:
Dr Peggy Dwyer of counsel, instructed by Ms Phoebe Callander, Meridian
Date of decision:
6 March 2023.
The Committee made findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct and
determined to reprimand the practitioner and impose conditions
registration.
Publication of decision:
Refer to page 11 of this decision for details of non-publication
REASONS FOR
INTRODUCTION
THE COMPLAINT
Vickery is a consultant psychiatrist who provided care and treatment to Patient
A from 1980 until 2020. In April 2020 the Ageing
and Disability Commission
notified the Health Care Complaints Commission (the Commission) of an anonymous
complaint concerning Dr
Vickery’s conduct in relation to Patient
23 June 2022 the Commission made three formal Complaints alleging that Dr
Vickery is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Those Complaints are
now being prosecuted before this Professional Standards Committee.
summary, Complaint One alleges that Dr Vickery inappropriately prescribed a
number of medications to Patient A which were not for
the treatment of her
psychiatric condition and so were not for purposes within the scope of his
Two and Three allege that at different times Dr Vickery failed to make and keep
adequate records in relation to Patient
A in breach of Regulations in force at
those times.
Complaints contain several Particulars and are set out in full in Annexure A to
this decision.
LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct is defined in section 139B of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law NSW
(National Law (NSW)), as, amongst other things,
conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
by the practitioner in the practice of the practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience.
is also defined to include improper or unethical conduct relating to the
practice or purported practice of medicine.
139B of the National Law (NSW) and other relevant legislative provisions are set
out in Annexure B to this decision.
STANDARD OF
Commission bears the onus of establishing that Dr Vickery is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
standard of proof required to establish the Complaint is the civil standard so
the Committee must be reasonably satisfied on the
balance of probabilities of
the matters alleged against Dr Vickery. Given the seriousness of the allegations
and the nature of their
consequences, the Committee needs to be comfortably
satisfied that the Complaints have been established on the Briginshaw principles
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336).
The issues to be determined by this Committee
if any, of the Particulars of the Complaint are proven to the comfortable
satisfaction of the Committee.
the proven conduct amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct. The Committee
can look at all the conduct found proven either
separately or cumulatively when
making a determination as to whether the conduct amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct (
Duncan v Medical Disciplinary Committee
[1986] NZCA 465
at 545, 546 and 547)
such a finding is made the Committee must decide whether orders or directions,
made pursuant to the National Law (NSW), are
appropriate.
Vickery graduated in MBBS (Hons) from the University of New South Wales in 1974.
He trained as a psychiatrist, becoming a Member
of the Royal Australian and New
Zealand College of Psychiatrists in 1980 and then a Fellow of the College in
1986. Dr Vickery was
first registered to practise medicine on 3 January 1975. He
has general and specialist registration in psychiatry according to the
Register of Health Practitioners. There are no conditions on his
registration.
After graduation, as well as pursuing his interest in
psychiatry, through placements at St Vincent’s Hospital, Sydney and also
in Darwin, Dr Vickery worked for one year as a general practitioner in the UK.
Dr Vickery has worked as a consultant psychiatrist
in private practice since
1980. He told the Committee he has not taken on any new patients for the last
seven years and is winding
down his private practice. He said his present
intention is to stop seeing patients by the end of 2022.
Vickery’s work also involves the preparation of medicolegal reports for an
insurance company. He has significant experience
with chronic pain management
and post-traumatic stress disorder and uses this expertise in the assessment of
impairment. He prepares
for medicolegal assessments on Sundays and sees clients
on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesday mornings. Dr Vickery said he works from
to 7 pm with short breaks and generally sees 8 clients a day and 4 clients on
Wednesdays. He said his assessments take an hour
or more and he is assessing
around 20 clients each week.
Dr Vickery told the Committee he is now 73
years of age and plans to continue his medicolegal work until retirement at the
Patient A was born was born on 3 October
1936. She first consulted Dr Vickery in 1980. She described a range of
psychiatric symptoms,
which she had experienced since she was 19 years of age.
She had previously been treated by another psychiatrist and had a period
inpatient care, involving electroshock therapy (ECT). Patient A was medically
retired from her employment as a teacher in 1972.
She made a suicide attempt in
1973 following the death of her mother.
Dr Vickery told the Committee that
when he first met Patient A she had not had psychiatric treatment for some years
and was living
in impoverished and very isolated circumstances. Dr Vickery
described Patient A as distressed and mentally tormented by her ‘sin
related contamination obsessions and compulsions’. He stated,
“Patient A reported the subsequent onset of
“contamination”, obsessions and compulsions..... She told me she
there were mortal sins contaminating her hands and forearms and she would
repeatedly feel compelled to decontaminate her hands and
forearms with
methylated spirits. The methylated spirits would burn and excoriate her skin and
she would feel compelled to rinse
her mouth out with ‘methylated
spirits’ whenever she ate anything.”
In 1980 Dr Vickery
diagnosed Patient A as having Anorexia Nervosa, a Major Depressive Disorder with
pervasive suicidal ideation and
an Obsessive Compulsive Disorder. He treated her
for the next 40 years until the complaint was made in April 2022. Dr Vickery
made weekly visits to Patient A at her home and later home visits on a
fortnightly basis.
Patient A also has a range of physical health
problems. In a letter to the Commission in June 2020, her general practitioner
Hamilton stated,
“I have treated Patient A since April 2015. Patient A has several
chronic medical conditions, namely chronic thrombocytosis,
mellitus, osteoporosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, gastro-oesophageal reflux
disorder and obsessive compulsive
disorder. With the assistance of her
specialist medical team her chronic physical illnesses are stable and well
controlled.”
In addition to the documentary material provided by the
parties, the Committee heard evidence from the following people:
Dr Vickery, the
Professor Stevenson, expert witness for the Commission, by
videoconference
CONSIDERATION OF THE ISSUES
the Particulars of the Complaint proven?
Complaint one relates to Dr Vickery’s prescribing for Patient
Particulars of Complaint One
1. From 16 January 2016 to 23 March 2020, the practitioner inappropriately
prescribed the Schedule 4 drugs listed below to Patient
a) Perindopril;
b) Omeprazole;
c) Esomeprazole;
d) Rosuvastatin;
e) Betamethasone Dipropionate;
f) Digoxin;
g) Amoxycillin + Clavulanic Acid,
in circumstances where the practitioner's scope of practice was in
psychiatry and the prescribing of these medications were not for
purposes within
his scope of practice.
2. On 21 November 2018, the practitioner inappropriately prescribed the
Schedule 3 drug, Glyceryl Trinitrate, to Patient A, in circumstances
practitioner's scope of practice was in psychiatry and the prescribing of these
medications were not for purposes within
his scope of practice.
Vickery admits that he prescribed the medications listed in the Particulars of
Complaint 1 to Patient A. Perindopril is a medication
prescribed for
hypertension. Omeprazole and Esomeprazole are medications prescribed to treat
gastro-oesophageal reflux. Rosuvastatin
he is a cholesterol lowering medication.
Betamethasone Dipropionate is an ointment prescribed for a skin condition.
Digoxin is used
in the management of chronic cardiac failure and Amoxycillin and
Clavulanic Acid can be prescribed for the treatment of pneumonia.
Trinitrate is used to treat angina.
In his Reply to the Complaint dated
4 October 2022, Dr Vickery did not admit that the prescribing was inappropriate
or outside the
scope of his practice,
“prescription of each of the medications was justified having regard
to Patient A’s presenting complaints, her refusal
to consult her general
practitioner (despite encouragement to do so) the results of pathology and in
accordance with a recognised
therapeutic
purpose.........”
However, at the commencement of the
proceedings Dr Vickery amended his Reply to the Complaint to admit that his
prescribing was inappropriate
and outside the scope of his practice.
COMPLAINTS 2 and 3
Complaint 2 alleges that at various times
Dr Vickery failed to keep adequate records in relation to Patient A by failing
record of detailed clinical history, assessments, referrals,
prescribing, treatment plans or reviews. It is alleged that in doing
breached the requirements of the Medical Practice Regulations (NSW) in force at
those times.
Complaint 3 alleges that at various times Dr Vickery failed
to make and keep adequate records in relation to Patient A, by failing
a detailed clinical history, assessments, referrals, prescribing, treatment
plans or reviews in contravention of the Health
Practitioner Regulation (New
South Wales) Regulation in force at those times.
Dr Vickery acknowledged
that his medical records for Patient A were inadequate and admits the
Particulars of Complaints 2 and 3.
On the basis of Dr Vickery’s
admissions and the evidence he gave at the hearing, the Committee is comfortably
satisfied that
the Particulars of the Complaints are proven.
proven conduct amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct?
commencement of the hearing Dr Vickery indicated he admits the Complaints in
their entirety. He acknowledged that his inappropriate
prescribing and his
inadequate record keeping constitute unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Professor Stephenson gave evidence as an expert witness for the
Commission. In relation to Dr Vickery’s prescribing for Patient
Professor Stephenson said,
“Dr Vickery is a psychiatrist and should not be prescribing
medications for physical illnesses. Physical illnesses require monitoring
medically trained GP or specialist, who makes an informed diagnosis based on
physical examination and investigations, including
regular reviews. It is
acceptable to occasionally prescribe a medication for a physical illness as a
one off, if the patient has
run out of regular medication and the GP authorizes
it. This is significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner of Dr
Vickery’s experience.”
Dr Vickery did not keep records
in respect of the care and treatment he provided to Patient A. Professor
Stephenson stated that it
is a legal requirement to keep records of
consultations and not keeping any form of record falls significantly below the
standard. Professor Stephenson referred to the Regulations which
require certain information to be included in a patient record.
She noted that
this information is entirely lacking in Dr Vickery’s records as, for
example, there are no records of his initial
and ongoing assessments of Patient
A, no documented treatment plans or reviews and no documented
The Committee is satisfied on the basis of Dr Vickery’s
admissions and the evidence before it, that the Complaints are proven
Vickery is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Are orders or directions pursuant to the National Law appropriate?
Having found Dr Vickery guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct, the
Committee must now consider what, if any, orders should
be made in relation to
General considerations
It is well established that the
punitive. Disciplinary
proceedings are intended to maintain proper professional
standards, primarily for the protection of the public. In relation to the
relevant protective orders to be made, the Committee notes that the powers
available to it in this regard are set out in section146
(B) of the National Law
which provides as follows:
A Committee may do one or more of the following:
a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
b) direct that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s
practising of the practitioner’s profession, it considers
appropriate be
imposed on the practitioner’s registration;
c) order that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric
treatment or counselling;
d) order that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by
the Committee;
e) order that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice at
the times, in the way and to the persons specified by
the Committee;
f) order that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner’s practice, from the
persons specified by
the Committee.
Dr Vickery’s evidence
Prescribing
Dr Vickery has
acknowledged that his prescribing for Patient A was inappropriate. In his
written statement to the Committee, he explained
he prescribed non-psychiatric
treatment for her because of her initial refusal and then ongoing reluctance to
consult a GP. However,
in his oral evidence Dr Vickery acknowledged he was aware
Patient A had a treating GP from at least 2012. Patient A consulted a number
different GPs at the Newcastle Family Practice from 2011 to 2014 and the
evidence indicates that Dr Vickery had received correspondence
from some of
those GPs over that time.
Dr Hamilton became Patient A’s GP in 2015
and Dr Vickery was aware that Dr Hamilton was treating Patient A for various
health problems. Dr Hamilton’s clinical records show that between
April 2015 and September 2020 Patient A consulted her on
35 occasions, on
average around once every six weeks.
Dr Hamilton’s records also
state that in January 2018 Patient A consulted Dr Hamilton accompanied by
“her friend Julie-Ann
Vickery”. Dr Vickery confirmed that Julie-Ann
Vickery was his wife, but stated he did not often discuss patients with his wife
and was not aware of that event.
Dr Vickery said he only prescribed
medications which were appropriate and necessary in order to prevent Patient A
from becoming seriously
unwell. He told the Committee he only prescribed
medications which Patient A had already been prescribed by other medical
practitioners
and which he felt he could prescribe safely, to keep her alive.
However, Dr Vickery acknowledged he initiated antibiotics when Patient
pneumonia and also analgesia for back pain. He agreed he had not communicated
with Dr Hamilton about this prescribing. He said
it was a ‘one off’
and Patient A was very ill.
Dr Vickery said he was aware of Patient
A’s physical health problems. He said he was aware of her current
medications as Patient
A told him what she was prescribed. He also saw
prescriptions written by Dr Hamilton when he made home visits. Dr Vickery
acknowledged
he has had no recent training in drug interactions. He said he used
MIMS when prescribing. He also said he discussed Patient A’s
with her GP although that is not recorded by Dr Vickery. Dr Hamilton’s
evidence was that despite her attempts to
spoke directly with him.
Dr Vickery also said that he had not been aware
that a psychiatrist should not prescribe for general medical issues. He said he
now aware he acted outside the scope of his practice, although that was not
his understanding of the time he was treating Patient
A. He said since the
Complaint he has read the Code of Ethics and he was surprised to learn he should
not be prescribing non-psychiatric
medications.
In his statement to the Committee Dr Vickery said,
“During my initial consultation with Patient A, Patient A told me
that she would only continue to see me if I agreed not to
make notes/records in
relation to my consultations/sessions with her, including reporting letters to
her general practitioner. When
I resisted this proposal, Patient A indicated to
me that it was non-negotiable. I suggested to Patient A that, in the
circumstances,
it may be best for her to find another psychiatrist to see.
Patient A told me that she would not see anyone else.”
said he was very concerned about Patient A’s mental state and reluctantly
agreed to her request.
In his written statement Dr Vickery also outlined
Patient A’s progress over the course of his treatment. He stated that with
medication, psychotherapy and ongoing support Patient A made a significant
recovery, so that her mental state improved and she has
been able to live more
independently and engage in a number of social activities. Despite her progress
Dr Vickery’s approach
to record keeping for Patient A did not change. Dr
Vickery acknowledged he should have revisited the issue of record keeping with
Patient A, but he did not do so.
Patient A did consult her GP and other
specialists on multiple occasions while seeing Dr Vickery and had no apparent
objection to
those medical practitioners maintaining clinical records. Dr
Vickery told the Committee he understood Patient A had no objection
being made in relation to her physical health conditions. Patient A did share
with Dr Vickery the notes she had made about
her mental state and related
Dr Vickery said he had a list of Patient A’s current
medications, which he kept in a folder, but this was unfortunately thrown
his secretary. He acknowledged this was inadequate storage of medical
Proposed orders
The Commission proposed that Dr
Vickery be reprimanded. It was also proposed that Dr Vickery practise under
supervision and that an
audit of his medical records take place in 12
months’ time.
Dr Vickery did not object to the conditions proposed
by the Commission.
It is difficult to accept Dr
Vickery’s statement that he prescribed medications for Patient A because
she was reluctant to consult
a GP. The evidence reveals that she did consult a
number of GPs at the Newcastle Family Practice from at least 2012 onwards. The
records of her consultations with Dr Hamilton show she made regular visits to
her GP and that Dr Hamilton was coordinating the treatment
she required for
various medical conditions.
Dr Vickery’s assertions that he only
prescribed medications initiated by other practitioners or in circumstances
where Patient
A was seriously unwell are also not supported by the evidence. Dr
Vickery’s training and experience in psychiatry do not properly
to manage general medical conditions and his assertion that he discussed Patient
A’s physical health problems with
her treating GP is also not
substantiated by the evidence.
Dr Vickery’s explanation for his
failure to maintain adequate records relating to his care and treatment of
Patient A is not
reassuring. Other treating medical practitioners were able to
maintain records for Patient A. Dr Hamilton’s records referred
A’s mental health issues. And Dr Vickery failed to revisit the issue of
record keeping with Patient A when the doctor-patient
relationship had been
securely established and when her mental state had improved.
Committee agrees that Dr Vickery should be reprimanded. In her submissions on
behalf of Dr Vickery, Dr Dwyer noted that Dr Vickery
had acknowledged the
entirety of the Complaint. And despite the flaws in his management, Dr Vickery
had provided support and treatment
to Patient A such that her quality of life
improved significantly. Nevertheless, the deficiencies in Dr Vickery’s
record keeping
and prescribing were extensive. They occurred over a prolonged
period of time, at least five years in relation to the prescribing
and some 40
years in relation to the record keeping. They gave rise to a number of serious
risks to Patient A’s health and
well-being and they constitute a
significant departure from expected professional standards.
The Committee
also agrees that Dr Vickery should practise under Category C supervision. Such
supervision will ensure oversight of
Dr Vickery’s practice. Despite his
long career it would appear that it was not until the Complaint was made that Dr
became aware of his obligations as a psychiatrist in relation to
prescribing. He did keep records for other patients and his failures
relation to recording Patient A’s care and treatment cannot be attributed
to ignorance.
Supervision will also provide Dr Vickery with an
opportunity to discuss professional issues with a colleague and peer. His
should be a consultant psychiatrist who is a Fellow of the College.
Meetings with his supervisor should occur on a monthly basis
with the supervisor
reporting to the Council at three monthly intervals. It would be appropriate for
Dr Vickery’s supervisor
to be able to access his medical records so these
might be meaningfully discussed during supervision sessions.
A condition
requiring an audit of Dr Vickery's medical records in 12 months’ time is
appropriate to ensure that his records
are up-to-date and that Dr
Vickery’s prescribing is appropriately monitored.
DETERMINATION
Having considered the submissions and Dr Vickery’s
evidence, the Committee considers that it is appropriate to make the following
section 146B(1)(a) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law, the
Professional Standard Committee reprimands the
Practitioner.
Practice Conditions
Section 146B(1)(b) of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
the Professional Standard Committee imposes the following conditions on the
practitioner’s registration.
Supervision
advise the Medical Council of NSW in writing at least seven days prior to
changing the nature or place(s) of practice.
practitioner is to practise under category C supervision in accordance with the
Medical Council of NSW Compliance Policy –
Supervision (as varied from
time to time) and as subsequently determined by the appropriate review body.
Supervisor must be a consulting psychiatrist in adult psychiatry with specialist
psychiatry registration with the Medical Board
of Australia.
terms of the Council’s Compliance Policy – Supervision are varied so
that the practitioner must meet with the supervisor
on a monthly basis and
authorise the Council-approved supervisor to provide reports to the Council on a
quarterly basis.
each supervision meeting the practitioner is to review and discuss his practice
with his approved supervisor with a particular
appropriate
prescribing practices
record keeping
at least 5 medical records of patients that are randomly selected by the
Council-approved supervisor.
authorise the Medical Council of NSW to provide proposed and approved
supervisors with a copy of the decision that imposed these
conditions and any
other decision or report as determined by the Council.
supervised for a minimum cumulative period of 12 months and as subsequently
determined by the Medical Council of NSW.
practitioner must have a supervisor approved by the Medical Council of NSW
within 3 months of 6 March 2023. The practitioner is
not to practise after this
date until a supervisor has been approved by the
practitioner is to submit to an audit of his medical practice, by random
selection of his medical records by a person or persons
nominated by the Medical
Council of NSW, and:
audit is to be held within 12 months from 6 March 2023 and subsequently as
required by the Council
auditor(s) is to assess the practitioner’s compliance with good medical
record keeping standards and legislative requirements.
authorise the auditor(s) to provide the Council with a report of their
meet all costs associated with the audit(s) and any subsequent
appropriate review body for the purpose pf a review under sections 163 –
163C of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
is the Medical
Council of NSW, when the practitioner’s principal place of practice is in
125 and 127 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
apply while the practitioner’s principal place of practice is anywhere in
Australia other than NSW, so that a review
of these conditions can be conducted
by the Medical Board of Australia.
APPEAL AND REVIEW RIGHTS
Dr Graham John Pierre Vickery has the right to appeal this decision to the
NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
An appeal must be lodged with the Tribunal within 28 days of the date of
these written reasons.
Dr Graham John Pierre Vickery also has the right to seek a review by the
Medical Council of NSW of the Committee’s order to
impose conditions.
Should Dr Graham John Pierre Vickery’s principal place of practice be
anywhere other than NSW at the time
of seeking a review of conditions, Dr Graham
John Pierre Vickery may make an application for review to the National Board.
NON-PUBLICATION ORDER
The name, address or any other information
which might identify the patient who is the subject of this Complaint are not to
be published.
DISTRIBUTION OF DECISION
We will provide a
copy of this written statement of our decision to Dr Graham John Pierre Vickery,
the Commission, the National Board
and the Ageing and Disability
Commission.
____________________
(Chairperson)
6 March 2023
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL
Executive Officer
Medical Council of NSW Punt Road
GLADESVILLE NSW 2111
The Health Care Complaints Commission of Level 12, 323 Castlereagh road
, Sydney, NSW, having consulted with the Medical Council of NSW in accordance
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) ('the
National Law');
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Dr. Graham John Pierre Vickery ("the practitioner") of
250 Darby Street, COOKS HILL NSW 2300, being a psychiatrist registered under
National Law,
BACKGROUND TO ALL COMPLAINTS
The practitioner graduated with MBBS(Hons) from the
University of New South Wales in 1974. The practitioner obtained his MRANZCP in
1980 and FRANZCP in 1986. The practitioner commenced practising as a
psychiatrist in 1980. From 1999, the practitioner worked as
a consultant
psychiatrist in a private clinical practice in Broadmeadow, and subsequently in
Cooks Hill and at Sydney locations.
From 1980 until 2020, the practitioner provided psychiatric care and treatment
to Patient A, who was born in 1936.
COMPLAINT ONE
The practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under section 1398(1)(a) and/or (I) of the
National Law
in that the practitioner has:
i. engaged in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in the
practice of
medicine is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience; and/or
in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice
of medicine.
BACKGROUND TO COMPLAINT ONE
This Complaint relates to the practitioner's prescribing to
Patient A. The drugs identified in this Complaint are in the following
categories:
only medicine within the meaning of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
being drugs contained within Schedule 3 of the Poisons
("Schedule 3 drugs");
ii. Prescription only medicine within the meaning of the PTGA,
being drugs contained within Schedule 4 of the Poisons List ("Schedule
The conduct in any of Particular 1, sub-particular
(a) to (g) and Particular 2 of Complaint One is repeated and relied upon in
combination
as a course of conduct involving description amounting to
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
1. From 16 January 2016 to 23 March 2020, the practitioner
inappropriately prescribed the Schedule 4 drugs listed below to Patient
Perindopril;
Omeprazole;
Esomeprazole;
Rosuvastatin;
Betamethasone
Dipropionate;
Amoxycillin
+ Clavulanic Acid,
in circumstances where the practitioner's scope of practice was in psychiatry
and the prescribing of these medications were not for
purposes within his scope
of practice.
21 November 2018, the practitioner inappropriately prescribed the Schedule 3
drug, Glyceryl Trinitrate, to Patient A, in circumstances
practitioner's scope of practice was in psychiatry and the prescribing of these
medications were not for purposes within
his scope of practice.
COMPLAINT TWO
The practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under section 1398(1)(a) of the
National Law
the practitioner has engaged in conduct that demonstrates the judgment
possessed, or care exercised, by the practitioner in
the practice of medicine is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training
or experience.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
1 January 1980 to 31 August 1998, the practitioner failed to make and keep
adequate records in relation to Patient A, includi_ng
failing to keep a record
of detailed clinical history, assessments, referrals, prescribing, treatment
plans or reviews.
1 September 1998 to 31 August 2003, the practitioner failed to make and keep
adequate records in relation to Patient A, including
failing to keep a record of
detailed clinical history, assessments, referrals, prescribing, treatment plans
or reviews.
practitioner's conduct in Particular 2 was in breach of clauses 13 to 17 of the
Medical Practice Regulation (NSW) 1998.
1 September 2003 to 31 August 2008, the practitioner failed to make and keep
adequate records in relation to Patient A, including
failing to keep a record of
detailed clinical history, assessments, referrals, prescribing, treatment plans
or reviews.
practitioner's conduct in Particular 4 was in breach of clauses 5 to 9 of the
Medical Practice Regulation (NSW) 2003.
1 September 2008 to 30 June 2010, the practitioner failed to make and keep
adequate records in relation to Patient A, including
failing to keep a record of
detailed clinical history, assessments, referrals, prescribing, treatment plans
or reviews.
practitioner's conduct in Particular 6 was in breach of clauses 4 to 8 of the
Medical Practice Regulation (NSW) 2008.
COMPLAINT THREE ·
The practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct under section 1398(1)(b) of the
National Law
the practitioner contravened a provision of:
Health Practitioner Regulation (New South Wales) Regulation 2010
Health Practitioner Regulation (New South Wales) Regulation 2016
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE
1 July 2010 to 31 August 2016, the practitioner failed to make and keep adequate
records in relation to Patient A, including
failing to keep a record of detailed
clinical history, assessments, referrals, prescribing, treatment plans or
1 September 2016 until 12 August 2020, the practitioner failed to make and keep
adequate records in relation to Patient A, including
failing to keep a record of
detailed clinical history, assessments, referrals, prescribing, treatment plans
or reviews.
Dated: 23 June 2022
Delegate of Nicole Lawless
Director of Proceedings
Care Complaints Commission
139B Meaning of “unsatisfactory
professional conduct” of registered health practitioner generally
"Unsatisfactory professional conduct"
registered health practitioner includes each of the following-
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of
the practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
(b) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
provision of this Law, or the regulations under this Law
or under the NSW
regulations, whether or not the practitioner has been prosecuted for or
convicted of an offence in respect of the
contravention.
(c) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of-
(i) a condition to which the practitioner’s registration is subject;
(ii) an undertaking given to a National Board.
(d) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
decision or order made by a Committee or the Tribunal in
relation to the
practitioner.
(e) A contravention by the practitioner of
section 34A(4)
Care Complaints Act
(f) Accepting from a health service provider (or from another person on
behalf of the health service provider) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or
reward for-
(i) referring another person to the health service provider; or
(ii) recommending another person use any health service provided by the
health service provider or consult with the health service
provider in relation
to a health matter.
(g) Accepting from a person who supplies a health product (or from another
person on behalf of the supplier) a benefit as inducement,
consideration or
reward for recommending that another person use the health product, but does not
include accepting a benefit that
consists of ordinary retail conduct.
(h) Offering or giving a person a benefit as inducement, consideration or
reward for the person-
(i) referring another person to the registered health practitioner; or
(ii) recommending to another person that the person use a health service
provided by the practitioner or consult the practitioner
in relation to a health
(i) Referring a person to, or recommending that a person use or consult-
(i) another health service provider; or
(ii) a health service; or
(iii) a health product;
if the practitioner has a pecuniary interest in giving that referral or
recommendation, unless the practitioner discloses the nature
of the interest to
the person before or at the time of giving the referral or recommendation.
(j) Engaging in overservicing.
(k) Permitting an assistant employed by the practitioner (in connection with
the practitioner’s professional practice) who is
not a registered health
practitioner to attend, treat or perform operations on patients in respect of
matters requiring professional
discretion or skill.
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner’s profession.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(i), a registered health
practitioner has a
"pecuniary interest"
in giving a referral or
recommendation-
(a) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
which the referral or recommendation relates is a public
company and the
practitioner holds 5% or more of the issued share capital of the company; or
(b) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
which the referral or recommendation relates is a private
company and the
practitioner has any interest in the company; or
(c) if the health service provider, or the supplier of the health product, to
whom the referral or recommendation relates is a natural
person who is a partner
of the practitioner; or
(d) in any circumstances prescribed by the NSW regulations.
(3) For avoidance of doubt, a reference in this section to a referral or
recommendation that is given to a person includes a referral
or recommendation
that is given to more than one person or to persons of a particular
(4) In this section-
means money,
property or anything else of value.
"recommend"
a health product
includes supply or prescribe the health product.
includes sell.
146B General powers to caution, reprimand, counsel
(1) A Committee may do one or more of the following in
relation to a relevant health practitioner the subject of a complaint referred
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b) direct that the conditions, relating to the practitioner’s
practising of the practitioner’s profession, it considers
appropriate be
imposed on the practitioner’s registration;
(c) order that the practitioner seek and undergo medical or psychiatric
treatment or counselling (including, but not limited to, psychological
counselling);
(d) order that the practitioner complete an educational course specified by
the Committee;
(e) order that the practitioner report on the practitioner’s practice
at the times, in the way and to the persons specified
by the Committee;
(f) order that the practitioner seek and take advice, in relation to the
management of the practitioner’s practice, from the
persons specified by
the Committee.
(2) If the relevant health practitioner is not registered, a direction
may still be given under this section but has effect only so
as to require the
conditions concerned to be imposed when the health practitioner is
registered.
(3) If a Committee acting under this section makes an order
or directs that any condition be imposed on a health practitioner’s
registration, the Committee may order that a contravention of the order or
condition will result in the health practitioner’s
registration in the
health profession being cancelled.
(4) The order or condition concerned
"critical compliance order or condition"
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (682 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter