URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2021/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Aluminium Specialties Group Pty Ltd v Opokuware [2021] NSWWCCPD 3 (19 January 2021)
DETERMINATION OF AN APPLICATION TO STRIKE OUT
A PRE-FILING STATEMENT
Aluminium Specialties Group Pty Ltd v Opokuware
[2021] NSWWCCPD 3
APPLICANT DEFENDANT:
Aluminium Specialties Group Pty Ltd
RESPONDENT CLAIMANT:
Abraham Opokuware
FILE NUMBER:
DATE OF DECISION:
19 January 2021
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Application to Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement;
Workers Compensation Act 1987
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
President Judge Phillips
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant Defendant:
Mr T Ainsworth, solicitor
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
Respondent Claimant:
Unrepresented
ORDERS MADE ON APPLICATION:
Opokuware’s pre-filing statement is struck out pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
order as to costs.
INTRODUCTION
matter concerns an application filed by the applicant defendant employer seeking
an order pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
1987 Act) that the respondent claimant worker’s pre-filing statement be
struck out. For the following reasons, the application
is successful.
approximately July 1992 to approximately October 2002, Mr Abraham Opokuware was
employed by Arrowpak Packaging Pty Ltd (Arrowpak)
as a pick packer. Mr Opokuware
alleges that in or around 1993, he started to develop pain in his lower back
whilst wrapping and packaging
items weighing approximately 10kg. He further
alleges that on or around 14 October 2002, he was placing a roll on a
machine when
he slipped and suffered an injury to his right knee.
8 May 2003 until 2010, Mr Opokuware was employed by the applicant defendant,
Aluminium Specialties Group Pty Ltd (Aluminium Specialties).
Opokuware alleges that on about 7 August 2009, he was packing metal sheets when
he felt a sharp pain in his backside, resulting
in intense pain in his hip and
groin. He further claims that the nature and conditions of his employment with
Aluminium Specialties,
which involved the packing of aluminium frames weighing
approximately 17 kgs, aggravated his pre-existing back injury.
2012, Mr Opokuware made a claim against both Arrowpak and Aluminium Specialties,
seeking compensation in respect of injuries he
suffered during the course of his
employment. Mr Opokuware commenced proceedings in the Commission in 2013.
19 June 2014, Mr Opokuware’s claim before the Commission was resolved at a
conciliation hearing. A Certificate of Determination
– Consent Orders
dated 20 June 2014
made orders for
weekly payments for a closed period from 28 October 2010 to 28 April 2013 and s
60 expenses. The parties agreed to
enter into a complying agreement providing
for payment of the sum of $30,250 pursuant to s 66 of the 1987 Act in respect of
(right lower extremity – hip).
31 July 2014, Mr Opokuware’s then solicitors (Turner Freeman Lawyers) gave
notice to Aluminium Specialties of Mr Opokuware’s
intention to bring
a claim for work injury damages in respect of his right hip injury pursuant to
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act).
28 October 2014, Mr Opokuware served a Pre-Filing Statement on Aluminium
Specialties’ solicitors. Aluminium Specialties declined
the claim in a s
74 notice dated 6 November 2014.
12 November 2014, Aluminium Specialties served a Pre-Filing Defence on
Mr Opokuware’s solicitors.
28 November 2014, Mr Opokuware lodged an Application for Mediation to
Resolve a Work Injury Damages Claim (matter no 6436/14) in
the Commission. That
application was served on 5 December 2014, and Aluminium Specialties filed
a response on 19 December 2014.
parties attended a mediation hearing on 19 February 2015 before Mediator
Lancken, who issued a Certificate of Mediation that the
parties did not resolve
the dispute and settle the matter.
Specialties submits the parties attended an informal settlement conference on
18 November 2016, which was unsuccessful in
resolving the dispute. It also
says that in June 2018, Mr Opokuware instructed new solicitors, Slater
& Gordon Lawyers.
to the present Application to Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement (the
Application), is an email sent on 20 September 2018 from
Slater & Gordon
Lawyers to Aluminium Specialties’ solicitors (HWL Ebsworth) enquiring if
it would consider making a further
offer. The email further notes that
Mr Opokuware’s solicitor may not be able “to obtain realistic
instructions”
from her client.
Specialties further contends that the parties attended a further informal
settlement conference on 25 (sic, 22) February
2019, which was also
unsuccessful.
14 May 2019, Slater & Gordon Lawyers informed HWL Ebsworth by
that they were in the process
of terminating Mr Opokuware’s retainer as they were “unable to
get any meaningful instructions
from [Mr Opokuware].”
Specialties submits there has been no further progress in relation to the claim
for work injury damages.
24 March 2020, Aluminium Specialties lodged the Application, seeking to strike
out the Pre-Filing Statement.
Commission’s file indicates that on 27 March 2020, the Commission
confirmed that they
no longer acted for Mr Opokuware and that McDonnell Schroder Solicitors
were now instructed.
a telephone enquiry from the Commission later that day, McDonnell Schroder
advised the Commission that they had only recently obtained
instructions in
relation to a s 66 claim, not in respect of work injury damages and were yet to
receive the file from Slater &
Gordon. McDonnell Schroder indicated that
they would accept service of the present Application.
Registrar issued a Direction dated 27 March 2020 that set a timetable for
Aluminium Specialties to serve on Mr Opokuware a sealed
copy of the
Application. The Registrar also directed:
“By 21 April 2020
McDonnell Schroder Solicitors are to notify the Commission and the applicant
defendant whether they have instructions
to represent Mr Opokuware in the 11E
Application and, if applicable, to advise the Commission of the timeframe
required to file a
Notice of Opposition (Form 11F).”
15 April 2020, McDonnell Schroder advised the Commission by email that due to
the COVID-19 pandemic and shutdown, they were unable
Mr Opokuware’s file from Slater & Gordon Lawyers.
20 April 2020, the Registrar issued a further Direction adjourning the matter
for three months until 20 July 2020. McDonnell Schroder
were directed to
facilitate the transfer of Mr Opokuware’s file from Slater &
Gordon, and Mr Opokuware was directed to
inform the Commission as to his
ability to respond on or before 20 July 2020.
18 June 2020, McDonnell Schroder advised the Commission by email that it had
been unable to retrieve the file from Slater &
Gordon and that it had been
provided with some documents, but not a complete file, which appeared to have
been lost. The Commission
encouraged the parties to confer as to whether
non-privileged material may be shared, and the parties were requested to provide
update to the Commission by 20 July 2020.
15 July 2020, McDonnell Schroder provided the Commission and Aluminium
Specialties’ solicitors the following update by
“After a conference with our client on 9 July 2020, we
gave an advice to Mr Opokuware which he did not accept.
We confirmed this advice to him in writing on 9 July 2020, seeking a response
no later than 20 July 2020.
His response is to advise whether Mr Opokuware wishes to take our advice or
if he has withdrawn his instructions.
We will advise as soon as we hear from Mr Opokuware or his new
representatives.”
the following day, McDonnell Schroder sent a further email to the Commission
that it “now [had] formal instructions from
Mr Opokuware that he is not
prepared to accept our advices and we are no longer acting on his behalf.”
McDonnell Schroder also
noted they had advised Mr Opokuware “that he
must seek new representation as a matter of urgency given the Strike Out
Application
and the date of 20 July 2020 listed in the WCC Direction dated
20 April 2020.” McDonnell Schroder provided the Commission with
Opokuware’s residential address and telephone numbers and was unable to
provide the Commission with Mr Opokuware’s
email address.
20 July 2020, two staff members from the Commission called Mr Opokuware and
enquired whether he would be seeking new legal representation.
Mr Opokuware
indicated that he would be seeking new representation. A file note of those
conversations records the Commission encouraged
Mr Opokuware to contact the
Law Society Referral Service or the Worker Compensation Independent Review
Office’s Independent
Legal Assistance and Review Service (ILARS), of which
he was provided the contact details.
30 July 2020, the Commission again contacted Mr Opokuware by telephone, where he
advised that he had not yet found a new lawyer.
calls from the Commission to Mr Opokuware were made on 10 and 12 August 2020,
which were not answered. Voicemail messages
were left on each occasion,
variously requesting he advise whether he has obtained legal representation and
that he return the Commission’s
telephone calls. Mr Opokuware did not
return the calls.
25 August 2020, the Commission sent, by Express Post, a letter to Mr Opokuware
at the address which was provided by McDonnell Schroder.
Included in the letter
was a complete copy of the Application, a blank Notice of Opposition, as well as
the contact details for ILARS
and the Law Society Referral Service. The letter
requested Mr Opokuware, or his solicitors, return the completed Notice of
by no later than 22 September 2020. It also noted that if the
Application to Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement is granted, Mr Opokuware
lose his right to common law damages and that it is important he obtain legal
advice urgently.
1 September 2020, the Commission’s Registry received the letter dated 25
August 2020, Application and attachments, which
were returned to the Commission
in a different envelope to that in which they were posted. There was no Notice
of Opposition returned
and no accompanying correspondence from
Mr Opokuware.
Commission’s file records that on 2, 3, and 4 September 2020, the
Commission attempted to call Mr Opokuware by telephone.
Those telephone
calls were not answered. In the calls of 2 and 3 September, voicemail messages
were left asking that the telephone
calls be returned. Mr Opokuware did not
return those calls.
8 September 2020, the Commission again attempted to contact Mr Opokuware by
telephone, calling on an alternative number that was
on the Commission’s
file, which was disconnected. Another staff member of the Commission then
attempted to call Mr Opokuware
on his mobile telephone and left a message
requesting he return the Commission’s call. Mr Opokuware did not
return the calls.
15 September 2020, the Commission sent a further letter to Mr Opokuware by
registered post, which was delivered on 18 September
2020. That letter attached
a blank Notice of Opposition and noted that if the Application is granted,
Mr Opokuware may lose his right
to pursue common law damages, and requested
a response from him by 23 September 2020. The letter further noted that in the
that he does not respond, the matter will be allocated to me for
determination.
28 September 2020, Mr Opokuware called the Commission. He advised that he
has not been well, he wishes to get a lawyer and requested
an extension of time
to seek legal representation. By email, Aluminium Specialties’ solicitors
consented to an extension until
26 October 2020. Its solicitors noted that
in the event that any further extensions would be sought, it requested medical
be provided. On 29 September 2020, the Commission posted
Mr Opokuware a letter confirming that the time for him to seek legal advice
had been extended until 26 October 2020. That letter further noted that if any
further extensions were to be sought, the Commission
would require
Mr Opokuware provide evidence in support of any such application.
Mr Opokuware
did not contact the Commission in response. On 27 October 2020, the Commission
called Mr Opokuware and left a voicemail
requesting he return the
Commission’s call. Mr Opokuware did not return that call. On the
following day, 28 October 2020, the
Commission again called Mr Opokuware,
which was not answered. A file note records no message was left as the
connection dropped out
during the automated greeting. On 29 October 2020, Ms
Taylor from the Commission again called Mr Opokuware. She recorded the following
in a file note of that call:
“I phoned Mr Opokuware on his
mobile phone ... . Mr Opokuware answered, I introduced myself and that I
was calling from the
Workers Compensation Commission, and confirmed that he was
Mr Opokuware. I told him I was calling to find out how he was progressing
the Application to strike out the pre-filing statement. Mr Opokuware said he
does not know anything about an application to
strike out a pre-filing
statement. He said he has no application and I said that the application was
filed by the insurer. He said
the insurer has not told him this and I clarified
that it was the insurer’s solicitor, and that the Commission has spoken to
him and sent him correspondence on a number of occasions about this. Mr
Opokuware insisted that he has had nothing to do with the
Commission. I said
that I had previously spoken to him on the phone as had Nyomi Gunasekera [Senior
Lawyer at the Commission]. He
denied speaking to Nyomi. I said that the
Commission has sent him a number of letters. He said ‘I don’t have
any dealings
with the Commission’, and I tried to explain that I am from
the Commission. He was becoming agitated and said ‘If you
have something
to do with the Commission go and do it. I don’t have anything to do with
the Commission’ and he hung up
the phone.”
note that at the time of writing this decision, Mr Opokuware has not lodged
a Notice of Opposition or responded to the requests
above that he advise if he
has obtained legal representation.
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the 1998 Act provides:
“(6) If the Commission is
satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with
proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
regard to Practice Direction Number 1, the documents that are before me, and the
submission by the applicant defendant that
the matter can proceed to be
determined on the basis of these documents, I am satisfied that I have
sufficient information to proceed
‘on the papers’, without holding
any conference or formal hearing, and that this is the appropriate course in the
circumstances.
LEGISLATION
151DA of the 1987 Act provides:
151DA Time not to run for
commencement of proceedings in certain cases
(1) Time does not run for the purposes of section 151D:
(a1) while the determination of the claim concerned is delayed as permitted
by section 281 of the 1998 Act, but not including delay
beyond 2 months
after the claimant has provided all relevant particulars about the claim as
required by section 281(2)(b) of that
Delay in determining a claim beyond 2 months is only permitted on the basis
that degree of permanent impairment is not fully ascertainable
and the insurer
has notified the claimant of this. In such a case, paragraph (a) of this
subsection can apply (if a dispute about
whether degree of permanent impairment
is fully ascertainable is the subject of medical assessment) to further prevent
time running
for the purposes of section 151D.
(a) while a medical dispute as to whether the degree of permanent impairment
of the injured worker is at least 15%, or whether the
degree of permanent
impairment of the injured worker is fully ascertainable, is the subject of a
referral for determination by the
Commission or a referral for assessment under
Part 7 of Chapter 7 of the 1998 Act (including any further assessment
under section
329 of that Act), or
(a2) during the period of 1 month after an offer of settlement is made to the
claimant pursuant to the determination of the claim
as and when required
by the 1998 Act, or
(a3) while an assessment under Part 7 of Chapter 7 of the 1998
Act in respect of a medical dispute referred to in paragraph (a) is
subject of a pending appeal under section 327 of the 1998 Act, or
(b) while a pre-filing statement served in accordance with section 315
of the 1998 Act in respect of the claim concerned remains
(2) A pre-filing statement remains current from the time it is served until
it is struck out under this section on the application
of the person (
) on whom it was served or it is withdrawn by the person who
served it, whichever happens first.
(3) The defendant may apply to the President to have the pre-filing statement
struck out by order of the President. Such an application
may not be made until
at least 6 months have elapsed after the defendant served on the claimant a
defence to the claim in accordance
with section 316 of the 1998 Act.
(4) The President may order that a pre-filing statement be struck out but
must not do so if satisfied that the degree of permanent
impairment of the
injured worker is not yet fully ascertainable and the matter is the subject of a
referral under Part 7 of Chapter
7 of the 1998 Act for assessment of
the degree of permanent impairment of the injured worker.
(5) A medical dispute is considered to be the subject of a referral for
assessment under Part 7 of Chapter 7 of the 1998 Act even
approved medical specialist has declined to make an assessment of the degree of
permanent impairment of the injured worker
until satisfied that the degree of
permanent impairment is fully ascertainable.
(6) The President may delegate to a Deputy President any function of the
President under this section (except this power of delegation),
but only if the
President is satisfied that the delegation is necessary to avoid a conflict of
interest or the appearance of bias.”
ALUMINIUM SPECIALTIES’ SUBMISSIONS
the commencement of its submissions, Aluminium Specialties sets out a chronology
of events preceding the lodging of the Application.
Specialties submits that the procedural requirements to bring this Application
have been met. It contends that six months
have elapsed since it served a
Pre-Filing Defence on 12 November 2014, satisfying the requirement in s 151DA(3)
of the 1987 Act.
It also argues that the requirement in s 151DA(4) has been
satisfied as Mr Opokuware’s lump sum claim pursuant to s 66 of the
1987 Act was resolved in a complying agreement dated 19 June 2014, which
provided for the payment of compensation in respect of 20%
whole person
impairment for injury arising from the injury of 7 August 2009.
support of the Application, Aluminium Specialties advances four grounds. It is
convenient to set out each in turn.
Ground One: Mr Opokuware’s delay
Specialties refers to
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer v
where Keating P said:
“factors such as the reasons for the delay and any prejudice to the
defendant are clearly relevant factors
in the exercise of the discretion under s
to the date of injury of 7 August 2009, Aluminium Specialties maintains that the
limitation period in which Mr Opokuware
was to bring a claim for work
injury damages expired on 7 August 2012 pursuant to s 151D of the 1987 Act. It
submits that more than
10 years have elapsed since the date of injury and
more than five years have elapsed since it conceded that the claim “had
breached the requisite threshold to bring a claim for work injury
Specialties quotes the following extract by Sheahan P in
Pasminco Cockle
Creek Smelter Pty Ltd v
in which his Honour
“It is clearly not the intention of the legislature that
the time limit within which a claimant may bring work injury damages
proceedings
should be extended indefinitely by the operation of these provisions. Claimants
must actively pursue the required steps
throughout this pre-litigation process.
The pre-filing statement should remain current for the purpose of completing
those required
Specialties submits there has been considerable delay by Mr Opokuware in
prosecuting the claim and Mr Opokuware has not
made any attempt to explain
the reasons for such delay. It argues a lack of response by Mr Opokuware
has caused it concern as to
the ability of Mr Opokuware to prosecute his
claim for work injury damages. It notes Mr Opokuware has not commenced
proceedings in
the District Court despite being entitled to commence proceedings
in the District Court since February 2015.
Ground Two: Want of prosecution by Mr Opokuware
Specialties submits the Pre-Filing Statement ought to be struck out on the basis
of Mr Opokuware’s want of prosecution
and his “unwillingness to
co-operate even with the benefit of legal advice.” It contends it has made
various genuine
attempts to progress the matter and resolve the claim. It says
that it has not received a substantive response from him, “nor
reasonable attempts by [Mr Opokuware] to reach a
resolution.”
is made to the contact that Aluminium Specialties’ solicitors made in 2015
to Turner Freeman Lawyers who were then
representing Mr Opokuware and
Turner Freeman’s response that their instructions had been withdrawn and
Mr Opokuware’s
file had been sent to another legal representative.
Aluminium Specialties submits it was informed in May 2016 that Turner Freeman
Lawyers had been reinstated and had received further instructions in relation to
Mr Opokuware’s claim.
Specialties notes Mr Opokuware’s solicitors sought to participate in
further settlement discussions at an informal
settlement conference, which it
agreed to participate in. At the informal settlement conference on 18 November
2016, Aluminium Specialties
contends Mr Opokuware did not convey an offer.
At the request of Mr Opokuware’s solicitors, Aluminium Specialties
says it conveyed
an offer that was open for two weeks, which Mr Opokuware
ultimately did not accept.
Specialties says that it is its understanding that Mr Opokuware then sought
to instruct LHD Lawyers to act for him and that
retainer was shortly thereafter
terminated. It says that thereafter Slater & Gordon were instructed to act
for Mr Opokuware.
6 June 2018, Aluminium Specialties’ solicitors attempted to arrange for a
further informal settlement conference to occur
on 12 June 2018. It says
Mr Opokuware was unavailable to attend that conference.
Specialties submits that even with legal representation, Mr Opokuware
continues to seek unrealistic sums of compensation
that are “enough for
him to buy a house” and “millions of dollars”. It has annexed
an email dated 20 September
2018 to its submissions from Slater & Gordon
Lawyers sent to its legal representatives, which it relies upon in support of
says that on that occasion its solicitors were invited to convey an offer on its
behalf. Aluminium Specialties submits that despite
conveying an offer, it
received no response from Mr Opokuware.
an informal settlement conference that was held on 22 February 2019 arranged at
Mr Opokuware’s request, it is said that his
legal representatives
took almost two hours to ascertain instructions from Mr Opokuware to make
the opening offer. Aluminium Specialties
submits his “offer also exceeded
his certificate offer of 19 February 2015”. Aluminium Specialties submits
further offer in good faith but Mr Opokuware’s solicitors
were unable to obtain instructions to make any further offer.
Specialties relies upon an email dated 14 May 2019, which it has annexed to its
submissions, in which its solicitors were
informed by Mr Opokuware’s
solicitors that they were in the process of terminating
Mr Opokuware’s retainer on the basis
of their inability to obtain
“meaningful instructions”.
submits that Mr Opokuware’s position and unwillingness to co-operate
at the mediation and subsequent two informal settlement
conferences have caused
it “great concern” as to Mr Opokuware’s intentions and
desire to resolve his claim for
work injury damages. It further submits that to
the best of its knowledge, Mr Opokuware has been represented by a number of
that have terminated his retainer on the basis that they had been
unable to obtain any meaningful instructions from him.
Specialties contends that having regard to Mr Opokuware’s inaction to
take steps to resolve the claim or commence
proceedings to have the claim
determined, coupled with his unrealistic expectations regarding the outcome of
the claim and failure
to take advice from his legal representatives, the
Pre-Filing Statement should be struck out.
Ground Three: Insufficient evidence adduced by
Mr Opokuware
Specialties submits that Mr Opokuware has failed to serve a report from an
expert witness and failed to provide a statement
in support of his claim. It
says that Mr Opokuware has not sought to remedy this deficiency and that he
has not adduced further and
relevant evidence since the Pre-Filing Statement was
served on 28 October 2014. Aluminium Specialties submits Mr Opokuware
taken no significant steps to progress the matter on an evidentiary
basis” since the failed mediation and informal settlement
attempts in 2015, 2016 and 2019.
Ground Four: Prejudice to the Defendant
the final ground in support of its application, Aluminium Specialties submits
that it is prima facie prejudicial to it, having
regard to the passage of time
since the date of injury, for Mr Opokuware’s action to be allowed to
progress and continue in
the absence of prosecution. It argues that given
Mr Opokuware’s allegations of negligence are directed to the nature
and conditions
of employment between 8 May 2003 and 7 August 2009, Aluminium
Specialties would be unfairly prejudiced as:
(a) systems of work are
likely to have significantly changed over time, particularly since 2003, and
(b) the credibility of witness accounts, if any witnesses are located at all,
are likely to be questioned due to the effluxion of
MR OPOKUWARE’S SUBMISSIONS
noted above, Mr Opokuware has not lodged any submissions or Notice of
Opposition.
RELIEF SOUGHT
Specialties seeks that Mr Opokuware’s Pre-Filing Statement served on
27 October 2014 be struck out pursuant to s 151DA
of the 1987 Act.
Aluminium Specialties also seeks that Mr Opokuware pay its costs of this
Application.
claim for work injury damages must be brought within three years after the date
of injury, except with leave of the
However, time may be
suspended for one of the reasons set out in s 151DA of the 1987 Act. Section
151DA(1)(b) of the 1987 Act suspends
time for the purposes of s 151D while a
pre-filing statement in respect of the claim remains current. That is, until the
Statement is struck out on the application of Aluminium Specialties
or withdrawn by Mr Opokuware.
employer may apply to have the pre-filing statement struck out by order, once
six months have elapsed after it served the pre-filing
defence (s 151DA(3) of
the 1987 Act). A pre-filing statement may be struck out by order if the degree
of permanent impairment is
fully ascertainable (s 151DA(4) of the 1987
are no impediments presented by s 151DA(3) or (4) of the 1987 Act to the
Application being determined at this time. More than
six months have elapsed
since Aluminium Specialties served the pre-filing defence and the medical
evidence indicates that the degree
of permanent impairment is fully
ascertainable.
are sound policy reasons for the inclusion of s 151DA(3) in the 1987 Act. The
provision ensures that the parties have sufficient
time to finalise the
pre-litigation phase of the
proceedings.
It also ensures that
there is a degree of certainty to the process and enables the parties to explore
resolution and/or mediation
of the claim before embarking on litigation.
is now over six years since Mr Opokuware gave notice on 31 July 2014 to
Aluminium Specialties of his intention to bring a claim
for work injury damages.
The mediation occurred on 19 February 2015 and informal settlement conferences
occurred on 18 November 2016
and 25 February 2019. Mr Opokuware has not
progressed the matter since the last informal settlement conference. I also note
there have been significant periods of time spanning between the mediation
and the two informal settlement conferences.
emails annexed to Aluminium Specialties’ submissions are indicative of an
unwillingness on the part of Mr Opokuware to resolve
submitted by Aluminium Specialties, I also note that Mr Opokuware was
entitled to commence proceedings in the District Court since
2015, which he has
not done so.
chronology above indicates that Mr Opokuware has been advised by multiple
legal representatives. It is also indicative of the
delay in resolving this
matter. Apart from an assertion made in a telephone call on 28 September 2020
that he had been unwell, Mr
Opokuware has not provided any explanation of
the reasons for delay. As noted in
prejudice to the
defendant and the reasons for delay are clearly relevant factors in the exercise
of the discretion under s 151DA(3)
of the 1987 Act.
following the lodgment of the Application, the Commission has provided
Mr Opokuware with multiple opportunities to lodge
a Notice of Opposition to
the Application. Contact has been made in numerous attempts by post and
telephone. To date, no Notice of
Opposition has been lodged.
Commission has made contact with Mr Opokuware on a number of occasions. Within
the past 18 months, the only difficulty he has
had is in relation to obtaining
legal representation, but over time it is apparent that he has had access to
legal advice. Nowhere
has Mr Opokuware given an indication of any difficulty he
has had in preparing his case, or an inability to obtain evidence, or that
medical condition has not stabilised. In short, he has not pointed to any reason
which would cause me to exercise my discretion
in his favour. The only problem
is his inability to retain and maintain a legal adviser.
am further conscious of the effluxion of time since the injury and the notice
being given of the intention to make the claim. As
submitted by Aluminium
Specialties, it faces prejudice by the proceedings being protracted.
view of the delay in this matter caused by the conduct of Mr Opokuware and the
absence of sufficient explanation of the reasons
for the delay, together with
the prejudice that Aluminium Specialties faces, and in all of the circumstances,
I consider it appropriate
to exercise my discretion to strike out the pre-filing
Opokuware’s pre-filing statement is struck out pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
order as to costs.
Judge Phillips
19 January 2021
Pre-filing Statement, p
Annexure B to the
Application to Strike Out a Pre-Filing
[2011] NSWWCCPD 41
NSWWCCPD 108
Aluminium Specialties’ submissions,
Section 151D of the 1987
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.66 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter