URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSSB/2001/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Chiles & Rush v Owners Corporation SP 14801 [2001] NSWSSB 7 (30 August 2001)
Chiles & Rush v Owners Corporation SP 14801
(30 August 2001)
STRATA SCHEMES MANAGEMENT ACT
APPLICATION NO : SB00/00836
SCHEME : SP14801
ADDRESS OF : "..."
STRATA SCHEME FORSTER NSW
APPLICANTS : J Chiles and J Rush
RESPONDENT : Owners
Corporation SP14801
1. Pursuant to
section 181(3)
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
the order of the adjudicator made in proceedings number SA00/00680 on 5 December
2000 be set aside and the following orders substituted
2. It is the opinion of the Board that the consent of the owners corporation for
permission to keep two Border Collie dogs on the
lots, namely "Bear" 10 years of
age and "Panda" 3 years of age (both female), pursuant to by-law 16(1) has been
sought and that in
breach of by-law 16(2) the owners corporation has
unreasonably withheld its approval of keeping the said dogs on lots "..." and
being the lots owned by Mr J Chiles and Ms J Rush.
3. The applicants, namely Mr J Chiles and J Rush may keep their female Border
Collies "Panda" and "Bear" on Lots 10 and/or 11 of
the Strata Scheme, subject to
the following conditions:-
i) Except when entering or leaving the Strata Scheme the dogs are to be kept
within the confines of either Lot "..." and/or
ii) When entering or leaving the Strata Scheme the dogs are to be taken by the
most direct route. The dogs are never to be taken
above the floor of the scheme
upon which either lots "..." or "..." are
iii) When on the Strata Scheme the dogs are at all times to be clean of worms,
fleas, and other
iv) When on common property of the Strata Schemes the dogs are to be leashed and
in control of a responsible adult at all
v) The dogs are not to create any noise or nuisance so as to interfere with the
peaceful enjoyment of another owner or occupier of
another lot or any other
person lawfully using the common property.
vi) The applicants are to ensure that any soiling or damage to the common
property caused by the dogs are promptly and properly remedied.
vii) The applicants are to ensure that all waste matter generated by the dogs
are disposed of properly and hygienically so as to
ensure that no unpleasant
odour or nuisance is caused thereby.
4. Permission to keep the dogs on the Strata Scheme relates only to the female
Border Collies "Panda" and "Bear" presently owned
applicants.
REASONS FOR DECISION
THE APPLICATION
This is an application to keep dogs, namely "Panda" and "Bear", two female
Border Collies, on Lots "..." and "..." of the Strata
Scheme. The Strata Scheme
comprises of 15 Lots plus common property on the New South Wales mid-north
coast. The Scheme is predominantly
used for holiday letting; only one owner
lives in the Strata Scheme permanently.
The evidence of the applicants is that they currently reside at the premises
approximately 100 days of the year.
The applicants originally applied to a Strata Schemes Adjudicator in proceedings
SA00/00680 for permission to keep the said dogs
on the Strata Scheme. That
application was dismissed by the Adjudicator pursuant to
section 163
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
") on 5 December 2000 for
reasons set out in that decision.
The applicant has appealed to the Board pursuant to
section 177
The appeal is a hearing
. The respondent argued that the appeal
had to be based on whether the decision of the Adjudicator was unreasonable.
This is a misunderstanding
of the legislation as that consideration only applies
to an appeal for an interim order of an Adjudicator
(Section 178(2)
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
APPLICANTS’ EVIDENCE
Mr Chiles gave evidence on oath.
Mr Chiles gave evidence that the two dogs concerned were both female Border
Collies. The names of the dogs are "Bear" (10 years
of age) and "Panda" (3
years of age).
Originally the application to the owners corporation had also taken into account
the needs of Mr Chiles’ father however since
the Adjudication Mr
Chiles’ father has passed away.
Mr Chiles stated that he currently has the two units, namely "..." and "...", on
the market for sale but is yet to sell same. Mr
Chiles stated that he used to
come to Forster only on holidays however, now spends up to 100 days of the year
He stated that the reason for applying for both lots is that sometimes he and
his partner stay in Lot "..." or "..." depending if
the other is leased out.
The applicants have owned Lots "..." and "..." for six and five years
respectively.
The evidence is that the dogs are well trained and fully vaccinated and are
regularly treated with Frontline Flea Control. The dogs
are exercised
"Panda" has had one litter. Mr Chiles said he would consider desexing "Panda"
and would comply with any condition in that regard.
Mr Chiles questioned the existence of any true "no dogs" policy and called upon
the owners corporation to produce any meetings at
which such a "no dogs" policy
was passed and also at which any decision was made regarding the "no dogs" sign
on the property.
Mr Chiles gave evidence that the two dogs were family to him and his partner and
that he would always due consideration of others
when having the dogs on the
Strata Scheme and would adhere to any conditions imposed regarding same. Mr
Chiles believes that the
objections that had been made were groundless and/or
unreasonable.
Mr Chiles noted that the bulk of the owners do not reside on the premises and
was at a loss as to how this could affect their enjoyment
of the Strata
Mr Chiles stated that there are a number of holiday accommodation lettings which
allow dogs to stay and in fact charge a premium
for dogs staying and they had
proven very popular. Further, in this regard Mr Chiles tendered in evidence a
book called "Dog on
Holidays" being a guide on accommodation where dogs can
stay. Mr Chiles referred to the presence of two dogs on the lots owned by
and Mrs Hall and stating it was not aware of any problems that had arisen since
the permission was granted for Mr and Mrs Hall
to keep their dogs on their lot.
As to those who may express a view regarding allergies or fears, Mr Chiles
stated there was no
reason for his dogs to venture anywhere near the units owned
by the owners of those lots.
The additional documents were tendered by Mr Chiles in evidence:
1. Copy of the Strata Plan.
2. Letter regarding mediation.
3. Letter dated 6 June 2000 to chairperson of the strata scheme seeking a reply
to the request to keep family dogs in the Scheme
during visits.
4. Response from the chairperson dated 15 June 2000 confirming the matter as
being referred to Extraordinary General Meeting.
5. Letter from the Strata Managing Agent of 16 June 2000 requesting information
for the notice of motion to be put to the Extraordinary
General Meeting.
6. Letter dated 24 June 2000 from the applicants setting out information for the
extra ordinary general meeting.
7. Letter dated 30 June 2000 from the Strata Managing Agent to the owners
corporation.
8. Minutes of Extraordinary General Meeting held on 28 July 2000.
9. Letter dated 31 July 2000 to Strata Schemes Mediation Unit.
10. Letter dated 22 August 2000 seeking correction to the minutes.
11. Strata Managing Agent reply regarding the minutes.
12. Media articles regarding the keeping of dogs from the Newcastle Herald
8/2/2000, Sunday Telegraph 27/8/2000 and Sunday Telegraph
13. Letter 15 November 2000 from CJ Hall and VE Hall, letter from V Hall of Lot
7 and 9 dated 15 February 2001.
THE RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE
Mr C Stevens represented the owners corporation and gave evidence on oath.
Firstly, Mr Stevens advised that there was a "no dogs" policy and tendered
copies of photographs of the signs clearly that displayed
"no pets allowed" in
the carpark of the premises and on the noticeboard. Further, Mr Stevens
tendered the "house rules" which stated,
amongst other things, "pets (including
dogs and cats) are not allowed on the premises (either in the units or on the
common areas)."
Mr Stevens stated that the units in their Strata Scheme were in a holiday area
and were primarily let, he being the main permanent
resident in the Strata
Scheme. He said that the owners were concerned that if holiday tenants saw pets
on the lots that they would
all bring their animals and that there would be
Mr Stevens stated that he was sure that there had been a meeting at some stage
approving both the house rules and the "no pets" policy
although was unable to
produce any minutes of any executive committee meeting of the owners corporation
or of the owners corporation
in general meeting to support this contention.
Mr Stevens stated that as there was a "no pets" policy which was quite clear
that the executive committee’s refusal was not
unreasonable.
Further, Mr Stevens tendered the following documents in support of the refusal
by the owners corporation:-
1. Letter of C Stevens dated 15 November 2000.
2. Letter from S McPherson (Lot 5) dated 10 November 2000.
3. Letter of J Cowling and J Cowling dated 10 November 2000 (Lot 14).
4. Letter of Dalligan (Lot 2) dated 14 November 2000.
5. Letter of J Joyce and D Bennett (Lot 3) 15 November 2000.
6. D Kay (Lot 13) dated 17 November 2000.
To paraphrase the objections set out in these letters they are as follows:-
1. The majority of unit owners do not want the dogs.
2. The owner of Lot "..." suffers from allergies and may find himself
encountering health problems when visiting the Strata Scheme
on holiday (no
medical evidence provided to support this).
3. Other visiting tenants may suffer allergies which may affect prospective
lettings and therefore other owners’ financial
situations.
4. Children may be attacked by the dogs.
5. Inappropriate to keep large dogs on a lot of a strata scheme. As the owners
of the Lot "..." and "..." (Mr and Mrs Hall) have
already been allowed to keep
the dogs, additional dogs will create chaos.
6. Tenants will think they are also allowed to bring pets which could lead to a
floodgate and "unpleasantness and possible police
intervention."
7. Lists of self imposed conditions are a waste of time as there is no-one to
enforce the conditions.
8. There are no facilities in the Strata Scheme to accommodate any dogs.
9. The owner of lot "..." contends that she has a mortgage on her premises and
that allowing the dog is a variation or abolition
of by-law 16 and that this in
turn would affect her mortgage.
10. The proximity of the Strata Scheme to parkland is irrelevant.
11. There is a "no dogs" policy in the Strata Scheme and it was there when the
applicant purchased the premises.
12. The medical reasons to support the application were only introduced at
13. The owner of lot "..." states that Ms Chomyn should board her dog elsewhere
like he does.
14. The presence of dogs will create odours and there will be noise with
Mr Stevens stated that he was concerned that if Ms Chomyn was allowed to keep
her dog with the conditions imposed, that it would
be his job as a full time
resident to police and enforce those conditions.
Mr Stevens conceded that since Mr and Mrs Hall had been allowed to keep their
dogs that he had not received any complaints from other
lot owners nor had he
himself been disturbed.
Mr Stevens in relation to the no dog policy sought to rely on an earlier Board
decision of
Arthur Paris
he Owners Strata Plan 16973
February 1998).
In support of his argument Mr Stevens conceded that no
special by-law had been passed to amend or repeal by-law 16 to deny owners
keeping their dogs on the Strata Scheme.
By-law 16 found in schedule 1 of the
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
states as follows:-
The Keeping of Animals
1. Subject to 49(4), an owner or occupier of a lot must not, without the
approval in writing of the owners corporation, keep any
animal on the lot or the
common property.
2. the owners corporation must not unreasonably withhold its approval of the
keeping of an animal on a lot or the common property.
The appropriate time of
considering whether the consent has been unreasonably withheld is at the time
the decision was made by the
owners corporation.
The Board is required to determine the reasonableness of the decision on the
information that was before the owners corporation,
at the time the refusal was
Section 150
Strata Schemes Management Act 1996
provides as
150 Order Relating To Keeping Of
(1) an adjudicator may order a person who the adjudicator considers is keeping
an animal on a lot or common property in contravention
of the by-laws to cause
the animal to be removed from the parcel within a specified time, and to be kept
away from the parcel.
(2) an order under subsection (1) ceases to have effect if the keeping of the
animal on the lot or common property is subsequently
authorised in accordance
with the by-laws.
(3) an application for an order under subsection (1) may be made only by an
owners corporation, a strata managing agent, the lessor
of a leasehold strata
scheme, an owner, any person having an estate or interest in a lot or an
occupier of a lot.
(4) an adjudicator may, by order, declare that the applicant for the order may
keep an animal on a lot or common property in such
manner as is specified in the
order if the adjudicator is satisfied
(a) subclause (2) of by-law 16 in schedule 1 (or a provision to the like effect
in any by-laws) is in force in relation to the strata
scheme, and
(b) the application is made with the consent of the owner of the applicant's lot
(if the applicant is not the owner), and
(c) the owners corporation has unreasonably withheld its consent to the keeping
by the applicant of the animal on the lot or the
(4a) an application for an order under subsection (4) may be made only
(a) an owner of a lot in the strata scheme, or
(b) an occupant of a lot in the strata scheme, with the consent of the owner of
(5) whether or not an order under this section is consistent with any by-law,
the order binds:
(a) in the case of a freehold strata scheme, each owner and occupier of a lot in
and the owners corporation for the strata scheme,
(b) in the case of a leasehold strata scheme, the lessor of the scheme and each
owner, sublessee and occupier of a lot in and the
owners corporation for the
strata scheme, or
(c) if the strata scheme concerned is for a stratum parcel, each person who is
bound by the strata management statement for the building
and its site.
Did the owners corporation unreasonably withhold its consent to the keeping by
the applicant in the lot or strata common property
(section 150(4)(c)
Strata Schemes Management Act
The word "unreasonably" is to be given its meaning in the ordinary parlance; the
authority for this is Davies J in
Curragh Coal Co Pty Lt
[1984] FCR46. In order to have regard to the ordinary
parlance one has regard to the dictionary. The Macquarie Dictionary provides
the following definitions:-
"Reason" Sound judgement or good
"Reasonable" Agreeable to reason or sound judgement, endowed with reasons.
"Unreasonable" Not reasonable, not endowed with reason, not guided by reason
or good sense, not based or in accordance with reason
The reasons for objection I propose to deal with as
1. The majority of unit owners do not want the dogs. The test is not whether
the bulk of the majority of the unit owners want the
dogs; it is whether the
request has been unreasonably refused. It would seem that the decision in
relation to objecting to the dogs
arose out of a common belief that there was a
valid "no dogs" policy that had been accepted by the owners corporation sometime
There is clearly no evidence that there was ever a "no dogs" policy
passed by the owners corporation either by the executive committee
thereof or by
the owners corporation in general meeting.
2. Allergies. There is no medical evidence provided by the owner of Lot 13 that
he suffers allergies in relation to dogs. Further
it is noted that the
complainant does not appear to have been affected by the presence of dogs
already on the strata scheme. Further
in any event there is no reason as to why
the dogs in lots "..." and "..." should be anywhere near the lot in which the
complainant
As to any possible allergies of prospective tenants this is highly speculative
3. Children may be attacked by dogs. There is no evidence that the dogs in
question are of a vicious breed or nature. This concern
is speculative at
4. Inappropriate to keep large dogs on the lot of a strata scheme. There was
evidence provided by the applicants that they regularly
exercise the dog. A
view expressed that it is inappropriate to keep a dog or dogs on a lot is a
subjective rather than an objective
view and clearly the validity of this
argument will vary from case to case. There is no evidence to support the view
presented by
the complainant in the present
5. Opening the Floodgate. There was no evidence produced to support this.
Further the allegation that this would lead to unpleasantness
and possible
police intervention appears to be somewhat sensational. It is always open to
the owners of other lots to place a special
condition in their leases to their
respective tenants not allowing animals on their respective
6. Inability to ensure compliance with conditions. It would be quite clear if
the conditions adhered to by the Board are not being
met. That is, if the dogs
are found frolicking over the common property or are otherwise leaving their
It is noted that a similar list of conditions were placed upon Mr and Mrs Hall
in the keeping of the dogs on their lots and that
no problems have arisen from
this, or at least none have been complained
Mr Stevens also expressed a concern that it would fall upon him to "police" the
conditions. There is simply no requirement that
this be the case and this
appears to be a self assumed role that Mr Stevens wishes to
7. There are no facilities in the Strata Scheme to accommodate any dogs.
The Board is not quite sure what the relevant complainant means by this; there
is no suggestion by the applicants that the Strata
Schemes supplies any such
facilities to accommodate the dogs in
8. Jeopardy to mortgage. The concern expressed that the consent of keeping of
dogs is somehow a variation or abolition of by-law
16 is nonsense. By-law 16
clearly contemplates the possibility of applications to the owners corporation
for permission to keep
a dog or dogs on a lot within a Strata Scheme. No actual
evidence is presented that the keeping of a lot on the Strata Scheme would
jeopardise the relevant complainant ‘s
9. The proximity to parklands. I would have thought this is highly relevant
given that it will enable the dogs to be exercised nearby
without jeopardising
the comfort of others using the Strata Scheme.
10. The "no dogs" policy. There is no evidence able to be produced that the
owners corporation in general meeting or the executive
of the owners corporation
ever approved the establishment of the house rules which amongst other things
set out a "no pets" policy.
The "no dogs" allowed sign was apparently put up pursuant to the "no pets"
policy. Again there is no evidence that there was ever
approval of the owners
corporation in general meeting or by the executive committee of the owners
corporation to erect the sign let
alone the policy.
11. Possible detriment on proposed lettings. There was no evidence produced to
support this. This is speculative highly speculative
12. The owners of Lot "..." and "..." should board their dogs elsewhere. This
is a subjective view. A decision by one owner to
deal with their personal
matters should not necessarily be a standard arbitrarily imposed upon
13. Odours and barking. There are by-laws in place to protect the rights and
comforts of owners and other occupants alike. Should
the presence of the dogs
on Lot "..." cause problems such as barking, clearly the others in the strata
scheme will be able to avail
themselves of by-law 1 in relation to noise.
Accordingly, they are not without remedy.
As the bases for objection appear to be either without foundation, speculative
or fallaciously based upon a supposed "no dogs" policy
(that has never at any
stage been approved by the owners corporation) it is difficult to accept that
the refusal to keep "Panda"
and "Bear" on lots "..." and /or "..." is not
unreasonable.
It is important however, that the parties note that the orders that are made
above apply to "Panda" and "Bear" only and do not apply
to any other dog that
the applicants may acquire or have visit or any litter of "Panda" or "Bear".
Further, the permission does
not run with the title of the units and does not
apply to any other occupant (eg tenant) or visitor to the units.
The conditions that are placed are stringent but are not unworkable and are
required by the Board to be adhered to as an intrinsic
part of the permission
Accordingly the orders were made as set out above.
The delay in delivery of this decision is regretted.
Strata Schemes Board
30 August 2001
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (67.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter