URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2021/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Southern Meats Pty Ltd v Tucker [2021] NSWWCCPD 2 (14 January 2021)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
Southern Meats Pty Ltd v Tucker [2021]
Southern Meats Pty Ltd
RESPONDENT:
Robert Tucker
Self-insured
FILE NUMBER:
SENIOR ARBITRATOR:
Ms J Bamber
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
8 September 2020
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
14 January 2021
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Rejection of uncontradicted expert evidence, acceptance of expert evidence
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
25 NSWCCR 218
applied; whether error to prefer the evidence of a treating
surgeon over the evidence of a medico-legal expert –
Shellharbour City
Council v Rigby
[2006] NSWCA 308
applied; lack of complaints of symptoms
prior to cessation of employment –
Cement Pty Ltd
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
10 NSWCCR 796
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Elizabeth Wood
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr P Stockley, counsel
Kemp & Co Lawyers
Mr J Wilson, counsel
Stacks Law Firm
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Senior Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination dated 8 September 2020 is
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Robert Tucker (the respondent) was employed by Southern Meats Pty Ltd (the
appellant) as a labourer in the appellant’s abattoir.
He commenced in that
employment in January 2006.
respondent suffered injuries to his left shoulder in 2012, on 5 February 2015
and in late May 2015. He ceased work in September
2015. The respondent developed
symptoms in his right shoulder, which were first recorded by his physiotherapist
on 26 July 2016.
The respondent asserted that the right shoulder symptoms arose
as a result of the heavy nature of his work with the appellant. He
attributed the symptoms to having to use the right arm more because of the left
shoulder injury. The respondent made a claim
for the cost of surgery to the
right shoulder in the form of a reverse total shoulder replacement.
appellant accepted liability for the respondent’s left shoulder condition,
but disputed liability in relation to the right
shoulder on the basis that the
right shoulder was not injured as alleged, was not rendered symptomatic as a
consequence of the left
shoulder injury and the surgery was not reasonably
respondent brought proceedings in the Commission, seeking an order that the
proposed surgery to the right shoulder was reasonably
necessary and for the
respondent to pay the cost of the surgery. The matter proceeded to arbitration
before Senior Arbitrator Bamber,
who found in favour of the respondent and made
orders accordingly.
appellant appeals that decision.
ON THE PAPERS
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) provides:
“(6) If the Commission is
satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with
proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
parties have indicated that they are content to have the matter determined on
the basis of the documents and written submissions
and that the matter does not
require an oral hearing.
have had regard to Practice Directions Nos 1 and 6, the documents that are
before me, and the submissions by the parties indicating
that the appeal can be
determined on the basis of these documents. I am satisfied that I have
sufficient information to proceed ‘on
the papers.’
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been
THE EVIDENCE
The respondent’s statement
respondent provided a statement dated 8 April
He gave a history of the
various types of manual work he had undertaken prior to commencing employment
with the appellant. The respondent
described the heavy nature of his duties with
the appellant. He referred to an earlier injury which he suffered in the course
his employment with the appellant on 6 August 2012. The respondent said that
in that incident he was pulling sheepskins, fell backwards
onto a crate, and
injured his back, left shoulder and neck. He reported the injury, took time off
work, but did not make a claim
for compensation. The respondent said he was
certified as fit for unrestricted duties from 28 August 2012 and did not suffer
pain or disability thereafter.
respondent described the injury on 5 February 2015, which he said involved
lifting a sheep which was particularly heavy. The respondent
said that as he
grabbed the sheep with his left arm, he experienced pain in his left shoulder.
He continued to work for a week but
was unable to move his left arm, so he
reported the injury and consulted his doctor, Dr Fadi Mahfoud, general
practitioner.
respondent said that Dr Mahfoud referred him to Dr Wisam Ihsheish, orthopaedic
surgeon, who he consulted on 4 June 2015. The respondent
said that, at that
consultation, he advised Dr Ihsheish that he had re-injured his left shoulder
while performing “light duties”
in the week before the
consultation.
respondent gave details of his continuing pain, restrictions in use of the left
arm and the ongoing treatment from Dr Mahfoud,
who referred the respondent to Dr
Vera Kinzel, orthopaedic surgeon. Dr Kinzel performed a left shoulder rotator
cuff repair on 4
March 2016. The respondent reported that the surgery did not
improve the pain.
respondent said that over time, he began to experience difficulties with his
right shoulder, which Dr Kinzel told him resulted
from overusing his right side
because of the left shoulder problems. He said that he was left arm dominant but
would use both arms
to perform the manual labour involved with his employment
with the appellant. The respondent advised that he underwent an MRI scan
right shoulder on 20 November 2018, which Dr Kinzel told him showed a full
thickness tear that would require surgery in the
form of a right rotator cuff
reconstruction and possible tenodesis. The respondent said that the appellant
refused to meet the cost
of the surgery on the basis that they did not accept
that he had suffered an injury to his right shoulder.
respondent gave details of the second injury to the left arm when he was pulling
the hose, which he said occurred while he was
on “light duties” and
occurred in about the end of May 2015. He also reported that on 15 September
2015, he was removing
the hocks from a sheep with a large saw when the hock flew
out of the saw and hit him in the left shoulder. The respondent said that
reported the injury, was put off work and did not return to work thereafter. The
appellant accepted liability for the left shoulder
The clinical notes from the Argyle Medical Centre
clinical notes from the Argyle Medical Centre commencing from 2006 were in
The first entry relevant
to these proceedings was recorded by Dr Mahfoud on 17 August 2012, and referred
to the respondent having
fallen at work, injuring his back and left shoulder. On
24 August 2012, Dr Mahfoud noted some improvement since the previous week,
on 28 August 2012, Dr Mahfoud recorded that the respondent had no more pain in
the left shoulder and wished to return to work
the following
respondent continued to consult Dr Mahfoud from that date without any relevant
complaints up to and including 5 June 2015. On
6 July 2015, the respondent
complained to Dr Mahfoud of pain and restriction of movement of the left
shoulder following a left biceps
tear five months previously, for which he had
sought treatment from another
17 September 2015, the respondent again complained of left shoulder symptoms, on
this occasion caused by being hit by a sheep’s
hock on 15 September
The respondent continued to
consult Dr Mahfoud complaining of left shoulder symptoms and restricted range of
movement. On 18 April
2016, the respondent attended for review following the
surgery to the left shoulder performed in March 2016. Dr Mahfoud noted that
left shoulder was stable and
In entries that
followed, Dr Mahfoud noted ongoing symptoms and restricted range of movement. By
12 October 2016, Dr Mahfoud described
“limited” range of
On 15 January 2018, Dr
Mahfoud noted that the respondent’s “right shoulder has been
compensating.”
respondent continued to attend Dr Mahfoud, complaining of left shoulder symptoms
with restricted range of movement. The final
entry in the clinical notes was on
14 December 2018.
The clinical notes from McNamara Physiotherapy
respondent attended McNamara Physiotherapy from 18 June 2015 to 8 August 2016
for treatment to his left shoulder. The clinical
notes from that practice were
in evidence.
The records show
that the respondent continued to complain of pain in, and difficulties with, his
left shoulder. Relevantly, on 25
July 2016, Ms Trish McNamara, the
physiotherapist, noted that the respondent was also complaining of pain in the
right shoulder.
Dr Vera Kinzel
Kinzel provided a number of reports detailing the respondent’s complaints
and the treatment provided to him by her. Not all
of those reports are relevant
in terms of addressing the issues on appeal.
Relevantly,
on 4 September 2015 Dr Kinzel reported to Dr Mahfoud that the respondent had
suffered an injury to his left shoulder at
work seven months previously,
following which the respondent was required to continue to undertake heavy work.
Dr Kinzel said that
the respondent was in considerable pain over the shoulder
and distal biceps. She was of the view that the respondent suffered from
pre-existing rotator cuff pathology which was exacerbated by the incident seven
months earlier and that in that incident, the respondent
ruptured the long head
of the biceps. Dr Kinzel foreshadowed that the respondent would likely require a
reverse total shoulder replacement
in the near
a report dated 25 January 2017, Dr Kinzel advised Dr Mahfoud that the respondent
had unfortunately not recovered good function
of the left shoulder. The
respondent was unable to abduct or elevate more than 90 degrees without
experiencing pain and was unable
22 June 2017, Dr Kinzel reported to Dr Mahfoud following the left reverse total
shoulder replacement six weeks earlier and advised
Dr Mahfoud that the
respondent was still wearing a sling for his left
a short report dated 14 September 2017, Dr Kinzel advised Dr Mahfoud that the
respondent had told her that his right shoulder was
symptomatic as he had to
“compensate”. Dr Kinzel noted that the respondent had worked in the
meat industry for a long
time and “definitely has evidence of long time
manual work injuries to his
27 September 2018, Dr Kinzel wrote to Dr Mahfoud, confirming that it had been
just over a year since the reverse total left shoulder
arthroplasty but that the
respondent continued with a poor range of motion. She opined that the range of
motion would not be assisted
by physiotherapy, although continuing physiotherapy
would help the respondent’s symptoms and
Kinzel reported to Dr Mahfoud on 22 November
Dr Kinzel advised that the
right shoulder MRI scan showed a full thickness tear with a 3 cm retraction. Dr
Kinzel said that, given
the length of time the respondent worked in the meat
industry, the right shoulder condition was a significant injury and would
a rotator cuff reconstruction and biceps tenodesis. Dr Kinzel was of the
view that the respondent’s work in the meat industry
was the sole
contributing factor in the development of the pathology. Dr Kinzel added that
the recent surgery to the left shoulder
was also a contributory factor to the
development of the rotator cuff tear as it was “now an overcompensatory
Kinzel wrote to Dr Neena Gottipati, general practitioner (from the same practice
as Dr Mahfoud), on 12 March 2020. Relevantly,
Dr Kinzel reported that the
respondent was still experiencing difficulties with his right shoulder. She said
that he had “worked
in the meat processing industry and his rotator cuff
tears are solely due to the manual work he had to perform over the years. Heavy
lifting, especially in the overhead position, strains the rotator cuff and
eventually leads to
Kinzel also provided a report dated 9 April 2020 directed to the
respondent’s legal
representatives.
She advised
that the respondent was “well known” to her. Dr Kinzel reported that
the respondent had experienced a good
result from the left reverse shoulder
replacement surgery but that following a prolonged recovery, the
respondent’s right shoulder
deteriorated. She opined that he was suffering
from an over-compensation injury directly related to the incident in which the
shoulder was injured. Dr Kinzel also observed that the respondent had
worked in the meat industry for over 10 years, which was physically
and the symptoms were directly related to that employment. Dr Kinzel explained
why the proposed right reverse shoulder
replacement was necessary.
Dr Roger Pillemer, orthopaedic surgeon
respondent’s legal representatives arranged for Dr Pillemer to examine the
respondent and provide a forensic opinion. Dr
Pillemer provided a report dated
15 March 2018.
Dr Pillemer
took the history that the respondent suffered an initial injury to his left
shoulder in 2012, following which he had
a few days off work and then returned
to normal duties, with some residual ongoing symptoms. Dr Pillemer recorded that
the respondent
suffered a further left shoulder injury on 15 February 2015 (sic,
5 February 2015) when he was pulling a sheep which had become stuck.
Dr Pillemer
noted that the respondent experienced ongoing problems in the left shoulder
since that injury.
Pillemer said that the respondent informed him that his right shoulder also
became symptomatic at that time, but that his treating
doctors were concerned
with treating his left shoulder symptoms. Dr Pillemer took a history of the
further injuries when the respondent
was pulling the hose and when the
sheep’s hock struck the respondent. Dr Pillemer reviewed the treatment
provided to the respondent,
including the surgeries to the left shoulder. He
noted that the respondent’s left shoulder symptoms were significant and
by movement and that the respondent’s right shoulder symptoms
were worsening.
examination, Dr Pillemer found restrictions of movement in both shoulders. He
concluded that the left shoulder rotator cuff tear
was attributable to the heavy
nature of the respondent’s work as well as the injury in February 2015. Dr
Pillemer was of the
opinion that this would be the case for the right shoulder
as well, but that the right shoulder condition could also be regarded
condition consequent upon the restriction of the function of the left shoulder.
In summary, he was of the view that the heavy
nature of the work performed by
the respondent and the injury in February 2015 were substantial contributing
factors to the ongoing
symptoms in both shoulders. Dr Pillemer gave his opinion
in relation to the respondent’s fitness for employment, need for treatment
and the degree of permanent impairment.
Pillemer provided a second report dated 5 February 2019, following a
re-examination of the
respondent.
Dr Pillemer
confirmed that his opinion expressed in his earlier report remained unchanged.
He reiterated that in his opinion, the
rotator cuff injuries to both shoulders
were consistent with the history provided to him, noting that the work the
respondent performed
for the appellant was, at times, very heavy. Further, the
surgery proposed by Dr Kinzel was medically necessary and as a result of
nature and conditions of the respondent’s employment.
26 May 2020, Dr Pillemer responded to a further request for information from the
respondent’s legal
representative.
He noted that Dr
Kinzel was of the view that the respondent required a right reverse total
shoulder replacement because the respondent’s
condition in that shoulder
had deteriorated. Dr Pillemer was of the view that the surgery proposed by Dr
Kinzel was reasonably necessary.
He added that the nature and conditions of the
respondent’s employment would be considered substantial contributing
to the need for the surgery.
Associate Professor Paul A Miniter, orthopaedic surgeon
Miniter examined the respondent on 3 April 2018 and provided a report dated 4
April 2018 at the request of the
He took a history of
the left shoulder problems in 2012, which he said were not associated with any
specific injury, and the injury
on 5 February 2015. A/Prof Miniter noted
the radiological findings in respect of the left shoulder and the treatment
provided to
the respondent, including the left rotator cuff repair, which he
considered was a failure. He further noted the heavy nature of the
work with the
appellant and was of the view that the respondent was fit for light manual work.
Miniter was asked to provide his opinion as to whether the respondent suffered
from a consequential condition in his right
shoulder as a result of the left
shoulder injury. He was of the view that:
“There is no
evidence of consequential injury to the right shoulder as a result of the left
shoulder. [The respondent] had a
full range of motion of the right shoulder, and
apparently the rotator cuff appeared to be well maintained on clinical
examination.”
a supplementary report dated 4 April 2018, A/Prof Miniter provided an assessment
of 8% whole person impairment of the respondent’s
left upper extremity. He
said that there was no evidence of any permanent impairment of the right
shoulder as, on examination, there
was full range of
Miniter provided a number of further supplementary reports. On 19 July 2019, he
provided an opinion in relation to the report
of Dr Pillemer dated 15 March
He noted that Dr Pillemer
recorded a restricted range of motion in the right shoulder, in contrast to his
findings of full range
of motion. A/Prof Miniter further noted Dr
Pillemer’s view that the respondent suffered a consequential condition in
shoulder. A/Prof Miniter considered that the “medical
literature” was clear on the matter and that there was no evidence
consequential injury. He observed that there was “no support of
consequential injury in objective randomised controlled
referring to the right shoulder.
Miniter noted that Dr Pillemer also considered that the pathology was due to the
heavy nature of the respondent’s employment
with the appellant. A/Prof
Miniter reviewed the MRI scan dated 20 November 2018 and concluded that there
was rotator cuff arthropathy
developing in the respondent’s right
shoulder. He further concluded that the presentation was similar to that in the
left shoulder,
there had been no work-related injury to the right shoulder and
the changes to the rotator cuff were age-related. A/Prof Miniter
opined that the
rotator cuff repair proposed by Dr Kinzel was not appropriate, particularly in
the light of the failure of that procedure
on the left shoulder. He said that
the definitive solution was a reverse shoulder replacement to address the
age-related changes,
however the surgery was not at that stage necessary because
the respondent had very adequate function. A/Prof Miniter recommended
conservative management.
Miniter reiterated that, despite the opinions of Dr Pillemer and Dr Kinzel,
there was no evidence of consequential “injury”
to the right
shoulder. He maintained that both doctors ought to be aware of “the
literature which suggests that there is no
objective basis for the
comment,” which was “well described in the
literature,”
and said that
references to support the view could be sought. A/Prof Miniter also concluded
that the respondent had not suffered
an injury to his right shoulder as a result
of the nature and conditions of his employment, noting that the right shoulder
recently become symptomatic. He conceded that the work undertaken by
the respondent may have been an aggravating factor, but it was
not a dominant
Miniter confirmed those views in reports dated 28 April
In the latter report,
A/Prof Miniter explained that the respondent’s symptoms in his right
shoulder did not emerge until many
months after he ceased work. He said that the
evidence showed that while an injured worker is receiving treatment for the
shoulder, there is decreased activity, rather than an increase in
such activity, resulting in both shoulders being used less. A/Prof
Miniter said
that he was happy to provide the medical literature referred to by him, which he
said he would forward under separate
cover. A/Prof Miniter annexed to his report
an article written by Dr Mark Melhorn MD et al in relation to the evaluation of
of symptoms in the upper and lower limbs opposite to the injured limb,
which he considered supported his
Trinitas Group Vocational Assessment report
a vocational assessment report dated 6 September 2017 prepared by Ms Natalie
Lam, occupational therapist and Ms Stacey Walker,
psychologist, the assessors
recorded that the respondent advised that Dr Kinzel was awaiting a reasonable
recovery before giving
consideration to performing surgery on the right
The assessors also
recorded that the respondent complained of symptoms in his right shoulder
because he was compensating for his
The assessors
discussed some of the activities the respondent was performing.
The radiological investigations
x-ray of the right shoulder dated 11 May 2017 noted “slight superior
migration of the humeral head with mild reduction [of
the] subacromial
space” and an acromial
An MRI scan of the right
shoulder undertaken on 20 November 2018 reported full thickness supraspinatus
and subscapularis tears with
moderate supraspinatus muscle
THE SENIOR ARBITRATOR’S REASONS
Senior Arbitrator noted the issues requiring determination and provided a
detailed summary of the evidence. She remarked that
the respondent’s
statement was very brief and did not give sufficient detail in relation to the
onset of the right shoulder
condition, so that relevant evidence had to be
gleaned from the medical records.
Senior Arbitrator observed that the first entry in the various medical records
that she was able to identify as a reference to
right shoulder symptoms was the
entry recorded in the McNamara physiotherapy records on 25 July 2016. She
further observed that the
Trinitas Group’s vocational assessment made
reference to the respondent having advised that Dr Kinzel was waiting for
shoulder to reasonably recover before contemplating surgery to the
right shoulder. The Senior Arbitrator said that this was consistent
respondent’s evidence. The Senior Arbitrator noted that:
(a) a right shoulder x-ray was undertaken on 11 May 2017, the same
day that the respondent consulted Dr Kinzel;
(b) in the vocational assessment report, Ms Lam took a history that the
respondent was experiencing right shoulder symptoms as a result
of compensating
for his left shoulder;
(c) Dr Kinzel noted right shoulder symptoms on 14 September 2017 because the
respondent was compensating for his left shoulder;
(d) the respondent reported to Dr Mahfoud on 15 March 2018 that his right
shoulder was troubling him because he had been compensating;
(e) on 15 March 2018, Dr Pillemer recorded that the respondent advised that
symptoms in the right shoulder developed at the same time
as the injury on
15 February 2015 (sic, 5 February 2015), and
(f) the respondent’s own evidence was that he noticed the right
shoulder symptoms over time.
Senior Arbitrator observed that A/Prof Miniter referred to full range of
movement of the right shoulder and that the rotator cuff
appeared well
maintained on examination but did not record an examination of the right
shoulder. The Senior Arbitrator further observed
that Dr Pillemer examined
the respondent 20 days before A/Prof Miniter and took the history that the
respondent had very restricted
use of his left arm and was trying to do
everything with his right arm. The Senior Arbitrator said that Dr Pillemer
recorded the
range of movement in both arms in a table and found limitation and
impairment in the right shoulder. The Senior Arbitrator added
that A/Prof
Miniter recorded no history of complaints in the right shoulder in his report
dated 4 April 2018, when the respondent
had made complaints to doctors well
before that date. The Senior Arbitrator observed that it was difficult to
reconcile the opinion
of A/Prof Miniter with that of Dr Pillemer.
Senior Arbitrator referred to the appellant’s submission that the
vocational assessment report disclosed nothing that would
establish that the
respondent was using his right arm more because of the left arm injury. She said
that the report did not refer
to the respondent doing less activity than he was
when he was working. The Senior Arbitrator indicated that the assessor did not
identify what tasks the respondent was doing with his right arm when working
between February and July 2015. Further, the assessor
did not consider the use
of the right arm while the respondent was recovering from the two surgeries to
the left shoulder, during
which times his left arm was in a sling for six weeks.
The Senior Arbitrator further referred to the appellant’s submission
A/Prof Miniter had speculated that there would be rotator cuff pathology in the
right shoulder, which was borne out by the subsequent
MRI scan report. The
Senior Arbitrator also noted the appellant’s submission that A/Prof
Miniter was of the view that the appropriate
surgery for the condition was a
reverse total shoulder replacement, which was ultimately the surgery proposed by
Dr Kinzel and recommended
by Dr Pillemer, which therefore gave potency to A/Prof
Miniter’s opinion.
Senior Arbitrator concluded that she did not have confidence in A/Prof
Miniter’s opinion because he did not record any detail
of findings on
examination of the right shoulder in his report dated 4 April 2018, when Dr
Pillemer had earlier found restriction
of movement. The Senior Arbitrator
considered that the fact that both Dr Kinzel and Dr Pillemer veered away from a
rotator cuff repair
in favour of a replacement indicated that they approached
the issue with caution and changed their approach on the basis of the radiology.
Senior Arbitrator referred to the article annexed to A/Prof Miniter’s
report dated 22 May 2020. She summarised the points
put in the article that
most injured people are already on major work restrictions, so they are
performing an easier job, or are
off work and therefore doing very little at
after the February incident until he ceased work, the work was heavy
work, and the respondent could not lift with his left arm. The
Senior Arbitrator
observed that A/Prof Miniter did not examine what the respondent was doing with
his right arm during the period
he had returned to work, or while the left arm
was in a sling for six weeks after each surgical procedure. She said that A/Prof
also did not give any consideration to the effect on the right shoulder
of ten years of heavy work. The Senior Arbitrator noted that
the article
suggested that the development of the condition in the uninjured arm is more
likely to be related to individual risk
factors such as age, sex, or genetics,
rather than overuse. She said that the author of the article did not consider
whether work
duties may have contributed to the development of the disease in
the collateral limb, or the type of work being performed by the
worker. The
Senior Arbitrator observed that the respondent spent many years in manual labour
and she described the heavy, constant
and repetitive work with the appellant
that required him to use both hands.
Senior Arbitrator said that the article annexed to A/Prof Miniter’s report
acknowledged that causation was a complex issue
and the steps taken had to be
applied to the specific individual’s case. The Senior Arbitrator
considered that A/Prof Miniter
did not adequately apply those factors to the
respondent’s specific circumstances and simply asserted a general
proposition.
Senior Arbitrator concluded that, for the above reasons, she did not accept the
appellant’s submissions and did not place
weight on A/Prof Miniter’s
opinion. The Senior Arbitrator accepted the respondent’s submission that
the opinions of Dr
Kinzel and Dr Pillemer should be preferred. The Senior
Arbitrator added that, in addition, Dr Kinzel had examined the respondent
many occasions and was therefore “best placed” to consider the
causal connection between the respondent’s right
shoulder condition and
his employment and/or his left shoulder injury.
Senior Arbitrator referred to the appellant’s submission in relation to
A/Prof Miniter’s comment that there were no
complaints of right shoulder
pain made while the respondent was working. She reasoned that Dr Kinzel’s
views were not inconsistent
with the right shoulder problems being aggravated by
the respondent’s employment and provided an explanation as to why there
may not have been complaints recorded before 2015. The Senior Arbitrator added
that Dr Kinzel’s opinion was supported by that
of Dr Pillemer in
respect of the heavy nature of the respondent’s work being causative of
the conditions in both shoulders
and the consequential effect of the left
shoulder injury on the right shoulder condition. Further, Dr Pillemer’s
that it was likely that there would have been pre-existing problems
with the rotator cuffs was, in the Senior Arbitrator’s
Senior Arbitrator referred to and quoted from the observations of Kirby P (as
his Honour then was) in
Pty Ltd v Bates
chain of causation of injury and whether the condition “results
from” the work injury. The Senior Arbitrator
also quoted from the
observations of McDougall J in
Nguyen v Cosmopolitan Homes (NSW) Pty
and concluded that,
applying those principles, she was satisfied, on the balance of probabilities,
that the symptoms in the right
shoulder complained of by the respondent were a
consequential condition causally related to the left shoulder injury. The Senior
Arbitrator also concluded that she was satisfied that the respondent had
established that he had suffered an aggravation and deterioration
of a disease
in the right shoulder as a result of the nature and conditions of his employment
with the appellant over the period
of that employment and that the employment
was the main contributing factor to the aggravation and deterioration. The
Senior Arbitrator
based her conclusion on the opinions of Dr Pillemer and Dr
Kinzel, noting that A/Prof Miniter did not comment that the changes were
advanced than those of the constitutional condition, did not provide any reason
for the advanced degenerative changes and did
not adequately address the
possibility of the advanced degenerative changes being attributable to the
respondent’s lengthy
heavy employment.
Senior Arbitrator reiterated that she was satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that the physical nature of the respondent’s
employment,
together with the length of that employment, caused injury to the
respondent’s right shoulder in accordance with
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act).
Senior Arbitrator proceeded to consider whether the proposed surgery was
reasonably necessary. The Senior Arbitrator’s findings
and conclusion that
the proposed surgery was reasonably necessary and arose as a result of an injury
to the right shoulder and as
a consequence of the injury to the left shoulder is
not challenged in this appeal, other than that it was based on the alleged
conclusion that the respondent suffered that injury and that
consequential condition. It is not necessary therefore to summarise
this aspect
of the Senior Arbitrator’s reasons.
Certificate of Determination issued on 8 September 2020
“The Commission determines:
section 4(b)(ii)
Workers Compensation Act 1987
the applicant
sustained injury to his right shoulder as a result of his employment with the
respondent concerning which his employment
was the main contributing factor to
the aggravation and deterioration of the underlying disease process.
applicant has also sustained a consequential condition in his right shoulder as
a result of the injury to the left shoulder sustained
in the course of his
employment with the respondent.
proposed right reverse shoulder replacement is reasonably necessary treatment as
a result of both the consequential condition
and injury to the right
respondent is to pay for the proposed right reverse shoulder replacement surgery
and ancillary treatment pursuant to the applicable
workers compensation gazetted
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant alleges that the Senior Arbitrator erred:
(a) in fact by
concluding that A/Prof Miniter’s examination finding of a full range of
movement of the respondent’s right
shoulder upon examination on 3 April
2018 was relevant to the weight that his opinion ought to be afforded (Ground
(b) in fact by concluding that A/Prof Miniter’s opinion failed to
consider what the respondent did with his right arm at a time
when he could not
use his left arm (Ground Two);
(c) in fact by assigning additional weight to Dr Kinzel’s opinion
because she had examined the respondent on many occasions
(Ground Three);
(d) by relying upon her conclusion that Dr Kinzel’s “familiarity
with the work” assisted her to conclude that the
worker had sustained an
injury of the right shoulder “in accordance with section 4(b)(ii) of the
1987 Act” (Ground Four),
(e) by rejecting A/Prof Miniter’s conclusion that any injury to the
right shoulder due to the nature and conditions of employment
would have been
accompanied by complaints of pain (Ground Five).
LEGISLATION
4 of the 1987 Act relevantly defines ‘injury’ as
Definition of
In this Act:
(a) means personal injury arising out of or in the course of employment,
(b) includes a
disease injury
which means:
(i) a disease that is contracted by a worker in the course of employment but
only if the employment was the main contributing factor
to contracting the
disease, and
(ii) the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or deterioration in the
course of employment of any disease, but only if the employment
was the main
contributing factor to the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation or
deterioration of the disease, and
SUBMISSIONS
Ground One: The Senior Arbitrator erred in fact by concluding
that A/Prof Miniter’s examination finding of a full range of movement
the respondent’s right shoulder upon examination on 3 April 2018 was
relevant to the weight that his opinion ought to be
The appellant’s submissions
appellant concedes that A/Prof Miniter’s clinical finding was different to
that of Dr Pillemer recorded a month earlier,
but submits that there was no
evidence to support the conclusion that the range of movement could not vary
over a period of weeks.
The appellant says that the fact that Dr Pillemer
provided a detailed record of his findings does nothing more than show that he
observed such a finding, which was different to the finding made by A/Prof
Miniter that he observed no abnormal finding. The appellant
submits that in the
absence of a direct question being put to the experts, there was no basis upon
which the Senior Arbitrator could
draw a conclusion as to whether one of the
experts was wrong and there was certainly no evidence to support the conclusion
that A/Prof
Miniter was wrong. The appellant contends that the Senior Arbitrator
clearly found that A/Prof Miniter was wrong and, because that
conclusion was
without basis, the Senior Arbitrator’s conclusion was erroneous.
appellant submits that the legal consequence of this error was that the Senior
Arbitrator formed the view that she did not have
confidence in the opinion of
A/Prof Miniter, which was an unjustified rejection of his expert opinion and
caused her decision to
The respondent’s submissions
respondent points out that the Senior Arbitrator acknowledged that Dr Pillemer
set out in a table his findings on examination
of both shoulders, whereas A/Prof
Miniter did not present any evidence of an examination of the shoulders other
than to assert that
there was a full range of motion in the right shoulder. The
respondent says that A/Prof Miniter also recorded that there was no complaint
which was incorrect. The respondent refers to the
fact that such complaints were
documented on 6 September and 14 September 2017.
respondent submits that the Senior Arbitrator did not err in fact. The
respondent says that the Senior Arbitrator examined the
medical evidence that
was available in relation to the period prior to the medico-legal examinations.
The respondent submits that
the Senior Arbitrator correctly acknowledged the
absence of findings in relation to the right shoulder in A/Prof Miniter’s
report and that such an omission made it difficult for the Senior Arbitrator to
compare the findings of both experts. The respondent
points out that the Senior
Arbitrator made that comment in her reasons.
The appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant asserts that the respondent does not engage with this ground of appeal
other than to assert that the Senior Arbitrator
was correct, so that it is not
necessary for the appellant to respond to the respondent’s submissions.
Ground Two: The Senior Arbitrator erred in fact by concluding
that A/Prof Miniter failed to consider what the respondent did with
arm at the time when the respondent could not use his left arm
The appellant’s submissions
appellant points out that the Senior Arbitrator did not have the benefit of any
direct evidence from the respondent whatsoever
shoulder condition. The appellant explains that for that reason, the Senior
Arbitrator was directed
to the Trinitas Group Assessment report, which gave some
insight into the respondent’s daily activities following his left
injury. The appellant submits that none of those activities appeared to be at
all as arduous as the unrestricted labouring
duties the respondent performed
prior to the injury on 5 February 2015.
appellant says that there was no doubt that the respondent complained to medical
practitioners about the effect of his selected
duties on his left shoulder, but
did not complain that he was required to undertake more arduous duties with his
right arm because
of his left arm disability. Further, there was no evidence
adduced as to the extent to which the respondent was required to use his
arm while recuperating from the surgeries to his left shoulder or at any other
time. The appellant submits that this was evidence
which was within the
respondent’s knowledge and about which the respondent either failed or
chose not to present to the Commission.
The appellant submits that this was a
lacuna in the evidence which the Senior Arbitrator placed “at the feet
A/Prof Miniter, which
she could not do.
appellant contends that, in the same manner, the Senior Arbitrator criticised
A/Prof Miniter because of his failure to consider
the reliance by the respondent
on his right arm at work between February 2015 and July 2015. The appellant
points out that while
the respondent appeared to complain that the modified
duties provided to him were not compatible with his left shoulder symptoms,
respondent did not describe those duties or the extent to which they caused him
to place greater reliance on his right arm. The
appellant refers to the medical
histories which consisted of a sheep’s hock striking the
respondent’s left shoulder,
left shoulder pain after pulling a hose, and
being required to lift heavy weights. The appellant contends that the Senior
Arbitrator’s
observations about the absence of evidence in the Trinitas
Group Assessment report of tasks the respondent was required to perform
identifies the lacuna in the evidence, for which she impermissibly criticised
A/Prof Miniter’s methodology and in doing so
appellant asserts that, in addition to there being no account by the respondent
of the reliance on his right arm, neither Dr Pillemer
or Dr Kinzel exposed the
basis of their relevant assumptions that the respondent’s symptoms
resulted from overuse. The respondent
says that, at best, Dr Pillemer identified
the factor of carrying shopping, which was expressly an activity assumed by
A/Prof Miniter
and upon which he advanced his medical opinion.
appellant submits that, by accepting the opinions of Dr Pillemer and Dr Kinzel
in that regard, the Senior Arbitrator misdirected
herself by failing to assess
the expert opinion evidence in accordance with the correct legal test, as
identified in the authorities
Dasreef Pty Ltd v
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v
Western Sydney Area Health Service v
The appellant
contends that, as a result of that failure to properly assess the expert
opinions, the Senior Arbitrator reached an
erroneous factual
conclusion.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that his statement provides details of the heavy lifting and
manual handling that he was required to perform
in his employment, which was
evidence of how his right arm would have been adversely affected after the left
shoulder injury. The
respondent further submits that he returned to work after
the left shoulder injury in duties which were intended to be suitable,
evidence was that those duties were still heavy in nature.
respondent contends that A/Prof Miniter failed to take into account the work the
respondent performed when the use of his left
arm was restricted and also failed
to consider the respondent’s work history when he expressed reliance on
the literature annexed
to his final report.
respondent asserts that the Senior Arbitrator did not err in her preference for
the opinions of Dr Kinzel and Dr Pillemer, in
which both experts gave
consideration to the respondent’s work history, including the
respondent’s reliance on his right
arm. The respondent refers to the
appellant’s reliance on
and submits that both Dr Kinzel and Dr Pillemer outlined the basis for their
conclusions, which the Senior Arbitrator found was a
proper basis for her
decision. The respondent further points to the observation by A/Prof Miniter
that the degenerative changes in
the respondent’s right shoulder were more
advanced than usual. The respondent submits that A/Prof Miniter did not give
consideration
as to why the changes were more advanced and, as the Senior
Arbitrator observed, did not give any consideration to the nature of
performed by the respondent.
The appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant says that it concedes that the respondent did not perform his full
duties after the left shoulder injury and complained
duties on his left shoulder. The appellant reiterates however that the
respondent made no complaint about
the effect of those duties on his right
Ground Three: the Senior Arbitrator erred in fact by assigning
additional weight to Dr Kinzel’s opinion because she had examined
respondent on many occasions
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that if it was a correct or logical statement of principle
that having frequently seen the respondent placed
Dr Kinzel in a better position
to assess the connection between the right shoulder symptoms and the
respondent’s work or left
shoulder injury, then the entire medico-legal
process would be rendered meaningless. The appellant asserts that a worker
almost always
consults and is examined by a treating doctor more frequently than
he or she is examined by a qualified expert, and if the Senior
Arbitrator was
correct to attribute more weight to the treating doctor’s opinion on that
basis then the qualified expert’s
opinion would be meaningless.
appellant concedes that there may be occasions when the rapport between a
patient and a treating doctor will afford the treating
doctor the opportunity to
have greater insight or more confidence in the patient’s complaints or the
history provided than
would be the case following an initial consultation. The
appellant contends that this case is not such a case. The appellant contends
that A/Prof Miniter put forward a scientific argument that remains unanswered by
Dr Kinzel and in that instance, the Senior Arbitrator’s
conclusion was not
available to her and constitutes an error.
appellant submits that, in any event, whatever benefit Dr Kinzel may have had,
it did not assist her in relation to the respondent’s
right shoulder
complaints because the first consultation she had with the respondent was not
until September 2015. The appellant
asserts that at no time did Dr Kinzel
caution the respondent about the risk of suffering right shoulder problems
because of his left
shoulder restrictions.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent reiterates his submissions that A/Prof Miniter:
not properly present his examination of the respondent’s right shoulder
movements, and
(b) failed to properly consider the respondent’s lengthy work history
in manual work as a possible reason for the condition
in the right shoulder.
respondent asserts that the Senior Arbitrator did not err in concluding that Dr
Kinzel was in a better position to give consideration
to the causal connection
between the right shoulder symptoms and the left shoulder injury. The respondent
submits that the doctor/patient
relationship is an important consideration, and
Dr Kinzel had been able to examine the respondent on a number of occasions, so
her opinion ought to have been afforded considerable weight. The respondent
adds that the assertion that Dr Kinzel ought to have
cautioned the respondent
The appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant relies on its submissions already made. The appellant adds that the
fact that Dr Kinzel did not warn the respondent
of the prospect of developing
symptoms in the right shoulder should lead to the inference that it was either a
remote or impossible
eventuality.
Ground Four: The Senior Arbitrator erred by relying upon her
conclusion that Dr Kinzel’s “familiarity with the work”
assisted her to conclude that the respondent had sustained an injury to the
right shoulder “in accordance with s 4(b)(ii) of
The appellant’s submission
appellant concedes that the treating surgeon made a correct assumption about the
work performed by the respondent and was probably
in a position to have a fair
appreciation of the type of work the respondent performed, although her reports
dd not provide any such
detail. The appellant submits that all of the medical
opinions proceeded on the assumption that the respondent was engaged in heavy
labouring work, which involved use of both arms. The appellant contends that
there is nothing to suggest that Dr Kinzel had any greater
insight into or
appreciation of the respondent’s duties than any of the other experts.
appellant submits that the Senior Arbitrator did not suggest that A/Prof Miniter
had been provided with an incorrect history in
relation to the nature of the
respondent’s duties. The appellant submits that there was no foundation
upon which the Senior
Arbitrator could afford greater weight to the opinion of
Dr Kinzel. The appellant asserts that this was an erroneous assessment of
Kinzel’s opinion and constitutes error which caused the Senior
Arbitrator’s decision to miscarry by erroneously rejecting
the opinion of
A/Prof Miniter.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that it is obvious from his statement and the histories taken
by Dr Kinzel and Dr Pillemer that there was a
lengthy history of the
respondent performing heavy manual work, which involved the repetitive use of
both arms. The respondent contends
that Dr Kinzel, as the respondent’s
treating specialist, would have a greater understanding of the nature of the
respondent’s
employment because she had seen the respondent on a number of
occasions. The respondent says that it follows that she would have
understanding of the nature of the respondent’s work as his condition was
developing following the left shoulder
respondent submits that the Senior Arbitrator gave consideration to all of the
medical opinions, including that of A/Prof Miniter
and chose to afford weight to
the opinion of Dr Kinzel for appropriate reasons. The respondent asserts
that the Senior Arbitrator
did not err in her reasoning process or in her
conclusions.
The appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant contends that the respondent does not engage with the proposition that
the assumptions about the work being performed
made by Dr Kinzel were no
different to those made by the other medical experts, in particular those made
by A/Prof Miniter.
Ground Five: the Senior Arbitrator erred by rejecting A/Prof
Miniter’s conclusion that injury to the right shoulder due to the
and conditions of employment would have been accompanied by complaints of
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that neither Dr Kinzel or Dr Pillemer provided a response to
A/Prof Miniter’s evidence in this regard.
The appellant submits that it is
significant that a further opinion was sought from Dr Pillemer in May 2020 and
Dr Pillemer did not
respond to this aspect of A/Prof Miniter’s evidence.
The appellant contends that it is not sufficient to simply observe that
experts’ opinions differed. The appellant asserts that the conflict in
those opinions requires an assessment as to why
the opinions differ before a
conclusion on the balance of probabilities could be reached. The appellant
submits that the Senior Arbitrator
did not attend to this and thus
The respondent’s submissions
respondent contends that it is not apparent as to whether this alleged error is
said to be an error of fact, law or discretion,
but in any event the ground
should fail. The respondent submits that both Dr Pillemer and Dr Kinzel properly
considered the issue.
The respondent says that Dr Kinzel expressed the view that
the respondent’s rotator cuff tears were attributable to the manual
he was required to perform, there was a 3 cm tear in the rotator cuff, and she
was concerned that the tear had progressed. The
respondent extracts the
following passages from Dr Kinzel’s reports:
lifting especially in the overhead position strains the rotator cuff and
eventually leads to
“In the course of his treatment, as he had a rather prolonged recovery,
his right shoulder deteriorated and he is now suffering
over-compensation injury which is directly related to the
respondent also refers to Dr Pillemer’s consideration of the
respondent’s left shoulder condition, where Dr Pillemer
(a) the left shoulder symptoms were longstanding, but
asymptomatic before his employment with the appellant;
(b) the heavy nature of the work performed and the injury in February 2015
either caused or aggravated the left shoulder condition
and were substantial
contributing factors to the left rotator cuff tear;
(c) the same would apply to the right shoulder, which could also be
considered to be a condition consequent upon the restricted left
arm function,
(d) it was likely that the respondent had pre-existing conditions in his
rotator cuffs, but those would account for less than one
tenth of his
impairment.
respondent submits that the Senior Arbitrator considered all of the evidence
before concluding that the respondent had established
that he suffered a right
shoulder injury in the form of an aggravation and deterioration of a disease as
a result of the nature and
conditions of employment, and the employment was the
main contributing factor to the aggravation and deterioration.
The appellant’s submissions in reply
appellant again asserts that the respondent has not engaged with the proposition
that A/Prof Miniter’s observation regarding
contemporaneous complaints of
symptoms was not addressed by Dr Kinzel and Dr Pillemer and was therefore not
THE RELIEF SOUGHT
appellant seeks to have the orders made in the Certificate of Determination set
aside and an award entered in its favour in lieu
thereof. The appellant submits
that in the alternative, if the Presidential member were to find error and
re-determine the matter,
on the basis of its submissions made, the respective
issues should be determined in its favour.
respondent submits that the Senior Arbitrator’s entire Certificate of
Determination should be confirmed.
CONSIDERATION
appellant submits the Senior Arbitrator fell into error by concluding that
A/Prof Miniter’s finding of a full range of movement
respondent’s right shoulder was relevant to the weight that ought to be
afforded to A/Prof Miniter’s opinion.
Firstly, the appellant submits that
there was no evidentiary basis upon which a conclusion could be reached that the
range of movement
could not vary over a period of weeks between medical
examinations.
Senior Arbitrator considered A/Prof Miniter’s finding of a full range of
movement in the right shoulder at [70] of her reasons.
She referred to the
appellant’s submission that the finding was relevant. The Senior
Arbitrator noted that A/Prof Miniter made
no reference to an examination of the
right shoulder in his findings in his report dated 4 April 2018. She noted
however, that he
recorded a full range of motion in the context of providing an
opinion as to whether there was a consequential condition in the right
In that report, A/Prof Miniter opined that:
“There was no
evidence of consequential injury to the right shoulder. [The respondent] had a
full range of motion of the right
shoulder...”.
is clear from this passage that A/Prof Miniter took into account that the
respondent had a full range of motion of the right shoulder
when he was
considering whether the respondent suffered from a consequential condition in
that shoulder, which was an issue the Senior
Arbitrator was required to
determine. The Senior Arbitrator provided reasons as to why she preferred the
evidence from Dr Pillemer
as to the respondent’s right shoulder
limitations. Her reasoning was that there was no record in A/Prof
Miniter’s report
of the actual right shoulder examination, whereas Dr
Pillemer’s observations were recorded in detail. It is implicit in her
conclusion that the evidence from Dr Pillemer showed that the respondent did
have limitations of movement, the fact of which lent
support to the presence of
a symptomatic condition in the right shoulder, which was one step in the process
of determining the issue
before her.
appellant asserts that the conflict between the findings recorded by Dr Pillemer
and A/Prof Miniter should have been put to those
experts in order for those
experts to explain their findings. The appellant says that, without that having
occurred, the Senior Arbitrator
could not infer that one of the experts was
wrong. Dr Pillemer clearly explained his findings on examination in the table
to by the Senior Arbitrator. A/Prof Miniter provided no explanation for
his finding and only made reference to it as a basis for
his opinion that the
respondent did not suffer from a consequential condition in the right shoulder.
Senior Arbitrator found that that evidence was inadequate to support A/Prof
Miniter’s conclusion. If an expert’s observations
clarification, it is a matter for the party relying on that opinion to adduce
sufficient evidence from that expert to explain
his or her observations and
conclusions. In circumstances where that does not occur, it is open to the
decision maker to find that
evidence unsatisfactory and prefer a different
is clear from the passage cited at [92] above that the absence of restriction in
the range of movement in the respondent’s
right shoulder initially formed
the basis for A/Prof Miniter’s opinion that the respondent did not suffer
from a consequential
condition in his right shoulder. The fact that other
experts did find such a restriction was a matter that weighed against the
of this opinion expressed by A/Prof Miniter. Notably, A/Prof Miniter
provided detail of his examination of the right shoulder in
his final report and
did find such a restriction. Thus, there was no error in the Senior Arbitrator
rejecting A/Prof Miniter’s
opinion that the respondent did not suffer from
a consequential condition because there was no restriction of movement in the
shoulder, a clinical finding that formed the basis of his opinion.
follows that Ground One of the appeal fails.
appellant alleges that the Senior Arbitrator reached an erroneous conclusion by
preferring the opinions of Dr Kinzel and Dr Pillemer
on the basis that A/Prof
Miniter failed to take into consideration what activities the respondent was
doing with his right arm while
he could not use his left arm. The appellant
(a) the absence of direct evidence in statement form from
the respondent about those activities;
(b) the tasks described in the Trinitas Group Assessment report performed by
the respondent following the left shoulder injury, which
the appellant describes
as not nearly as arduous as the respondent’s pre-injury duties;
(c) the absence of complaints about the effect of those duties on the right
shoulder, in the context of the respondent having made
complaints about the
worsening of the left shoulder symptoms when performing that work, and
(d) the absence of evidence of the respondent overusing his right arm, in
particular while recuperating from the left shoulder surgeries,
respondent could have given evidence, but did not.
appellant argues that this lacuna in the evidence meant that the Senior
Arbitrator could not reject or place less weight on the
opinion of A/Prof
Miniter because he failed to take these matters into account. Further, the
appellant maintains that neither Dr
Pillemer nor Dr Kinzel exposed the
basis for their assumptions that overuse of the right arm was causative of the
right shoulder
respondent submits that he gave evidence about the heavy nature of the work he
performed following return to work after the left
shoulder injury. The
respondent asserts that both Dr Pillemer and Dr Kinzel gave consideration to the
respondent’s work history,
including the respondent’s reliance on
his right arm.
is thus necessary to consider whether there was a proper basis available to the
Senior Arbitrator to prefer the opinions of the
respondent’s experts over
that of A/Prof Miniter. The Senior Arbitrator’s task in assessing the
evidence was made somewhat
difficult because of the absence of the evidence
identified by the appellant, summarised at [98] above. The Senior Arbitrator
to the medical evidence, and the report from the Trinitas Group
Assessment, in order to glean evidence of the facts she was required
determine. The Senior Arbitrator was entitled to take that approach and rely
upon the histories recorded in the medical evidence.
The history taken by
medical experts is evidence of the
history recorded by A/Prof Miniter in his first report was that the respondent
performed heavy work for the appellant. There was
no reference to the
development of right shoulder symptoms. The only relevant fact recorded in that
report was that the respondent’s
right shoulder had a full range of
movement. In an addendum to that report, A/Prof Miniter opined that, on that
basis, there was
no whole person impairment of the right upper limb. In a
further addendum of the same date, A/Prof Miniter opined that there was
evidence of a consequential “injury” to the right shoulder. He
maintained that opinion in his short report dated 3
July 2018. In his report
dated 30 August 2018, A/Prof Miniter advised that in his view, the respondent
suffered from a constitutional
degenerative disease in his left shoulder, a
frank injury in the course of his employment, and there could have been some
contribution
to the degenerative process by the nature and conditions of the
respondent’s employment. He added that the appellant ought
not to accept
liability for the right shoulder condition because:
respondent had only recently complained of right shoulder symptoms;
(b) the onset of the symptoms was after the respondent had ceased his
employment;
(c) he did not contemporaneously complain of right shoulder problems;
(d) the literature annexed to his report rebuffed the concept of a
consequential “injury,” and
(e) there had been no frank injury to the right shoulder.
Miniter re-examined the respondent on 19 March 2019 and provided a report dated
20 March 2019 in which he recorded his findings
on examination of the right
shoulder. He noted the history of onset of right shoulder symptoms which had
troubled the respondent
for “a long period of time.” He maintained
his view in relation to liability for the right shoulder, despite finding
restrictions on examination.
history recorded by Dr Pillemer was that:
(a) the respondent
experienced problems with his right shoulder at about the same time as the
injury to the left shoulder on 15 February
2015 (sic, 5 February 2015), but the
treating doctors had focussed on treatment for the left shoulder;
(b) there were two further incidents after February 2015, when the respondent
returned to work, in which the respondent was struck
by a sheep’s foot and
was pulling a heavy hose, and
(c) the respondent complained of significant restrictions in using his left
shoulder, had difficulty with self-care, and was trying
to do everything with
his right hand, including carrying the shopping.
Pillemer opined that the nature of the respondent’s work was very heavy at
times and the nature and conditions of his employment
were a substantial
contributing factor to the aggravation of an asymptomatic degenerative condition
in both shoulders. Dr Pillemer
observed that the right shoulder symptoms could
also be considered a consequential “injury,” suffered because of the
restrictions of left shoulder function. As noted earlier, Dr Pillemer found
restricted range of movement and permanent impairment
in both shoulders.
there was no direct evidence from the respondent as to a greater reliance being
placed on his right arm, the fact that he was
experiencing restrictions in the
use of his left arm was well recorded by the respondent’s treatment
providers, the respondent’s
qualified expert and the assessment conducted
by the Trinitas Group. Further, there was evidence recorded by the
physiotherapist,
Ms McNamara, that the respondent complained of right shoulder
symptoms as early as 25 July 2016. On 12 September 2016, Dr Mahfoud
the respondent’s left shoulder as having “limited” range of
movement. On 14 September 2017, Dr Kinzel
noted that the respondent complained
of right shoulder symptoms because he was compensating for his left shoulder
limitations. Dr
Kinzel subsequently opined that the respondent had suffered
injury to his right shoulder because of the heavy nature of his work
because, following the surgery, the respondent was compensating for his left
shoulder limitations. Dr Kinzel was well aware
of the respondent’s left
shoulder deterioration and limitations, having consulted with the respondent
from September 2015,
performed surgery in early 2016 and April 2017, and having
reviewed the respondent over that period. She was thus well placed to
view that the respondent was using his right arm to compensate for those
limitations and accordingly developed a consequential
condition in the right
appellant maintains that the duties the respondent undertook after the left
shoulder injury, as described in the Trinitas Group
Assessment report, were not
at all arduous. The report was dated 6 September 2017 and made observations
the respondent was undertaking at that time, namely
sweeping, washing up and putting on shirts and jackets. The respondent was no
longer able to mow the lawn. The Senior Arbitrator dealt with this submission at
[74] of her reasons, in which she observed:
“However, the
author of this report did not evaluate what tasks Mr Tucker did at work after he
injured his left shoulder and
what tasks he used his right arm to perform in the
period from February 2015 to July 2015, when he stopped working. Also, the
of the report did not consider the situation regarding usage of the right
arm after Mr Tucker’s two surgical procedures when
he had his left
shoulder in a sling for six weeks each time and its state as the shoulder was
recovering from each of the surgeries.”
reasons were sufficient for the Senior Arbitrator to discount that evidence. The
evidence relied upon is not evidence of the
respondent’s activities at the
time of onset of the right shoulder symptoms which were evident as early as July
2016 and noted
by Dr Mahfoud in September 2016. The submission is not persuasive
of error on the part of the Senior Arbitrator.
restriction of function of the left shoulder was well documented throughout the
medical evidence. Overall, that evidence was evidence
of the fact that the
respondent suffered limitation of movement of his left arm, placed reliance on
his right arm and, as a result,
developed symptoms in his right shoulder. The
respondent’s case was therefore clearly identified, and it was incumbent
the appellant to adduce evidence to address each element of the case.
Miniter was of the view, in part, that liability should not be accepted because
there had been no frank injury to the right
shoulder and no contemporaneous
complaints of pain in the right shoulder.
absence of there being a frank injury to the right shoulder is not relevant to
the question of whether the right shoulder symptoms
were as a consequence of the
left shoulder injury. The contemporaneity of complaints is not always
determinative of whether a worker
suffered injury and is less determinative in
relation to an allegation of a condition consequent upon an accepted
work-related injury.
As Kirby P observed in
“The result of the cases is that each case where causation is
in issue in a workers’ compensation claim, must be determined
facts. Whether death or incapacity results from a relevant work injury is a
question of fact. The importation of notions
of proximate cause by the use of
the phrase ‘results from’, is not now accepted ... As the early
cases demonstrate, the
mere passage of time between a work incident and
subsequent incapacity or death, is not determinative of the entitlement to
compensation.
In each case, the question whether the incapacity or death
‘results from’ the impugned work injury (or in the event of
disease, the relevant aggravation of the disease), is a question of fact to be
determined on the basis of the evidence, including,
where applicable, expert
is apparent from the clinical notes of Dr Mahfoud and the McNamara Physiotherapy
notes that the onset of the right shoulder symptoms
occurred following a
deterioration of the left shoulder condition noted on 22 January 2016, the
respondent having undergone surgery
shortly thereafter, and the respondent
wearing a sling following the surgery in March 2016. The respondent underwent
further surgery
in April 2017, following which he continued to complain of right
shoulder symptoms, which his treating surgeon and his general practitioner
attributed to him compensating for the left shoulder injury.
of this relevant evidence was addressed by A/Prof Miniter. It follows that it
was open to the Senior Arbitrator to take that
into account in assessing the
weight to be afforded to the opinion of A/Prof Miniter.
appellant further asserts under this ground of appeal that the Senior Arbitrator
misdirected herself by not applying the correct
legal test when accepting the
opinions of Dr Pillemer and Dr Kinzel. The appellant relies upon the Court
of Appeal authorities of
authorities establish that, although the rules of evidence do not apply in the
Commission, for the evidence to be accepted,
it should be logical and probative,
relevant to the fact in issue, and not based on speculation or unsubstantiated
assumptions. The
basis of an expert’s opinion must be explained. It is a
question of weight, and not admissibility of the medical expert’s
that does not conform with that standard.
have discussed the essence of Dr Kinzel’s evidence at [106] above. It is
apparent that Dr Kinzel was aware of the heavy nature
respondent’s employment and the significant limitations in the
respondent’s use of his left shoulder. She also
had the history that the
respondent was using his right arm to compensate for the left shoulder. In the
context of that knowledge,
her opinion that the right shoulder symptoms resulted
from the heavy nature of the respondent’s employment and the use of the
right arm to compensate for the left shoulder limitations was a logical
conclusion.
have summarised the reasons and conclusions reached by Dr Pillemer at
[104]–[105] above. Dr Pillemer took a history of the
(at times) heavy
nature of the respondent’s duties and discussed what he referred to as
significant restrictions in the respondent’s
use of the left shoulder. Dr
Pillemer also recorded that the respondent experienced difficulty with self-care
and was trying to do
everything with his right hand, including carrying the
shopping. That factual evidence was not disturbed by any evidence to the
and formed a proper basis upon which Dr Pillemer could arrive at his
conclusion that the right shoulder symptoms resulted from the
left shoulder
restrictions and the undisputed heavy nature of the respondent’s
employment.
Senior Arbitrator conducted a proper analysis of the expert medical evidence and
did not fail to apply the correct test. The opinions
expressed by both Dr
Pillemer and Dr Kinzel were based upon facts that were consistent with the
available evidence. The opinions
were logical and probative, and it was open to
the Senior Arbitrator to accept those opinions and to give preference to them
the opinion of A/Prof Miniter.
allegation that the Senior Arbitrator erred by concluding that A/Prof Miniter
failed to take the identified matters into account
is not made out and this
ground of appeal fails.
Grounds Three and Four
appellant asserts error on the part of the Senior Arbitrator by affording
greater weight to the evidence of Dr Kinzel because
she was the
respondent’s treating doctor and saw the respondent more frequently than
A/Prof Miniter. This criticism is raised
in respect of Dr Kinzel’s
opinion that the right shoulder symptoms arose as a consequence of the
restrictions in the respondent’s
ability to use his left shoulder (Ground
Three) and that the right shoulder was injured as a result of the nature and
of employment (Ground Four).
Senior Arbitrator in this case considered that Dr Kinzel was in a better
position than A/Prof Miniter to be aware of the respondent’s
duties, his complaints of restriction of movement in the left shoulder and the
onset of right shoulder symptoms. The Senior
Arbitrator’s conclusion is
supported by the numerous reports provided by Dr Kinzel that detailed the
respondent’s difficulties,
the nature of the work performed by the
respondent and the treatment regime provided to the respondent. The Senior
Arbitrator’s
conclusion is also supported by the inconsistent history
recorded by A/Prof Miniter in relation to the date of onset of the right
shoulder symptoms. That history was inconsistent with the evidence of
Dr Kinzel, Dr Mahfoud, the x-ray of the right shoulder undertaken
2017, the McNamara Physiotherapy records and the history of right shoulder
symptoms reported in the Trinitas Group Assessment
report dated 6 September
agree with the respondent’s submissions that the asserted fact that Dr
Kinzel did not caution the worker that there was a
possibility of symptoms
occurring in the right shoulder (which fact was not established by any evidence)
is not relevant to the issues
for determination.
respondent submits that a worker is almost invariably examined by a treating
doctor more frequently than by a medico-legal expert,
so that if the treating
doctor’s evidence is to be preferred on that basis, an opinion from a
qualified expert would be meaningless.
I do not accept that submission and I do
not accept that the Senior Arbitrator erred in that regard. It is logical that a
medical practitioner who examines and treats a patient on a number of
occasions has more opportunity to obtain an accurate history
complaints than does a qualified expert. That does not always mean that the
treating doctor’s opinion will be accepted
over that of the qualified
expert, but it is one factor that a decision maker can take into account. The
role of the decision maker
is to weigh the evidence of each expert and provide
reasons for affording greater weight to the opinion of one expert over another.
Questions of the acceptance of evidence and the weight it is given are
peculiarly matters within the province of an arbitrator, unless
it can be said
that the finding was so against the weight of the evidence that some error must
have been involved.
It cannot be
said that the Senior Arbitrator’s conclusion as to the weight to be
afforded to the opinion of Dr Kinzel was so
against the weight of the evidence
that it was wrong. Dr Kinzel’s evidence was consistent with all of the
medical experts other
than A/Prof Miniter.
follows that Grounds Three and Four of this appeal fail.
Ground Five
appellant asserts that the Senior Arbitrator erred by rejecting A/Prof
Miniter’s conclusion that if the respondent injured
his right shoulder as
a result of the nature and conditions of his employment, the injury would have
been accompanied by contemporaneous
complaints of pain. The appellant contends
that this conclusion was not addressed by either Dr Pillemer or Dr Kinzel and
Arbitrator did not assess why the expert opinions did not address
that point.
Senior Arbitrator provided a thorough review of the evidence from Dr
Dr Pillemer
as well as the relevant
clinical records from Dr Mahfoud
and McNamara Physiotherapy.
Senior Arbitrator noted that it was difficult to reconcile the conflict in the
expert opinions before she embarked upon an analysis
of those opinions. The
Senior Arbitrator provided reasons as to why she found the opinion of A/Prof
Miniter unpersuasive. She referred
to the appellant’s reliance upon A/Prof
Miniter’s observation that if there had been an injury to the right
as a result of the heavy work, symptoms would have arisen during the
respondent’s working life.
The Senior Arbitrator dealt with this observation at [85] of her reasons, in
which she said:
“However, Dr Kinzel has expressed the view
that his rotator cuff tears are solely due to the manual work he had to perform
the years. She explains that ‘heavy lifting especially in the
overhead position strains the rotator cuff and eventually leads
tearing.’ Dr Kinzel advised that Mr Tucker had a 3 cm tear on the right
side over 18 months earlier and she was concerned
there had been further
progression of the same. She also states ‘in the course of his treatment,
as he had a rather prolonged
recovery, his right shoulder deteriorated and he is
now suffering from an over­ compensation injury which is directly related
to the incident he initially sustained to his left
I do not regard
these propositions as inconsistent and provide an explanation as to why there
may not have been complaints before
2015, but that nonetheless the development
of the pathology in the right shoulder has been aggravated by his
employment.”
Senior Arbitrator added that Dr Kinzel’s opinion was supported by that of
Dr Pillemer. She referred to and quoted from the
judgment of Kirby P in
, relevantly reproduced in part at [111] above, and concluded
that she was satisfied that the respondent’s symptoms in the right
shoulder were causally related to the left shoulder symptoms and his employment.
makes it clear that the proximity of complaints or the passage
of time between the injury and the onset of symptoms is not, of itself,
determinative of the cause of injury. The Senior Arbitrator’s approach was
appellant’s allegation of error on the part of the Senior Arbitrator
appears to rest on the proposition that A/Prof Miniter’s
conclusion that
there would have been a contemporaneous complaint remained unanswered by Dr
Pillemer or Dr Kinzel. If the appellant’s
submission is that because that
conclusion was not contradicted, the Senior Arbitrator was bound to accept it,
the submission is
wrong. A court, or in this case the Commission, is not obliged
to take the opinion of an expert as conclusive even though there is
evidence to contradict it.
Senior Arbitrator took the evidence and the appellant’s submission about
that evidence and acted upon it. Her conclusion
was not unreasonable or
is sufficient to dispense with this allegation of error and there is no other
challenge to the Senior Arbitrator’s reasons
for determining that she did
not accept the respondent’s submission about that evidence or A/Prof
Miniter’s conclusion.
follows that this ground of appeal also fails.
appeal from a decision of an Arbitrator to a Presidential member is limited to
the identification of error of either fact, law
or discretion and to the
correction of such error.
appellant has failed to establish any relevant error on the part of the
Arbitrator. The Senior Arbitrator’s Certificate
of Determination is
therefore confirmed.
Senior Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination dated 8 September 2020 is
Elizabeth Wood
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
14 January 2021
Application to Resolve a
Dispute (ARD), pp
Respondent’s Application to Admit Late Documents dated 2 June
Reply to Application
to Resolve a Dispute (Reply), pp
AMA Guides on
the Evaluation of Disease and Injury Causation, Second Edition, 1 July 2013,
Chapter 33, reply, pp
Tucker v Southern
Meats Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWWCC 312 (reasons),
(1994) 35 NSWLR 452
10 NSWCCR 796
[2008] NSWCA 246.
Appellant’s submissions,
[2010] NSWCA 154
[2001] NSWCA 305
52 NSWLR 705
25 NSWCCR 218
dated 12 March 2020, ARD, p
Report dated 9 April
2020, ARD, p 315.
dated 4 April 18, reply, p
Guthrie v Spence
[2009] NSWCA 369
Smith v Parkes Shire Council
[2010] NSWWCCPD 130
Shellharbour City Council v Rigby
[2006] NSWCA
Ellis v Wallsend
District Hospital
(1989) 17 NSWLR 553
Section 352(5) of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.85 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter