URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCTTT/2013/660.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:53:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mendiratta v Clarendon Homes NSW Pty Ltd (Home Building) [2013] NSWCTTT 660 (30 December 2013)
Mendiratta v Clarendon Homes NSW Pty Ltd (Home Building)
[2013] NSWCTTT 660
December 2013)
CONSUMER, TRADER AND TENANCY
APPLICATION NO:
HB 11/51741
Harjinder Mendiratta
RESPONDENT:
Clarendon Homes (NSW) Pty Ltd
APPLICATION:
Applicant’s claim under the
claiming damages for breaches of statutory warranty
APPEARANCES:
For the applicant – Mr N Allan of Counsel
For the respondent
– Mr J Mitchell of Counsel
29 and 30 April 2013
SUBMISSIONS:
31 May 2013,20 June 2013 and 8 July 2013
LEGISLATION:
Limitation issue on building claim
Extent of defects in the context
of reasonableness of the cost of remedying defects
CASES CITED:
Tabcorp v Bowen Investments
[2009] HCA 8
(2009) 236 CLR 272
[1954] HCA 36
(1954) 90 CLR 613
Wheeler v Ecroplot Pty Ltd
Hampton Court Ltd v Crooks
[1957] HCA 28
Agricultural
and Rural Finance Pty Limited
[2008] HCA 57
Sciacca v Ace Insurance
[2011] NSWSC 798
Extent of causally related defects;
Weight to be given to expert
Meaning of “brickwork”
respondent, Clarendon Homes (NSW) Pty Ltd, is to pay the applicant, Harjinder
Mendiratta, the sum of $18,023.00 immediately.
or before 24 January 2014, the parties are to file and exchange submissions as
REASONS FOR DECISION
Preliminary
present application was lodged on 23 October 2011 by Harjinder Mendiratta
arising out of a dispute with Clarendon Homes (NSW)
Pty Ltd (the builder)
arising out of the construction of a residential dwelling that ensued subsequent
to the signing of a contract
on 26 June 2007 between Mr Mendiratta and his wife,
Seema Mendiratta, (referred to for the purpose of this dispute as the
have heard and read all of the oral and documentary evidence and have considered
it in the context of submissions lodged on behalf
of both parties. To the
extent that I may not refer to every specific piece of evidence or line of
submission, it should not be
construed that I have failed to give that material
full and proper consideration. My reasons have been prepared, having regard to
issues of clarity, evidence-based reasoning and brevity having regard to the
direction contained in s. 49(3) of the
Consumer, Trader & Tenancy
Tribunal Act
original claim lodged by the owner, without the assistance of legal
representation, alleged that the builder did not pay attention
to the colour of
individual Austral Silver bricks being laid, resulting in a variation in colour
of throughout the entire brickwork.
In May 2012, through his solicitor, the
owner alleged that whereas by a variation dated 18 October 2007 it was agreed
that the bricks
to be used in the construction would be “Austral
Silver” bricks, the builder completed the works “
using different
bricks resulting in failing to complete the works with the colour of the brick
that was agreed”,
and moreover,
“failed to supply (and)
complete the construction using Austral Silver bricks and provide a
brick face house as per the contract”
(clause 9(g) Points of Claim).
is no evidence adduced by the owner that contests that the builder contracted
with Austral Bricks for the supply and delivery
of 15,600 bricks, including
14,400 Urban One Silver bricks, (see annexure A to Affidavit of Stephen Paul
Austin sworn 17 May 2012;
purchase order dated 29 November 2007).
the commencement of the hearing, Counsel for the builder raised, with respect to
this specific allegation, the question of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to
hear and determine this part of the owner’s claim as, it was alleged by
the builder, that
it contravened
(the HBA) which is in the following terms:
“The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction in respect of a building
claim relating to building goods or services that have been
supplied or for the
claimant if the date on which the claim was lodged is more than three years
after the date on which the supply
was made (or, if made in instalments, the
date on which the supply was last made).”
hearing submissions from both parties on this issue, it was found that this part
of the owner’s claim, alleging a failure
to use specified bricks did not
contain any allegation with respect to the statutory warranties set out in
of the HBA. Accordingly, by reason of the application of
determined that the Tribunal did not have the jurisdiction in respect of a
building claim relating to the bricks supplied
to the owner pursuant to the
contract entered into between Mr and Mrs Mendiratta and the builder, such supply
having occurred more
than three years before the application was filed.
Factual background
as is necessary, it can be summarized that by August 2008 the owner was
dissatisfied with the appearance of the brickwork
of his home, then nearing
completion. In the period during which the relevant home was being constructed,
there was a degree of difference
of opinion as to what, when and how various
aspects of the construction should proceed, principally between Mr Mendiratta
builder’s supervisor, Stephen Austin. The home was built with two
Latte coloured face
bricks. The build proceeded through until August 2008, when in consideration of
the owner’s complaints,
Mr Austin suggested, and the owner agreed, that
acid washing of the brickwork would be carried out. According to the owner, it
asserted by Mr Austin that acid washing would remedy any unevenness in the
colour of the brickwork. Although Mr Austin, in his affidavit
of 17 May 2012
does not recall discussing the washing of bricks with the owner, he does say at
[7] that on inspection by him in August
2008, he noticed,
from the cleaning of the bricks in the form of spots or
“blotches””.
Although the submissions of the builder
assert that there is no evidence as to whether acid was used in the washing
process, I am
of the view that the builder was, and has been in the unique
position to obtain knowledge as to the brick cleaners use of acid in
relevant brick cleaning process, (see
Hampton Court Ltd v Crooks[1957] HCA
The only evidence is that of Mr Austin and I conclude that the brick
washing did include the use of hydrochloric acid.
2 October 2008 Mr Alan Rann, a Quality Assurance Manager in the employ of the
builder, conducted an inspection of the premises
with the owner. In the process
he filled out a document titled “
Practical Completion walk
. The completed document was signed by the owner, and is
annexure A to the affidavit of Mr Rann sworn 16 May 2012. The document
relevantly contains the confirmation that Practical Completion has been reached
other than for certain omissions and defects noted
in the body of the document
as follows:
to be Nawkaw treated
Window locks not operational - Bradmans
Shower doors – en suite squeaks / main bathroom hits on
is a dispute as to the extent of the meaning of the word
”. Mr Rann in his affidavit, said that he
recognised the terms as meaning not only bricks, but the mortar joints as well.
On this issue, in his first statement of 25 May 2012, at [20] Mr Mendiratta he
says that he did a
walk through
with Mr Austin, and that it was Mr Austin
that gave him the piece of paper which he signed. He says at [21] that
“...was not familiar with what would occur to make the brick face
look what the Respondent had agreed to. I believed Nawkaw
to be another
chemical which would rectify the difference in the brick colour. I relied upon
Steve Austin saying the above words
that there would be face brick of the nature
we had selected and the colour would be a match to our selection. At this point
the required payment for the works had been paid”.
am satisfied that the owner’s
walk through
on 2 October 2008 was in
the company of Mr Rann. This conclusion is consistent with [6] of the
owner’s second affidavit sworn
10 April 2013. I am not satisfied that
there was a conversation, alleged to have occurred with Mr Austin on 2 October
walk through
as deposed by the owner in [20] of his first
affidavit. At [8] of his second affidavit, the owner asserted that at,
no time did I want mortar colour to be the same as the brick
It was put to the owner that despite the Nawkaw treatment
being applied on the 6 and 7 October 2008, it was not until his email to
builder of 7 May 2010 that he first raised the issue of the Nawkaw treatment of
the house. At [8] of that email, the owner states:-
“MOST IMPORTANT – brick colour of the house – Nawkaw
This needs to be fixed all around the house”.
The owner refuted this proposition and said in his oral evidence that he had
had a conversation with Mr Phillip Taylor, a State Manager
of the builder, in
November 2008 in which he raised the issue of the Nawkaw treatment of both the
face bricks and the mortar joints.
This alleged conversation is not mentioned
in any of the applicant’s affidavits, or statement documents (exhibits. A1
A3). In the context of his evidence, I do not rely upon this statement
and am of the view that it was more a matter of expediency,
and construction
rather than a true recall of the situation. This answer given in
cross-examination was certainly was an assertion
inconsistent with the
owner’s record of email complaint submitted by him in the period
immediately subsequent to and after
the Nawkaw treatment was applied to both the
bricks and the mortar joints.
is submitted on behalf of the owner that the meaning of the word
” is to be construed not as a technical term as
suggested by Mr Wearing, who was a Technical Officer of Nawkaw and who gave
evidence on behalf of the builder, nor either the view of Mr Rann who took the
view as set out above. It was submitted that the
” may mean something different to a lay person than
to a builder, and that the best guide as to the meaning of the term could
gleaned from the use of the words
bricks, brickwork, mortar
associated terms as they appeared in the contract specifications. The
difficulty with that submission is that the applicant
document without asking any questions of Mr Rann as to precisely
what was meant. The applicant’s original Points of Claim
filed 28 May
2012, do not assist the interpretation submitted on behalf of the owner, noting
that at [20] of such document it is
asserted, without differentiation between
bricks, brickwork or mortar that:-
“Contrary to the representations, the completed exterior brick
colour does not match the colour selected by the applicant; the
work performed
does not comply with the representations”.
there is a level of ambiguity in the applicant’s position, it is evident
that the finished product with respect to the
brickwork of his housing, as at 2
October 2008 was not what he initially contracted for. It is my view that the
owner, by signing
walk through
document did agree to
treatment of the brickwork of his house, however the meaning of the
document and its consequences are set out below.
is submitted on behalf of the builder, and I accept that the claims advanced by
the owner can only be viewed in the context of
alleged breaches of statutory
warranty arising under
which relevantly
18B Warranties as to
residential
building work
The following warranties by the holder of a contractor
licence, or a person required to hold a contractor
licence before entering
into a contract, are implied in every contract to do
residential
building work:
(a) a warranty that the work will be performed in a proper and workmanlike
manner and in accordance with the plans and specifications
set out in the
(b) a warranty that all materials supplied by the holder or person will be
good and suitable for the purpose for which they are used
and that, unless
otherwise stated in the contract, those materials will be new,
(c) a warranty that the work will be done in accordance with, and will comply
with, this or any other law,
(d) a warranty that the work will be done with due diligence and within the
time stipulated in the contract, or if no time is stipulated,
reasonable time,
(e) a warranty that, if the work consists of the construction of a dwelling,
the making of alterations or additions to a dwelling
or the repairing, renovation, decoration or protective treatment of a dwelling,
the work will result, to the extent of the work conducted,
in a dwelling
that is reasonably fit for occupation as a dwelling,
(f) a warranty that the work and any materials used in doing the work will be
reasonably fit for the specified purpose or result,
if the person for whom the
work is done expressly makes known to the holder of the contractor
licence or person required to hold
a contractor
licence, or another person with express or apparent authority
to enter into or vary contractual arrangements on behalf
of the holder or
person, the particular purpose for which the work is required or the result that
desires the work to achieve,
so as to show that the owner
relies on the holder’s or person’s skill and
Statutory Warranties Claim
parties have narrowed certain of the issues relating to a claim made by the
owner concerning the rectification of a plumbing connection
to the hot water
tank and fixing a down pipe. Accordingly in my final determination I shall
allow an amount of $850.00, referable
to the rectification of the water heater
pipe and $150.00 for the rectification of a down pipe. I adopt the terminology
for the respondent in identifying the outstanding issues. There are
two areas of claim, one relating to the brickwork and the second
to the window
frames. As to the first, the brickwork claim, the original submission set out
in the owner’s Points of Claim
was for the stripping of the entire
brickwork of the residence and replacing it with new brickwork at a cost of
approximately $131,000.00.
Before the commencement of the hearing, the claim was
amended such that the owner claimed an amount of $77,191.00 for the cost of
rendering the brickwork and a further amount of $8,670.00 for replacing the
damaged windows. Some concessions were made on behalf
of the builder with
respect to the rectification of a limited number of brickwork defects.
The Brickwork Claim
owner relied upon two reports of an expert building consultant Mr Barry Morris,
the first a report dated 2 March 2012, a substantive
report as to defects,
causation and quantum, and a second report dated 24 July 2012, outlining his
views as to the anticipated costs
of rendering the dwelling.
Morris’ first report sets out his views that:-
brickwork had been laid with an ironed joint, but due to brickwashing and acid
process, the joints had been eroded;
were inconsistent brick joints which varied in thickness, level and regularity;
were locations where mortar courses had been repaired and were uneven in
appearance.
this context I am dealing only with the allegation of damaged brickwork. As a
preamble to his report on page 3 at paragraph 1.04,
Mr Morris stated that in
compiling his report he had referred to the following documents:-
Code of Australia
to Standards and Tolerances 2007
Australian Standards as referred to in his report.
the course of his cross-examination, Mr Morris conceded that his opinions and
supporting reasons and photographs, did not include
any reference to a breach of
any standard, industry guide or other objective criteria by which such defects
are traditionally gauged.
It was put to Mr Morris that there were three
standards which applied to brickwork, AS3700, AS4455 and AS4456. No breach of
standards was relied, nor was any reference made to the Masonry Code. Mr
Morris further conceded in cross-examination that the mortar
was structurally
sound and met with Australian Standards and that the building brickwork as a
whole did not breach either the BCA
or the Guide to Standards and Tolerances.
He asserted however, that there was evidence of defects which on any
construction of the
evidence, could only be described as minimal, numbering up
to a total of no more than 50 bricks in a total of 15,600 contained within
brickwork of the premises.
parties relied upon the authority of the Court of Appeal where views were
expressed in a matter of
Wheeler v Ecroplot Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWCA 61
McColl, MacFarlan and Basten JJA noted that evidence of industry code or
practice could establish a failure to meet a level
of standard of care,
associated with an interpretation of what is a
workmanlike
as a prerequisite to establish a breach under s.18B(a) of the
HBA. Counsel for the owner submitted, and I accept that industry standards
not the only criteria by which a departure from
proper practice
gauged. The concern I have with accepting the views of Mr Morris are that
notwithstanding his assertion that he had regard
to the relevant industry and
Australian Standards, he did not explain in his report, other than by way of
bare assertion, the reasoning
behind his conclusion of the presence of defects
which would give rise to his ultimate conclusion that the outer brick skin of
dwelling had to be demolished. It is evident however that he also had
concerns as to the
treatment, a matter which I shall refer to in
the next sub-section of my report.
The builder called Mr Tony Waights, the principal of Ceramic Advisory Services.
His report of 3 May 2012, together with his oral
evidence, has been adduced by
the builder in answer to the assertions made by Mr Morris. Mr Waights is very
well credentialed.
He is the author and contributor to the compilation of
various Australian Standards relating to masonry and brickwork. His
Curriculum Vitae
is sufficient testimony to his expertise, which was
confirmed during the course of his evidence. He said that the only evidence
erosion, was to the face brick edges of the front entry feature built of the
coloured bricks, and by reference to photographic evidence such
defects were of a limited number only. As to opinions expressed
by Mr Morris
concerning the mortar joints being variable in thickness, level and regularity,
Mr Waights expressed the view that the
”mortar joints generally
meet the tolerance requirements of Australian Standard AS3700 – 2001
Masonry Structures. It
is not reasonable to expect that every single mortar
joint in brickwork will be within tolerance, particularly around windows or
openings....”
accept the submissions made on behalf of the builder that the assertions of
damaged brickwork, including isolated areas of unevenly
repaired mortar courses
are not made out, other than as conceded in the report of Mr Waights. In
reaching my conclusion I preferred
the builder’s expert evidence. Any
shortcomings in the applicant’s expert evidence cannot and are not
remedied by the
lay evidence of the applicant.
Nawkaw Claim
only allegation of defect with regard to the application of the
claim is that, on the inspection of Mr Morris, he was of the view that the
treatment had, with the passage of time, darkened and there were
now inconsistent colour patches. He says that it is not regular
and does not
have the depth of coverage and accordingly in some locations darker bricks can
be seen. Mr Morris adopts at 5.07 the
owner’s assertion that he was led
to believe that it would be only individual bricks that were to be
treated and not the mortar. He went on at 5.08 to note that the
owners were not informed what in fact the Nawkaw brick treatment would
involve, they assumed it was a brick colouring treatment”.
deal separately with the factual issues concerning the aspects of the
treatment which I have touched upon previously.
his report, Mr Waights identifies a need for repointing of mortar joints and
treatment at the front entry and for individual dark headers where
there has not been a complete
coverage. He also identified 10
bricks on the rear elevation that also required, in his view,
treatment to overcome certain discolouration.
the necessity of going item, by item through the alleged defect concerning
“black hearting” I am satisfied that
whereas this alleged defect was
not technically a defect, it was one which could, with a careful level of
bricklaying, have been
overcome. The evidence of “black hearting”
was agreed by both experts and the applicant to affect not more than four
in total. The builder concedes this defect as requiring rectification.
The Nawkaw Brickwork Issue
have referred previously to the owner’s submission that the meaning of the
should be interpreted in the context of contract
terminology. Both parties are bound by that contract. It is submitted by the
Practical Completion walk through
form is neither a
contractual term, nor is it a variation. I do not accept this submission, which
urges that the owner’s consent
should be disregarded. If it was not a
variation then it could hardly be considered to be in any way binding upon the
Just as in the contract, in my view, is a variation, which has
ostensibly been agreed to by the owner, and paid for by the builder
context of the builder’s obligations arising out of the defects liability
period. I have previously noted my preference
in accepting the evidence of Mr
Rann as against the version of Mr Mendiratta at [20] of his first affidavit as
to the events of 2
October 2008. I have been referred to the decision of the
High Court in
Agricultural and Rural Finance Pty Limited v Gardiner
[2008] HCA 57
, where at [35] it was confirmed that subsequent conduct should not
be used in the construction of a contract, or in this case a word
in a term of
what I have found to be a contractual variation. The owner did agree to having
the brickwork colour treated. He did
not necessarily agree to having the mortar
joints coloured. He had previously specified in the contract to have mortar
a different colour to that of his selected bricks. The
document created by the builder, through its servant and agent Mr
Rann contained an ambiguity. The assertion made by the builder
ought to be
considered and construed
contra proferentem, see
Sciacca v Ace
Insurance Ltd
[2011] NSWSC 798
and accordingly I find that
. The builder is in breach of s. 18B(a) and
(f) of the HBA. How does the builder’s breach of statutory warranty sound
in damages.
am of the view that the suggestion made in the report of Mr Morris that there
ought to be a complete demolition or for that matter
even now a rendering of the
entire property, ought to not be considered as reasonable within the terms of
Tabcorp v Bowen Investments
[2009] HCA 8
(2009) 236 CLR 272
Belgrove v Eldridge
[1954] HCA 36
(1954) 90 CLR 613.The
owner’s home, although not as contracted for in
terms of outward presentation, is close in appearance to the
variation as it should have been. There is evidence before me, given by Mr
Wearing that the mortar joints can be recoloured, lightened
to the extent that
there will be a difference of a character that was evident in the specifications
to the original contract. He
estimated the cost to recolour the mortar joints at
$5,000.00. The original contract position cannot be restored. It was varied
the acceptance by the owner of the method of brick colouration set out in the
document of 2 October 2008.
Windows Claim
evidence relied upon by the owner is that contained in the first report of Mr
Morris. It too is a bare assertion without reasoning.
In his evidence Mr
Morris expanded upon his view and said that he took the view that in his
experience the discolouration, appearing
some four years after the alleged acid
washing, was the cause of such discolouration and therefore should be attributed
to the builder.
The builder submits that there is no evidence of acid being used
in the brick washing process. I have rejected this submission. Mr
Ransley the
builder’s expert consultant opined that, in his view acid washing would
not constitute a risk to powder coated
windows as long as water was used to wash
down the windows and frames after the acid washing process. I infer from such
opinion that
if the appropriate water dousing is not carried out that there may
be some risk to the relevant window frames. The opinion of Mr
Morris proposes a
causal nexus between the window frame discolouration and acid washing. Mr
Ransley gives oblique support to this
opinion. I find that the window defect has
been established as being causally related to the builder’s brickwork acid
As to quantum I prefer the opinion of Mr Ransley, being based on
Cordell’s guide, rather than the Rawlinson guide, more frequently
commercial purposes, as relied on by Mr Morris. I adopt the Ransley estimates at
paragraphs 4.2 and 4.20 of his report of
12 September 2012, totaling $6380.00,
to which I add GST of $638.00, a final rectification amount of $7018.00.
Summary of Claim
rectification $7,018.00
Water heater and downpipe $1,000.00
Nawkaw joint recolouration $5,000.00
rectification as per Waights $3,850.00
Nawkaw treatment to
brickwork- Waights/Wearing $1,155.00
Total allowed
rectification
order that the respondent, Clarendon Homes (NSW) Pty Ltd is to pay the
applicant, Harjinder Mendiratta $18,023.00 immediately.
I further order that
not later than 24 January 2014 the parties are to file and exchange submissions
Richard F Buckley
Consumer, Trader & Tenancy Tribunal
December 2013
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (189 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter