URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATCD/2025/119.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Next Level Skin Pty Ltd v Volvo Car Australia Pty Ltd [2025] NSWCATCD 119; (15 August 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Next Level Skin Pty Ltd v Volvo Car Australia Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATCD 119
Hearing Date(s):
9 April 2025 and 25 June 2025
Date of Orders:
15 August 2025 (Amended 15 August 2025)
Decision Date:
15 August 2025
Consumer and Commercial Division
G A Kinsey General Member
The Tribunal makes the following amended orders under section 63 of the
Civil Administrative Tribunal Act 2013:
(1) The Application
is dismissed.
(2) In the event that a party (“the
costs applicant”) makes an application for costs, such application must be
in the Tribunal and served on or given to the other party (“the
costs respondent”) within 14 days of the date of the
orders in these
proceedings either by attaching or referring to the documents relied upon in
support of the application.
(3) The costs respondent will
have 14 days after the date it receives the application to lodge in the Tribunal
and serve on or give
to the costs applicant its submissions, if any, in response
to the costs application, attaching or referring to any documents relied
support of its submissions.
(4) The parties must state in
their submissions if they consent to the costs application being determined
based on the parties written
submissions and attached documents, if any, without
the need for a hearing.
(5) Subject to the parties’
submissions, the Tribunal will determine any costs application made based on the
submissions and
papers filed in the Tribunal.
Catchwords:
CONSUMER LAW-Consumer guarantees under Australian Consumer Law-whether
motor vehicle of acceptable quality-test of acceptable quality
in section 54 of
Australian Consumer Law- consideration of consumer guarantee in section 55 of
Australian Consumer Law-whether motor
vehicle fit for purpose - whether repair
to motor vehicle took unreasonable time-whether breach of consumer guarantees
established-
remedies for breach of consumer guarantees against suppliers and
manufacturers
Legislation Cited:
Australian Consumer Law 2010(NSW)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Fair Trading Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Jayco Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1672
Dwyer v Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWSC 715
Frediani v Hall t/as Happy Camper Conversions
[2024] NSWCATAP 134
Auto (Sydney) Pty Ltd v Sherman (No 2)
[2021] NSWCATAP 272
Matumaini v
Automobile Industries
[2017] NSWCATAP 93
Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd v
[2022] NSWCATAP 133
Williams v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia
Limited; Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited v Williams
Williams v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited [2023]FCAFC50
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
Next Level Skin Pty Ltd (Applicant)
Volvo Car Australia Pty Ltd (First
Respondent)
Peter Warren Automotive Pty Ltd trading as Volvo Cars Liverpool
(Second Respondent)
Representation:
Solicitor for Applicant: Genevieve Hehir of Baybridge
Solicitors for
First Respondent: Callum McInnes and Sonny Scott of CIE Legal (First
Respondent)
Adam Augustynowicz (Dealer Principal) for the Second
File Number(s):
2024/00387005
Publication Restriction:
Unrestricted
REASONS FOR DECISION
Applicant (hereinafter referred to as “NLS”) was the purchaser of a
Volvo C40 Electric Demonstrator motor vehicle
registration **** (“the
Motor Vehicle”) from Volvo Cars Liverpool on or about 3 June 2023.
First Respondent is the manufacturer of the vehicle. For the sake of
convenience, the First Respondent shall hereinafter be referred
Manufacturer”.
Second Respondent carried on business as a licensed motor dealer and traded as
Volvo Cars Liverpool. For the sake of convenience,
the Second Respondent shall
hereinafter be referred to as “the Dealer”.
Application
an application filed in the Tribunal on 18 October 2024, NLS requested an order
that the Manufacturer and the Dealer provide it
with a full refund of the
purchase price of the Motor Vehicle.
its application NLS alleged the vehicle was not of acceptable quality in breach
of Australian Consumer Law (“the ACL”). The
application listed various defects and repairs to the Motor Vehicle, delays
having work done and ongoing problems with the vehicle’s performance.
Palvasha Naziry (“Naziry”), a director of NLS, stated in the
application:
I am requesting a full refund for the vehicle, as I no longer have confidence
that these issues can be permanently resolved.
application was amended on 7 November 2025 to seek a refund of $80,000.00 and
foreseeable losses of $15,000.00.
Procedural Directions
Tribunal made directions on 7 November 2024 and 2 December 2024 for the parties
to file and serve documents on which they intended
to rely at the hearing.
Bundles of documents were received from NLS and the Manufacturer. The Dealer did
not file and serve any evidence
but relied on the documents filed by the
Manufacturer.
documents received from NLS and the Manufacturer were tendered as evidence in
the proceedings.
Evidence of NLS
documents tendered by NLS included the following:
(i) Points of Claim;
(ii) Vehicle Purchase Agreement for the Motor Vehicle dated 3 June 2023;
(iii) Statement of Account from Power Torque Finance;
(iv) Payout Quote from Power Torque Finance dated 13 January 2025;
(v) Service and Repair Invoices issued by the Dealer;
(vi) EV Charger invoice and receipt for payment;
(vii) Vehicle registration certificate and CTP Insurance documents
(viii) Email correspondence between NLS and the Dealer.
(ix) Expert Report of Joseph Gabko dated 12 January 2025 (“the Gabko
the hearing, NLS tendered 2 technical reports AU 365000 and AU 376692, and an
updated payout figure from Power Torque Finance dated
8 April 2025.
documentary material was supplemented by oral testimony from Palvasha Naziry,
and expert oral testimony from Joseph Gabko and
Graham Judge.
to the hearing, the Tribunal received from NLS revised payout figures provided
by Power Torque Finance in accordance with
leave given by the
Evidence of the Manufacturer
documents tendered by Volvo Cars included the following:
(i) Points of Defence;
(ii) Expert Report of Dr Andrew George dated 6 March 2025 (“the George
(iii) Five Service Invoices from the Dealer.
documentary material was supplemented by expert oral testimony from Dr Andrew
Evidence from the Dealer
Dealer did not file any evidence in the proceedings. It sought to rely on
evidence given on behalf of the
Manufacturer.
CONSIDERATION
Factual Findings
Tribunal makes the following findings of fact:
(i) NLS is a “consumer” as defined in section 3 of the ACL;
(ii) The Dealer is a licensed motor dealer which conducted business as Volvo
Cars Liverpool from premises at Todman Road Warwick
(iii) The Manufacturer is a vehicle manufacturer of Volvo motor vehicles
including the Motor Vehicle.
(iv) On 3 June 2023 NLS contracted to purchase the Motor Vehicle being a
Demonstrator Volvo C 40 Recharge Pure Electric Single Speed
Auto Wagon for a
price of $79,500.00 from the Dealer.
(v) he Sales Contract recorded the odometer reading at the time of purchase as
1024 kilometres.
(vi) The purchase of the Motor Vehicle was financed through Power Torque
(vii) The amount financed was $79,880.00.
(viii) The Motor Vehicle was delivered to NLS on 17 June 2023.
(ix) At the time of purchase, Naziry and NLS were made aware of 2 bubbles in the
glass roof which the Dealer agreed to repair under
(x) The Motor Vehicle was booked in for service in July 2023 but the appointment
was cancelled by NLS.
(xi) The Motor Vehicle was booked in for service with the Dealer on 4 June 2024
for replacement of the sunroof glass.
(xii) The Dealer’s Service Invoice VOCVS111952 recorded the work
undertaken as:
GLASS IMPERFECTION IN SUNROOF
Inspected internal fault on the sunroof glass
Sent TR#365000 found sunroof glass to have imperfection distorted glass and
requires replacement
Carried out removal of the roof lining and windscreen removed sunroof glass and
refitted in reverse order
Tested all okay
(xiii) In addition, the Dealer inspected the wireless charger for faults and
found it was working within specifications.
(xiv) Whist the Motor Vehicle was in for service, the Dealer supplied a loan car
to Ms Naziry.
(xv) NLS reported that after the repair of the sunroof, it rattled when driving
on rough surfaces.
(xvi) The Motor Vehicle was booked in with the Dealer on 17 July 2024 for a
30,000 kilometres service, and for repair of the faulty
driver side sunvisor,
replacement of the glovebox lid and front wipers, and to identify the cause of
the rattling.
(xvii) The Dealer’s Service Invoice VOCVS 114195 detailed the work which
was performed on the Motor Vehicle. In respect of
the roof, the Technician
recommended obtaining a quote from a smash repairer.
(xviii) The Dealer’s Service Invoice recorded the odometer reading as
29641 kilometres as at 17 July 2024.
(xix) The Dealer supplied NLS with a loan car whilst the vehicle was in for
service and repairs.
(xx) NLS was dissatisfied with the repairs. Naziry complained the sunroof still
rattled and she had issues with the cruise control,
light in the centre console
and wireless charger.
(xxi) The Motor Vehicle was returned to the Dealer for repairs on 1 October
(xxii) On 4 October 2024 NLS sent an email to the Manufacturer which relevantly
I am writing to formally reject the vehicle and ask for a buyback of my Volvo
C 40 rego ****, under the Australian Consumer Law, as
the vehicle I purchased
has been considered unfit for purpose. I have returned the vehicle for repairs
on multiple occasions due
to the same issues, yet these problems persist, and I
have now lost faith in its reliability and quality.
(xxiii) In her email, Naziry listed 6 defects which impacted the vehicle’s
safety and reliability.
(xxiv) On 18 October 2025, NLS filed an application to NCAT
(xxv) On 24 October 2024, Naziry went for a test drive with a representative of
the Dealer.
(xxvi) Following the test drive, NLS sent an email to the Dealer on 31 October
2024 requesting a full refund of the purchase price.
NLS alleged the Motor
Vehicle had persistent faults which compromised the vehicle’s safety, the
Manufacturer had engaged in
misleading conduct and alleged breaches of the
(xxvii) In an email from Adam Augustynowicz to Naziry on 5 November 2025, the
Dealer rejected the claims made by NLS and asserted:
“The vehicle meets all Manufacturer’s specifications including
Australian Consumer Law guarantees.”
(xxviii) The Dealer’s Service Invoice VOCVS115608 dated 8 November 2024
records the odometer reading as 34189 kilometres.
NLS Causes of Action
Points of Claim filed by NLS pleaded the following causes of action:
(i) Breach of the consumer guarantee of acceptable quality in section 54 of the
(ii) Breach of the consumer guarantee in section 55 of the ACL in that the Motor
Vehicle was not fit for purpose;
(iii) Breach of the consumer guarantee in section 58 of the ACL in that the
repairs to the Motor Vehicle were not completed within
a reasonable time frame.
a result of the alleged breaches, NLS submitted there had been a major failure
which entitled it to a full refund of the purchase
price of $79,500 and
consequential losses.
Is the claim a Consumer Claim?
find that the claim is a “consumer claim” as defined in section 79E
of the Fair Trading Act 1987 (“the FTA”).
find that NLS is a consumer, the Manufacturer and the Dealer are suppliers and
the application is a claim by a consumer that arises
from a supply of goods and
services by a supplier to a consumer under a contract made in New South
find that the application was made within the 3 years period from the date on
which the causes of action arose (Section 79L(1)(a)
of the FTA). The Tribunal
has jurisdiction to make the orders sought by NLS. I find the Tribunal has
the application.
Principles- An Overview of Section 54 of the ACL
submitted the vehicle was not of acceptable quality in that it was not free from
defects, safe, durable, and not fit for purpose
in breach of the consumer
guarantee in section 54 of the ACL.
54 of the ACL is in the following terms:
Guarantee as to acceptable quality
(a) a person supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by auction;
there is a guarantee that the goods are of acceptable quality.
(2) Goods are of acceptable quality if they are as:
(a) fit for all the purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly
supplied; and
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from defects; and
(d) safe; and
(e) durable;
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods (including any hidden defects of the goods), would
regard as acceptable
having regard to the matters in subsection (3).
(3) The matters for the purposes of subsection (2) are:
(a) the nature of the goods; and
(b) the price of the goods (if relevant); and
(c) any statements made about the goods on any packaging or label on the
(d) any representation made about the goods by the supplier or manufacturer
of the goods; and
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the
(a) goods supplied to a consumer are not of acceptable quality; and
(b) the only reason or reasons why they are not of acceptable quality were
specifically drawn to the consumer’s attention before
the consumer agreed
to the supply;
the goods are taken to be of acceptable quality.
(a) goods are displayed for sale or hire; and
(b) the goods would not be of acceptable quality if they were supplied to a
the reason or reasons why they are not of acceptable quality are taken, for
the purposes of subsection (4), to have been specifically
consumer’s attention if those reasons were disclosed on a written notice
that was displayed with the goods and that
was transparent.
(6) Goods do not fail to be of acceptable quality if:
(a) the consumer to whom they are supplied causes them to become of
unacceptable quality, or fails to take reasonable steps to prevent
becoming of unacceptable quality; and
(b) they are damaged by abnormal use.
(7) Goods do not fail to be of acceptable quality if:
(a) the consumer acquiring the goods examines them before the consumer agrees
to the supply of the goods; and
(b) the examination ought reasonably to have revealed that the goods were not
of acceptable quality
Matumaini v Automobile Industries
[2017] NSWCATAP 93
the Appeal Panel
stated at [73]:
“The question which the Tribunal had to consider and
answer was whether, at the time of the sale, the vehicle was of acceptable
quality as that phrase is defined in s 54 (2) of the ACL NSW. In other words, it
was not necessary for the Appellant to prove that
at the time of the sale, there
was a particular identified defect which caused the vehicle not to be of an
acceptable standard.”
54 of the ACL and the remedies available to consumers against suppliers for non-
compliance have been the subject of judicial
consideration in recent years.
LSH Auto (Sydney) Pty Ltd v Sherman (No 2)
[2021] NSWCATAP 272
Panel set out the legal principles applicable in a case involving a claim under
section 54 of the ACL at [35]-[36]:
35 The relevant principles to apply in a case such as the
present were summarised by Derrington J in Vautin v By Winddown (No 4)
(2018) 362 ALR 702
as follows:
“[142] Mr Vautin asserts that the existence of the construction defects
in the sandwich core panels of Revive means that the
vessel is not of an
“acceptable quality” within the meaning of the guarantee imposed by
s 54 of the ACL. In determining
whether the guarantee in that section is
contravened the following matters are relevant:
(a) The test as to whether goods are of an “acceptable quality”
is an objective one; being taken from the perspective
of a “reasonable
consumer” (APS Satellite Pty Ltd (formerly known as Sky Mesh Pty Ltd) v
Ipstar Australia Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWSC 1898 (APS
Satellite Pty Ltd) at [57];
Merck Sharp & Dohme (Australia) Pty Ltd v Peterson
(2011) 196 FCR 145
[2011] FCAFC 128).
(b) The question for the “reasonable consumer” is whether the
goods in question the identified qualities have enumerated
in 54(2) to an
“acceptable standard”. This requirement is derived from the words
“as a reasonable consumer ...
would regard as acceptable”.
(c) The “acceptable standard” is used as the yardstick against
which the qualities of the goods are to be measured. It
is ascertained by a
consideration of the matters referred to in s 54(3); the nature of the goods,
their price, any statement made
representations made about the goods by the supplier or manufacturer, and any
other circumstance
relating to their supply.
(d) It is necessary the goods have all of the qualities identified in s 54(2)
to the ascertained acceptable standard. Those qualities
are that the goods are
fit for all the purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly supplied,
acceptable in appearance and
finish, free from defects, safe and durable.
(e) In the assessment of whether the goods meet that relevant standard, the
reasonable consumer is taken to be fully acquainted with
the state and condition
of the goods (including any hidden defects of the goods).
(f) If the goods supplied do not have all of the identified qualities to the
acceptable standard, they will not be of an “acceptable
[143] In compendious terms, the issue is whether, objectively, the goods
supplied (when taking into account their actual quality including
defects) are, to an acceptable standard, fit for all the purposes for which
goods of that kind are commonly supplied,
acceptable in appearance and finish,
free from defects, safe and durable when measured by a standard which reflects
the nature of
the goods, their price, statements about the good as per their
packaging, representations made about the goods and any other relevant
circumstance. In Prestige Auto Traders Australia Ltd v Bonnefin
[2017] NSWSC 149
N Adams J identified the manner in which s 54 should be applied in the
following way:
“The relevant test in s 54(2) of the ACL (NSW) of whether or not goods
are of “acceptable quality” is an objective
one based on whether a
reasonable consumer who was aware of the “defects” in the goods at
the time of the supply would
have considered them to be of acceptable quality.
There was no issue taken that the determination of what is objectively
for a consumer to expect is to be made taking into account the
relevant information known as at the time of the trial, including
“after-acquired knowledge”: Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
(2003) 130 FCR
198 ALR 630
[2003] FCAFC 151
36 In Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Jayco Corporation Pty
[2020] FCA 1672
Wheelahan J said:
“[25] ... The standards under s 54(2) include that goods will be fit
for all purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly
supplied. This
general standard of fitness for purpose is not dependent upon the consumer
communicating any intended purpose to the
supplier or relying upon the
supplier’s skill or judgment. And, in relation to the general standard, it
does not suffice that
the goods will be fit for only some of those
[26] The standard of acceptable quality in s 54(2) has as its reference point
a construct, namely the objective standard of a reasonable
consumer fully
acquainted with the state and condition of the goods, including any hidden
defects of the goods. The reasonable consumer
sits with an array of other
hypothetical persons who have been recruited by the law and by reference to whom
objective standards
are evaluated: see, Healthcare at Home Ltd v The Common
Services Agency
[2014] UKSC 49
; 4 All ER 210 at
- [4] (Lord Reed JSC). Such a
person has been described as an anthropomorphic conception of justice that is
and must be the court
itself: see Davis Contractors Ltd v Fareham Urban District
[1956] UKHL 3
[1956] AC 696
at 728 (Lord Radcliffe).
[27] The hypothetical question whether the reasonable consumer would have
regarded the quality of the goods as acceptable is to be
determined at the time
of supply. However, the reference in s 54(2) to hidden defects has the
consequence that for the purposes of
determining that question, the reasonable
consumer may be acquainted with information known at the time of trial: cf,
Ltd v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
130 FCR 182
(Branson J,
Jacobson J agreeing). The standard of acceptable quality prescribed by s 54(2)
is not absolute, or a standard of perfection.
It is tempered by what a
reasonable consumer would regard as acceptable having regard to the several
matters in s 54(3). These matters
render the standard of acceptable quality
elastic, and context specific: Contact Energy Ltd v Jones
[2009] NZHC 2631
[2009] 2 NZLR 830
(Miller J). The significance of the components of the
guarantee of acceptable quality will therefore vary with the circumstances
each case.”
The standard of acceptable quality is the objective standard of a reasonable
consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition
of the goods including
any hidden defects. The standard of acceptable quality is not absolute or a
standard of perfection. It is
elastic and depends on the circumstances of each
Frediani v Hall t/as Happy Camper Conversions
[2024] NSWCATAP 134
Appeal Panel summarised the legal principles applicable to a consideration of
sections 54(2) and 54(3) of the ACL. The Appeal
Panel stated at
18. The matters in s 54(3) are “mandatory
considerations” to establish whether or not goods are not of acceptable
under s 54(2)(a)-(e) such that a reasonable consumer, fully
acquainted with the state and condition of the goods, would regard the
being of acceptable quality, determined at the date of the supply of the goods
(Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC
179 (Capic-Appeal)
19. The principles applicable to s 54(2) of the ACL can be
summarised as follows:
(1) The “reasonable consumer” in s 54(2) is assessed
objectively, and idiosyncratic subjective views by the consumer about
or condition of the goods or what is, or is not, acceptable, is irrelevant
(Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited
(2023) 296 FCR
[2023] FCAFC 50 (Williams-Appeal)
(2) Section 54 of the ACL requires consideration of at least some
knowledge acquired after supply, or else it would not be possible
to hold that
goods were not of acceptable quality by reason of a latent or hidden defect
(Capic-Appeal at [57]).
(3) The statutory language of s 54(2) does not confine
“acceptable quality” to “not potentially fatal” or
“unusable” (Capic-Appeal) at [53].
(4) The existence of a manufacturer’s warranty should generally have no
bearing on the question of whether the goods comply
with the statutory
guarantees of acceptable quality (Capic-Appeal at [63],
applying Jayco at [43]; and Toyota Motor Corporation Australia
Limited v Williams
(2023) 296 FCR 514
[2023] FCAFC
(5) The consumer guarantee in s 54 should not be “read
down” because it could otherwise lead to a “disproportionate
outcome” (Capic-Appeal at [75]).
(6) A reasonable consumer in the hypothetical circumstances in s
54 would be aware that motor vehicles are complicated pieces of machinery
that may develop future problems that may require rectification by the
vehicle’s manufacturer during its lifetime, and a merely
speculative
theoretical possibility of a future problem may not be regarded as unacceptable
by a reasonable consumer (Dwyer v Volkswagen
Group Australia Pty Ltd t/as
Volkswagen Australia
[2021] NSWSC 715
Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA
(7) A reasonable consumer being aware that motor vehicles are complicated
pieces of machinery that may develop problems is different
to a reasonable
consumer accepting that a vehicle, because of a defect already present at the
time of supply, cannot be used in a
reasonable and normal way without
malfunctioning and consequently exposing the vehicle one or more non-trivial
adverse consequences
(Williams v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia
[2022] FCA 344
; Capic v Ford Motor Company
[2021] FCA 715
Williams v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited; Toyota Motor
Corporation Australia Limited v Williams
[2024] HCA 38
(“Williams”)
the High Court stated at [33]-[34]:
33. Section 54(2) posits a hypothetical inquiry as to what a reasonable
consumer at the time of supply would regard as acceptable
if the reasonable
consumer was “fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods”, including any “hidden
defects”. At least in a case
involving a hidden defect, an inquiry into whether the guarantee has been
complied with requires
attributing to a reasonable consumer, at the time of
supply, later acquired knowledge of the defect that renders the goods below
acceptable quality. The attributed knowledge of the defect must be knowledge
that would render a reasonable consumer “fully
acquainted” with the
true state and condition of the goods; it follows that this must include full
knowledge of or acquaintance
with the defect, including later acquired knowledge
of the propensity of the defect to occasion adverse consequences and the nature
of those consequences, even if understandings of those matters vary over the
period of time leading up to the trial.
34. If such knowledge is attributed to a reasonable consumer at the time of
supply, there is no reason why later acquired knowledge
of the capacity to
repair the defect or ameliorate its consequences, including when, how and at
what cost those repairs or ameliorative
steps could be undertaken, should not
also be attributed. Those matters are characteristics of the nature and
seriousness of the
defect and, in turn, the state and condition of the goods.
Knowledge of those matters cannot be divorced from what constitutes the
“defect”, even though they may not necessarily preclude the defect
from rendering the goods in breach of the
guarantee in s 54.
authorities make it clear that assessment of whether goods are of acceptable
quality under section 54(2) of the ACL is conducted
objectively, not
subjectively.
test as to whether goods are of an “acceptable quality” is an
objective one being taken from the perspective of a
“reasonable
consumer” fully acquainted with the state and condition of the goods
(including any hidden defects of the
inquiry is made by reference to a hypothetical reasonable consumer, not by
reference to the individual consumer to whom the goods
are supplied in any
particular case:
Williams v Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited
remedies available to a consumer for breach of the consumer guarantees in the
ACL are different depending on whether the claim
is against the supplier or
manufacturer.
5-4 Division 1 of the ACL (sections 259-270) deals with actions against
suppliers of goods. The remedies include repair, replacement
depending on matters including whether the failure to comply is a “major
failure”, and whether the goods have
been rejected within the rejection
these proceedings, the Dealer is the supplier of the Motor Vehicle.
5-4 Division 2 of the ACL (Sections 271-272 of the ACL) set out the damages
which are available against manufacturers of goods.
The damages available are
for the reduction in the value of the goods resulting from the failure to comply
with the consumer guarantee
and the recovery of any loss or damage which was
reasonably foreseeable because of the failure to comply with the consumer
these proceedings, the Manufacturer is the manufacturer of the Motor
Expert Evidence for NLS
relied on the Gabko Report and oral evidence from Graham Judge to establish the
Motor Vehicle was not of acceptable quality under
section 54 (2)(a)-(e) such
that a reasonable consumer, fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
Motor Vehicle, would
regard the Motor Vehicle as being of acceptable quality,
determined at the date of the supply of the Motor Vehicle.
its Points of Claim, NLS submitted the Dealer and the Manufacturer “failed
to meet their obligations under the ACL by supplying
a vehicle that is not of
acceptable quality, does not match its marketed description as a premium, safe
and quiet vehicle, and required
unreasonable repair times, causing significant
inconvenience.”
Tribunal is satisfied Joseph Gabko (“Gabko”) has sufficient
knowledge, skill and experience to express the opinions
and conclusions in the
Gabko Report. He is the holder of trade qualifications as an auto electrician
and motor mechanic with 40 years’
experience in the automotive industry.
The Gabko Report was prepared in a manner compliant with the
NCAT Practice Direction 3 concerning
expert evidence and which
includes the Expert’s Code of Conduct.
was instructed by Naziry “to examine and test the vehicles ADAS (Advanced
Driver Assist Systems- referred to by Volvo as
Pilot and Co-Pilot) and prepare a
report on my findings relating to the operational status of the vehicle’s
driver assist functions.”
informed Gabko that when she purchased the Motor Vehicle, “the cruise
control was functioning correctly” and “the
problems have started
since the glass roof was replaced.”
noted NLS’s complaints as:
(i) Adaptive Cruise Control - The adaptive cruise control failed to decelerate
when approaching a stationary vehicle in front, requiring
manual intervention
and creating a significant safety hazard.
(ii) Glass Roof Imperfections – The glass roof was replaced due to the
glass being distorted.
(iii) Sun Visor Malfunction – The sun visor failed to remain in the
adjusted position and the sun visor courtesy lights malfunctioned.
(iv) Wireless Charger- The wireless charger intermittently and inconsistently in
its operation.
(v) Roof Rattling- This issue first occurred after the replacement of the glass
roof and was not resolved at the date of inspection
ie 16 November 2024.
(vi) Interior Roof Lighting – The interior roof lighting fails
intermittently resulting in the non-illumination of the interior
cabin of the
(vii) Bluetooth Connectivity – The Bluetooth connectivity between the
vehicle and mobile devices was inconsistent, unreliable
and problematic.
examined the service history of the Motor Vehicle and set out a chronology in
his report.
point 6.11 of the Gabko Report (Understanding ADAS Advanced Driver Assist
Schemes), Gabko provides a brief history of the development
6.11.3 Gabko makes the following observation:
It is crucial to acknowledge that Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS),
Driver Support, Driver Assist Pilot and Co-Pilot systems
do not constitute
autonomous driving systems. These technologies along with their varying
functionalities between vehicle manufacturers,
are solely intended to assist
drivers and improve safety for vehicle occupants and other road users, thereby
mitigating the risk
of collisions.
sought information from the Manufacturer’s website and vehicle manual
in the Motor Vehicle. He
included in his report information about the operation of the Pilot Assist
function and collision avoidance
Relevantly,
Gabko included pages from the website Volvocars.com/au which provided detailed
information on the functionality of each
system fitted to the Motor Vehicle.
the page headed “Detection of obstacles with assistance at risk of
collision”, the Manufacturer included the following
warning about the
limitations of the function:
Warnings and brake interventions could be late or not occur at all. The driver
is always responsible that the vehicle is driven correctly
and with a safety
distance adapted to the speed.
the page headed “Pilot Assist”, there is a further
Driver Responsibility
As a driver, you are responsible for doing everything possible to ensure your
own safety as well as that of your passengers and others.
part of his evaluation of the Motor Vehicle, Gabko took it for a test drive and
noted the vehicle’s performance under varying
conditions. Ms Naziry and
Graham Judge were in the vehicle within him during the test drive.
Judge recorded Gabko’s test drive on video and the Motor Vehicle’s
performance in different scenarios. Various
images from the video are included
in his report to highlight the problems with the ADAS.
the test drive, Gabko observed that the vehicle did not warn Naziry whilst she
was driving of any frontal or rearward collision
warnings (Point 7.4 of the
Gabko Report).
Gabko drove the vehicle, the obstacle detection system activated a warning on
only one occasion. (Point 7.5 of the Gabko Report).
carried out further testing on stationary objects. He determined the Driver
Assist functions failed to warn the driver of impending
objects or the risk of
point 7.10 Gabko concluded:
Following extensive road testing, extensive testing of the vehicles equipped
ADAS system, the vehicles Driver assist functions did
not function as intended
or described on Volvo’s web page www.volvocars.com.au/
was critical of the repair procedure used by the Dealer for the repair of the
glass roof. From his research, the procedure for
replacement or repair of the
glass roof did not mention removal of the vehicle’s windscreen.
noted the vehicle’s front cameras are mounted to the windscreen and
“it is standard industry practice that when a windscreen
is removed or
replaced that the vehicle’s ADAS systems are recalibrated including the
windscreen mounted camera.”
found no evidence that the Motor Vehicle’s ADAS system or front cameras
were calibrated following the windscreen removal
and refitment.
set out his conclusions in Section 8 of the report. In summary, he
(i) The driver warning systems and the functionality of the Advanced Driver
Assist Systems were compromised (Point 8.1);
(ii) The major issue was related to the Adaptive Cruise control and frontal
driver warning systems (Point 8.1.1)
(iii) There were no apparent faults with the glass roof which was functioning as
intended (Point 8.2)
(iv) The failure of the driver assist functionality jeopardises the safety of
the vehicle’s passengers, other road user and
pedestrians.
(v) The evidence supports the notion there were no roof rattles, no interior
roof lighting issues, no sun visor issues or safety
concerns relating to the
ADAS systems prior to the glass roof being replaced by the Dealer (Point
(vi) There is no evidence the ADAS systems were recalibrated following the
repairs and removal of the windscreen;
(vii) The replacement of the glass roof and windscreen may not have been
executed in a workman like manner with due care and skill.
(viii) Faults were introduced into the vehicle as a direct result of the glass
roof replacement indicating the Dealer has not done
the repair with due care and
(ix) The current failure of the driver assist functions means the Motor Vehicle
cannot be confidently and safely driven.
Judge (“Judge”) gave evidence on affirmation. He is a director of
Collision Safety Consultants NSW. He is a panelbeater
by trade. I am satisfied
he has sufficient expertise and experience to express the opinions he gave in
his evidence.
accompanied Gabko during the test drive on 16 November 2024 and sat in the back
seat with a video camera.
took a video of test drive which was provided to Gabko. He did not hear any
warning sounds as the Motor Vehicle approached other
Judge’s opinion, the Motor Vehicle was not operating safely. He had safety
concerns if the sunroof was not repaired properly
as it is a structural part of
the vehicle.
Expert Evidence for the Manufacturer
Andrew George (“Dr George”) gave evidence on affirmation. He was the
author of the George Report.
George is an engineer with 35 years experience in automotive and industrial
engineering. He has a PhD in engineering and is a Registered
Professional
engineer. He is a casual lecturer in mechanical engineering at Swinburne
University. I am satisfied Dr George has sufficient
knowledge, experience and
qualifications to express the opinions in the George Report.
George Report was prepared in a manner compliant with the
NCAT Practice Direction 3 concerning expert evidence and included the
Expert’s Code of Conduct.
20 February 2025 Dr George inspected the Motor Vehicle at Liverpool.
inspection involved a diagnostic system download, a detailed inspection of the
vehicle and a comparator with similar systems,
and a final diagnostic
George took the Motor Vehicle for a test drive in a low-speed suburban
environment and on high-speed freeway. During the inspection
and test drive, he
was accompanied by representatives of the Dealer and the Manufacturer.
4.1 of his report, Dr George listed the complaints about the Motor Vehicle made
by NLS. The issues included problems with the phone
charger, Bluetooth
connectivity and the cruise control.
George was supplied with a copy of the Gabko Report. He provided a detailed list
of the documents he was supplied with by the Manufacturer.
section 6 of his report, Dr George set out his observations. From his
investigations, he observed:
(i) The vehicle was well maintained and in good condition;
(ii) A diagnostic fault code check revealed some codes which did not require
action and were not associated with issues under review;
(iii) He conducted a detailed review of Ms Naziry’s complaints and sought
information from both Respondents on the operation
and configuration of the
systems in the Motor Vehicle.
(iv) He took the Motor Vehicle for a test drive for about 60 minutes. As the
testing of ADAS is not regulated in Australia, no Australian
Design Rules exist
to control the performance and configuration of these systems.
(v) At point 6.6, Dr George provided details of the test drive which included
low speed (30-60 km/h) suburban driving, higher speed
(70-100km/h) freeway and
highway driving and driving the Motor Vehicle towards a planted hedge.
(vi) From his testing, Dr George stated at point 6.7:
(a) The electronic safety and driving systems such as
adaptive cruise control and lane keeping assist operated effectively;
(b) The Motor Vehicle’s safety systems were calibrated
(d) Driving the Motor Vehicle towards the hedge activated the front parking
sensors with sufficient notice to apply the brakes and
stop the vehicle.
(vii) The drive testing identified the vehicle did not perform unwanted
intervention in certain situations and the sensors operated
as expected when
driving towards the hedge.
(viii) Dr George test drove a comparator vehicle with the same electronic
systems as those in the Motor Vehicle.
(ix) He concluded the “drive test was able to confirm the collision
avoidance systems were working appropriately through use
of the comparative
method (point 6.11)”
point 6.14 Dr George set out his observations in respect of the other complaints
made by NLS about the Motor Vehicle.
noted there were no rattles in the glass roof during the test drive, the
sunvisor worked properly, the sunvisor light and automatic
door lights on the
roof worked correctly, the wireless phone charger and Bluetooth system were
working as expected.
point 6.14 (n), Dr George stated:
The active cruise control system was operating effectively and consistently.
point 6.14 (p), he stated:
The collision detection system was not observed as malfunctioning during my
testing with reference to a comparator vehicle.
George performed a second diagnostic check and found no fault codes were logged
during the test drive of the Motor Vehicle.
point 7 of his report, Dr George commented on the methodology used by Gabko and
the conclusions in the Gabko Report.
disputed Gabko’s reliance on the diagnostic codes as an indication the
vehicle’s systems are not working effectively.
At point 7.7 Dr George
asserted “it is my opinion that the diagnostic code download performed by
Mr Gabko does not accurately
identify the true state of the vehicle’s
electronic systems.”
the reasons appearing in Point 7 of his report, Dr George is critical of the
testing method adopted by Gabko and set out his reasons.
He submitted
Gabko’s self-developed testing procedures were flawed as they lacked an
understanding of the vehicle’s systems.
George concluded at 7.22:
“....the subject vehicle’s collision avoidance and active control
systems have not provided with evidence of a defect.”
George concluded that the inspection and test drive did not identify defects
with the vehicle except for possibly the phone charger.
Motor Vehicle of Acceptable Quality?
there been a failure by the Manufacturer and the Dealer to comply with the
consumer guarantee of acceptable quality set out in
section 54 of the ACL?
submitted “The persistent rattling noise, the cruise control issues and
repeated failures, all within the first year of
ownership, mean the vehicle is
not of acceptable quality.”
Dealer and the Manufacturer asserted the Motor Vehicle was of acceptable
quality. They argued the Motor Vehicle was fit for purpose,
free from defects,
safe, durable and of acceptable quality within the meaning of section 54 of the
this case, the question which the Tribunal must consider and answer is whether
at the time of sale, the Motor Vehicle was of acceptable
quality as that phrase
is defined in section 54(2) of the ACL.
deciding this issue, the Tribunal has applied principles in the authorities
referred to above to the facts of this case.
Applicant bears the onus of proof. NLS must produce evidence which satisfies the
Tribunal on the balance of probabilities that
it is sufficient to make the
orders sought in the application.
there was a breach of the consumer guarantees as to acceptable quality in
section 54 of the ACL and the guarantee as to fitness
for purpose in section 55
of the ACL apply at the time of supply of the goods.
Motor Vehicle was purchased on 3 June 2023. At the date of purchase, NLS was
made aware of the bubbles in the sunroof. The Dealer
agreed to replace the
sunroof under warranty.
find on the evidence that at the date of supply, the Motor Vehicle was fit for
all the purposes for which goods of that kind are
commonly supplied, acceptable
in appearance and finish, safe and durable.
find the Motor Vehicle was not free of defects at the date of supply in that the
sunroof had glass imperfections.
54(4) of the ACL provides that if goods supplied to a consumer are not of
acceptable quality and the only reason why they
are not of acceptable quality
was specifically drawn to the consumer’s attention before the consumer
agreed to the supply,
the goods are taken to be of acceptable quality.
this case, the Dealer specifically drew the attention of Naziry and NLS to the
defect in the sunroof/glass roof prior to the sale
of the Motor Vehicle. NLS
proceeded with the full knowledge of the defect.
find that by operation of section 54(4), the Motor Vehicle was taken to be of
acceptable quality notwithstanding the defect in the
and Naziry’s general dissatisfaction with the Motor Vehicle is not
sufficient to prove a breach of the consumer guarantee
provisions of the ACL and
their subjective views about the state or condition of the goods or what is, or
is not acceptable, is irrelevant.
6.3 of his report, Gabko listed NLS and Naziry’s primary concerns with the
Motor Vehicle. He noted that “
faults were introduced into the vehicle
as a direct result of the glass roof replacement thus indicating that due care
and skill has
not been applied to the repair of the applicant vehicle.”
(section 8.7.5 of the Gabko Report).
did not state that the faults were present at the date of supply of the Motor
Vehicle or could be considered “hidden defects”.
8.2 of the Gabko Report, Gabko confirmed that at the date of his inspection,
there were no apparent faults with the glass roof
/sunroof, sunvisor, or
interior roof lighting and the rattling had been fixed. Dr George made similar
findings at Point 6.14 of his
and Naziry are dissatisfied with the operation of the Advanced Driver Assist
System (“ADAS”) after the repair of the
glass roof. That repair took
place on or about 5 June 2024, almost 12 months after the Motor Vehicle was
is no evidence before me of any malfunction of the ADAS between the date of
delivery and 15 July 2024. The Motor Vehicle had
travelled approximately 30,000
kilometres by 15 July 2024 since being purchased.
7.2.1 of the Gabko Report, Gabko recites the following conversation with Naziry
on 16 November 2024:
Q5: Have you had any repairs warranty or accident related carried out on the
vehicle and was the cruise control giving you problems
A: When I first bought the vehicle the cruise control was functioning
correctly come to think of it the problems have started since
the glass roof was
replaced. There has been no accidents
evidence of Naziry is the Motor Vehicle was booked in with the Dealer to have
the sunroof repaired in July 2023. She cancelled
the booking because of concerns
Dealer’s service history shows that the only major repair to the Motor
Vehicle during the ownership of NLS was the sunroof/glass
roof. The other
repairs undertaken appear to be relatively minor in nature and looked at
objectively, would have no impact on a reasonable
consumer’s decision to
purchase the motor vehicle.
Service records show the Dealer replaced the Volvo Badge on the alloy wheel on 3
January 2024.This was a minor repair.
next service invoice dated 4 June 2024 records the Motor Vehicle was booked to
replace “the glass imperfection in the sunroof”.
The odometer
reading entered on the service invoice was 26924 kilometres. Naziry was supplied
with a loan vehicle.
next service invoice dated 17 July 2024 records the Motor Vehicle was booked in
for 30,00 kilometres service. The Dealer noted
Naziry complained about the sun
visor getting stuck, and the moon roof rattled when driving on rough surfaces.
The Dealer supplied
her with a loan vehicle. The service invoice noted the
odometer reading as 29641 kilometres.
Motor Vehicle was returned to the Dealer on 8 November 2024. The Service Invoice
records Naziry complained about the sunvisor,
problems “when activating
cruise control vehicle is speeding up when car is in front and stopped vehicle
will not slow down
will speed up” and continuing rattle in the
service invoice recorded the odometer reading as 34189 kilometres. The Dealer
provided Naziry with a loan car.
, the standard of acceptable quality in section 54(2)
what a reasonable consumer at the time of supply would regard as
acceptable if the reasonable consumer was fully acquainted with the
condition of the goods”, including any “hidden defects”.
courts recognise that the reasonable consumer is taken to be fully acquainted
with the state and condition of the goods (including
any hidden defects of the
reasonable consumer under section 54(2) of the ACL “
would also be
acquainted with the fact that motor vehicles are complicated pieces of machinery
that may develop problems, even problems
going to the safety of the vehicle,
that may require rectification by the manufacturer during the vehicle’s
Dwyer v Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWSC
is not in dispute the Motor Vehicle developed problems which were repaired under
warranty by the Dealer. I am satisfied when viewed
objectively, a reasonable
consumer would consider faults as relatively minor and the Motor Vehicle was of
“acceptable quality”.
the reasonable consumer would expect motor vehicles to
have problems which are rectified under the manufacturer’s warranty.
reasonable consumer fully acquainted with potential faults, would understand
that the purchase of a motor vehicle is not entirely
risk free with any problems
to be addressed under warranty.
Tribunal accepts the submission of the Manufacturer that the existence of minor
faults, which were either repaired or did not
affect the functionality, do not
render the vehicle of unacceptable quality.
Tribunal turns to a consideration of the alleged defect with ADAS. NLS says the
problem with the system did not manifest itself
until after the repair to the
glass roof. This persuades me there was no defect with the ADAS at the date of
supply of the Motor
evidence establishes at the date of repair, the Motor Vehicle had travelled
approximately 26924 kilometres in about 12 months.The
Dealer fixed the problem
under the manufacturer’s warranty.
and Dr George had differing opinions about the operation of the ADAS.
the vehicles Driver assist functions did not function as
intended or described on Volvo’s web page
www.volvocars.com.au/”
George concluded from his testing:
The active cruise control system was
operating effectively and consistently.
am satisfied that if there was a problem with ADAS as identified by Gabko, then
by the date of Dr George’s inspection and
assessment, any defect had been
George’s assessment was the ADAS operated as it was designed. He found no
fault with the system from his testing (Point 6.11
of the George Report).
Tribunal notes Gabko’s comments about the manufacturer’s warning
Warnings and brake interventions could be late or not occur at all. The driver
is always responsible that the vehicle is driven correctly
and with a safety
distance adapted to the speed.
the evidence, Naziry and NLS did not fully appreciate the limitations of the
cruise control as published by the Manufacturer.
As explained by Gabko, ADAS is
not an autonomous driving system but a driver assistance system.
Tribunal is not satisfied that at the date of supply, there was a defect which
would render the Motor Vehicle not to be of acceptable
quality after considering
the matters in section 54(2) and 54(3) of the ACL.
Tribunal has considered the matters in section 54(3) of the ACL, and
whether or not the Motor Vehicle was of acceptable quality
54(2)(a)-(e) such that a reasonable consumer, fully acquainted with the state
and condition of the goods, would regard the
goods as being of acceptable
quality, determined at the date of the supply of the goods.
the “reasonable consumer” is assessed objectively, the Tribunal
finds that at the date of supply, a reasonable consumer,
fully acquainted with
the state and condition of the Motor Vehicle, would regard the Motor Vehicle as
being of acceptable quality.
if the Tribunal was satisfied the Motor Vehicle was not of acceptable quality, I
would find the failure was not a “major
failure” as defined in
section 259 and 260 of the ACL.
further difficulty for NLS is whether the rejection period had ended. Whether
the “rejection period” had ended is to
be determined by reference to
section 262 of the ACL.
Motor Vehicle was supplied in June 2023, and NLS notified the Manufacturer of
the rejection in October 2024.
Tribunal dismisses the claim by NLS that the Dealer and Volvo Cars did not
comply with the consumer guarantee in section 54 of
General Principles- Section 55 of the ACL- An Overview and
Consideration
55 of the ACL provides:
55 Guarantee as to fitness for any disclosed purpose
(a) a person (
the supplier
) supplies,
in trade or commerce, goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by
there is a guarantee that the goods are reasonably fit for any
disclosed purpose, and for any purpose for which the supplier represents
they are reasonably fit.
disclosed purpose
particular purpose (whether or not that purpose is a purpose for which
the goods are commonly supplied) for which the goods
being acquired by the consumer and that:
(a) the consumer makes known, expressly or by implication,
(i) the supplier; or
(ii) a person by whom any prior negotiations or arrangements
in relation to the acquisition of the goods were conducted or made;
(b) the consumer makes known to the manufacturer of
the goods either directly or through the supplier or the person
referred to
in paragraph (a)(ii).
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Jayco Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1672
, Wheelahan J said at [28]-[29]:
Fitness for purpose
28 Section 55 of the ACL provides for a guarantee that the goods are
reasonably fit for any disclosed purpose, or for any purpose
for which the
supplier represents that they are reasonably fit. The meaning
of “disclosed purpose” is the subject of
(2) A disclosed purpose is a particular purpose (whether or not
that purpose is a purpose for which the goods are commonly supplied)
the goods are being acquired by the consumer and that:
(a) the consumer makes known, expressly or by implication, to:
(i) the supplier;
(ii) a person by whom any prior negotiations or arrangements in relation to
the acquisition of the goods were conducted or made; or
(b) the consumer makes known to the manufacturer of the goods either directly
or through the supplier or the person referred to in
paragraph (a)(ii).
29 There is some conceptual overlap between the statutory guarantees in s
54(1) and s 55(1) to the extent that any disclosed purposes
or represented
purposes that engage s 55(1) may also amount to common purposes for the
objective standard of acceptable quality under
s 54(2)(a): see, Jewson Ltd
[2003] EWCA Civ 1030
; [2004] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 505 at
[68], [71] (Clarke LJ), and at [77] (Sedley LJ).
purpose for which the goods are to be used is relevant to determining a
contravention of s 55. The fact the goods are not acceptable
quality does not,
necessarily, mean the goods are not fit for purpose.
asserted the Motor Vehicle did not meet its intended purpose as a quiet and
premium electric vehicle as marketed. It submitted
the rattling noise
compromised a key feature of the Motor Vehicle and the cruise control did not
work as intended.
its Points of Defence, the Manufacturer asserted that “the vehicle
performs in accordance with its intended purpose as a
premium electric
vehicle”. It submitted the Motor Vehicle was fit for purpose.
this case, the intended purpose of the Motor Vehicle was for use as an electric
motor vehicle. There is no evidence that NLS or
Naziry disclosed to the Dealer
any particular purpose for which they intended using the Motor Vehicle.
am satisfied on the evidence, the Motor Vehicle was, at the date of supply, fit
for use as a premium electric motor vehicle.
reject the claim made by NLS that the Dealer and the Manufacturer did not comply
with the consumer guarantee in section 55 of the
claim for breach of section 55 of the ACL is dismissed.
58 of the ACL- An Overview and Consideration
complained the Dealer and the Manufacturer did not comply with the consumer
guarantee in section 58 of the ACL.
58 of the ACL provides:
Guarantee as to repairs and spare parts
(a) a person supplies, in trade or
commerce, goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by
there is a guarantee that the manufacturer of the goods will take
reasonable action to ensure that facilities for the repair of the
and parts for the goods, are reasonably available for a reasonable period
after the goods are supplied.
(2) This section does not apply if the manufacturer took
reasonable action to ensure that the consumer would be given written
at or before the time when the consumer agrees to
the supply of the goods, that:
(a) facilities for the repair of the goods would
not be available or would not be available after a specified period; or
(b) parts for the goods would not be available or
would not be available after a specified period.
submitted the repair of the sunroof/glass roof and other repairs took several
months which was an unreasonable timeframe under
the ACL for a vehicle of its
nature and price.
contended that the time taken for the repairs was excessive and unreasonable. In
its Points of Claim, NLS claimed the Respondent
took from 5 June 2024 to 24
October 2024, a period of 141 days to resolve the rattling issue with the glass
Point 2 of the Points of Defence, the Manufacturer denied the repairs undertaken
by the Dealer were not done within an unreasonable
time frame. It argued that
NLS and Naziry continued to use the Motor Vehicle. There is no dispute the
Dealer supplied them with a
loan vehicle during the period of repairs as
recorded on the Service Invoices. There was minimal inconvenience to NLS and
is a reasonable time is to be determined on the facts and circumstances. There
is no evidence from the parties what is a reasonable
time frame for the repairs
or that the time taken was excessive.
concur with the submission made by the Manufacturer that the claim for breach of
the consumer guarantee in section 58 of the ACL
is misconceived.
consumer guarantee in section 58 of the ACL mandates that manufacturers must
take reasonable action to ensure that facilities
for the repair
of goods and spare parts for goods are reasonably available for
a reasonable period after the goods are supplied.
submitted by the Manufacturer, the section “does not provide a guarantee
that repairs will be carried out within a reasonable
time but rather that repair
facilities and spare parts are reasonably available for a reasonable
I am wrong in my interpretation of section 58, the evidence does not persuade me
the time taken for the repairs was excessive or
unreasonable. There is
insufficient evidence from which I can reach any conclusion on that issue.
Tribunal dismisses the claim by NLS for a breach of the consumer guarantee in
section 58 of the ACL.
NLS has failed to establish breaches the consumer guarantees in sections 54,55
and 58 of the ACL, it follows that NLS is not entitled
to the remedies set out
in sections 259-263 and 271-272 of the ACL; or any alternative remedy under
s 79N of the FTA.
NLS did not identify or argue any alleged breach of section 60 of the ACL by the
Dealer even though a possible breach of
the consumer guarantee was referred to
in the Gabko Report. It was not pleaded in the Points of Claim.
made no claim in the Points of Claim that the Dealer was in breach of section 60
of the ACL and accordingly, that issue does not
fall for consideration in these
proceedings.
section 79U
Fair Trading Act 1987
, the Tribunal must make orders
which are fair and equitable between the parties.
Tribunal is satisfied that the order is fair and equitable between the
has not proved its claim on the balance of probabilities. The application is
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (369 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter