URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/77.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Angela Di Mauro v Maryvale Medical Clinic Proprietary Limited [2006] NSWCIMC 77 (6 June 2006)
OPYRIGHT RESERVED
reproduction, except under authority from the Crown, of the contents of
transcript for any purpose other than the conduct of these proceedings is
prohibited.
Coram: G A Miller
Industrial Magistrate
ANGELA DI MAURO
MARYVALE MEDICAL CLINIC
PROPRIETARY LIMITED
IR ACT 1996, Section 365
JUDGMENT ON QUANTUM AND COSTS
On 25 November 2005 I handed down my decision in regard to the above matter
directing the parties to calculate and agree if possible
the quantum of the
order in respect to the underpayment to the applicant to be made. Unfortunately
no agreement was reached, and
as a result the matter was relisted for
determination of quantum and the question of costs. I will deal with each matter
separately.
Submitted to the court by the applicant was the applicant’s schedules
of calculations of the amount owing for hours worked,
overtime and entitlements
that were not paid based on advice from the then Department of Industrial
relations( in accordance with
the Clerical and Administrative Employees (State)
Award as varied) (Ex.1) showing a total amount owing by the respondent to the
of $21,940.19. The respondent submitted the amount set out above
ought to be reduced by a total of $4,223.49.
At the hearing counsel for
the parties addressed each of the points of contention raised in the
respondent’s submission on quantum.
Each of the points involved an
interpretation of either clauses 6(b)(1)(a), 6(ii), 12(i), 12(iii), and 12(v),
or a combination of
the clauses of the then award. These clauses relevantly
(i)- Weekly Employees
(a) Subject to paragraph (b) the ordinary hours of work exclusive of meal
hours shall not exceed an average of 38 hours per week
and except as provided in
Clause 7 - Shift Work, shall be worked between the hours of 6:00am and 7:00pm,
Monday to Friday inclusive,
and between the hours of 6:00am and 12:00 noon on a
Saturday and shall be worked in one of the following ways:
days over a 4-week cycle; or
(2) on 10 days over a 2-week cycle; or
(3) on 5 days in any week; or
(4) on 5 and one-half days in any
(5) where the employer and employee agree, rostered days off,
which occur as a result of employees working in accordance with the
of this subclause, may accumulate to a maximum of 5 days. These accumulated
days may be taken at any time mutually agreed
between the employer and employee
and shall be taken within six months of accrual.
Notwithstanding any
other provision of this award the ordinary hours of work prescribed herein may
be worked up to 10 hours on any
day. Provided that in any arrangement of
ordinary working hours where the ordinary working hours are to exceed 8 on any
no more than 10, the arrangement of hours shall be subject to the
agreement of the employer and the majority of employees concerned.
(f) Where a 5½ day week is worked the ordinary hours of work shall
be worked so that they shall not exceed 6 hours and 48 minutes
per day, Monday
to Friday inclusive, and 4 hours on Saturday.
(ii) Casual
Employees-The spread of ordinary hours of work shall be the same as those worked
by weekly employees in the establishment
concerned. Where there are no such
weekly employees the spread of ordinary hours of work shall be those prescribed
by subclause
(i) of this clause
12.Overtime
(i) All time
worked outside the ordinary hours of work prescribed by Clause 6,Hours,shall be
overtime and shall be paid for at
the rate of time and one-half for the first
two hours and double time thereafter. Provided that overtime at the rate of
double time
shall be paid for all time worked after 12:00 noon on a Saturday. In
calculating overtime each day's work shall stand alone.
overtime work is necessary it shall, wherever reasonably practicable, be so
arranged that employees have at least ten consecutive
hours off duty between the
work of successive days. An employee, other than a casual employee, who works
so much overtime between
the termination of his/her ordinary work on one day and
the commencement of his/her ordinary work on the next day that he/she has
had at least ten consecutive hours off duty between those times shall, subject
to this subclause, be released after completion
of such overtime until he/she
has had ten consecutive hours off duty, without loss of pay, for ordinary
working time occurring during
such absence. If on the instruction of the
employer such an employee resumes or continues work without having had such ten
consecutive
hours off duty, he/she shall be paid at double rates until he/she is
released from duty for such period and he/she then shall be
entitled to be
absent until he/she has had ten consecutive hours off duty without loss of pay
for ordinary working time occurring
during such absence.
(iv) Casual Employees- This clause shall apply to casual employees and in
such cases overtime shall be calculated on the casual rate
of pay contained in
clause (xii) of clause 5, Classification Structure and Wages.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Clause 6 - Hours, and subclause (i) of
this clause, employees whose fixed hours of employment
are less than
thirty-eight hours per week, may be worked without the payment of overtime up to
two hours after the fixed finishing
time on any one day, on not more than four
days in any calendar month, or eight days in any two consecutive calendar
months; provided
that, in any case, an employee shall not be required to work
more than nine hours in any one day nor more than thirty-eight hours
week without the payment of overtime provided further that such nine hours shall
be worked between 6:00am and 7:00pm Monday
to Friday, inclusive.
casual employee, the applicant whose fixed hours of employment are less than 38
hours per week cl.12 (v) has effect. Effect
has to be given to the words”
on not more than 4 days in any calendar month” and the proviso as set out
above. However,
time worked in excess of 8 hours and 48 minutes of ordinary
time and /or after 6pm on a weekday or 12 noon on a Saturday will attract
overtime. There are also occasions where the applicant has worked after two
hours after the fixed finishing time on more than 4 occasions
in the calendar
month, eg. 8/3/00.
I agree with the respondent in regard to cl l2 (v) except
to those occasions where in a calendar month the applicant has worked in
of the 4 occasions permitted in cl 12(v).
In regard to the applicant’s
claim for “open office”, check office”, “close
office” I have allowed
the applicant’s claim having regard to my
comments in paras 36 and 37 of my decision on 5 November 2005. Furthermore, in
addition to the comment of Dr Galea as set out in para 36, as practice manager
in the absence of Dr Galea, especially during the
period of the Olympics, there
was an implied duty on the practice manager to ensure the security of the
practice. Having regard,
at the time, to my comment in para 37 I will deduct the
amount of $101.36 in regard to 3/1/01.
In regard to 8/5/00 there is a
pencil entry in the 2000 calendar so I will allow a !/2 hour overtime.
is difficult with the lack of administrative assistance given to magistrates in
the typing of decisions to set out in detail the
court’s comments in
regard to each individual date. Accordingly, I have endeavoured to deal with
each date on a category basis
that I hope is understood by the parties. My
pencilled notes in respect of each date are contained on the respondent’
submissions and are available to the parties if required.
summary I have reduced the applicant’s claim by $900.90, leaving an amount
outstanding to the applicant of $ 21,039.29.
One of the leading judgments in this area of law is that of Toohey J in
Hughes v Western Australian Cricket Association (Inc)
(1986) 8 ATPR 40-748,
where at page 48,136 his Honour sets out in a summary way the effect of the
decisions, which, omitting reference
to authorities, is as follows:
"1. Ordinarily, costs follow the event and a successful litigant receives
costs in the absence of special circumstances justifying
some other order.
2. Where a litigant has succeeded only upon a portion of his claim, the
circumstances may make it reasonable that he bear the expense
of litigating that
portion upon which he has failed.
3. A successful party who has failed on certain issues may not only be
deprived of the costs of those issues but may be ordered as
well to pay the
other party's costs of them. In this sense, "issue" does not mean a precise
issue in the technical pleading sense
but any disputed question of fact or of
There is no difficulty in stating the principles; their application to the
facts of a particular case is not always easy."
The respondent submitted that the applicant was not successful on all aspects
of the claim and that the respondent was successful
in respect of whether the
casual hourly rate paid included the one /twelfth holiday pay loading as claimed
by the respondent, partly
successful in regard to the overtime claim and
successful in regard to termination pay and superannuation. The respondent
that a realistic estimate of the time taken on each aspect of the
claim was a minimum entitlement in favour of the respondent to
costs of 40%
depending on how the overtime claim is treated.
The respondent submitted that in all the circumstances of the case, where the
issue of the interpretation of the Award in relation
to payment of overtime was
a major aspect of the overtime claim and a significant source of cross
examination in relation to those
aspects of the hours worked and claimed on
overtime, that the appropriate order is that each party pay their own costs.
The power to award costs in these proceedings is a general discretion found
principally at
Industrial Relations Act 1996
. As conceded by the
respondent the apportionment of costs is of course a matter for evaluation and
impression. As noted by Bowen
Forster v Farquhar
[1893] 1 QB 564
570 a judge has got to look at the matter globally and in the circumstances of
each case and make an order for
costs that is fair
and reasonable after taking
into account the general guidelines.
Although much of the applicant’s cross-examination related to the
question of overtime and times worked the underlying theme
and issue was the
credit of the applicant. As a result the credit of the principal witness for the
respondent, Dr Galea was a very
live issue. Cross-examination of the applicant
was extensive with the underlying theme an attack on her credit particularly in
to her claim she was the practice manager of the medical practice. A
claim denied by the respondent throughout the hearing despite
prior inconsistent
statements by the respondent, particularly by Dr Galea in relation to the
applicant’s previous workers compensation
claim. Dr Galea expressed the
belief that he was the subject of a conspiracy by former employees, including
the applicant, which
no doubt led to the vigorous defence of the
applicant’s claim that she had been underpaid.
It is wrong in my view to see each particular of the claim as separate
claims, the claim before the court being that the applicant
had not been paid
her legal entitlement under the industrial instrument. It is quite artificial
to look at the number of sub-issues
and work out on which the applicant
succeeded and which she did not. The only real test is whether she was
successful in the only
matter before the court, which is whether or not there
was an underpayment under the industrial instrument as claimed. In money
she obtained nearly all she claimed to be entitled to.
The proceedings were for an order under
Industrial Relations
. The Applicant had to establish that there was underpayment and that she
was entitled to be relieved against that underpayment and
this she did. The
applicant did not get everything she wanted, but that when one looks at the
result the applicant succeeded in
the proceedings. As the applicant was
successful she should receive the costs of the proceedings.
Playing a part
in the application for costs are the letters from the applicant’s
solicitor dated 19 April 2004 and the letter
of (5 May 2005, a letter that the
respondent states it did not receive at the time.. These letters were described
by the applicant’s
counsel as “Calderbank
“Calderbank offers” are a well-recognised
means of making offers of settlement in circumstances where the party making
offer ultimately seeks a costs advantage if the offer is not accepted: see
Calderbank v Calderbank
(1975) 3 WLR 586.
There are two lines of
authority on the question of what effect a Calderbank offer has on the
Court’s discretion in awarding
costs. The two approaches were discussed in
Jones v Bradley (No.2)
[2003] NSWCA 258
where the Court of Appeal
considered that the approach taken by the Court in
SMEC Testing Services Pty
Ltd v Campbelltown City Council
[2000] NSWCA 323
was correct and is
the approach which should be consistently applied when dealing with Calderbank
SMEC Testing Services
Giles JA stated at para 37:
“The making of an offer of compromise in the form of a Calderbank
Letter … where the offeree does not accept the offer
but ends up worse off
than if the offer had been accepted, is a matter to which the court may have
regard when deciding whether to
otherwise order, but it does not automatically
bring a different order as to costs. All the circumstances must be considered,
while the policy informing the regard had to a Calderbank letter is
promotion of settlement of disputes an offeree can reasonably
fail to accept an
offer without suffering in costs. In the end the question is whether the
offeree’s failure to accept the
offer, in all the circumstances, warrants
departure from the ordinary rule as to costs, and that the offeree ends up worse
if the offer had been accepted does not of itself warrant
departure.”
The applicant claims she is entitled to an order that
the respondent pay indemnity costs of the trial from 20 April 2004 when the
applicant’ offer of 19 April 2004 was rejected, and if not from that date
from 9 May 2005 when the applicant’s final
offer of $12,000 plus costs as
agreed or assessed lapsed, as the “Calderbank offer” made on 5 May
2005 was most reasonable
in the circumstances, and it was unreasonable of the
respondent to refuse it. Counsel for the applicant submitted that this
findings indicate the reasonableness of the offer of
settlement.
The Application for Recovery of Moneys was filed in the Court
Registry on 23 February 2004. The original application sought some
$12,000 odd.
The application was subsequently increased to $20,973.37 from 13 July 2004 and
increased to $21,940.19 on the first
day of hearing. In my view the offer of 5
May 2005 was a most reasonable offer and in light of all the circumstances,
particularly
in a jurisdiction where conciliation of claims is recognised,
mandated and encouraged, the applicant is entitled without doubt to
costs from 5 May 2005.
Furthermore, in all the circumstances the
applicant’s offer of settlement of 19 April 2004, rejected by the
respondent on 20
April 2004, was a most reasonable offer. An employer under the
Industrial laws applying in this State is obliged to be aware of
the appropriate
award entitlements and to properly maintain and oversee the proper keeping of
the prescribed time and wage records.
This is a duty that cannot be delegated
to others. An employer is in the best position to ensure an employee is paid the
entitlements. In this case this did not occur. Accordingly, the
respondent should pay indemnity costs from 20 April 2004. An applicant
position of an employee should not be disadvantaged in obtaining her lawful
entitlements: see
Lavis v Lismore Challenge Limited
[1999] NSWIRComm
A schedule of costs was tendered to the court with a copy
having earlier been provided to the respondent. Some objections were made
particular items, whereas other objections were made as to costs incurred prior
to the filing of the Application for the Recovery
of Moneys and to the hourly
charge by the applicant’s solicitor. To me the solicitor’s hourly
charge of $300 per hour
plus GST is not unreasonable for this jurisdiction given
the nature and complexity of the case.
There is an error in the
applicant’s calculations on page 20 of the schedule, the subtotal on page
17, $6315, has been omitted
from the calculation of professional costs. The
total of professional costs should read$37,470.
I deduct in respect to
item 180- $35, which seems to have little or no relevance to the case and $ 180
in regard to Ms Vadnay who
was not called and whose relevance I do not
understand. I allow costs in regard to Ms Spiteri, not called but whose
statement was
tendered and relevant regarding the workers compensation
investigation. I allow costs regarding the AAPM documents, attempted to
subpoenaed although not available due to an objection regarding Federal
legislation. I have allowed indemnity costs from 20 April2004
for the reasons
stated above. In respect of the period prior to 20 April 2004 I have assessed
the costs to be paid by the respondent
as fair and reasonable at $2500. Added
in error to the “Total costs” calculations is a 25% loading. That is
not included.
In summary I allow costs to the applicant in the amount of
$35,945 for professional costs, plus GST of $3594 and disbursements of
$25,718.27. In addition I allow to the Applicant an amount of $3,500 inclusive
of professional costs, GST and disbursements for the
final day 12 May 2006. A
total of $68,757.27.
1. The respondent is ordered to pay the
applicant the amount of $ 21,039.29 in respect of underpayments of
entitlements.
2. In addition the respondent is to pay interest on the above
amount from the date of termination to today’s date at the rates
prescribed.
3. The respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs and
disbursements assessed at $68,757.27.
4. The above moneys are to be paid to
the applicant within 28 days.
Acting Industrial
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (40.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter