URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIRComm/2025/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Secretary, Ministry of Health v Australian Salaried Medical Officers' Federation (New South Wales) (No 2) [2025] NSWIRComm 27 (3 October 2025)
Industrial Relations Commission
New South Wales
Health Secretary, Ministry of Health v Australian Salaried Medical
Officers’ Federation (New South Wales) (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIRComm 27
Hearing Date(s):
17 - 20 March 2025, 3 - 4, 11 April 2025, 7 May 2025, 19-20 June 2025
(final submissions received 4 July 2025)
Date of Orders:
3 October 2025
Decision Date:
3 October 2025
Industrial Relations Commission
Chin J, Vice President
Senior Commissioner Constant
The Commission orders that:
(1) The parties are to have discussions with
a view to providing the Full Bench with a clean Word version of the new interim
that reflects our decision by 4:00pm on 17 October 2025.
extent that any clauses of the interim award are not agreed upon, the parties
are to file a Word document by 4:00pm on
17 October 2025 setting out their
competing draft clauses that reflect our decision.
Catchwords:
EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL LAW — Awards and enterprise agreements
— Application for interim award for temporary attraction
and retention
allowance — Commission-led arbitration to resolve dispute about mass
resignations of psychiatry staff specialists
at public hospitals —
Approach of the Commission when considering wage increases designed to remedy a
labour shortage —
Whether restraint is warranted where arbitration of a
claim for salary increases for staff specialists generally is imminent —
Whether claim should not be granted to reward an industrial strategy —
Mandatory consideration of the fiscal position and outlook
of the NSW Government
— Mandatory consideration of the state of the economy of NSW —
Special Case Principle satisfied
Legislation Cited:
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Cases Cited:
Health Employees Pharmacists (State) Award
(2003) 132 IR 244
NSWIRComm 453
Health Secretary v Australian Salaried Medical Officers’
Federation (New South Wales)
[2024] NSWIRComm 1081
Health Secretary, Ministry
of Health v Australian Salaried Medical Officers’ Federation (New South
[2025] NSWIRComm 5
Industrial Secretary & Ors v Public Service
Association and Professional Officers’ Association Amalgamated Union of
South Wales & Ors (No 2)
[2024] NSWIRComm 21
Public Hospital
Nurses (State) Award
(2002) 115 IR 183
[2002] NSWIRComm 100
Miscellaneous Grades Award 1953
[1955] CthArbRp 321
(1955) 82 CAR 146
Railways Traffic, Permanent
Way and Signalling Wages Staff Award 1952; The Australian Railways Union v The
Victorian Railways Commissioners
[1957] CthArbRp 214
(1957) 87 CAR 693
Employees (Administrative and Clerical Officers) Award
[1975] AR (NSW) 1
Crown Employees Scientific Officers Health Commission, Interim Award
Re Public Hospital Nurses' (State) Award (No 3)
(2002) 121 IR 28
[2002] NSWIRComm 325
Re Public Service Board and Public Service Association
of New South Wales (Local Courts Anomaly Case)
[1989] AR (NSW) 638
Railways Professional Officers Award
[1958] CthArbRp 51
(1958) 89 CAR 40
Re Staff Specialists
(State) Award
(2006) 152 IR 405
[2006] NSWIRComm 124
Re Unilever Australia
Ltd, AP Foods (Sydney) Pty Ltd, AWU and TWU - various proceedings re Proposed
Sale of Marrickville Site
(2005) 141 IR 298
[2005] NSWIRComm 3
Case 2024 (No 3)
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
State Wage Case 2024
(2024) 337 IR 182
[2024] NSWIRComm 25
Teachers (Non Government Early
Childhood Service Centres other than Preschools) (State) Award 2006
[2009] NSWIRComm 198
Principal judgment
Health Secretary (Notifier)
Australian Salaried Medical Officers’
Federation (New South Wales) (Respondent)
Representation:
I Neil SC / D Fuller (Notifier)
T Dixon / R Kumar
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Bartier Perry (Notifier)
Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/385638, 2024/076984
Publication Restriction:
On 17 October 2024 the Health Secretary notified the existence of an
industrial dispute about the mass resignation of over 180 psychiatry
specialists from their employment at public hospitals across New South Wales.
The mass resignations were submitted in furtherance
of an industrial demand for
a 25% increase in salary for all psychiatry staff specialists.
The Commission acted on its own initiative to arbitrate this dispute, with
the cooperation of the Australian Salaried Medical Officers’
(New South Wales) (ASMOF) and the Health Secretary. On 3 March 2025 ASMOF filed
an application for an interim award, the
centrepiece of which is the payment of
a temporary 25% “attraction and retention allowance” over the
12-month term of
the award to address an asserted shortage of psychiatry staff
specialists in New South Wales.
The interim award application contained several other claims, including a
requirement to employ an unspecified number of additional
psychiatry staff
specialists on a permanent and ongoing basis within a two year period.
This application is made in the context of a broader pay dispute involving
all doctors employed in NSW Health. On 7 April 2025 ASMOF
filed an application
for a new comprehensive award covering all doctors employed in NSW Health. The
comprehensive award application
seeks a salary increase for staff specialists in
the order of 30% and will soon be arbitrated in the Commission.
The Secretary opposed the application for interim relief in its entirety.
The Commission held:
(1) A special case is made out which justifies the payment of a temporary
allowance for the purpose of attracting and retaining psychiatry
specialists. There is an acute shortage of psychiatry staff specialists,
distinguishable from other staff specialists, which
is causing a deterioration
in the quality of mental health care delivered in the public health system in
New South Wales and a deterioration
in the working conditions of psychiatrists.
The comparatively low pay of psychiatry staff specialists is contributing to
this shortage.
(2) A temporary attraction and retention allowance for psychiatry staff
specialists is a discrete and stop-gap measure applicable
only to one cohort of
staff specialists and able to be determined separately from the making of the
broader doctors’ award.
However, restraint is warranted given the
potential for overlap between the interim determination in this case and the
arbitration of the claim for salary increases for staff specialists
(3) An interim increase in rates in the form of an allowance is likely to
have a positive retention or attraction effect
In recognition of this,
the Ministry of Health has effectively re-purposed a 10% “abnormal duties
allowance”, which has
been unconditionally paid to psychiatry staff
specialists since 3 February 2025, to function as an interim retention strategy
encourage them to rescind or delay their resignations or otherwise remain
employed with NSW Health.
(4) The Commission will make an interim award that provides a temporary
attraction and retention allowance of 10% calculated on base
salary, the Special
Allowance, and the Level 1 Private Practice Allowance to be paid to all
psychiatry staff specialists for a period
of 12 months from the date of this
decision. This allowance will supplement the Health Secretary’
“abnormal duties allowance”, resulting in a combined interim uplift
of 20% for a period of 12 months which is intended
to attract psychiatry staff
specialists to, and to retain them within, the New South Wales public health
(5) Payment of the temporary 10% attraction and retention allowance is to be
absorbed into any subsequent increase to the salary rates
of psychiatry staff
specialists that is attributable to attraction and retention to be determined by
the Commission.
(6) This allowance is granted not to reward ASMOF’s industrial strategy
in facilitating the mass resignations, but because a
special case has been made
out. It is necessary to separate the fact of industrial action from the merits
of the claim brought before
the Commission.
(7) The Commission does not propose to grant any of ASMOF’s other
claims set out in its proposed interim award. The Commission
would require a
more substantial examination of the merits of those claims than was able to be
provided by the parties in the context
of this interim hearing.
(8) The fiscal impact of the allowance is relatively modest and is unlikely
to have significant adverse economic impacts.
The Commission orders:
(1) The parties are to have discussions with a view to providing the Full
Bench with a clean Word version of the new interim award
that reflects our
decision by 4:00pm on 17 October 2025.
(2) To the extent that any clauses of the interim award are not
agreed upon, the parties are to file a Word document by 4:00pm
on 17 October 2025 setting out their competing draft
clauses that reflect our decision.
Australian Salaried Medical Officers’ Federation (New South Wales) (ASMOF)
seeks an interim award with a term of 12 months,
the centrepiece of which is the
payment of a temporary 25% allowance over the 12 month term, for the express
purpose of attracting
and retaining psychiatry staff specialists.
claim is based on an asserted shortage of psychiatry staff specialists in New
South Wales and is advanced within principle 13
of the Commission’s Award
Making Principles (AMPs): the Special Case
application for interim relief also extends to several additional conditions
which attracted little or no attention during the
hearing of this matter. For
example, the claim includes the imposition of a requirement on the employer to
employ additional psychiatry
staff specialists on a permanent and ongoing basis
within a two year period. However, ASMOF never specified the precise number of
additional staff to be so employed. The case advanced by ASMOF at the hearing
was overwhelmingly focussed on its claim for an attraction
and retention
allowance. For these non-monetary aspects of the claim to be properly
considered, the Full Bench would require a more
substantial examination of their
merits than was able to be provided by the parties in the context of this
interim hearing, For this
reason, save for the temporary allowance, we do not
propose to grant any of ASMOF’s other claims set out in its proposed
the reasons set out below we have decided to grant interim relief in the form of
a temporary allowance
of 10% on base salary, together with the Special
Allowance and Level 1 Private Practice Allowance. This allowance will supplement
the 10% so-called “abnormal duties allowance” which, by operation of
a Determination made under the
Health Services Act
Health Secretary has re-purposed to be payable to all psychiatry staff
specialists from 3 February 2025 on an unconditional
basis with the aim of
retaining those staff specialists in their current employment (the Health
Secretary’s retention allowance).
combination with the Health Secretary’s retention allowance, the
supplementary allowance that we propose to grant would effectively
result in a
combined interim uplift on the base salary of psychiatry staff specialists
(together with the Special Allowance and Level
1 Private Practice Allowance) of
20% for a period of 12 months. Of this amount, 10% comprising the Health
Secretary’s retention
allowance will continue to be paid for two years or
until a new Staff Specialists (State) Award is made pending the broader
arbitration
involving all doctors referred to below. The supplementary 10%
allowance to be prescribed by the interim award will apply for a period
months from the date of this decision
interim award is to be expressly qualified to ensure that payment of the
temporary allowance is to be absorbed into any subsequent
increase to the salary
rates of psychiatry staff specialists that is attributable to attraction and
retention to be determined by
the Commission.
observe that this is an application for an interim award and a large number of
psychiatry staff specialists have tendered their
resignations but delayed acting
on them pending the outcome of this case. Notwithstanding the interim nature of
the case, the volume
of material before the Commission is extensive. There has
been approximately 10,000 pages of documents tendered, some 10 days of
time involving approximately 500 pages of transcript and extensive written
submissions. Were this an application for a final
award that material would
warrant more extensive explicit review in these reasons. However, the case as
has already been delayed and the parties, as detailed at [
] below, will soon be
involved in the presentation of a general case of wider and final dimension. Our
reasons have therefore been
somewhat truncated to provide our decision as
quickly as possible.
Genesis of the Psychiatrists Dispute
17 October 2024 the Health Secretary notified the existence of an industrial
dispute about the provision of notices of resignation
by a large number of
psychiatry staff specialists (the Psychiatrists Dispute). In the course of this
dispute a total of about 183
psychiatry staff specialists tendered their
resignations. A number of these staff specialists (72) have indicated that they
to convert from full time employment to working as contractors (Visiting
Medical Officers (VMOs)); 32 have rescinded their resignations;
and about 105
have since postponed the dates on which their resignations take effect.
dealing further with that dispute it is convenient to note a truncated history
of developments in certain cognate matters.
12 January 2022 ASMOF notified a dispute concerning the normal duties clause in
the Staff Specialists (State) Award 2021. Following
arbitration, Commissioner
Sloan made a Statement in which he suggested that the parties give consideration
to an application to vary
that award.
Health Secretary filed her application on 26 June 2023 seeking several
variations to the award.
parties then engaged in mutual gains bargaining for several months during 2024.
On 9 December 2024 proceedings relating to the
various doctors’ awards
came before the President for report. Those proceedings included the
applications by the Health Secretary
to vary the awards covering: staff
specialists, medical superintendents, medical officers and career medical
officers. A common feature
of each application was an intended increase in rates
from the first pay period on or after 1 July 2023. At that report there was
discussion about the future of the mutual gains bargaining process.
by that time the Psychiatrists Dispute had been before the Commission for
conciliation for some time. The President directed
that all these proceedings
should be listed together for report back before another member of the
Commission in the first week of
February 2025.
were then made in the Psychiatrists Dispute on 20 December 2024 pursuant to
ss 136(1)(c) and 137(1)(a) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Act) prohibiting ASMOF from coordinating, organising or facilitating the
concerted, mass resignations of psychiatry staff specialists:
Secretary v Australian Salaried Medical Officers’ Federation (New South
[2024] NSWIRComm 1081
Dispute Order
ordering, the Commission found that the mass resignations submitted by
psychiatry staff specialists in furtherance of their
industrial demands, as
encouraged, supported and facilitated by ASMOF, constituted industrial action
for the purposes of the IR Act:
Dispute Order Decision at [42]–[47].
ASMOF’s and its member psychiatrists’ central industrial demand was
psychiatrists employed in NSW Health to be remunerated at a “Level
4 Salary with Maximum Drawings (L4 Salary) in accordance
with the Staff
Specialists (State) Award Salary Increases Bulletin”. Assuming each
psychiatrist remained on the same incremental
level, this claim amounted to a
25% increase in salary for all psychiatry staff specialists.
15 January 2025 the Health Secretary had become concerned that the mutual gains
bargaining process was not likely to lead to a
timely resolution of the disputes
between the parties about the conditions of employment of doctors employed in
the New South Wales
health service.
on 21 January 2025 Senior Commissioner Constant heard the parties on whether the
Commission should proceed of its own motion
to arbitrate the matters that are
the subject of the Psychiatrists Dispute. At that time both the Health Secretary
and ASMOF made
submissions touching upon the intersection of the matter with the
foreshadowed broader applications. Nevertheless, both parties submitted
expeditious resolution of the dispute by arbitration was appropriate. Indeed,
the Health Secretary asserted before the Senior
Commissioner that “an
expeditious pathway for the psychiatry matter is urgently needed”. The
Senior Commissioner then
made directions for the preparation and listing of the
arbitration.
3 February 2025 Senior Commissioner Constant, pursuant to the President’s
decision of 9 December 2024, listed the various
doctors’ proceedings for
directions. The Senior Commissioner directed the Health Secretary, ASMOF and the
Health Services Union
to file and serve any award variation or application they
proposed in those matters.
Commission subsequently commenced the arbitration of the Psychiatrists Dispute
at its own initiative, with the cooperation of
ASMOF and the Health Secretary.
ASMOF filed its amended application for relief – in the form of an interim
3 March 2025 and the Full Bench commenced hearing the
application expeditiously on 17 March 2025 which was due to conclude on 11
2025. The hearing in this matter was interrupted and necessarily delayed because
ASMOF proceeded with industrial action by
all Staff Specialists in defiance of
the Commission’s dispute orders: see
Health Secretary, Ministry of
Health v Australian Salaried Medical Officers’ Federation (New South
[2025] NSWIRComm 5.
The Health Secretary’s
retention allowance
23 January 2025, as an interim measure to encourage psychiatry staff specialists
to rescind or delay their resignation or to otherwise
remain employed with NSW
Health, the NSW Ministry of Health directed all Chief Executives to pay
psychiatry staff specialists the
10% “abnormal duties allowance”. We
referred to this as the Health Secretary’s retention allowance. This is
because, as a result of this directive, an
allowance that was ordinarily
conditional on a requirement to perform abnormal or excessive work is now
effectively re-purposed as
a retention strategy and is payable to all psychiatry
staff specialists unconditionally. The Health Secretary’s evidence is
all psychiatry staff specialists are in receipt of the 10% pay increase since 3
February 2025; and that this payment will remain
in place for a period of 2
years or until ASMOF’s substantive claim for all doctors is determined.
the hearing, Senior Counsel for the Health Secretary, Mr Neil SC, resisted the
proposition that the 10% “abnormal duties
allowance” had been
re-purposed as an attraction or retention allowance; relying on the terms of the
relevant Determination
(No 52 of 2024) as follows:
“Noting workload pressures associated with acute nationwide psychiatrist
workforce shortages, psychiatry staff specialists
are to receive an additional
payment of 10% of the rate applicable under a Level 1 arrangement (including the
special allowance and
private practice allowance) in accordance with clause
6(f), (g) and (h) of the
Staff Specialist Determination 2015
this position is undermined by the terms of the Determination identifying that
it was occasioned by the pressures associated
with acute workforce shortages in
psychiatry and in recognition of “particular, unique and temporary factual
circumstances”
pertaining to psychiatry staff specialists, and by the
complete dissociation between payment of the allowance and the actual
performance
of any abnormal or onerous duties.
resistance collapses completely under the weight of the evidence given in
cross-examination by the Health Secretary’s own
witness, Ms Collins,
Executive Director of Workplace Relations at the NSW Ministry of Health, that
the unconditional payment of the
10% allowance was intended to retain psychiatry
staff specialists and to entice them to remain within their staff specialist
and not take up other positions as VMOs or locums or leave the public
health system entirely.
also note that the Health Secretary’s retention allowance is paid on the
same basis as ASMOF seeks for payment of its interim
25% attraction and
retention allowance, i.e. paid on the sum of three components: (1) salary, (2)
the “Special Allowance”
of 17.4% in cl 4 of the Dept of Health
Circular 90/39, and (3) Level 1 Private Practice Allowance.
is clear from our reasons that the continuation of the payment of the Health
Secretary’s retention allowance during the term
of the interim award is a
critical underlying assumption on which we have relied in determining the
interim relief. Should that change
for any reason during the life of the interim
award, the parties are granted leave to apply to the Commission at short notice.
Application for a comprehensive doctors’ award
is important to note the broader context of this arbitration. Pursuant to the
Commission’s directions of 3 February 2025,
ASMOF filed an application for
a new comprehensive award on 7 April 2025 covering all doctors employed in NSW
Health, including all
staff specialists (psychiatry and otherwise). The award
would cover interns, residents, registrars, staff specialists, career medical
officers and medical superintendents. In doing so, it seeks to bring many
matters presently regulated administratively or by Determination
into the award.
Included amongst these matters are rights of private practice arrangements.
relation to psychiatry staff specialists, the comprehensive award application
seeks a salary increase in the order of 30%. Moreover,
it seeks to vary all
staff specialists’ conditions − from an annual salary with a
specification of “normal duties”
to be worked over not less than 40
hours per week to one in which the maximum ordinary hours is 40 per week.
Effectively the application
seeks to regulate the employment on a rate per hour
basis rather than by an annual salary. Time worked in excess of 40 hours is to
be paid at overtime rates. The application provides for an on-call allowance of
10% and for recall to be compensated at overtime
rates with a minimum payment of
four hours for each physical recall. Time worked outside the employee’s
ordinary span of hours
is to be subject to a penalty of between 45% and
application also includes claims in relation to facilities, equipment, and
office space and secretarial and administrative support,
accommodation and
facilities for recall and secondments. There are changes sought to several leave
entitlements and increases in
the number and amount of allowances.
hearing of that application, and the Health Secretary’s counter
applications identified at [
], are presently listed to commence hearing on 24
November 2025. Notwithstanding the Commission’s reservations about the
of the parties to be ready for such an extensive hearing by the end of
the year, 12 days have been set this year. The parties estimate
for the length
of the hearing is in the order of eight weeks. The Health Secretary has filed
her evidence in chief consisting of
approximately 2900 pages of documents
including 18 affidavits. ASMOF has filed approximately 16,000 pages of documents
affidavits and/or outlines of evidence for approximately 53 witnesses
including expert evidence. The Health Secretary is scheduled
to complete the
filing of her evidence in reply by 16 October 2025.
complexity of the issues in the general case may be illustrated by the fact that
the Commission conciliated for five days in May
and June of 2025 on issues the
parties identified as being capable of agreement. Not all of the issues
identified could be agreed,
although good progress was made. That is not a
criticism of any party. It simply illustrates the nature of the case the
will need to decide.
the parties can complete the preparations for hearing by 16 October 2025 the
Commission will consider listing further dates in
the new term in 2026. On the
present estimate it will require another 28 hearing days. The Commission’s
resources are finite
and there are other cases competing for hearing time. All
of this means that it is unlikely that the case will be determined until
into 2026. For these reasons we consider, contrary to the submission of the
Health Secretary, that the need for interim relief
has not been diminished by
the perceived proximity of the general case.
counsel for the respondent, Mr Dixon, in this case disavowed the notion that
ASMOF was currently seeking an “attraction
or retention payment”
for doctors generally, he could not say what would ultimately be
at issue. Mr Dixon accepted, however, that a major plank of ASMOF’s
in the broader doctors’ salary dispute is that one of the difficulties
facing NSW Health is the loss of staff specialists
generally to the private
sector and to other jurisdictions by reason of asserted lower pay rates in New
South Wales. Part of ASMOF’s
claim in that case is to bring those pay
rates up to remove that perceived difficulty.
is thus necessary for the Full Bench in this case to proceed on the basis that
the Commission is soon to be faced with the task
of arbitrating a claim for
salary increases for staff specialists generally at least some part of which may
be pursued on the basis
of attraction and retention. We take up the significance
of this broader context when we deal with the question of whether, or to
extent, the Commission’s conventional approach to granting interim relief
that avoids “embarrassing the final result”
applies in this
ASMOF’s proposed interim award
proposed interim award seeks the following:
(1) an aggregate 25% attraction and retention allowance on the base Award
remuneration plus the 17.4% Special Allowance and Level
1 Private Practice
(2) that the employer will pay the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of
Psychiatrists (RANZCP) fellowship training fees (as
defined) and the Australian
Health Practitioner Registration Agency annual registration fees of interns,
residents, registrars and
psychiatry staff specialists;
(3) an obligation on NSW Health to fill current vacancies within two years, with
an unspecified minimum number of new psychiatry
staff specialists and interns,
residents and registrars to be retained each year; and
(4) the establishment of a “Psychiatry Staff Specialist Committee”,
with consulting and reporting functions on staffing
levels, vacancies,
recruitment, clinical demand and strategies by NSW Health in regard of those
matters and comprised of NSW Health
and ASMOF representatives.
The principles of wage fixation based on labour shortages
Commission is generally reluctant to grant a wage increase that is designed to
remedy a labour shortage.
“attraction rates” sit in tension with the Commission’s
function to make awards that reflect the true
value of the work
Staff shortages have
historically been seen as an issue for the employer to address, with attraction
rates potentially incentivising
pre-emptive wage increases to retain staff
creating a “circular self perpetuating process of wage
enhancement.”
that is not to say that issues of attraction and retention cannot be relevant to
determining a successful application for
a wage increase that relies on the
Commission’s AMPs. The Special Case Principle – principle 13 of the
− accommodates these
considerations.
Full Bench of this Commission has recently affirmed this approach to wage fixing
based on considerations of attraction and retention:
State Wage Case 2024 (No
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
a special case to be found, the labour shortage must contribute to the
assessment that the case has “special attributes”
of the ordinary”.
existence of a labour shortage, when combined with or when operating in the
context of other significant public interest considerations,
may justify a wage
increase as a special case. Having been satisfied of the existence of a serious
and significant shortage of staff
specialists covered by the award, the Full
Re Staff Specialists (State) Award
(2006) 152 IR 405
NSWIRComm 124
“We consider, however, that a shortage of staff specialists is not, on its
own, sufficient reason to award a salary increase.
If the fact is that there is
no public interest to be served by granting a salary increase based on
shortages, or the shortages have
not contributed to an increase in work value,
or that a salary increase will not also address an imbalance in comparative pay
as was the case in
Public Hospital Nurses (No 3),
nothing to improve the shortage, or the Commission is convinced that there are
better alternatives to addressing the shortage
than salary increases, then the
basis for granting a salary increase would be unconvincing.”
for example, in
Re Public Hospital Nurses (State) Award (No 3)
[2002] NSWIRComm 325
Nurses’ Case
salary increase based on shortages of nurses was determined to serve the public
interest in circumstances where:
the shortage was
causing a strain on the public hospital system in New South Wales and a
deterioration in the quality of care being
the shortage
presented a serious problem that needed to be addressed as a matter of priority
in the short and long term;
the employees
concerned were experiencing increasing stress and a deterioration in working
conditions due to the shortage, with an
effect on the value of their work;
employee’s wages were below the level of all other comparable health
professionals and was contributing to the shortage;
a failure to
grant a wage increase would likely constitute a negative signal and lack of
appreciation which risked exacerbating the
shortage and the associated problems
facing the public health
Re Staff Specialists (State) Award
, the Commission awarded a wage
increase for staff specialists in public hospitals, finding that there was a
serious shortage of staff
specialists of the same order found in the
Nurses’ Case referred to in the preceding
The labour shortage
was found to have caused a deterioration of working conditions impacting work
which was of particular
concern as the public hospital system relied on staff specialists to function
effectively.
The Commission was
therefore satisfied that a special case was made out to justify granting a wage
increase on the basis of a shortage
specialists.
The Commission also
considered the potential impact of a wage increase on attraction and retention,
reflecting that an increase “will
have a positive retention
It likewise
determined that a failure to grant an increase would not be in the public
interest as it would have “a negative
effect on their [staff
specialists’] perceptions as to the value of working in the public
hospital system”... which in
turn would “erode the confidence of
specialists in that
written submissions the Health Secretary relied on the fact that, where the
Commission has in the past awarded increases to address
staff shortages under
the Special Case Principle, it has invariably done so in circumstances where a
change in work value has also
been demonstrated, including in
Specialists (State) Award
in which the Full Bench (at [168]) made the
statement which is reproduced at [
Health Secretary points to the absence of any serious attempt by ASMOF to
demonstrate any change in work value as disqualifying
it from making out a
special case as a matter of principle.
accept that a shortage of staff is not, on its own, sufficient reason to award a
salary increase. There is a need for something
more and that can be work
we do not accept that the Special Case Principle is so narrowly constrained as
to elevate the work value nexus to the level
of a precondition. The principle
operates more broadly. The principle permits the Commission to create or vary
awards arising from
an extraordinary case that otherwise falls outside the AMPs,
to ensure that conditions of employment are fair and
reasonable.
As the Full Bench
explained in the Nurses’ Case at [91]:
“When considering an application for wage increases on the basis that a
special case exists and where it is claimed that there
is a shortage of labour,
the Commission is entitled to look at all of the circumstances in order to
determine whether a special case
is made out. The circumstances will include the
important consideration of the public interest.”
agree with ASMOF’s submission that the Full Bench in
Specialists (State) Award
at [168] which we have set out at [
] above, recognised
that any one or more of the circumstances listed therein could, if established,
justify a pay increase which is
also directed at alleviating a staff shortage.
The critical requirement is that the public interest is served by granting a
increase based on staff shortages. The public interest element may be
fulfilled by considerations that include any one or more of
the grounds
identified by the Full Bench in
Re Staff Specialists (State) Award
[168]. Such a combination of factors constitutes the necessary “special
attribute” and gives the matter the quality
of being “out of the
ordinary” in a manner accommodated by the Special Case Principle.
does not detract, however, from the need for the Commission to craft any relief
that is warranted in these circumstances so as
to avoid or minimise the prospect
of any “circular self perpetuating process of wage
enhancement”.
addition to the Commission’s established approach to wage fixing, the 2024
amendments to the IR Act included the introduction
of a new object at
s (3)(i) “to encourage strategies to attract and retain skilled staff
where there are skill shortages so
as to ensure effective and efficient delivery
of services”. This object explicitly directs the Commission’s focus
attraction and retention in the context of skill shortages when considering
wage claims.
the 2024 State Wage Case a Full Bench of this Commission observed that this
object “is at least directed to encouraging targeted
measures, for
example, measures to encourage workers into entry level training programs, or an
allowance to attract targeted professionals
to work in regional areas”;
but did not otherwise determine the question whether, and if so to what extent,
the new object
requires any departure from the longstanding authority outlined
Health Secretary contends that the new object does not call for a departure from
what he contended was a longstanding principle.
Given the interim nature of the
relief sought in these proceedings and the associated need for the Commission to
act quickly in this
matter, we do not consider that this is the appropriate
vehicle in which to make comprehensive and definitive pronouncements on the
effect of the new object. However, if the Health Secretary’s position is
no more than that the new object does not operate
to alter the
Commission’s established reluctance to award a salary increases on the
basis of a shortage of staff alone, we
are inclined to agree. Our view is
different if, on the other hand, the Health Secretary intends to assert that the
new object is
compatible with a rigid principle that pay increases may only be
awarded to address staff shortages if those shortages have resulted
in a change
in work value. For the reasons we have given earlier, we reject this as a matter
of principle.
do not purport to state definitively the effect of the new object, which is a
task that is neither necessary nor appropriate for
this Full Bench to undertake
in the context of determining interim relief by this expedited arbitration. But
it seems to us that
the new object at least reinforces the need for the
Commission to consider issues of attraction and retention where there are labour
shortages when making and varying awards, including by determining fair and
reasonable remuneration in accordance with the AMPs.
proposed interim award “embarrass the final result”?
Commission may make an interim award applying for a period of up to 12 months.
It may do so only in “special circumstances”:
firstly observe that the ameliorative effect of s 16(1) – which
provides that an award applies after its “nominal term”
rescinded by the Commission – applies to interim awards in the same way as
it applies to awards of the usual kind so
an interim award continues to have
legal effect notwithstanding that its nominal term may have concluded:
Unilever Australia Ltd, AP Foods (Sydney) Pty Ltd, AWU and TWU - various
proceedings re Proposed Sale of Marrickville Site
(2005) 141 IR 298
NSWIRComm 3
Notwithstanding
this, we understand that ASMOF’s claim, at least so far as it concerns the
25% allowance, is that the allowance
is intended to be genuinely, albeit
conditionally, temporary. Counsel for ASMOF indicated that it was not intended
for the interim
award to apply beyond the initial or nominated 12-month period,
that a fresh application would be required to extend the operation
of any of the
benefits or conditions provided in its proposed interim award and that “an
application would only be made to
continue the interim award if there were
grounds to do so”. Mr Dixon concluded as follows:
“It is simply identifying that in a nutshell it is intended to be a 12
month interim solution. If after 12 months the staff
shortages, attraction and
retention problems persist at a level that would support a submission to renew
the application for the
interim award, then those questions would be
revisited.”
regard to the application of s 16(1) of the IR Act, we understand this to
mean that ASMOF accepts that the Commission would
rescind its proposed interim
award at the end of its 12-month term, subject to the resolution of any
application ASMOF may wish to
make at that time to maintain the operation of the
issue between the parties arises in the context of the Commission’s
approach to making interim awards. This approach stipulates
that an important
consideration in deciding whether to make an interim award is whether it will
“embarrass the final result”
of the final award which might be
result” in relation to an interim award in this context refers to the
increase in rates of remuneration that
is to be fixed ultimately at a final
hearing. The appropriately conservative or cautious approach to granting −
on an interim
basis − part of the increase in rates sought at the final
hearing is to ensure that the Commission’s discretion is not
constrained in circumstances where the whole of the case has not been heard:
Industrial Secretary & Ors v Public Service Association and Professional
Officers’ Association Amalgamated Union of New
South Wales & Ors
[2024] NSWIRComm 21
Health Secretary contends that “the Commission is not in a position to
evaluate whether the terms and conditions of the
proposed interim award would be
fair and reasonable if applied outside that one cohort. That is, the Commission
could not be satisfied
increase in remuneration (or other
conditions) awarded to psychiatry staff specialist in this case represents an
appropriate baseline
or starting point for an increase in remuneration for staff
specialists or salaried doctors more broadly”. This is said to
“an insuperable obstacle to making the proposed interim award”
because “the Commission cannot be satisfied that
making the proposed
interim award will not ‘embarrass the final result’”. The
“final result” referred
to by the Health Secretary in this context
is the outcome of the arbitration in the comprehensive doctors’ awards
dispute referred
of ASMOF’s answer is to undertake not to “double-dip” in
respect of attraction and retention payments. Mr Dixon
“...if there is, ex hypothesi, a general increase of 10% in the
comprehensive award matter, then if the 25% attraction or retention
allowance is
payable to staff specialist psychiatrists, then under the present intention,
they would receive both the 25% interim
award for a year plus the 10%, unless
there was a component of attraction and retention within the 10%, in which case
would be adjusted to make sure there’s no double-dipping in
that respect.”
give effect to this position, ASMOF undertook to “support an urgent
application if the interim award is on foot when the
comprehensive award is
handed down and consent to any variations to the terms of the interim award that
the parties agree or the
Commission determines give rise to any double-dipping.
ASMOF will also support the inclusion of any clause in the interim award that
designed to avoid such double-dipping”.
consider that the nature of the interim award sought by ASMOF in this case
differs somewhat from the usual circumstances in which
the Commission applies
the conventional approach of avoiding any “embarrassment to the final
result”. It seems clear
that, at least at this stage, as part of the
broader arbitration of the doctors’ awards ASMOF makes no claim for an
“attraction
and retention allowance” for doctors generally or for
any other cohort of staff specialists (nor indeed for psychiatry staff
specialists beyond the interim 12-month period). The present claim for a
temporary “attraction and retention allowance”
for psychiatry staff
specialists is not therefore in the nature of a claim to apply a portion of
precisely the same relief that will
be sought at a later final hearing. This
means that in determining this claim for an interim award, the
Commission’s flexibility
to determine a claim for salary increases for all
other cohorts of staff specialists is not unduly constrained in the sense that
the interim relief is a discrete measure applicable only to one cohort of staff
specialists and is able to be determined separately
from the making of the
broader award.
Health Secretary’s contention that the Commission cannot be satisfied that
the temporary allowance claimed for psychiatry
staff specialists is an
appropriate baseline or starting point for an increase in remuneration for staff
specialists or salaried
doctors more broadly assumes that the nature of the
relief to be sought for doctors generally is coextensive with that interim
assumption is incorrect. The temporary allowance is not claimed as a
“baked in” ongoing component of the salary rates
for psychiatry
staff specialists. Instead, it is in the nature of an emergency stop-gap measure
designed to address a labour shortage
crisis. Different considerations are
likely to apply in determining whether or to what extent salary rates should be
adjusted for
doctors more broadly.
Accordingly,
we do not consider that our determination in this case necessarily constrains
the Commission’s flexibility when
it comes to determining the adjustment
of doctors’ salary rates generally.
recognise, however, that the Commission is likely to be faced with the task of
arbitrating a claim for salary increases for staff
specialists generally at
least some part of which may be pursued on the basis of attraction and
retention. We acknowledge that there
may be potential overlap between our
determination in this case and the considerations around adjusting remuneration
for psychiatry
staff specialists in particular on the basis of attraction and
retention, at least for the 12-month period during which a temporary
may apply. On this basis, a degree of restraint and caution is nevertheless
warranted, and the result we have determined
for the interim award reflects this
consideration.
this question, we are satisfied that the arbitration for ASMOF’s claim for
the interim award was sufficiently detailed, extensive
and rigorous in terms of
the scope of evidence and the overall cases advanced by the parties to enable us
to determine the matter
conclusively. In other words, in all the circumstances
including the urgent need to ameliorate the effects of the recent mass
resignations
of psychiatrists, we consider that the minimum amount likely to be
awarded to psychiatry staff specialists on the basis of attraction
and retention
for the 12 months from the making of the interim award would be an uplift in
remuneration of 10%.
addition, we consider that ASMOF’s proposal to guard against double
counting any increases for this cohort of doctors is
appropriate. To this end we
propose to grant relief in a manner that is expressly qualified to ensure that
payment of the temporary
allowance we grant is to be absorbed into any
subsequent increase to the salary rates of psychiatry staff specialists that is
attributable
to attraction and retention to be determined by the
Commission.
Furthermore,
we are satisfied that the factors making this claim a “special
case”, which we explain below, also constitute
the “special
circumstances” justifying the grant of interim relief.
the Health Secretary’s invocation of a strict presumption that the
relevant award already sets fair and reasonable
conditions for staff specialists
(which ASMOF is required to displace) is misconceived and not sustainable in
light of the recent
determination in
State Wage Case 2024 (No 3)
[70]–[79]. This does not detract from the operation of the longstanding
principle that, as the applicant for the making of
an interim award, ASMOF bears
the persuasive onus to establish a case for making the award.
special case
the following reasons we consider that ASMOF has made out a “special
There is a shortage of psychiatry staff specialists,
the nature and consequences of which are distinguishable from shortages
other staff specialists
is uncontroversial that there is a national shortage of psychiatrists, and by
extension, a shortage of psychiatrists in New South
Wales; although the parties
differ on the particular significance of the shortage of psychiatry staff
specialists in New South Wales
given the vacancy rates in other specialties in
the public health system. There was also a dispute as to the significance of the
shortage of staff specialists given the concurrent increase in engagement of
VMOs and locums who also comprise the public psychiatry
the evidence established that psychiatry has one of the highest staff specialist
vacancy rates in the public health system.
This shortage is on track to worsen
with vacancy rates increasing by 271% from July 2019 to October 2024 (measured
as full-time equivalent
positions (FTE)). Underlying the increasing vacancy
rates is an inability to convert a sufficient number of trainees into psychiatry
staff specialists. The evidence showed that the reasons for this
(1) many do not want to work as staff specialists due to the perception that the
conditions and pay are insufficient;
(2) an increasing number of trainees opting to leave New South Wales to work in
other states, namely Victoria and Western Australia;
(3) an increasing number of trainees opting to work in private practice; and
(4) there is an insufficient number of supervisors to facilitate trainees
resulting in a lack of available positions, particularly
stage 1 registrars.
evidence demonstrated that difficulties attracting staff specialists are also
compounded by retention problems. Putting aside
the recent resignations, when
comparing the workforce data from the financial years 2018/2019 to 2023/2024, it
is evident that separations
of psychiatry staff specialists have been increasing
each year. Further, despite the FTE and headcount of the psychiatry workforce
increasing each year from 2018/2019, the headcount of staff specialists has
remained steady. Overall, this reflects the diminishing
role that staff
specialists are playing in delivering psychiatric care in the public health
response to the diminishing rate of staff specialists, the evidence of Mr
Thompson, Director of Workforce Insights and Transformation
in the NSW Ministry
of Health, established that the workforce composition has changed significantly
to incorporate more VMOs and
locums which has resulted in:
(1) the FTE performed by the staff specialist workforce declining by
approximately 7.5% from 2018/2019 to 2023/2024;
(2) the FTE performed by VMOs increasing 45.9% from 2018/2019 to 2023/2024; and
(3) the estimated FTE of locums increasing, with the estimated locum FTE from
2017/2018 to 2023/2024 increasing from 0.5 to 46.2
FTE (a 9140% increase).
the shift towards VMOs and locums, vacancies still remain in the system and
there are difficulties recruiting VMOs and locums.
Health Secretary contends that this shortage does not relevantly distinguish
psychiatrists from other specialists for two principal
reasons: firstly, other
specialties are experiencing comparable vacancies; and, secondly, the vacancy
rates are adequately ameliorated
by the engagement of VMOs and locums.
to the Health Secretary’s first proposition, we are unable to accept that
the scale of the shortage in the psychiatry workforce
is comparable to that in
other cohorts of staff specialists. Mr Thompson’s evidence revealed that
psychiatrists comprise one
of the largest cohorts having employed 442 Staff
Specialists, at varying FTE workloads, in financial year 2023/24. As at 28
2024 the psychiatry staff specialist vacancy rate was 31.6% from 131.6
vacant FTE. The current vacancy rate is likely higher given
that of the 183
resignations tendered, 122 were projected to come into effect by 21 April 2025.
This may be distinguished in scale
from other cohorts, for example, with staff
specialist vacancies as outlined by Dr Harris, the Chief Medical Workforce
the NSW Ministry of Health, in her evidence:
(1) 33.9% in radiology from 88 vacant FTE;
(2) 18.4% in general medicine from 29.7 vacant FTE;
(3) 56.7% in gynaecological oncology from 11.14 vacant FTE;
(4) 19.4% in community child health from 7.2 vacant FTE;
(5) 20% in haematopathology/clinical haematology from 3.2 vacant FTE;
(6) 18.9% in forensic pathology from 3 vacant FTE;
(7) 21% in pain medicine from 2.2 vacant FTE;
(8) 35.7% in genetic pathology from 2 vacant FTE; and
(9) 24.1% in maternal-fetal medicine from 1.43 vacant FTE.
is ample evidence before the Commission that the demand for mental health
services, particularly public mental health services,
has been growing rapidly
over at least the past 10 years. There are not only direct observations by
witnesses working in the field
but several reports by national and state bodies
including the NSW Ministry of Health attesting to that growth.
2014 the Mental Health Commission of New South Wales published a document
entitled “Living Well: A Strategic Plan for Mental
Health in NSW
2014-2024”. The document identified that 17% of the NSW population had
mild to severe mental illness and a further
23% were estimated to have an
underlying or undiagnosed mental problem. It laid out a plan for improved mental
health services in
in 2018 the Mental Health Commission published the “NSW Strategic
Framework and Workforce Plan for Mental Health 2018–2022”
response to the Living Well Report. While this plan identified anticipated
population growth of 14% from 2017/2018 to 2027/2028
as a source of increased
demand for mental health services, it also identified sections of the community
as probable areas of increased
demand. Persons over 65, with population growth
of 33%, and adolescents, with increased rates of major depressive disorders,
the “Workforce priorities” identified was the need for action to
support retention of the relatively small but critical
further report published in 2021 was the “NSW Health Psychiatry Workforce
Plan 2020-2025”. The report described psychiatrists
as a “critical
component of the mental health workforce, making up about 10%” of it.
Among the strategies outlined was
a strategy to attract and support the future
psychiatry workforce by developing processes to support recruitment of trainees
in psychiatry.
report was, in turn, followed by another entitled “NSW Community Mental
Health Services Priority Issues Paper” published
in December 2023 by the
NSW Ministry of Health. The second priority identified in the paper was
“Workforce and Training”.
The report identified significant
shortages across the mental health workforce as a “crucial gap impacting
effective service
Specifically
in relation to the consultant psychiatry workforce, including staff specialists,
trainees, VMOs and locums the report
noted that, while there had been
improvement in registrar numbers, consultant psychiatrist vacancies continued to
rise statewide.
Further, the Ministry’s report found:
“Staff Specialist positions, which have a lower hourly rate but afford the
opportunity for significant contribution to leadership,
safety and quality and
education work have been particularly difficult to fill. However, VMO roles
(which pay at a higher rate but
are more focused on clinical contact only) are
also now increasingly difficult to fill. The result is that, even in inner
metropolitan
Sydney, services are dependent on the most expensive model (locum
coverage) to allow for services to remain open. This comes at the
expense not
only of premium labour, but continuity of care.”
“NSW Health recognises that there is more work to be done regarding the
consultant psychiatry workforce. This includes working
on retaining staff
specialist cover by ensuring LHDs and Networks provide the aspects of these
roles that make them attractive (e.g.
clinical leadership work), while also
considering approaches to staff specialist Award reform.”
succession of reports demonstrates the recognition, over many years, of staff
shortages in the mental health workforce especially,
in the present context, of
consultant psychiatrists and the need for strategies to address both recruitment
and retention. It also
demonstrates the public interest in ensuring an adequate
well-trained workforce to meet the mental health needs of the community.
further consideration recognised in these reports is the relatively high cost of
VMOs and locums and their comparative focus on
clinical contact. It may be that
in theory, VMOs and locums can deliver the leadership, training and research
required for the system
to continue, but as a matter of practice their higher
cost means their focus is directed to clinical work. Reliance on increasing
proportions of VMOs and locums (as identified in [
] above) therefore does
not seem to accord with the need to support trainees as recommended in these
to the increase in demand for mental health services:
(1) As stated in Mr Thompson’s evidence, the full-time equivalent hours
for psychiatrists within the New South Wales public
health system has increased
every year since 2018. The evidence overwhelmingly established that demand for
public psychiatric services
has increased. This demand is reflective of an
increase in the complexity and volume of patients requiring care, with further
in demand expected to occur in future due to increasing community demand
for public psychiatry services.
(2) We are also satisfied that the growing service demand is currently being
borne by the workforce, who are experiencing an increase
(a) the volume and intensity of work required during shifts;
(b) the number of additional shifts;
(c) the volume and intensity of on-call work; and
(d) the requirement to generally perform additional labour to compensate for
increasing staff shortages.
(3) During this period of growing demand, the headcount of psychiatry staff
specialists has remained relatively stable. Mr Thompson’s
disclosed that there were 454 in 2019/20, increasing to 462 in 2021/22, and
thereafter decreasing to 442 in 2023/24.
(4) With the demand for public psychiatry accelerating and the workforce
capacity dwindling, it is clear there is a shortage of psychiatry
specialist that needs to be addressed.
to the Health Secretary’s second proposition, we are unable to accept that
there is a sufficient functional equivalence between
staff specialists and
VMOs/locums such that the substantial and escalating vacancy rate among staff
specialists does not present
significant difficulty in terms of staff shortages.
If, as contended by Dr Harris and the Health Secretary, “staff specialist
and VMO appointments are used interchangeably within NSW Health as they
undertake the same duties” the scale of the shortage
would be ameliorated
by the ability to fill staff specialist vacancies with VMOs or locums. The
evidence, however, does not support
this contention.
Dr Harris stated that staff specialists, VMOs, and locums have the “same
qualification and skillset”, the work of
staff specialists is necessarily
coloured by the permanent nature of their employment. As staff specialists are
permanent and are
paid a salary, they are embedded within the team on a
long-term basis and perform clinical, teaching, training, research and
functions within the team. The multifaceted nature of the staff
specialist role is reflected in the definition of “Normal Duties”
the Staff Specialists (State) Award 2022 as “clinical, teaching, research,
administrative, quality improvement or other
duties and responsibilities
undertaken by the Staff Specialist.”
contrast, VMOs are engaged on a short-term basis predominantly to perform
clinical work. We accept the evidence of Dr Gunaratne,
Chair of the New South
Wales Branch of the RANZCP, that because VMOs are often engaged to meet
increased service demand and are more
expensive than staff specialists to engage
on an hourly basis, local health districts are incentivised to direct VMOs to
clinical work. The nature of VMO contracts can also mean that
non-clinical work often falls outside the scope of hours for which
compensated. For example, Dr Choong-Siew Yong, who is employed as a VMO, stated
that meetings may take place outside of
contracted hours, and are explicitly
excluded in the definition of “services” in the Public Hospitals
(Visiting Medical
Officers - Sessional Contracts) Determination 2014. Dr Yong
reported that as a VMO he generally did not perform the following tasks:
“supervision of junior medical staff; teaching medical students;
participating in clinical governance activities, participating
in administrative
meetings concerning the operations of the service, liaising with other medical
services, health professionals and
staff, participating in service planning and
service development.”
we have already noted at [
] material published by the NSW Ministry of Health
itself concedes that, in practice, VMOs have a predominant focus on clinical
as distinct from education work.
this distinction was echoed by Mr Minns, the Deputy Secretary of People, Culture
and Governance at the NSW Ministry of
Health, who stated the following during
the Budget Estimates 2024-2025:
“But there are some productivity benefits associated with having a VMO on
deck rather than staff specialists, because they
don't take annual leave that we
pay for. They are incentivised in a sessional contract to focus on treatment of
patients. They don't
have non-clinical time elements to their contractual
arrangement.”
difference is clearest when it comes to the supervision of trainees. As the
number of staff specialists dwindle, VMOs and locums
are increasingly relied
upon to supervise trainees. However, Dr Drew, Chair of the New South Wales
Branch of the RANZCP Training
Committee, gave evidence that the temporary nature
of their engagement means that trainees will often not have a constant
throughout their six-month rotation, with some psychiatrists
reporting that trainees may have up to four or even six supervisors
rotation. The lack of continuity impacts the quality of training as trainees are
less likely to build a relationship with
their supervisor and have a consistent
standard of care modelled to them throughout a rotation.
problems are exacerbated where there is a reliance on locum doctors who are
employed on short-term contracts for up to three
months, typically to cover
absences. Dr Gunaratne and Dr Drew explained that locums, even with the same
training and skills, are
unable to provide continuity of care to patients or
supervision to trainees as they are only temporary members of their team.
to Dr Brahmbhatt, who had worked as a Clinical Director and Senior
Staff Specialist, it is also not guaranteed that locums will be
engaged on the
same numerical FTE basis as the absence that they are employed to cover, leaving
further shortfalls in service delivery
and non-clinical work for staff
specialists to absorb. This problem is particularly acute having regard to the
significant increase
in psychiatry locums in recent years referred to at [
] and highlighted at
Commission heard directly from a trainee, Dr Leeder, who has experienced
difficulties in securing vacant registrar positions as
these positions cannot be
filled because of a shortage in staff specialist supervisors.
the evidence before the Full Bench, psychiatry staff specialists, VMOs and
locums are not perfectly interchangeable positions.
The reliance on VMOs and
locums to fill staff specialist roles has not adequately compensated for the
full scale of work performed
by staff specialists, including supervisory
education work with trainees.
increasing reliance on VMOs and locums in substitution for staff specialists
itself constitutes a significant bottleneck in the
supply of psychiatry staff.
Relevantly, the RANZCP Accreditation Panel noted in 2022 that:
“Short staffing contributed to concerns around the consistent provision of
minimum supervision requirements and reliable access
for trainees to mandatory
RANZCP training requirements.”
Dr Gunaratne further gave evidence during her examination-in-chief that when
VMOs and locums are substituting staff specialists in
their supervisory role,
trainees may have five or six different supervisors within a six-month period,
significantly diminishing
the quality of the training.
is supported by the Productivity Commission Inquiry Report, Mental Health (Vol
1, No 95, 30 June 2020) which highlighted the
shortage of psychiatrists in New
South Wales by reference to the high rate of filling psychiatry vacancies with
locums (nearly 50%
in 2019) combined with the need to increase trainee
supervisors. Since that report the rate of substitution of locums for psychiatry
staff specialists has proliferated. As noted at [
], the estimated
locum FTE from 2017/2018 to 2023/2024 increased from 0.5 to 46.2 FTE − a
9140% increase.
The shortage is causing a strain on the public
hospital system in New South Wales and a deterioration in the quality of mental
care delivered in the public health system; and psychiatry staff
specialists are experiencing increasing stress and a deterioration
conditions because of the shortage
witnesses such as Dr Goodison and Dr Leeder referred to the lack of beds or the
potential closure of beds for mental health
patients related to the shortage of
staff specialists. Dr Oliver, Director of Medical Services for South Western
Sydney Local Health
District conceded in cross-examination that a planned
significant increase in the number of psychiatric beds at Campbelltown Hospital
was not able to proceed because of shortages in the number of psychiatry staff
specialists.
physicians and psychiatrists expressed concerns at the reduced number of mental
health beds and lack of psychiatry staff
specialists causing mental health
patients to seek help through the Emergency Department with consequent
disadvantages and risks
to both the mental health patients and other users of
the Emergency Department.
evidence established that staff shortages lead to “broken therapeutic
relationships” between patients and treating
psychiatrists. The rapport
between a psychiatrist (and other members of the team) and their patient is one
of the most important
factors in successful treatment of mental health patients.
Staff shortages mean that psychiatrists do not have the time to build
maintain the relationship of trust to achieve successful treatment
is no exaggeration to describe the state of mental health care in the New South
Wales public system as being in crisis. The evidence
relied on by ASMOF includes
the unchallenged view expressed by the Clinical Director and Conjoint Professor
at the Prince of Wales
Hospital, Matthew Large, that “the current state of
psychiatrist recruitment poses an existential threat to public
psychiatry”.
is telling that, in the face of this evidence, the Health Secretary did not
seriously challenge any of ASMOF’s witnesses
issue, and her written submissions fail to engage with ASMOF’s submissions
on this issue. Indeed
the documents published by the NSW Ministry of Health and
referred to above at [
] express similar views.
The wages of
psychiatry staff specialists are below the level of other comparable health
professionals and is contributing to the
specialists in New South Wales have the lowest base salary and are among the
lowest paid in Australia. For example, when compared
with New South Wales,
ASMOF’s evidence showed that first year staff specialists:
(1) in Western Australia earn 51.66% (regional rate) or 34.32% (metro rate) more
(2) in Queensland earn 36.44% more;
(3) in Victoria earn 24.69% more (based on the Victorian custom of appointment
for 38 hours on an hourly rate);
(4) in Tasmania earn 38.6% (North West rate) or 22.6% more (Standard rate);
(5) in South Australia earn 38.79% more.
VMO in New South Wales is paid $244.70 hourly, and a senior VMO is paid $262.60
hourly. In comparison, staff specialists are paid,
depending on seniority and
accounting for the private practice allowances, between $125.71 and $169.84 per
specialists have rights of private practice. The doctor elects to be remunerated
at one of levels 1 to 5, presenting a mix of
options between a special allowance
on their base award salary and a share of the fee paid by private patients in
the hospital which
they treat. If the area of practice has a low level of
private patients, such as in psychiatry, emergency physicians and geriatrics,
level one tends to be the preferred option. A report produced by the Health
Secretary recorded that in 2024/2025 99.3% of psychiatry
staff specialists
elected Level 1.
An interim increase in the form of an allowance
is likely to have a positive retention or attraction effect
proposed allowance is intended to incentivise:
(1) trainees to select and rotate in psychiatry;
(2) trainees to take staff specialist psychiatrist positions in public hospitals
in New South Wales;
(3) existing staff specialists to remain in New South Wales;
(4) existing staff specialists to remain as staff specialists instead of
switching to VMO or locum employment arrangements; and/or
(5) existing staff specialists to remain in the public system rather than the
private sector.
It is therefore necessary to assess the likely impact of the proposed
allowance on these groups.
is conflicting evidence as to whether there are a sufficient number of trainees
electing to rotate in psychiatry. Material from
the RANZCP which was introduced
and accepted by Dr Gunaratne indicated that there was “poor take up of
training positions”
and “low numbers of PGY [postgraduate year] 1
& 2 rotations in psychiatry”. The RANZCP has also advocated for a
increase in PGY 1 & 2 rotations across New South Wales mental
health services”. However, in cross-examination Dr Gunaratne
did not agree
that there is a shortage of trainees in the pipeline, but asserted instead that
the problem lies with the lack of available
supervisors. She stated that the New
South Wales public health system had “probably...more trainees than we can
Dr Harris similarly conceded that there were sufficient numbers
of trainees commencing in psychiatry within NSW Health.
data from the RANZCP presented by Dr Gunaratne indicates that the total number
of trainees commencing psychiatry training in New
South Wales has grown by 28.2%
from 2020 to 2024. Although this is low compared to a growth of 63.4% in
Victoria, it is roughly commensurate
with the 29.9% growth in Queensland.
However, the number of new trainees in psychiatry from 2020 to 2024 does
indicate that New South
Wales is growing slower than other states − by
10.8% compared to an increase of 81.3% and 24.4% in Queensland and Victoria
respectively. There is no evidence that there are any vacancies in any trainee
positions for psychiatry. The problem, as noted in
], is that there are
insufficient numbers of supervisors.
balance the evidence indicates that while there may be sufficient numbers of
trainees at the moment, as demand continues to grow
for psychiatry in the
community, the slowing trend of growth suggests that NSW Health will struggle to
attract trainees to meet projected
requirements for service delivery. These
issues were addressed in NSW Health Psychiatry Workforce Plan 2020-2025 referred
there was evidence that remuneration plays a significant role in motivating
trainees to consider psychiatry, there is no
claim for trainees to receive an
allowance and therefore the impact of the allowance will be less direct for
trainees. Its impact
on the evidence is intended to be threefold. First, it will
provide an incentive for successful trainees to apply for staff specialist
positions in New South Wales rather than interstate or in private practice.
assuming the numbers of staff specialists in New South Wales increase, and the
workloads and levels of job satisfaction improve
for psychiatry staff
specialists accordingly, the position of staff specialist will be perceived as
more attractive.
if the allowance had a positive attraction and/or retention effect on staff
specialists who act as supervisors, this would
allow for a greater number of
trainees to complete a psychiatry rotation.
allowance is likely to have a more decisive impact on a trainee’s decision
to become psychiatry staff specialist. Evidence
of ASMOF’s witnesses
established that remuneration plays a significant role in the weighing up
between commencing as a VMO
in comparison to a Level 1 Staff Specialist or
commencing in the private sector. Even setting aside the question of
remuneration
being competitive with the private sector or VMO/locums, Dr Yong
stated that some first year staff specialists may earn less compared
they were registrars due to the loss of overtime entitlements.
addition to remuneration, trainees are also highly influenced by working
conditions. Psychiatry staff specialists provided evidence
that trainees are
increasingly uninterested in commencing as a staff specialist in New South Wales
due to the perception of poor
working conditions, in particular, that the
workforce was stretched, that vacancies intensified the workload, and there was
of supervision.
Leeder gave evidence of his experience as a psychiatry registrar including the
requirements of and limitations on the training
program. He said that a staff
specialist can only supervise a maximum of two registrars at a time. If the
staff specialist is less
than full time they may be restricted to one or in some
cases (if the FTE is less than 0.3) none. Fewer staff specialists mean fewer
trainee positions. The importance of retaining staff specialists is therefore
emphasised.
allowance will likely have the greatest impact on the retention of staff
specialists in the public sector. In particular, we consider
that it would
assist with cost of living pressures faced by early career psychiatrists.
potential positive impact of the allowance on retention is conceded by Dr Harris
whose evidence was relied upon by the Health
Secretary. It is also recognised,
for the reasons identified at [
] by the introduction of the Health Secretary’s
retention allowance.
consider that to not grant the allowance would likely constitute a negative
signal and lack of appreciation which could have the
effect of exacerbating the
shortage and the associated problems facing the public health system.
McLean gave evidence that she had delayed her resignation until after the
Commission’s decision and if ASMOF’S claim
were successful she would
”likely rescind” her resignation. Dr Lawler said that if
ASMOF’s claim were successful
he would return as a staff specialist. Dr
Drew expressed the view that the allowance sought would:
“significantly alleviate the difficulty in recruiting because it would
bring up the pay levels closer to Staff Specialists
in other states, such as
Queensland and closer to VMO pay, whereas presently there is a financial
disincentive for people coming
to work for our service.”
Brahmbhatt also said she would consider returning if the interim award were made
although she emphasised the item of primary importance
was the allowance. Dr
Yong expressed a similar view as to the importance of the allowance although he
did not comment about the prospects
of his return. Dr Korbel’s resignation
had not taken effect. He was on unpaid leave at the suggestion of his Clinical
He also expressed a view about the primacy of the allowance. He had
been offered but declined VMO work because taking it up would
undermine his
reason for resigning. Dr Taylor resigned from NSW Health in November 2024
because she could no longer afford to live
in Sydney. She took employment as a
staff specialist in South Australia. She also expressed the view that a move
closer to “pay
parity with interstate colleagues” was a key step
towards solution of the crisis in the New South Wales health
There are no better alternatives to addressing the
Health Secretary submitted that “other steps” were being taken to
address issues with the psychiatry workforce. From
the evidence of Dr Harris
those steps appear to consist of the following:
(1) psychiatry is one of the first four specialties identified nationally to
receive an expedited specialist registration pathway
for overseas
practitioners;
(2) jurisdictions have agreed to workforce modelling and Psychiatry Workforce
modelling is due to be released;
(3) NSW Health has developed the Psychiatry Workforce Plan 2020–2025 along
with an action plan;
(4) the Health Education and Training Institute (HETI) has reduced the fees paid
by New South Wales trainees for the formal education
course required as part of
specialist training;
(5) other actions taken by HETI in 2013, 2016, 2018 and 2019;
(6) the Psychiatry workforce is the only medical workforce with a specific
workforce plan at a NSW Health level;
(7) there is an intention to develop a new Mental Health Workforce Plan
2026-2032 during 2025; and
(8) there has been an increase in funding for prevocational positions across NSW
Health over 2024, 2025 and 2026.
wishing to be critical of these steps, we make the observation that many of them
cannot be described as “current”.
As for the most recent workforce
plan, Dr Drew stated that she had seen no evidence of several actions she
identified in the plan
actually having been done. As that plan is now more than
five years old it cannot be said to have been successful to date given the
of increase in staff specialist vacancies even before the “mass
resignations”.
was no other alternative to address the shortage suggested to the Commission.
Health Secretary’s decision to make the Determination about the retention
allowance is also indicative that other and better
alternatives are not
Mass resignations as an industrial strategy
evidence is consistent with the Commission’s finding in
the Dispute
Order Decision at [42]–[47] that the mass resignations submitted by
psychiatry staff specialists in furtherance
of their industrial demands was at
least encouraged, supported and facilitated by ASMOF.
Health Secretary submitted that an allowance should not be granted effectively
to reward an industrial strategy. We agree with
that submission. Were the claim
to be without merit other than by reason of industrial force that submission
would be successful.
In this case, however, we see industrial merit in the
claim. The impact of rates of pay for staff specialists providing a level of
income well below that of other jurisdictions and of other forms of engagement
of specialist psychiatrists in this jurisdiction,
together with the other
elements of the special case, require a rebalancing of the scales. The Health
Secretary has gone some way
to achieve that ambition but, in our assessment, not
quite far enough.
our view there is a need to separate the fact of industrial action from the
merits of the claim brought before the Commission.
The fact of industrial action
being taken should not be a disqualifying feature of an otherwise meritorious
claim. We emphasise the
reverse is also true. Industrial action does not cause
an unmeritorious claim to become meritorious.
economic impacts
amount to be awarded is substantially less than the 25% claimed by ASMOF.
fiscal impact would be relatively modest: approximately $10-15 million, which is
less than half of the $30.5 million of ASMOF’s
claim for a 25% allowance
estimated by Ms Livingstone, the Deputy Secretary for the Policy and Budget
Group within the NSW Treasury.
take into account the evidence that the NSW Health budget is fully allocated,
and that the allowance would need to be separately
funded by the NSW Government.
The quantum of the allowance that we propose is intended in part to accommodate
such fiscal considerations.
Nevertheless, for the reasons we have explained, in
our view the Commission’s statutory duty to set fair and reasonable terms
and conditions of employment requires a temporary measure that may require the
allocation of additional funds − much like the
Health Secretary’s
retention allowance. Ms Collins confirmed that this allowance was centrally
funded from the Ministry of
Health and the Deputy Secretary, Financial and
Corporate Services NSW Ministry of Health and Chief Financial Officer of NSW
Mr D’Amato, revealed that the allowance is not provided for in the
budget unless it has been paid in the previous financial
year. We infer that,
because the Health Secretary’s retention allowance has not previously been
universally payable, the allowance
in its present incarnation is also largely
unaccounted for in the NSW Health budget.
are satisfied that the interim award is unlikely to have any significant adverse
economic impacts, given the Health Secretary’s
economic modelling suggests
that significant adverse impacts on the economy would arise only if the full 25%
increase was awarded
on an ongoing basis and this extended or spilled over not
only to all staff specialists, nurses and midwives and all other public
staff, but also to New South Wales private sector workers more generally.
Although none of the Health Secretary’s expert
evidence purports to assess
the likelihood of the interim increase spilling over to other employees, the
risk of such a widespread
spill over must be regarded as remote.
cross-examination, the Executive Director for the Macroeconomy Division,
Economic Strategy and Productivity Group within the NSW
Treasury, Dr Warlters,
sought to qualify his report by saying he thought there would also be
“significant” economic impact
if the spill over was confined to all
public health workers - but the degree of significance in this scenario appears
to be limited
to his assessment of 0.65% above GDP forecast, 0.53% higher
consumer prices and lower unemployment by 0.34%. He described this as
“more material” compared to the “no or marginal” impacts
of his alternative modelling scenarios, but with
a “not especially
large” inflationary impact which nonetheless pushes the RBA’s
inflation forecast further above
the target band. However, Dr Warlters conceded
in cross-examination that, since his report, inflation has eased and that his
outlook had been overtaken by data and the RBA’s more recent
projections, although the RBA continued to be concerned about
addition, we consider that the risk of any spill over to other public sector
health employees is somewhat ameliorated by ASMOF’s
undertaking that it
proffered to the Commission in the course of the hearing, namely, that it would
not use any decision to award
an attraction and retention allowance to staff
specialist psychiatrists in support of future claims from any other category of
lack of flow-on consequences or any industrial discord or discontent from the
payment of the Health Secretary’s retention
allowance also tends to
militate against the prospect of any significant spillover effect of a retention
allowance for staff specialist
psychiatrists in the present circumstances.
we note the modelling by Professor Buchanan, member of the Business Information
Systems Discipline and Co-Director of the
Mental Wealth Initiative at the
University of Sydney, that is relied upon by ASMOF to support a contention that
the overall cost
of a 25% allowance is likely to be broadly equivalent to, or
may even be less costly than the Health Secretary’s offer of a
increase. This modelling rests on an assumption that such an allowance will
result in a substantial shift in the mix of
staff specialist psychiatrists
compared with VMOs and locums. The Health Secretary criticised some of the
assumptions underlying
this modelling, particularly as to the capacity of an
allowance to shift the mix in favour of staff specialists and raised
doubts” about its reliability.
is not necessary for us to resolve the controversy over Professor
Buchanan’s prognostications in this regard. We consider
that the allowance
we have determined is justified for the reasons we have given. However, there is
no doubt that the recent and
sustained trajectory of the composition of the
public sector psychiatrist workforce has been to incorporate proportionally more
and locums, who represent a greater cost compared with staff specialists.
Having regard to the evidence of the current efforts outlined
] to address the staff
shortage, there is no reason to think that, absent the countervailing monetary
incentives represented by the
Health Secretary’s retention allowance as
supplemented by the allowance granted by the Commission, this trajectory of
composition will not continue
indefinitely.
Commission orders that:
(1) The parties are to have discussions with a view to providing the Full Bench
with a clean Word version of the new interim award
that reflects our decision by
4:00pm on 17 October 2025.
(2) To the extent that any clauses of the interim award are not agreed upon, the
parties are to file a Word document by 4:00pm on
17 October 2025 setting out
their competing draft clauses that reflect our decision.
State Wage Case 2024 (No 3)
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
–[170]; State Wage Case
2024 (No 4)
(2024) 337 IR 182
[2024] NSWIRComm 25
, Annexure A (principle
ASMOF filed an application
for leave to appeal and appeal against this decision on 10 January 2025. This
appeal was subsequently
withdrawn on 14 April
State Wage Case 2024 (No
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
, [169]; Railways
Miscellaneous Grades Award 1953
[1955] CthArbRp 321
(1955) 82 CAR 146
at 153; Re Railways
Professional Officers Award
[1958] CthArbRp 51
(1958) 89 CAR 40
at 48; Railways Traffic, Permanent
Way and Signalling Wages Staff Award 1952; The Australian Railways Union v The
Victorian Railways
Commissioners & Ors
[1957] CthArbRp 214
(1957) 87 CAR 693
Re Public Service Board
and Public Service Association of New South Wales (Local Courts Anomaly Case)
[1989] AR (NSW) 638
at 645; Railways Professional Officers Award
[1958] CthArbRp 51
(1958) 89 CAR
Re Public Service
Board and Public Service Association of New South Wales (Local Courts Anomaly
[1989] AR (NSW) 638
State Wage Case 2024 (No
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
Hospital Nurses (State) Award (No 3)
(2002) 121 IR 28
[2002] NSWIRComm 325
. See also Health Employees Pharmacists (State) Award
(2003) 132 IR 244
[2003] NSWIRComm 453
–[54], [81]; Re Staff Specialists (State)
(2006) 152 IR 405
[2006] NSWIRComm 124
Teachers (Non Government
Early Childhood Service Centres other than Preschools) (State) Award 2006
[2009] NSWIRComm 198
Hospital Nurses (State) Award (No 3)
(2002) 121 IR 28
[2002] NSWIRComm 325
, [91]. See also [44], [51],
Re Staff Specialists
(State) Award
(2006) 152 IR 405
[2006] NSWIRComm 124
Re Staff Specialists
(State) Award
(2006) 152 IR 405
[2006] NSWIRComm 124
Re Staff Specialists
(State) Award
(2006) 152 IR 405
[2006] NSWIRComm 124
Re Staff Specialists
(State) Award
(2006) 152 IR 405
[2006] NSWIRComm 124
Re Staff Specialists
(State) Award
(2006) 152 IR 405
[2006] NSWIRComm 124
Re Staff Specialists
(State) Award
(2006) 152 IR 405
[2006] NSWIRComm 124
State Wage Case 2024
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
Re Public Service
Board and Public Service Association of New South Wales (Local Courts Anomaly
[1989] AR (NSW) 638
State Wage Case 2024
(2024) 337 IR 111
[2024] NSWIRComm 19
Re Public Hospital
Nurses' (State) Award (No 3)
(2002) 121 IR 28
[2002] NSWIRComm 325
applying the principles discussed in Public Hospital Nurses (State) Award
[2002] NSWIRComm 100
(referring to Re Crown Employees
(Administrative and Clerical Officers) Award
[1975] AR (NSW) 1
at 7 and Re Crown
Employees Scientific Officers Health Commission, Interim Award
[1974] AR (NSW)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (406 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter