URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/56.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lotz v Coco Chocolates Pty Ltd (No 2) (RLD) [2013] NSWADTAP 56 (23 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Lotz v Coco Chocolates Pty Ltd (No 2) (RLD)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 56
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Decision Date:
23 December 2013
Appeal Panel - Internal
M Chesterman, Deputy President
1. The Appellant is to pay to the Respondents the amount of $11,600 on
account of their costs of the proceedings at first instance.
2. The Appellant
is to pay to the Respondents the amount of $6,700 on account of their costs of
these appeal proceedings.
Catchwords:
Retail lease - costs of proceedings at first instance and on appeal
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Retail Leases Act 1994
Cases Cited:
Adwell Holdings Pty Ltd v Ull Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWADT 166
Commissioner of Police
[2010] NSWCA 131
Chand v Railcorp of NSW (No 2)
[2011] NSWCA 80
Coco Chocolates Pty Ltd v Lotz
[2013] NSWADT 83
Pty Ltd v Alramon Pty Ltd (No 2) (RLD)
[2010] NSWADTAP 3
Lotz v Coco
Chocolates Pty Ltd (RLD)
[2013] NSWADTAP 43
Meriton Properties Pty Ltd v DCM
Leases-Five Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2010] NSWADT 11
Rucom Pty Ltd and Anor v
Multiplex & Ors
[2010] NSWADT 1
Valentino Franchise Pty Ltd (ACN 114 469
662) v Brookfield Multiplex WS Retail Landowner Pty Ltd (ACN 109 033 794) (No 2)
[2012] NSWADTAP 40
Debrah Ann Lotz (Appellant)
Coco Chocolates Pty Ltd (First Respondent)
Rebecca Kerswell (Second Respondent)
Representation
P Glissan (Appellant)
- Solicitors:
Brown & Partners (Respondents)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
Retail Leases Division
- Date of Decision:
19 April 2013
- Citation:
Coco Chocolates Pty Ltd v Lotz
[2013] NSWADT 83
- Court File Number(s):
125042, 125074
REASONS FOR
Introduction
decision relates to the costs of first instance and appellate proceedings in the
Tribunal. These proceedings commenced with the
filing of an application (file
125042) under the
Retail Leases Act
Chocolates Pty Ltd ('Coco') and Rebecca Kerswell against Ms Debrah Lotz.
Subsequently, Ms Lotz filed a cross application
(file 125074) against the
Respondents.
these reasons, I will refer to Coco and Ms Kerswell jointly as 'the
Respondents', since from a practical point of view this was
their role in both
the first instance proceedings and the appeal.
Tribunal heard the application and cross application on 13 August 2012. In a
decision delivered on 19 April 2013 (
Coco Chocolates Pty Ltd v Lotz
[2013] NSWADT 83
- 'the Tribunal decision'), it dismissed both of them.
2 May 2013, pursuant to directions given by the Tribunal, the Respondents filed
an application, with supporting submissions, for
a costs order in their favour.
Attached to the application was an invoice for costs and disbursements totalling
$23,169.16, addressed
by Brown & Partners to Ms Kerswell and dated 24 April
17 May 2013, Ms Lotz appealed against the dismissal of her cross application.
20 May 2013, Ms Lotz filed submissions in reply to the Respondents' application
letters to the parties dated 28 May 2013, the Registrar advised that the costs
of the first instance proceedings would be determined
in due course by the
Appeal Panel.
hearing of Ms Lotz's appeal took place on 29 July 2013. Mr Glissan of counsel
appeared for Ms Lotz. Mr Noonan, of Brown &
Partners, appeared for the
Respondents.
a decision delivered on 25 September 2013 (
Lotz v Coco Chocolates Pty Ltd
[2013] NSWADTAP 43
- 'the appeal decision'), the Appeal Panel
dismissed the appeal. It also gave directions for the filing of submissions
the costs of the appeal and of any additional submissions that the
parties might wish to make as to the costs of the proceedings
23 October 2013, the Respondents filed an application, with supporting
submissions, for an order that Ms Lotz pay their costs of
the appeal. This
application was accompanied by a statutory declaration sworn by their solicitor
in the proceedings, Mr Noonan, on
22 October 2013. Annexed to the declaration
was a copy of an invoice for costs and disbursements associated with the appeal,
by Brown & Partners to Ms Kerswell and dated 22 October 2013. The
total amount quoted was $10,168.19. In their submissions, the
Respondents
renewed their application relating to the costs at first instance.
20 November 2013, Ms Lotz filed submissions in reply.
the present decision relates only to questions of costs, it may be determined by
a Deputy President sitting alone, pursuant
section 24A(2)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
provides that costs in Tribunal proceedings brought under this
Act may be awarded under
. Relevant parts of
are reproduced below.
, an Appeal Panel hearing an appeal from a decision at first instance
has power to award costs in relation to both the proceedings
that led to this
decision and the appeal proceedings themselves. This was established by a ruling
of the Court of Appeal in
Chand v Railcorp of NSW (No 2)
[2011] NSWCA
appeal decision contains an outline (at [7 - 25]) of relevant aspects of the
dispute between the parties and the proceedings at
first instance. In the
ensuing paragraphs, the Appeal Panel summarised the principal contentions
advanced by Mr Glissan in support
of the appeal and its rulings in relation to
them. These passages in the appeal decision should be read in conjunction with
the present
Principles regarding costs orders
states, so far as relevant:-
(1) Each party to proceedings before the Tribunal is to bear the party's own
costs in the proceedings, except as provided by this
(1A) Subject to the rules of the Tribunal and any other Act or law, the
Tribunal may award costs in relation to proceedings before
it, but only if it is
satisfied that it is fair to do so having regard to the following:
(a) whether a party has conducted the proceedings in a way that unnecessarily
disadvantaged another party to the proceedings by conduct
such as:...
(i) failing to comply with an order or direction of the Tribunal without
reasonable excuse, or
(ii) failing to comply with this Act, the regulations, the rules of the
Tribunal or any relevant provision of the enactment under
which the Tribunal has
(iii) asking for an adjournment as a result of a failure referred to in
subparagraph (i) or (ii), or
(iv) causing an adjournment, or
(v) attempting to deceive another party or the Tribunal, or
(vi) vexatiously conducting the proceedings,
(b) whether a party has been responsible for prolonging unreasonably the time
taken to complete the proceedings,
(c) the relative strengths of the claims made by each of the parties,
including whether a party has made a claim that has no tenable
basis in fact or
(d) the nature and complexity of the proceedings,
(e) any other matter that the Tribunal considers relevant.
2) The Tribunal may:
(a) determine by whom and to what extent costs are to be paid, and
(b) order costs to be assessed on a basis set out in Division 11 of
Legal Profession Act 2004
or on any other basis.
following passage in the Appeal Panel's decision in
Valentino Franchise Pty
Ltd (ACN 114 469 662) v Brookfield Multiplex WS Retail Landowner Pty Ltd (ACN
109 033 794) (No 2) (RLD)
[2012] NSWADTAP 40
bears on the
application of
section 88(1A)
to proceedings under the
(1) The criterion established in this subsection is a 'relatively
low hurdle for an applicant seeking an order', since 'the criterion
"fairness" will take into account the compensatory purpose of an award of costs,
which will generally favour the successful party':
AT v Commissioner of
[2010] NSWCA 131
(2) When proceedings in the Tribunal are commercial in nature, involving two
parties who are acting in trade and commerce, one significant
effect of the
amendment to section 88 introducing the notion of 'fairness' (this took effect
on 1 January 2009) is to 'broaden the
basis upon which costs might be awarded':
Adwell Holdings Pty Ltd v Ull Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWADT 166
relevant is the following passage in
Rucom Pty Ltd and Anor v Multiplex &
[2010] NSWADT 1
37 So, it is plain to me that, not only is this Division a
commercial division dealing with commercial issues between lessors and
in a retail lease environment, but, and in addition, proceedings should only be
commenced in this Tribunal after very careful
consideration of the merits of the
Trust Company of Australia Ltd v. Craig
[2005] NSWADT 65
. After all, commencing proceedings without such consideration inevitably
results in considerable expense being incurred by the other
party and one might
not unreasonably ask: "why should the other party have to bear those expenses
when the proceedings should not
have been commenced in the first place?"
should also be made to the decision of the Appeal Panel in
Jonamill Pty Ltd v
Alramon Pty Ltd (No 2) (RLD)
[2010] NSWADTAP 3.
It related to an application
by a successful respondent for the costs of an appeal in proceedings under the
. At [45], the Panel said that it would not regard the appellant's case in
the appeal as 'unarguable, unreasonable or untenable'.
But at [47 - 49] it went
on to award costs to the respondent, having regard particularly to the
'substantial disparity between the
relative strengths of the parties' claims'.
It gave the following reasons:-
47 In the light of these considerations... we conclude as follows.
Having regard to both the substantial disparity between the relative
of the parties' claims and 'the nature of the proceedings' (i.e., that it is an
unsuccessful appeal from a decision in
the Retail Leases Division), as is
required of us by section 88(1A)(c) and (d), it is in all the circumstances
'fair' that the unsuccessful
Appellant should pay the Respondent's costs.
48 There is no contradiction between this conclusion and the order made at
first instance that each party should pay its own costs...
The Tribunal pointed
Meriton Properties Pty Ltd v DCM Leases-Five Pty Ltd (No 2)
that 'in decisions under section 88 as it stood before the
2008 amendments, the Tribunal showed itself to be more willing to award
appeal proceedings (notably against an unsuccessful appellant) than against the
losing party at first instance'.
The costs at first instance
Submissions
by the Respondents.
In relatively brief submissions prepared by Brown &
Partners and filed in support of an application for these costs to be paid
Lotz, the Respondents advanced the following propositions.
Lotz's allegation that, in fitting out the premises that she had leased to them
('the Premises'), they had breached the Building
Code of Australia in a number
of ways made it necessary for them, when preparing their defence to her
application, to obtain legal
and technical advice regarding the contents of
numerous documents, thereby exposing themselves to substantial costs.
Lotz, by serving on them the 'section 129 Notice' (i.e., a letter dated 17
February 2012, described in the appeal decision at [12
- 14]), forced them to
apply to the Tribunal during a 'critical sales period' (i.e., the Easter
holidays) for an interim order preventing
them from being locked out from the
40-day period stipulated in this Notice for compliance with its requirements was
clearly inadequate, because Ms Lotz required
the Respondents to pay for a copy
of a building code assessment report ('the BCA Report') to which the Notice
referred (see the appeal
decision at [15]). By imposing this requirement, Ms
Lotz sought to conceal from them the true reason why she had commissioned this
Report. It was not until the Tribunal called for production of the Report that
she disclosed a section of it showing that she had
commissioned it for the
purposes of a strata subdivision of the building. This conduct on her part 'was
less than forthright' and
showed that she was 'prepared to withhold material
that was prejudicial to her case, even if it meant that the Tribunal would be
a 'self-serving' letter to her insurer, Ms Lotz claimed that the Premises might
not be safe. The Tribunal found, however, that
she had 'no reasonable basis for
this belief' (the relevant passage in its decision is in paragraph [51]). The
motivation for her
letter could only have been to support her claim for lost
rent of a residential unit above the Premises (this matter is dealt with
appeal decision at [143 - 149]). But an email from her to her estate agent
showed that she never intended to let this unit.
truth, Ms Lotz's claims had 'no basis in fact', except in relation to certain
light fittings in the ceiling of the Premises (as
to this, see the appeal
decision at [116 - 142]). The inference should therefore be drawn that she
'wanted nothing more than to evict
Coco from the premises in order to perform
the strata subdivision'.
Notwithstanding
an argument to the contrary put by Ms Lotz, Ms Kerswell had instructed Brown
& Partners to act both for Coco and
for herself (the sole director of Coco)
in these proceedings. Mr Noonan's statutory declaration made this clear. Both
the Respondents
were accordingly liable to pay to Brown & Partners the costs
and disbursements itemised in the invoice dated 24 April 2013.
Lotz's submissions
. In submissions prepared by Mr Glissan, the following
contentions were advanced on Ms Lotz's behalf.
invoice issued by Brown & Partners on 24 April 2013 was addressed to Ms
Kerswell only. It followed that no order for costs
could be made in favour of
Lotz had not misconducted herself in the proceedings in any way contemplated by
section 88(1A)(a)
or (b) of the
proceedings involved complex and difficult questions relating to retail leases
and to the alterations to the Premises forming
part of Coco's fit-out.
Resolution of the building issues was particularly difficult because the parties
received inconsistent advice
from Mosman Council and from the certifier,
Fitzgeralds (see the appeal decision at [43 - 46]). The legal and factual issues
determined were not straightforward and required careful consideration.
There was accordingly no 'substantial disparity' between
the relative strengths
of the parties' cases. For these reasons, there were no grounds for a finding
that it would be 'fair' to make
a costs order against Ms Lotz pursuant to
section 88(1A)(c)
, (d) or (e).
application by the Respondents that initiated the proceedings was dismissed by
the Tribunal. It had previously given them leave
to amend this application by
adding a claim for relief against forfeiture and withdrawing their other claims
(see the Tribunal's
decision at [10]). In initiating the proceedings, therefore,
they had failed to abide by the Tribunal's injunction (in the passage
Rucom v Multiplex
quoted above at [18]) to take 'very careful
consideration of the merits of the case'. It followed that there should be a
'mutual cancelling
out of any costs being ordered' against any of the parties.
reason why Ms Lotz filed her cross application was that the Tribunal, on 27
March 2012, had made an interim order restraining
her from interfering with
Coco's possession of the Premises.
the Premises were inspected during October 2012, pursuant to leave granted by
the Tribunal, significant defects in the light
fittings that the Respondents had
installed in the ceiling of the Premises were discovered. At all relevant times,
therefore, Ms
Lotz had a legitimate concern that the residential unit above the
Premises might not be fire safe.
there had been 'no retail tenancy mediation'; neither Coco nor Ms Kerswell had
made any offer of settlement; and Ms Lotz,
who was 'not a commercial giant', had
incurred substantial legal costs at first instance.
and conclusions
. It is clear from
section 88(1)
starting-point of the costs regime established by the Act is a prima facie
principle that the parties to proceedings should
bear their own costs. A party
seeking an award of costs has the onus of showing that such an award would be
'fair', having regard
to the considerations outlined in paragraphs (a) to (e) of
section 88(1A).
my opinion, the Respondents have discharged this onus to the extent that they
should be awarded a substantial proportion of their
costs at first instance.
conclusion is principally based on paragraph (c) of
section 88(1A).
Except with
regard to a small number of the numerous allegations of breach of the Lease made
against Coco by Ms Lotz, her case was
a very weak one.
following specific claims made by her, each of which was rejected by the
Tribunal and/or the Appeal Panel, were distinctly unmeritorious:
defaults by Fitzgeralds in performing the duties of a certifier were to be
treated as defaults by Coco, on the ground that
Fitzgeralds acted as an agent of
Coco; (b) that Mr Lotz was not the agent of Ms Lotz in any sense, with the
consequence that any
statements or conduct on his part signifying approval of
the actions of Coco or of persons engaged by Coco did not constitute approval
her; (c) that certain work done on the Premises was not 'workmanlike' for the
sole reason that the builder responsible for it,
Mr Sharp, was unlicensed; (d)
that Ms Lotz could not obtain insurance for the building on account of concerns
that Coco's fit-out
operations may have rendered it structurally unsound (it may
be noted that the Tribunal's rejection of this claim was not challenged
appeal); (e) that Coco should bear responsibility for the fact that the height
of a step at an entrance to the Premises contravened
a clause in the Building
Code of Australia; and (f) that Coco's conduct, seen overall, amounted to
repudiation of the Lease.
all these matters, there was in my opinion a 'substantial disparity' between the
strength of Ms Lotz's case and that of the Respondents.
reject Ms Lotz's claim that Coco should not receive any award of costs because
it did not retain Brown & Partners to act for
it. Mr Noonan's declaration
sufficiently refutes this contention.
addition, it is irrelevant that no retail tenancy mediation occurred, that
neither Coco nor Ms Kerswell had made any offer of settlement
and that Ms Lotz
is 'not a commercial giant'.
reasons why I consider that the Respondents should not have an award covering
all of their costs at first instance can be summarised
in four propositions.
not all of Ms Lotz's claims of breach of the Lease by Coco were unfounded. For
reasons summarised in the appeal decision at
[134], Coco bore responsibility for
ensuring that the new ceiling that it had installed in the Premises was fire
safe. Following
the inspection carried out by Ms Lotz in October 2012, it
acknowledged that it had not discharged this responsibility and it arranged
fire protection downlight covers to be fitted. For reasons explained at [136 -
149], the Appeal Panel concluded that this default
on Coco's part did not confer
on Ms Lotz any right to terminate the Lease or claim damages. But as it stated
at [141], it would have
awarded damages to her if Coco had not agreed to attend
to this task at its own cost.
because the evidence on key matters furnished to the parties by Mosman Council
and by Fitzgeralds was both contradictory
and confusing, this was not a case in
which Ms Lotz, at the time when she filed her cross application, could have
discerned all the
weaknesses in her case that subsequently became apparent. In
particular, both the Council and Fitzgeralds advised her that the complying
development certificate issued by Fitzgeralds made did not take account of the
planned removal of an internal wall (see the appeal
decision at [44]). Other
evidence put before the Tribunal and the Appeal Panel was sufficient to ground a
finding to the opposite
effect. But Ms Lotz could fairly maintain that, until
the question had been adequately investigated, there were good reasons for
believing that both the certifier and the responsible local authority had
permitted Coco's fit-out operations to proceed without
taking account of this
important aspect of them.
both the interpretation of several provisions of the Lease on which Ms Lotz
relied and their application to a fact situation
involving significant building
operations within the Premises were not straightforward. There were, as Mr
Glissan submitted, 'difficult
building and retail lease issues'.
and finally, the Respondents' application initiating the proceedings was
defective in a number of respects. The relief that
they sought - namely ' to
trade in peace', 'an end to building disputes' and 'if no resolution then to end
the lease' and 'seek compensation
for loss of trade and legal expenses' - was
formulated in a most unsatisfactory manner.
account of these countervailing considerations, the costs relating to the first
instance proceedings that Ms Lotz should pay by
virtue (principally) of
paragraph (c) of section 88(1A) should, in my opinion, be confined to 75% of the
Respondents' costs and disbursements.
to a submission made by Mr Glissan, I believe this case to be one in which the
Tribunal itself, in the exercise of the broad
powers conferred on it by
, should fix the amount of costs to be paid. The evidence
put before it shows that the amount charged to the Respondents by their
solicitors is not unduly large.
invoice dated 24 April 2013 sent by Brown & Partners to Ms Kerswell
quantified the Respondents' costs and disbursements in
the first instance
proceedings at $23,169.16. Discounting this figure by 25%, and by a further
amount to reflect the fact that my
order relates to party/party costs only, an
appropriate sum is $11,600.
The costs of the appeal
Submissions
by the Respondents.
In the relatively brief submissions prepared by Brown
& Partners and filed in support of an application by the Respondents for
these costs to be paid by Ms Lotz, the main propositions advanced were that she
had been 'wholly unsuccessful on appeal' and that
'even where errors were
identified by the appeal panel, these errors were of such a minor nature that
they did not disturb the substance
of the decision at first instance'.
was also placed on the fact that the Appeal Panel rejected an application by Ms
Lotz for leave to adduce further evidence
in the appeal proceedings. As
explained in the appeal decision at [49 - 51], this evidence comprised (a) a
copy of an adverse disciplinary
determination made by the Building Professionals
Board against Mr Fitzgerald, relating in part to a complaint lodged against him
by Ms Lotz and (b) copy of a letter from Mosman Council to Ms Lotz, outlining
the steps that needed to be taken if work on a property
had been carried out
without development consent.
grounds on which the Panel rejected Ms Lotz's application to adduce these two
items of further evidence were that the questions
addressed in the Board's
determination differed materially from those arising in the appeal and that the
evidence furnished by the
Council's letter was of insufficient weight to warrant
its being admitted in appeal proceedings.
was argued in the Respondents' submissions that they had been compelled to incur
unnecessary expense in examining these items of
evidence and responding to Ms
Lotz's application for leave to adduce them.
Lotz's submissions.
The main argument put forward by Mr Glissan on Ms Lotz's
behalf was based on the fact that the Appeal Panel discerned a number of
of law in the Tribunal's decision and accordingly held that pursuant to
the appeal should be extended to a review of the merits
of this decision.
associated argument was that the Appeal Panel 'reached a number of conclusions
which were materially different to those reached
by the Tribunal at first
Mr Glissan's submissions, the specific matters on which the Appeal Panel's
rulings differed from those of the Tribunal were identified
through references
to passages in the appeal decision. I will describe each of these matters in the
next section of these reasons.
these grounds, Mr Glissan contended that Ms Lotz's appeal had significant merit
and that a costs order should therefore not be
made against her.
Glissan did not specifically address the submission by the Respondents based on
the rejection of his application to adduce fresh
evidence in the appeal.
and conclusions.
As was stated in
Meriton Properties Pty Ltd v DCM
Leases-Five Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2010] NSWADT 11
(in the passage quoted above at
[19]) and in a number of other decisions under
Tribunal is more willing to award costs in appeal proceedings (notably against
an unsuccessful appellant) than against a losing
party at first instance.
this appeal, the claim made by the Respondents for their costs of the appeal was
based primarily on
section 88(1A)(c).
They maintained that there was a
'substantial disparity' between the strength of their case in the appeal
proceedings and the strength
of Ms Lotz's case.
fact that in my judgment a 'substantial disparity' was discernible between the
relative strengths of the parties' cases on a large
proportion of the matters
determined at first instance suggests that the same assessment should be made
with regard to Ms Lotz's
unsuccessful appeal. But consideration must be given to
her argument that this does not necessarily follow, because the Appeal Panel
identified a number of errors in the Tribunal's decision and arrived at
conclusions on a number of specific issues diverging from
those of the
Glissan's submissions pointed to eight matters on which the Appeal Panel either
held that the Tribunal erred in law or in some
other way expressed a view or
adopted reasoning diverging from that of the Tribunal. I will discuss each of
these matters in the
order in which they were dealt with in the appeal decision.
The focus of my discussion will be on the extent, if any, to which the
divergences of views between these two bodies provide justification for Ms
Lotz's contention that her appeal had significant merit.
the Panel held (at [60]) that the complying development certificate relating to
Coco's fit-out of the Premises was issued by Fitzgeralds,
an accredited
certifier, not (as the Tribunal appeared to assume) by Mosman Council.
error identified by the Appeal Panel is not of significance because of the
Panel's associated ruling, also stated at [60], that
Fitzgeralds was not an
agent of Coco (or, for that matter, of Ms Lotz). The significant point, on which
the Tribunal and the Appeal
Panel were in agreement, was that the authority that
issued the certificate was independent of the parties.
the Panel held (at [76]) that the Tribunal erred in law through not giving
adequate reasons for its finding that Mr Lotz was an
agent of Ms Lotz within the
context of her dealings with the Respondents.
Panel did not, however, consider this error sufficient to justify interference
with the Tribunal's decision. It simply furnished
substantiation for the
Tribunal's finding by drawing attention to the relevant evidence. In deciding
whether or not to appeal, Ms
Lotz and her advisers could readily have identified
this evidence for themselves and concluded that a challenge to the finding was
likely to fail.
matters can usefully be considered in conjunction.
At [91 - 94], the Appeal Panel held that the Tribunal erred in two ways: (a) by
stating that Ms Lotz did not make any complaint about the quality of work done
on the Premises by the unlicensed builder (Mr Sharp)
whom Coco had engaged to
complete its fit-out operations and (b) by overlooking the necessity to record
its own finding as to whether
these operations were carried out in a 'proper and
workmanlike manner', as was required by a clause in the Lease.
Panel's decision to extend the appeal to the merits and to review relevant
aspects of the evidence was based in part on these
two errors by the Tribunal.
But their existence is not enough of itself, in my opinion, to provide
significant support to Ms Lotz's
claim that her appeal was meritorious. My
reasons are as follows.
issue to which the first error related was not of immediate significance. The
question whether Ms Lotz did or did not complain
in any sense determinative. In confirming the Tribunal's overall decision, the
Appeal Panel did in
any event take due account of the fact that she did
the course of addressing the question to which the second error related -
whether or not Mr Sharp's work was 'workmanlike' - the
Appeal Panel reached the
same conclusions as the Tribunal regarding the three specific allegations of
sub-standard work that Ms Lotz
had made. It held that two of these allegations,
relating respectively to plumbing work and the height of a step, were not borne
out by the evidence (see the appeal decision at [112 - 113] and [157 - 158]). It
also noted that Coco had acknowledged and responded
appropriately to the third
allegation (relating to fire safety), in the manner described above at [43].
matter on which the Appeal Panel's reasons diverged from those of
the Tribunal concerned a demand made by Ms Lotz in the
section 129
'certification' relating to plumbing operations that Coco had carried out in the
Premises. The Panel held at [105] that
this 'demand' was inadequate, on two
distinct grounds, for the purposes of a Notice of this nature. In the ensuing
paragraphs, it
cited relevant authority.
contrast, the Tribunal did not deal at all with this particular matter. But
after reviewing Mr Glissan's submissions and the account
of Ms Lotz's case given
in the Tribunal's decision, I am not satisfied that it was raised before the
this ground, this difference between the Tribunal's reasons and those of the
Appeal Panel cannot be relied on as an indicator of
merit in Ms Lotz's case on
point of divergence between the two sets of reasons related to
responsibility for the state of the ceiling of the Premises following
fit-out operations. In its decision at [61], the Tribunal attributed this to Ms
Lotz. The Appeal Panel held, however, at [135]
that Coco was responsible for
safety aspects of the ceiling because there was 'unchallenged evidence' that it
had installed a new
Coco had not acknowledged responsibility before the Tribunal for the repairs
needed to ensure the fire safety of the ceiling, this
error on the Tribunal's
part might well have been significant in the present context. But because Coco
did acknowledge responsibility,
Ms Lotz and her advisers, when considering the
matter of an appeal, could have realised that irrespective of the Appeal Panel's
on the matter, the outcome of the appeal would be the same. Once again, the
Tribunal's error is not sufficient on its own to support
her claim that her
appeal was meritorious.
point of divergence between the Tribunal and the Appeal Panel is
discernible in their reasons for dismissing Ms Lotz's claim relating
height of the rear step of the Premises. The Tribunal, in its decision at [55],
held that there was no evidence showing the
height of this step before Coco's
fit-out operations commenced. The Appeal Panel, however, dealt with the matter
as follows (at [158]):-
158 In our opinion, the photographs and accompanying testimony
sufficiently establish the following: (a) the height of the step contravened
standard before the fit-out operations commenced; and (b) Mr Lotz knew that the
height would remain the same after these operations
were completed. In these
circumstances, Ms Lotz cannot be permitted to claim forfeiture of the Lease, or
an award of damages, solely
on the ground of the continuation by Coco of her own
pre-existing breach of the building standard. Coco was entitled to assume, at
the time of the fit-out, that this was not a matter of concern to her.
availability of this line of reasoning as an alternative justification for
dismissing Ms Lotz's claim was known to her and her
advisers when she lodged her
appeal. Once again, therefore, the existence of a difference of opinion between
the Tribunal and the
Appeal Panel does not support her assertion that her appeal
was meritorious.
and finally
, the Appeal Panel, at [161], held that, contrary to a ruling in
the Tribunal's decision at [46], a special condition (AC 23.01(d))
in the Lease
relating to fire safety was an 'essential term'. But as the Panel pointed out in
the preceding paragraph, it did not
have to determine this matter. Ms Lotz may
have succeeded on it, but it was of no avail to her in seeking to overturn the
the separate matter of Ms Lotz's unsuccessful application to adduce fresh
evidence in the appeal, I agree with the Respondents'
submission. The making of
this application extended the scope of the appeal. To a limited extent, it had
the effect of 'prolonging
unreasonably the time taken to complete the
proceedings', within the meaning of
section 88(1A)(b)
the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied under
section 88(1A)
that it is 'fair' to
require Ms Lotz to pay the costs incurred by the Respondents in defending her
appeal, assessed on a party/party
the invoice dated 22 October 2013 sent by Brown & Partners to Ms Kerswell,
the amount charged for the Respondents' costs and
disbursements in the appeal
proceedings was $10,168.19. Once again, it is appropriate that an order for a
fixed sum be made. This
order will be for the sum of $6,700.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (215 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter