URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2006/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ho [2006] NSWPB 4 (10 May 2006)
[2006] NSWPB 4
Health Care Complaints Commission v Tuong (Thomas) Ho
10 May 2006
The complaint of professional misconduct alleged that between 17 January 2000
and 7 September 2000, the pharmacist dispensed supplies
of oral female
contraceptive drugs pursuant to prescriptions written for a male patient, in
circumstances where the pharmacist knew
or ought to have known that such
supplies were in quantities or for a purpose that did not accord with
appropriate recognised therapeutic
standards. The pharmacist also failed to
make adequate enquiries of the prescribers as to the authenticity of such
prescriptions.
The complaint also alleged that the pharmacist had participated
in failing to make the appropriate endorsements on the subject
prescriptions in
accordance with the provisions of Clause 43(1)(a)(b)(c) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
1994. The pharmacist had purchased the
pharmacy in March 1999 in Wollongong and continues to operate that practice. The
admitted dispensing oral contraceptives to the male customer as
alleged in the complaint and that he had demonstrated a lack of judgment
disputed the charge that he had acted unethically. The pharmacist believed that
the customer and a doctor were going to take
the medication to Papua New Guinea
for distribution by medical practitioners to local women. The pharmacist was not
suspicious of
the customer and never suspected the prescriptions were forgeries.
The breaches of the Poisons
Regulation took place over a significant period of time and are objectively very
The pharmacist failed to make
any adequate enquiry of the prescriber. In failing to make any enquiry of the
male customer presenting
the prescription made out in this name for the oral
contraceptive pill, the pharmacist has made a grave error of judgment and acted
improperly. The pharmacist should have immediately recognised the
inappropriateness of the prescription and taken more action to
determine its
authenticity.
Notwithstanding the fact that
the pharmacist has engaged in substantial rehabilitation since his peer
reviewer’s visit, this
case warrants the imposition of conditions on
practice regarding continuing professional education.
All the particulars of the
complaint have been proven to the Board’s reasonable satisfaction and
professional misconduct established
in that the pharmacist has engaged in
conduct that demonstrates a lack of adequate judgment and care in the practice
of pharmacy
and other improper conduct.
The pharmacist is reprimanded
and required to complete extensive continuing education requirements at his
expense including the presentation
of a tutorial to a panel of pharmacists
nominated by the Board , on the legal and professional responsibilities of a
pharmacist in
dispensing Prescription Only medications including the detection
and subsequent handling of forged prescriptions. The cost of complying
these orders is to be borne by the pharmacist.
(Editorial note: for related cases see Metlege
[2006] NSWPB 5
[2006] NSWPB 6.)
Findings of a Professional Standards Committee (the "Committee") held on 27
October 2005 into a complaint of professional misconduct
made under the
provisions of the
Pharmacy Act
") by Judge Kenneth V Taylor
AM, RFD, nominal complainant and Acting Commissioner of the Health Care
Complaints Commission,
Tuong (Thomas) Ho of Downtown Day and Night
Pharmacy 60 Crown Street, Wollongong in the State of New South Wales being a
registered in this State.
THE COMPLAINT
That Tuong (Thomas) Ho has been guilty of professional misconduct within the
section 19D(1)(c)
in that the pharmacist
has demonstrated
a lack of adequate judgment and/or care in the practice of pharmacy and/or
engaged in improper
or unethical conduct
related to the practice of
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT
Between 17 January 2000 and 7 September
2000, the pharmacist dispensed supplies of oral female contraceptive drugs on
the dates shown
in the attached schedule, Schedule A, pursuant to prescriptions
written in the name of a male patient, Patient A, in circumstances
pharmacist knew or ought to have known that such supplies were for a purpose
that did not accord with the recognised therapeutic
standard of what was
appropriate in the circumstances, contrary to the requirements of Clause 57,
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
regulation").
Between 17 January 2000 and 7 September
2000, the pharmacist dispensed supplies of oral female contraceptive drugs to
Patient A on
the dates and in the quantities shown in Schedule A in
circumstances where the pharmacist knew or ought to have known that such
were in quantities that did not accord with the recognised therapeutic
standard of what was appropriate in the circumstances, contrary
requirements of Clause 57 of the regulation.
Between 17 January 2000 and 7 September
2000, the pharmacist participated in the dispensing of prescriptions for oral
contraceptives
(Schedule A) and failed to endorse certain particulars in the
prescription in ink, contrary to the requirements of the provisions
43(1)(a)(b)(c) of the regulation as
A prescription for Marvelon 28
dated 1 September 2000 (Script number AH08796289) with the date on which the
substance was supplied,
the address of the place at which the substance was
supplied and/or the prescription reference number.
A prescription for Loette 20 ED dated 1
September 2000 (Script number AH08796288) with the date on which the substance
was supplied,
the address of the place at which the substance was supplied
and/or the prescription reference number.
Between 17 January 2000 and 7 September
2000, the pharmacist failed to make adequate enquiries of the medical
practitioner who had
purportedly written the prescriptions in the name of
Patient A on the dates shown in Schedule A, as to the authenticity of the
prescriptions
and the appropriateness of the supplies of medication directed
thereon, prior to dispensing the medications.
Counsel for the Complainant tendered with the consent of the Respondent, the
following documents:
Exhibit 1 – Bundle of
Complainant’s documents;
– Certificate of Registration;
3 – Original duplicate copies of
prescriptions.
Exhibit 4 – Bundle of
Respondent’s documents including the Peer Review report and
references.
The Respondent gave evidence and confirmed that at the time of the hearing he
was 35, graduated in 1993, worked on an employed basis
for a number of years
including as a locum and then in March of 1999 purchased a Wollongong pharmacy
known as "Downtown Day and Night
Pharmacy". The breaches took place in the
following January of 2000 until the September of that year. The Respondent
continues to
operate that practice.
The Respondent agreed that he dispensed oral contraceptives to Mr David
Hughes as alleged in the complaint. He said that he had seen
news coverage of a
tsunami on the north coast of Papua New Guinea in 1998 which resulted in the
wiping out of a number of villages.
He became aware of the efforts to help the
survivors. He came to Australia in 1981 himself as a boat person after having
from Vietnam. He said he felt empathy toward the people of Papua New
Guinea and went into pharmacy to help people. He said David
Hughes explained he
had a doctor friend who was carrying out aid work in Papua New Guinea and his
friend was going to take the medication
and distribute them to local people. He
said he insisted on a prescription. He said Mr Hughes appeared very genuine but
refuse to supply him on the first occasion without a prescription. He
said he was not suspicious of him. He said he had no idea
that David Hughes was
intending to sell, or selling, the oral contraceptives over the internet in the
United States. He returned
to the pharmacy with a prescription from Dr
Weatherlake (Dr W). He said he had tried to call Dr W but could not get
through. He
said in his evidence that he did not try subsequently to get
through to Dr W. He said he never suspected the prescriptions were forged
was trying to contact Dr W to make sure of the legality of taking medication out
of the country. He dispensed the prescription
when it was presented to him. He
believed it was going to Papua New Guinea for women to be dispensed to them by
medical practitioners.
The Respondent said he told Mr Thompson, who was conducting the inquiry that
Mr Hughes had told him it was for overseas aid. He said
Mr Hughes attended the
pharmacy at the busiest time of the day. The Respondent said he learned of it
from the local media. He
I think it was in the paper, local paper, or the TV actually they said.
It is in the media anyway
The Respondent agreed that he demonstrated a lack of judgment at the time but
did not agree that he acted unethically. He said he
practised with the utmost
ethical standards and takes his obligations very seriously. He is a member of
the PSA, the Pharmacy Guild,
the Australian College of Pharmacy Practice and his
pharmacies are fully quality care accredited. He does his PSA continuing
and goes to as many seminars as he can as well as consumer education.
He told the Committee that he did not think he would be able
to make such an
error of judgment again in his life. He has learned his lesson and it has been
hard to wait for the matter to be
heard. He said he had only just bought the
pharmacy at the time and it was not making much in 1999. The Committee notes
Respondent purchased the pharmacy in March 1999 and the offences took
place in January 2000. He said that he has now reduced the
hours and has two
locums working for him. He said his procedure now is to check all the details
of the prescription before he processes
it, and if the prescription is not for
the intended person, or his or her agent, he would never dispense it. He
queries the intended
use, the dosage and what other medication they are taking.
He said he is familiar with the document,
Principles of Dispensing a
Prescription
. The Committee notes that this was one of the suggestions made
by the peer reviewer. He said that he infrequently receives forged
prescriptions and that he contacts the doctor. He said he reads literature from
each of the professional bodies to which he belongs.
He practises what is set
out in the Pharmacy Board IV of 1994 dealing with patient counselling. He said
he followed up Mr Mahoney’s
suggestions about continuing professional
education. He said the year before the hearing that he had done around 20.5 or
continuing education and in the year of the hearing he had done 25, 23
or so. The Committee notes that according to a print out supplied
Respondent subsequent to the hearing the Respondent has completed 10 CPE points
of self education with the Australian College
of Pharmacy Practice and
Management from 1 November 2004 to 31 October 2005 and 38 points from the PSA
from the 1 January 2004 to
1 November 2005.
The Respondent said he was starting the ACPP&M course Drugs of Abuse and
Misuse 1 and 2. For the last 3 years, he and his employees
participated in the
Non-Prescription Medication Education Program conducted at Sydney University.
Prior to the hearing he had participated
with his staff in clinical placement
programs. He acknowledged he did the wrong thing by the Board and his
profession but did not
acknowledge he had acted unethically at any stage. He
said he was very apologetic and gave his undertaking that it could never happen
In cross-examination, the Respondent said he had not considered why Mr Hughes
would not have arranged for the prescription to be filled
in Albury where it was
issued by Dr W. He said no one answered the phone when he tried to ring Dr W.
He said he thinks he tried
again later. The Committee notes that this evidence
is inconsistent with the evidence he gave in chief. He said he thinks he told
Mr Battye that he made two attempts to call Dr W on the same day. The record of
interview does not disclose that Mr Ho told Mr Thompson
He said in cross-examination, about the record of interview:
Because there is no reference to it here doesn’t mean I
didn’t mention it later on.
The Respondent said that sometime prior to the conversation recorded he told
Mr Thompson he believed that Mr Hughes did what he did
for the people of Papua
New Guinea and for the tsunami victims. He said he could not recall whether or
not there was another occasion
apart from the interview at the Oxford Tavern
when he spoke with Mr Thompson about Mr Hughes wanting the medications to send
New Guinea. He said he did not consider calling the Pharmaceutical
Services Branch to ask them if it was legal to take the medications
county. He said he would do that now.
The Respondent agreed in cross-examination that some of the seminars and
courses he was attending were to do with the running of the
business rather than
the pharmaceutical side of the industry.
He insisted in cross examination that he believed all the time Mr Hughes was
friend assisting him who
was a doctor who would distribute it for him. He maintained that he did not
believe that he was dispensing
the medication to a male. He agreed the ultimate
responsibility for running the pharmacy fell on his shoulders. The Respondent
that he did not suspect that the prescriptions were forgeries.
Both counsel agreed that at the time of the offences there was nothing in the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
1994 that created a legal
obligation to notify police or any other authority.
Subsequent to the conclusion of the hearing, counsel for the Complainant,
with qualified consent by the Respondent, helpfully drew
the attention of the
Committee to the fact that, in September 2002, Clause 39 of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation
came into effect (replacing Clause 42) and
providing for police notification if the prescription appears to have been
forged or fraudulently
obtained or altered otherwise than by the medical
practitioner by whom it was issued. The Committee asked the Respondent some
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulatio
n when faced with a forged
prescription. The Respondent recounted a recent situation where he did not so
report a forged prescription
after being informed that it had been forged. He
said he did not dispense it and left it to the doctor to deal with it. The
considers that this is evidence that the Respondent continues to have
a lack of understanding of his unique professional responsibilities
obligations under the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation
The Respondent said that he did not believe he was dispensing the medication
to a male. He said:
It was for the doctor overseas to prescribe it to the villager, female
In submissions, counsel for the Complainant:
repeated the submissions in relation to
the issue of improper or unethical conduct that he had made in the earlier
hearings of Sawan
and Metlege. The Committee had regard to those
submissions;
indicated that irrespective of the fact
that the Respondent may have believed the medication was to end up with an
appropriate person
overseas, the dispensing of it to a male by the name of Mr
Hughes made out in the name of D Hughes was enough to make out Particular
which was that he supplied a restricted substance in a quantity and for a
purpose that did not accord with recognised therapeutic
indicated the same submission is made in
respect of Particular Three;
indicated that the enquiry made by the
Respondent of Dr Weatherlake was not adequate enquiry and that the Respondent
had more experience
than Mr Metlege and that a fine was appropriate as a
indicated that the Respondent fell into a
different category than Sawan and Metlege in that it appeared on the evidence,
Respondent complied with the suggestions made by Mr Mahoney, the peer
indicated that the Complainant was not
seeking the imposition of conditions upon the Respondent.
Counsel for the Respondent provided the members with written submissions and
in speaking to those submissions he added:
his client concedes professional
misconduct in that his behaviour demonstrated a lack of adequate judgment or
his client’s case should be
distinguished from the matters of Sawan and Metlege in that his client said the
printout accurately
recorded his dispensing to Mr Hughes;
his client did attempt to contact Dr
his client had no suspicion that the
drugs were to be misused;
his client never thought the medication
was going to a man, but that he thought it was going to
his client was also a
in relation to the failure of his client
to make adequate enquiry he relied upon his earlier submissions in Sawan and
Metlege that
even if he had made the enquiry of Dr W he may not have been told
that Dr W did not impress as a witness of
Mr Mullan did not suspect forgery
initially and did not attempt to verify the prescriptions;
his client was at a cultural
disadvantage to Mr Mullan;
his client is contrite and annoyed that
he was misled by the perpetrator;
Mr Mahoney’s suggested protective
orders earlier on had dealt with the accumulation of CPE
Mr Mahoney thought very highly of the
Respondent’s standard of practice and did not feel he needed
conditions;
had his client acted as he should have
he would have refused to dispense;
his client did not dispense without a
prescription;
his client has made very good progress
in the last five years;
his client concedes a reprimand would be
appropriate;
the protection of the public requires
nothing past a reprimand;
his client is held in high regard in the
community and by the profession and that he relied upon testimonials tendered in
this regard.
The Committee accepts that the Respondent is contrite and is apologetic to
the profession, the Board and the community generally.
The Committee
acknowledges that the Respondent did not dispute the print out annexed to the
complaint as did Mr Sawan and Mr Metlege.
The Committee finds that the
Respondent did not try to contact Dr W after the first attempt as indeed he
should have. The Committee
finds that the Respondent was not suspicious of
misuse and that he too, like the others was a victim of Mr Hughes. The Committee
accepts that the Respondent is highly regarded in the community and the
profession and that he has made considerable progress since
the period of the
However, the Committee finds that the breaches took place over a significant
period of time and are objectively very serious. The
Committee finds that the
Respondent has failed to make any adequate enquiry of Dr W and that in failing
to make any enquiry of a
male presenting a prescription, made out in his name
for the oral contraceptive pill, the Respondent has made a grave error of
and has acted improperly. The Committee takes the view that the
Respondent should have immediately recognised the inappropriateness
prescription and taken more action to determine the authenticity of the
prescription. The Respondent was a relatively experienced
pharmacist at the time
of the breaches. He was working long hours in his new business. Notwithstanding
the fact that the Respondent
has carried out substantial rehabilitation since
his visit by the peer reviewer the Committee is not satisfied that this is a
in which no conditions should be imposed. The Committee is not satisfied
that a fine is appropriate in all of the circumstances.
Having considered the totality of the evidence, including the admissions of
the Respondent and the objective seriousness of the breaches,
the Board is
comfortably satisfied on the balance of probabilities"
Bannister v
(1993) 30NSWLR699) that all the particulars of the complaint have
been proved to its reasonable satisfaction and that the conduct
constitutes
professional misconduct, in that the Board finds that the Respondent has engaged
Conduct that demonstrates a lack of
adequate judgment and care in the practice of pharmacy and ;
Other improper conduct related to the
practice of pharmacy.
This is not a punitive jurisdiction, it is a protective one. The Board is
concerned to protect the public, to deter other pharmacists
from committing
similar breaches and to engender public confidence in the profession. The Board
does not consider that the imposition
of a fine in this case is appropriate. The
Board finds that conditions in respect of continuing professional education are
appropriate
and that a significant part of that education should be carried out
in contact with other members of his profession.
Accordingly, the Board makes the following orders pursuant to
Pharmacy Act
That Tuong (Thomas) Ho is
reprimanded;
That Tuong (Thomas) Ho is required to
complete, in each of the years 2006, 2007 and 2008 at least 30 hours of
continuing professional
education (CPE), of which at least 15 hours of each year
is to be in lecture, seminar, workshop or other contact activity. At the
conclusion of each year the Respondent is to submit to the Pharmacy Board a
report of the CPE he has completed during that year.
That Tuong (Thomas) Ho is required to
present, within three months of the date of these Orders, to the satisfaction of
pharmacists nominated by the Pharmacy Board, a one hour tutorial on
the legal and professional responsibilities of a pharmacist in
Prescription Only medications, including the detection and subsequent handling
of forged prescriptions, with specific
reference to procedures in place in his
pharmacies to ensure that these responsibilities are met at all
The costs of complying with these Orders are to be met by the pharmacist.
The effective date of these Orders will be one month from the date on which
Tuong Ho is notified by registered post at his address
as it appears on the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (313 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter