URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSIRADRS/2020/248.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AQV v QBE (Claims Assessment) [2020] NSWSIRADRS 248 (23 November 2020)
v QBE (Claims Assessment)
[2020] NSWSIRADRS 248
NSW DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE (NSWDRS)
Miscellaneous Claims Assessment
Claimant was not wholly at fault for causing the accident - Claimant was
mostly at fault for causing the accident – motorcycle
with a pillion
passenger collision with a parked vehicle- dashcam footage – hazard lights
activated – contributory negligence
– careless behaviour –
relative culpability – legal costs
Legislation Cited
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
Schedule 1(3), Schedule
Civil Liability Act
Cases Cited
Blacktown City Council v Hocking
[2008] NSWCA 144
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
Alford v Magee
[1952] HCA 3
(1952) 85 CLR 437
Ayre v Sawn
March v Stramere Pty Limited
[1991] HCA 12
[1991] 171 CLR 506
Braud v Henning
[1988] HCA 36
Pennington v Norris
[1956] HCA 26
(1956) 96 CLR 10
Podrebersek v Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
AAI Limited t/as GIO v Moon
[2020] NSWSC 714
AQV – Claimant
QBE – Insurer
This decision has been edited to remove all Unique Personal
Identification including the name of the Claimant
MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS ASSESSMENT CERTIFICATE
Issued in accordance with
section 7.36(5)
Accident Injuries Act
and clause 7.441 of the
Motor Accident
Determination of a matter declared under Schedule 2(3) of
the Act to be a miscellaneous claims assessment matter
QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited
Date of Accident
28 April 2019
DRS Reference
DRS Claims Assessor
Date of Decision
23 November 2020
Method of Assessment
Assessment undertaken on the papers
Teleconferences
21 October 2020 at 10.00am
11 November 2020 at 1.00pm
Legal Representative for Claimant
Ms Alicia and Mr David Marocchi of Paramount Lawyers
Legal Representative for Insurer
Ms Michelle Landers of Moray & Agnew Lawyers
For the purposes
sections 3.11
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Claimant was not wholly at fault for causing the accident.
For the purposes
sections 3.11
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Claimant was mostly at fault for causing the accident.
Claimant’s costs are assessed at $3,652 inclusive of GST.
DRS Claims Assessor
Dispute Resolution Services
REASONS FOR DECISION – MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS
Issued in accordance with
section 7.36(4)
Accident Injuries Act 2017
28 April 2019, AQV was riding his motorcycle on the Western Distributor on the
approach to the Anzac Bridge coming up to the International
Convention Centre on
his left and the Goldsborough Mort building up ahead and to his right. AQV was
accompanied by his pillion passenger.
was in the middle of three lanes with the first and second lanes merging and he
was travelling behind an SUV type vehicle which
was in the third lane. As he
rounded a bend the SUV in front of him merged into his lane and he moved to
overtake it. At that time,
he was confronted by a car parked in the right-hand
lane and a collision occurred between his motorcycle and the rear passenger side
of the parked vehicle.
car that was parked was driven by LC.
was injured and made a claim under
Motor Accident Injuries
. He made his claim against QBE the third-party insurer of
LC’s vehicle. QBE accepted liability for the claim and paid statutory
benefits to AQV for the first 26 weeks after the accident.
a letter dated 30 September 2020, QBE has denied liability and has ceased paying
any statutory benefits to AQV in accordance with
basis that AQV was wholly at fault for causing his accident. AQV sought an
internal review of that decision and in a decision
dated 25 November 2019 QBE
affirmed their original decision maintaining its view that AQV was wholly at
has referred the matter to DRS for a determination as to whether his statutory
benefits will continue beyond the first 26 weeks
after the accident and that
dispute has been referred to me.
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
claim for statutory benefits is made under
Motor Accident
Injuries Act
Section 3.1
of the Act provides as
(1) If the death of or injury to a person results from a
motor accident in this State, statutory benefits are payable in respect of
death or injury as provided by this Part.
(2) Statutory benefits are payable (except as otherwise provided by this
(a) whether or not the motor accident was caused by the fault of the
owner or driver of a motor vehicle in the use or operation of
the vehicle,
(b) even if the motor accident was caused by the fault of the person to
whom the statutory benefits are payable.
benefits are payable by the ‘relevant insurer’ in accordance with
which provides as follows:
(1) The statutory benefits
payable under this Part are payable by the relevant insurer.
(2) The relevant insurer is (subject to this section and
section 3.3):
(a) if the motor accident concerned involved only 1 motor vehicle with motor
accident insurance cover—the insurer of the motor
vehicle, or
(b) if the motor accident concerned involved more than 1 motor
vehicle—the insurer of the at-fault motor vehicle, or
(c) in any other case—the Nominal Defendant.
(4) The insurer of the at-fault motor vehicle is the insurer who
provides motor accident insurance cover to:
(a) the owner or driver of the motor vehicle whose fault in the use or
operation of the vehicle caused the death or injury in respect
of which the
statutory benefits are payable, or
(b) if there is more than one such motor vehicle—the owner or driver of
the motor vehicle who was most at fault.
payments of statutory income support benefits may cease 26 weeks after the
accident in accordance with
section 3.11
as set out below.
injured person is not entitled to weekly payments of statutory benefits under
this Division for treatment and care expenses
incurred more than 26 weeks after
the motor accident concerned if:
(a) the motor accident was caused wholly or mostly by the fault
of the person ..., or
(b) the person’s only injuries resulting from the motor
accident were minor injuries.
(2) A motor accident was caused mostly by the fault of a person if the
contributory negligence of the person in relation to the
motor accident (as
referred to in
section 3.38)
was greater than 61%.
is a similar provision with respect to the cessation of treatment and care
benefits at
PRELIMINARY ISSUE – THE RELEVANT INSURER
section 6.12
provides that a statutory benefits claim is made by
notifying the ‘relevant insurer’ under
statutory benefits are paid by the ‘relevant insurer’. Under
the relevant insurer in a two car-collision is the at
fault motor vehicle or the most at fault vehicle.
has made a claim against LC’s Insurer (QBE) on the basis that it is the at
fault motor vehicle or the most at fault vehicle
and at no stage has QBE
disputed that it is not the relevant insurer and, as I noted in paragraph 4
above, QBE has been paying AQV
his statutory benefits on that basis.
pillion passenger (SV) who is also represented by Paramount Lawyers has made a
claim arising out of this accident however
I am advised that her claim was made,
presumably on the advice of her lawyers, against AQV’s insurer (NRMA) and
therefore it
would appear that SV is alleging AQV is the at fault or most at
fault driver and not LC. I was also advised that NRMA has accepted
liability for
SV’s claim and NRMA is paying her statutory benefits.
CTP insurers of both drivers appear to be accepting that they are both the at
fault or most at fault driver because they are both
accepting they are the
‘relevant insurer’ and both are paying statutory benefits. It is
trite to say, but in a two-car
collision, only one vehicle can be the most at
fault vehicle unless of course they are equally at fault but
section 3.2
silent in respect of that situation.
will not deal further with this issue and will not take any implied admission of
fault by QBE into account as neither party has
addressed this matter in their
submissions despite being alerted to it in my first preliminary conference
ISSUES IN DISPUTE
parties have put before me dashcam footage of this accident from a car
travelling behind AQV’s motor cycle.
parties were asked to consider the film and attempt to agree on:
speed limit applicable to the stretch of the Western distributor where the
accident occurred – agreed at 60kmph.
approximate speed at which the Claimant was travelling before the collision
(with reference to the speed recorded on the film)
– this was not agreed
although the parties did agree that the dash cam footage suggests the vehicle
following the Claimant
(with the dashcam device) was travelling at between 54
the SUV had its indicators activated as it moved from the third lane into the
second lane – this was agreed.
is agreed that LC had her hazard lights activated at the time of the
its original liability notice and the internal review decision, QBE alleges AQV
is wholly at fault for causing the accident. In
its submissions lodged with the
reply, QBE asserts AQV is either wholly or mostly at fault.
says there he is not at all at fault for causing this accident.
discussed the matter with the parties at two teleconferences, I am of the view
that I must determine the following matters:
AQV wholly at fault – in that regard I must consider whether anyone was
negligent or breached their duty of care to AQV;
AQV mostly at fault which in turn requires me to decide:
AQV contribute to the cause of the accident?
so, what is the degree of his contribution?
REVIEW OF THE EVIDENCE
Emergency Personnel
Police report [A4] was created by Xialan Con Fang of Sydney Police Command on 5
September 2019. The report notes the accident
occurred on 28 April 2019 at
between 3.45 and 3.46pm and that the police received a report of the accident at
report notes that ‘the motor cycle ... was travelling ... at high
speed’ when it tried to overtake the broken-down
car driven by LC.
speed limit was said to be 60 kms per hour and that AQV was riding at 40 kms per
was recorded as having 11 years’ experience with driving and her pre-crash
speed was said to be 50 kms per hour (which is
of course quite wrong as it is
agreed she was parked and not moving at the time).
Apparently,
AQV was charged with an offence and his statement suggests the charge was
negligent driving. In the DRS file is a letter
from the Claimant’s
solicitors to the Insurer dated 5 February 2020 [A5] advising that the charges
or the proceedings against
AQV had been withdrawn.
Ambulance report [R4] records a call received at 3.43pm and that an ambulance
reached the scene 10 minutes later at 3.53pm.
case description is of a ‘motor cycle MVA into stationary car’ and
that the male patient was the rider of a ‘scooter’
kmph who was ejected from his scooter and was ‘amnesic to
Claim form and Claimant’s statement
says in the claim form [A2] that as he was approaching the Anzac Bridge he was
presented by a stationary vehicle which caused
him to collide with it.
Claim form also notes the Claimant had a right scapula fracture, a right knee
laceration as well as injuries to his neck, back,
right shoulder, left shoulder,
left hand, left thumb, left hip, left heel and anxiety.
are medical records and taxation returns attached to the Claimant’s
application which do not appear to be relevant to
the matters I have to
his statement dated 4 November 2020, AQV says he has had a license for 40 years
and rides about 5,000kms per year and drives about
10,000kms per year [7].
says he has had a speeding ticket and was charged with negligent driving but it
appears he was not convicted [9].
the day of the accident he had been with SV to Balmoral Beach and they were
heading home [17]. He says he is familiar with the
accident location [20].
says he was travelling at 40kmph – 50kmph as the traffic was heavy [21].
He was heading to the right intending to get onto
the Anzac Bridge, he put his
right hand indicator on and checked his rear vision mirror [24].
he was changing lanes he says the 4WD in front of him indicated and changed into
the right lane and he followed [25] but the 4WD
suddenly and quite aggressively
changed back into the middle lane [26] and he then saw the stationary vehicle
notes that LC asked him for his license, he asked why she was stopped and she
replied that she had run out of petrol [33]. Police
and ambulance arrived a
short time later [34].
could not see the stationary vehicle because of the curve of the road and the
presence of the 4WD [35].
Insurer decision making and evidence
30 September 2019, QBE advised the Claimant [R3] that he was wholly at fault
because he ‘failed to keep a safe speed and
distance between your vehicle
and our insured vehicle’. QBE relied upon the police report only to make
that decision.
25 November 2019, QBE wrote again to the Claimant [A3], after conducting its
internal review finding the Claimant wholly at fault.
By this time QBE had the
ambulance report and the Dashcam footage and listed these as well as the claim
form, the QBE liability decision
and the police report. QBE say that their
driver said she had broken down suddenly, put on her hazard lights and waited
for 20 minutes
before the collision. QBE said that AQV was wholly at fault
because he failed to keep a proper lookout, failed to maintain a safe
and failed to take care for his own safety. In particular QBE said he had a duty
to allow enough time to notice and react
to the broken-down vehicle.
Insurer relies on a report from Verifact dated 3 October 2019 [R6] which
includes a statement from LC dated 27 September 2019.
has had her license suspended one because of unpaid fines [7] but she has been
driving for 10 years [5].
vehicle she was in (a blue lexus) was owned and registered in her
brother-in-law’s father’s name [10].
incident occurred at 3.30pm, the weather was fine and dry and she had two
friends with her in the car [20], [24] and [27].
[30] she says the car was in good working order.
[34] she says ‘I was in lane 2 of 2 and all of a sudden, I have come to a
stop suddenly, and suspected that I have run out
of petrol, in the outside lane
... The fuel indicator light showed low.’
put on her indicators [35] and called her husband and then her brother in law
‘to ask what to do’ [36].
had been stopped for about 20 minutes [37].
the ambulance and police had been, her brother in law arrived changed the tyre
and he ‘bought some petrol with him’.
The dashcam footage
dashcam footage is 7 seconds long but it is good quality and shows how this
accident happened. I am however mindful of the caution
expressed by appellate
courts such as in
Blacktown City Council v Hocking
[2008] NSWCA 144
how photographs are to be used in the absence of expert evidence. I have been
able to slow the footage down and to stop the
footage which has enabled me to
carefully consider it.
are four still shots from the film.
first taken about 2 seconds into the film shows the Claimant on the left of the
shot in lane 2. The SUV/4WD in the right lane
is commencing its move into lane 2
and ahead of it is LC’s stationary vehicle. The vehicle with the dashcam
is in lane 3 behind
second shot is at about 3 seconds into the footage and the car with the dashcam
is moving or has moved into late 2. The SUV/4WD
is partly in the second lane but
still mainly in the third lane. The Claimant’s motorbike appears closer to
the lane markings
between lane 2 and 3 in this shot.
third shot below is close to 4 seconds into the footage. The SUV/4WD is almost
fully into the second lane and the Claimant is
clearly moving from lane 2 into
lane 3 and LC’s vehicle is visible.
fourth shot is just before impact which occurs 5 seconds into the
SUBMISSIONS
Claimant’s submissions
Claimant provided brief submissions with his application [A1] asserting that
liability should be accepted in full.
Claimant says the footage shows the Claimant riding safely within the speed
limit wearing protective gear. Further the Claimant
says he was riding a safe
distance behind a large SUV which obstructed AQV’s vision on a curve or
bend on a busy Sydney motorway.
Claimant says the accident established the ‘total negligence of LC’
because a prudent road user should not have driven
their vehicle and run out of
petrol particularly bearing in mind the time of day.
Claimant’s updated submissions (undated and unsigned but received by me on
18 November 2020) assert again that there should
be no contributory negligence
Claimant asserts the Insurer’s submissions that the Claimant moved from
lane 2 into lane 3 without ensuring it was safe
is lay evidence without expert
evidence [2] and that in the case of
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
avoid making findings about time, space, speed and distance without expert
evidence [3] and that in the absence of expert
evidence common sense must
prevails [4];
Claimant indicated before merging and was driving within the speed limit [5] and
that the video suggests AQV was travelling at
less than 60 kmph [6];
vehicle behind the Claimant had the opportunity to see the stationary vehicle
because of the curvature of the road [8];
LC been stopped in traffic the Claimant would have been able to see this and the
collision would not have occurred [9];
was not foreseeable that LC would drive along a busy motorway with an empty
petrol tank and stop in an overtaking lane [10];
is no evidence of an alternate cause of the breakdown of LC’s car [11] and
it is apparent it broke down due to insufficient
petrol [18 – 21];
had a duty to move her vehicle as soon as possible however did not call the
police or roadside assistance but called her husband
and brother-in-law
would have had notice before running out of petrol (the low petrol gauge)
Claimant relies on
Alford v Magee
[1952] HCA 3
(1952) 85 CLR 437
where it is
apparently reported that contributory negligence ‘will seldom be
appropriate in cases of collision’ between
vehicles. This was a Victorian
case involving a direction made to a jury in circumstances where the law at the
time was that a finding
of contributory negligence defeated a claim completely.
I do not find that case of any assistance;
I find contributory negligence the Claimant says it should be no more than 10%
[24] and that when considering the relative culpability
of the two parties LC
allowed her fuel supply to run close to employ on a multi-lane road approaching
the Anzac Bridge and that a
reasonable person would have filled up their car and
her responsibility was greater [27-28];
Ayre and Swan,
LC’s indiscriminate disregard for her own safety
and those around her by failing to fill up her petrol take significantly
contributed
to the accident.
Insurer’s submissions
Insurer’s first submissions[R1] argue:
insured was stationary for about 20 minutes and that for 20 minutes other
vehicles had been able to navigate and avoid colliding
with it [4];
dash cam footage shows the 4WD merge from lane 3 into lane 2 to avoid the
insured vehicle and the Claimant, without waiting for
the insured to complete
its merger back from lane 3 to lane 2 starts moving into lane 3 without ensuring
it was safe to do so [5];
Claimant went ‘around the outside’ of the 4WD without checking [8]
and breached the over-taking road rules [11];
Claimant failed to indicate [9];
Claimant failed to keep a sufficient distance behind the 4WD and the stationary
vehicle in order to avoid a collision breaching
the road rules [10];
driver must keep a proper lookout and take reasonable care for their own safety
and the safety of his pillion passenger [14];
Ayre v Sawn
is relevant (which resulted in a finding of 80%
contributory negligence) where Ms Ayre had slowed down before turning across two
lanes of traffic after Mr Smith’s vehicle had passed but had failed to
appreciate the presence of the Claimant on his motorcycle
who had overtaken Mr
Smith’s car, increased his speed (to 80 or 100 kms);
Claimant bears the greater level of responsibility because the insured vehicle
had been stationary for some time; and
outcome of the police matter bears no relevance to the matters I have to decide
and should be ignored.
3 November I asked the Insurer to make contact with its insured to clarify
whether any other steps had been taken to move her vehicle
other than ringing
her husband and brother-in-law. For example, I wanted to know whether she had
rung the police or a roadside assistance
service. The Insurer advised me in its
second submissions that it had not been able to contact LC.
Insurer’s second set of submissions dated 10 November 2020 confirms that
the Insurer alleges the Claimant is wholly at fault
or in the alternative mostly
at fault and says:
insured did not breach a duty of care to the Claimant and her actions or
inactions did not cause the accident [6];
Claimant merged from lane 2 to lane 3 without ensuring it was safe to do so. If
he had waited for the 4WD to move completely into
lane 3 he would have seen the
presence of the stationary insured vehicle [8];
Insurer says it was unclear why LC’s car broke down [10] and that because
she stopped suddenly, the vehicle came to an involuntarily
sop due to a
mechanical fault [11];
circumstances of the accident differ from those in
March v Stramere Pty
[1991] HCA 12
[1991] 171 CLR 506
[12] because the truck parked in the middle of a
dark road had been voluntarily parked and that this had ‘created a
of danger’ and a foreseeable risk and there was no legitimate
reason for the poorly lit truck for being there [14 - 18];
was legitimately parked because she had broken down without prior warning
extent of LC’s duty of care to fellow road users was, in circumstances
where she had come to rest ‘through no fault
of her own’ was to make
the position of the vehicle known and to ‘seek to have her vehicle removed
from the roadway as
soon as possible’ [20];
hazard lights were on and there was nothing more she could have done to alert
other vehicles to the presence of her vehicle
on the road [21];
20 minutes other vehicles managed to avoid colliding with the Insured [22] which
suggests there was no breach of duty of care;
Claimant failed to keep a proper lookout before merging from lane 2 into lane 3
and did not see the insured vehicle until it was
too late and if the Insured had
been at the tail end of a traffic jam or was stopped because of something on the
roadway the accident
would still have occurred [25].
sole cause of the Claimant’s accident as a matter of ordinary common sense
was the Claimant’s negligence and not the
insured’s driver’s
breach of duty of care [26];
relation to the suggestion that LC could have called the police or roadside
assistance there is no evidence to suggest when they
would have got to LC and no
evidence that a different outcome would have occurred had they arrived earlier
terms of ‘mostly at fault’ the Insurer says the Claimant was
according to the police report ‘travelling at high
is supported by the dashcam footage which shows the Claimant’s motor cycle
pulling away from the vehicle with the dash
cam which recorded that vehicle as
travelling between 54 and 59 kmph [32];
Claimant’s statement is incorrect in suggesting he was travelling at 40
– 50 kms because at no stage does the imprint
on the dash-cam footage
suggest the following vehicle was travelling below 50kmph [33];
Claimant’s statement at [25] that as the 4WD changed into the right lane
he followed behind at a safe distance [34] is incorrect
because the 4WD was
moving from lane 3 into lane 2 when the Claimant was moving from lane 2 into
lane 3 [36];
Claimant’s statement is also inconsistent when describing the movement of
the 4WD as aggressive [37 – 39];
Claimant had short notice of the presence of LC’s vehicle because he was
not keeping a proper lookout and was travelling
too close behind the 4WD to give
himself the opportunity of identifying potential hazards. [42];
the claimant waited for the 4WD to complete its merger manoeuvre the accident
would not have occurred [43-44 and 48];
Insurer relies on the High Court decision of
Braud v Henning
which it was said that subject to the particular circumstances of an
individual case ‘the driver of the following vehicle which
collides with
the vehicle which is ahead of it is usually held primarily liability for the
consequences of the collision’.
In that case the vehicle in front had
stopped suddenly which was significant in terms of causation’
cause of this collision was not the breakdown of the Insured vehicle but the
Claimant’s merging manoeuvre when it was unsafe
to do so [54-58]
Claimant is mostly at fault and his contributory negligence should be assessed
at 70 – 80%.
EVALUATION OF THE EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS
Reliability of the evidence of AQV and LC
statement of AQV about the circumstances of the accident is not in my view
reliable. Firstly, because the ambulance notes he was
‘amnesic of
events’ and secondly because I have the benefit of the footage.
statement of LC concerns me because it was completed ‘with the
assistance’ of an interpreter and does not bear the
usual interpreter
attestation clause however that is not, in the informal setting of DRS and in
the absence of any challenge by the
Claimant, fatal to its
reliability.
Why was LC stationary?
am satisfied that the cause of LC being stationary on the approach to the Anzac
bridge was because she ran out of petrol. I make
this finding based on the
Claimant’s unchallenged report of what she said to him immediately after
the accident, LC’s
own statement in which she thought she had run out of
petrol, her indicator was low and her statement that her brother-in-law arrived
after the accident with petrol. Why would her brother-in-law turn up with petrol
if there was a mechanical failure?
is no dispute that LC was stationary for at least 20 minutes. Her statement says
she rang her husband and then her brother-in-law.
Her statement is silent as to
any other attempts she made to get help and the wording of her statement was
that she rang her husband
and brother-in-law to ask them what she should do. In
the light of that evidence the absence of any mention of her calling anyone
satisfies me that she did not make any other calls.
Was the Claimant speeding?
note the parties agree that the driver of the vehicle with the dashcam footage
was driving at 54 – 59 kms per hour because
of the speed imprint on the
police report which suggests the Claimant was travelling at ‘high
speed’ is a record of police officers who attended
after the event and
were not there at the moment of impact and it is therefore unreliable in that
am not satisfied that the Claimant was speeding. I make this finding based on my
careful viewing of the film. The Claimant was closer
to the dashcam vehicle at
the commencement of the film and does appear to be drawing away from that
vehicle however until just before
impact the speed of the dashcam vehicle was
between 54 and 57 kmph and it was not until the Claimant was in the third lane
and appears
to have seen the stationary vehicle that the speed of the dashcam
vehicle moves to 59kms per hour. In the absence of expert evidence,
prepared to make a finding as to what precise speed the Claimant was travelling.
I reject the Claimant’s evidence
that he was travelling at 40 –
50kms per hour. If he was, the dashcam vehicle would have been closing in on him
as it was travelling
at 54 – 59 kms per hour for the duration of the
What did the parties do?
parties have agreed LC had her hazard lights on. There is no suggestion she did
anything else such as removing any safety / hazard
triangle from the boot of her
car, if she had one, and placing it on the road behind her car.
is no evidence that LC made any other calls to the police, a tow truck or a
roadside assistance service. I note that according
to the dashcam the accident
occurred at about 3.41/42pm and that ambulance personnel arrived 11-12 minutes
later at 3.43pm and according
to the police documentation, the police received a
report, 13-14 minutes later. This suggests to me that if LC had rung 000 when
she first broke down, it is likely that the police would have been there within
20 minutes and the police would be more visible (with
flashing lights) or could
otherwise have managed the traffic to alert motorists to the presence of
LC’s vehicle.
am satisfied from my viewing of the film that the Claimant indicated before
moving into the third lane and of course the parties
agree that the SUV
indicated before moving from the third lane into the second lane. They appear to
have indicated at roughly the
reject the Insurer’s submission that the Claimant went around the SUV. At
no stage does the dashcam show AQV’s motor
bike in front of the SUV.
reject the Claimant’s evidence that the SUV moved aggressively into the
second lane because the film shows the SUV driver
indicated as he moved to the
left although I do accept the submissions based on a reasonable viewing of the
footage there was a relatively
sudden move to the left.
accept the Insurer’s submission and find that the film suggests the
Claimant did not slow down as the SUV moved into his path
but continued on,
moving from the second towards the third lane.
am also satisfied on my viewing of the film that the Claimant commenced his move
towards the third lane before the SUV was fully
within the second lane.
parties agree that LC’s vehicle was out of AQV’s line of sight
because of the curvature of the road and the presence
of the SUV in front of
MY CONSIDERATION OF THE ISSUES
Is the Claimant wholly at fault?
Civil Liability Act
provides that whether a defendant
owes a duty to a plaintiff, depends on whether:
risk was foreseeable
risk was not insignificant
reasonable person, in the person's position would have taken those
precautions
made the findings above in relation to LC running out of petrol, I am not
satisfied AQV was wholly at fault. Running out of
petrol while driving on what
the parties agree is a busy Sydney road (the approach from the Harbour to the
Anzac Bridge) when LC
admits her warning light was on, is careless behaviour
that puts other road users at risk. Ringing her husband and his family would
have been, in my view, a reasonable response if she had run out of petrol on a
suburban road. In my view noting the location of where
she broke down, in my
view a reasonable person in her position would have rung the police to alert
them to her presence on a very
busy roadway. Not making further calls and
allowing 20 minutes to elapse from the breakdown was, in my view, also
unreasonable.
Considering
March v Stramere
[1991] HCA 12
[1991] 171 CLR 506
, LC did not have a legitimate reason
for being stationary in lane three for a period of 20 minutes and she was there
because of her
failure to ensure her car had sufficient petrol in the tank. Her
car presented a situation of danger and a foreseeable risk to other
Is the Claimant partly responsible?
Civil Liability Act
provides that the standard to be applied in
determining the issue of contributory negligence is that of a reasonable person
position of the Claimant on the basis of what he or she knew or ought to
have known at the time.
my view the Claimant is guilty of contributory negligence. A driver must drive
to the conditions and must be able to stop to avoid
a rear end collision in
circumstances other than those in the case of
Braud v Henning
where the driver is faced with a sudden emergency. While it may not be a
regular occurrence that a car would run out of petrol on
the approach to the
Anzac Bridge, it is foreseeable that there may be a broken-down vehicle, a line
of traffic or some other hazard
on the road and that care should be taken before
moving from one lane into another.
accept the Insurer’s submissions that the Claimant did not follow the SUV
into the third lane. I accept the Insurer’s
submission that the Claimant
commenced his move into the third lane before the SUV had moved into the second
lane and the Claimant
therefore moved when he did not have a clear view of what
was, if anything, in the third lane. A reasonable person in the position
being in a vulnerable position on a motorbike would have slowed down as the SUV
moved into his lane and waited until he had
a clear view of what, if anything
was in lane 3. Had he done so, he would have seen LC’s vehicle and this
accident would not
have occurred.
What is the degree of the Claimant’s contributory
negligence?
leading authorities on the assessment of contributory negligence
Pennington v Norris
[1956] HCA 26
(1956) 96 CLR 10
Podrebersek v Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
59 ALR 529.
Podrebersek
, above, at [10] the court
The making of an apportionment as between a plaintiff and a
defendant of their respective shares in the responsibility for the damage
involves a comparison both of culpability, ie of the degree of departure from
the standard of care of the reasonable man ... of the
relative importance of the
acts of the parties in causing the damage ... It is the whole conduct of
each negligent party in relation
to the circumstances of the accident which must
be subjected to comparative examination. The significance of the various
involved in such an examination will vary from case to case; for
example, the circumstances of some cases may be such that a comparison
relative importance of the acts of the parties in causing the damage will be of
little, if any, importance.
parties agree that the approach to be taken by me is to consider the relative
culpability of LC and AQV.
is driving a car and has, through her carelessness, stopped in a busy place. She
has activated her hazard lights. She has made
a call although she has not made a
call to the authorities.
Claimant on the other hand has ridden his motor cycle changing lanes from the
second lane to the third before the vehicle in front
had fully merged from the
third lane into the second. He admits in his statement that his view of what was
ahead and to the right
was blocked by the presence of the SUV/4WD. And he says
in his statement the SUV moved ‘suddenly’ and
‘aggressively’
into his lane. That behaviour should have alerted him
to be aware and on the lookout. The Claimant has therefore changed lanes without
a clear view of what was in the lane he was moving into and in my view, he must
bear the lion’s share of the blame for causing
this accident.
am guided by the apportionment of liability in
March v Stramere
responsibility to the dangerously parked vehicle and 75% to the speeding drunk
driver). While AQV was not speeding or inebriated,
LC’s vehicle was not as
dangerously parked (to the side of the road not in the middle of it). In my view
when considering the
relative culpability of LC and AQV, the Claimant’s
responsibility for causing this accident should be assessed at 70%.
Is AQV wholly at fault?
found the degree of AQV’s contributory negligence is 70% it follows by
applying the definition contained within sections
3.11(2) and 3.28(2) of the Act
that he is mostly at fault and that his is not entitled to statutory benefits
beyond the first 26
weeks after the accident.
COSTS AND DISBURSEMENTS
AAI Limited t/as GIO v Moon
[2020] NSWSC 714
Justice Robertson found that
in miscellaneous claims assessment statutory benefits disputes, costs do not
follow the event. Therefore,
even though AQV has not been successful in the
matter before me, he is entitled to his costs.
Claimant’s submissions claim ‘full scale of costs to be award in the
total amount’ but no further details are
Insurer’s submissions are silent as to costs.
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation
provides at Schedule 1(3) for 16
monetary units as the maximum costs up to a maximum of 60 monetary units per
claim for a ‘dispute
was referred to me were two disputes, a dispute pursuant to section 3.11 (about
weekly income benefits) and a dispute pursuant
to section 3.28 (about treatment
and care benefits). While the substance of the dispute is the same (whether the
Claimant was wholly
or mostly at fault), Schedule 2(3) of the Act and Schedule
1(3) of the Regulation identifies these disputes and the sections
separately.
my view, AQV is therefore entitled to the cost of two disputes that
dispute about whether, for the purposes of s 3.11 his weekly payments should
have ceased and
dispute about whether, for the purposes of s 3.28 his treatment and care
benefits should have ceased.
note that the application to DRS was made by the Claimant’s solicitors and
was supported by documentation and eventually two
sets of submissions. The
Insurer lodged a reply and two teleconferences were held, the first of which was
in excess of 30 minutes.
Noting the amount of work involved in those tasks, I am
of the view AQV’s solicitors are entitled to the maximum regulated
the regulated fee for each of those disputes is currently 16 monetary units
which is the equivalent of the sum of $1,660
I will therefore allow AQV costs in
the sum of $3,320.00 plus GST.
am satisfied that in respect of the cause of the motor accident on 28 April
2019, AQV was not wholly at fault but was mostly at
avoid all doubt, in accordance with s 8.3(4) I permit QBE to pay its solicitors
for the reasonable and necessary costs associated
with the liability disputes
that have arisen in the statutory benefits claim and that were before for
assessment.
accordance with s 8.3(4) and s 8.10(3) I permit AQV to recover from QBE the
reasonable and necessary costs associated with the
statutory benefits claim as
assessed by me at $3,320.00 plus GST of $332.00.
Assessor Cassidy
Dispute Resolution Services
23 November 2020
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter