URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMRP/2024/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance v Zahoor [2024] NSWPICMRP 1; (22 March 2024)
DETERMINATION OF MERIT REVIEW
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance v Zahoor
NSWPICMRP 1
Sohail Zahoor
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA
MERIT REVIEW PANEL MEMBERS:
Elizabeth Medland
Stephen Boyd-Boland
Katherine Ruschen
DATE OF DECISION:
22 March 2024
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; review of a
Merit Review decision about whether the insurer is entitled to give a direction
to the claimant under
section 6.26
; consideration of whether the claimant had
provided particulars pursuant to
section 6.25
; whether the obligation to provide
particulars pursuant to
section 6.25
is a positive obligation upon the claimant;
whether “evidence” constitutes “particulars”;
the claimant had not provided particulars in discharge of the
positive obligation pursuant to
section 6.25
; the insurer entitled to issue a
direction pursuant to
section 6.26
; the Merit Review decision is revoked.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
Issued under
Motor Accident Injuries
The reviewable decision is about whether the insurer is entitled to give a
direction to the claimant under s 6.26 of the
Motor Accident Injuries Act
(MAI Act), which is a Merit Review matter under Schedule 2, cl 1(z) of
the MAI Act.
relation to the decision made by a single Merit Reviewer, the Review Panel
revokes the Merit Reviewer’s certificate dated
17 May 2023.
Panel finds that the insurer was entitled to give a direction to the claimant
under s 6.26 of the MAI Act.
amount of the claimant’s costs awarded in this matter is $500 plus GST.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Zahoor (the claimant) suffered injuries caused by a motor accident that occurred
on 30 October 2019. A claim for damages was
lodged on Insurance Australia
Limited t/as NRMA (the insurer) who are the insurer of the vehicle considered to
be at fault.
dispute has arisen in respect of a direction issued by the insurer under
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(MAI Act). The insurer contends
that the claimant is taken to have withdrawn the claim due to a failure to
provide relevant particulars
claimant subsequently lodged an application with the Personal Injury Commission
(Commission) seeking a determination of the dispute.
Merit Reviewer Maurice
Castagnet conducted a Merit Review and issued a certificate and reasons dated 17
May 2023 which certified
that the insurer was not entitled to issue a direction
to the claimant under s 6.26 of the MAI Act.
insurer has lodged an application seeking a review of the Merit Review
certificate of Merit Reviewer Castagnet.
President’s delegate has determined that there is reasonable cause to
suspect the Merit Review determination was incorrect
in a material respect.
Consequently, the review has been referred to this Review Panel (Panel) for
determination.
objects of the MAI Act are set out in s 1.3(2). The MAI Act seeks "the early
resolution of motor accident claims and the quick,
cost-effective and just
resolution of disputes” and “to provide early and ongoing financial
support for persons injured
accidents".
1.3(4) says a decision maker should promote the objects of the MAI Act when
interpreting those provisions.
Section 1.3(5)
provides that the decision-maker must act in a way that promotes the objects of
the MAI Act when exercising an MAI
Act discretion. Part 5 of the PIC Act enables
the Commission to make rules regarding the Commission’s practice and
This includes panel proceedings reviewing Merit Reviewers’ or
Medical Assessors’
3 sets out the objectives of the
Personal Injury Commission Act 2020
PIC Act) and includes ensuring the Commission’s decisions are timely,
fair, consistent and of high quality. It also enables
the Commission to decide
matters justly, quickly, cost-effectively and with as little formality as
4 of the PIC Act echoes ss 1.3(4) and (5) of the MAI Act and requires exercising
the powers and discretions to promote the
42(1) of the PIC Act and the Commission Rules contain the Commission’s
‘guiding principle’. The section
requires the Commission to
facilitate “the just, quick and cost-effective resolution of the real
issues in the proceedings”.
42(2) requires the Panel to give effect to the guiding principle when exercising
any power given to a decision-maker under
the PIC Act or the rules.
to s 7.15(4) of the MAI Act, the Panel may confirm the decision of the single
Merit Reviewer, or set aside the decision and
make a decision in substitution
for the decision the review panel set aside.
Panel met via teleconference on 6 November 2023. It was noted that a Reply to
the insurer’s application had not been received.
Directions were issued
requiring a Reply to be lodged by 4 December 2023.
Panel reconvened via teleconference on 5 December 2023. By such time, the
claimant’s representatives had not lodged a Reply
in accordance with the
previous directions. A request for an extension was received and the Panel
issued further directions dated
7 December 2023 requiring a Reply be lodged
by 11 December 2023 and the insurer provided an opportunity to lodge any
submissions in
response by 15 January 2024.
Submissions
dated 11 December 2023 have been received from the claimant’s
representatives. The insurer lodged submissions in
reply dated 15 January 2024.
LEGISLATION
6.25 of the MAI Act provides as follows:
Duty of claimant
to provide relevant particulars of claim for damages
(1) A claim for damages must provide the insurer of the person against whom
the claim is made with all relevant particulars about
the claim as expeditiously
as possible after the claim is made.
(2) For the purposes of this section,
particulars
(a) the motor accident concerned, and
(b) the injuries sustained by the claimant in the motor accident, and
(c) all disabilities and impairments arising from those injuries, and
(d) any economic losses and other losses that are being claimed as
sufficient to enable the insurer, as far as practicable, to make a proper
assessment of the claimant’s full entitlement to damages.”
6.26 of the MAI Act provides as follows:
“Consequences of
failure to provide relevant particulars of claim for damages
(1) If after a period of 2 years and 6 months since the motor accident
concerned a claimant for damages has failed without reasonable
excuse to provide
the insurer with all relevant particulars about the claim (as required by
section 6.25), the insurer may by a written
direction given to the claimant
within 2 months after the end of that period require the claimant to provide
those particulars.
(2) The insurer’s direction must be given in accordance with the Motor
Accident Guidelines.
(3) If the claimant does not comply with the direction within 3 months after
it is given, the claimant is taken to have withdrawn
(4) The claimant may make an application for reinstatement of the
(a) to the Commission for a claim that is not exempt from assessment under
Division 7.6, or
(b) to a court of competent jurisdiction for a claim that is exempt from
assessment under Division 7.6.
(5) (Repealed)
(6) If the application for reinstatement is made less than 3 years after the
date of the motor accident, the claim is to be reinstated
if the court or
Commission is satisfied that the claimant has a full and satisfactory
explanation for the failure to provide the
required particulars.
(7) If the application for reinstatement is made 3 years or more after the
date of the motor accident, the claim is to be reinstated
if the court or the
Commission is satisfied that—
(a) the claimant has a full and satisfactory explanation for the failure to
provide the required particulars, and
(b) the total damages of all kinds likely to be awarded to the claimant if
the claim succeeds are not less than 25% of the maximum
amount that may be
awarded for non-economic loss under section 4.13 as at the date of the motor
(8) This section does not apply to a claim that, as at 2 years and 6 months
since the motor accident concerned, is the subject of
a determination by a
medical assessor declining to make an assessment under Division 7.5 of the
degree of permanent impairment of
the injured person because the impairment
caused by the injury has not become permanent.”
2 cl (1)(z) of the MAI Act provides that a dispute as to whether the insurer is
entitled to give a direction to the claimant
under s 6.26 is a Merit Review for
the purposes of Part 7 of the MAI Act.
DOCUMENTATION
Panel has considered the application and the submissions lodged on behalf of
each party. Also considered by the Panel are a copy
of the documents that were
before the single Merit Reviewer.
Summary of relevant
correspondence
insurer’s representatives, via letter dated, 8 September 2021, requested
‘further and better particulars’ of
the claimant’s claim
purportedly pursuant to s 6.25 of the MAI Act.
30 June 2022 the insurer sent the claimant and his legal representative a s 6.26
direction to provide all relevant particulars
within three months (ie, by 30
September 2022), or the claim would be taken to be withdrawn.
claimant’s representative provided a response dated 27 September 2022 to
the direction, however, it was not sent to the
insurer (via email) until 2
October 2022 due to an apparent administrative error. The email states as
“Please find attached our response to your request
for Further and Better Particulars.
We noticed our response was suppose (sic) to be sent on 27 September 2022 but
it was not sent due to an administrative error.
Nonetheless we have attached our response along with Notice of Assessment
[sic] from June 2019 till 2022.
Also we are finalising our Schedule of Damages and supporting material for
our ISC booked on 18 October 2022. We should submit those
to you in the coming
the letter also indicated that particulars for claims for past and future
economic loss are “yet to be finalised”.
way of letter dated 11 October 202 the insurer advised the claimant’s
representatives that the claim is considered to be
withdrawn pursuant to s
6.26(3) of the MAI Act. In so doing, the insurer referred to the fact the letter
purporting to provide particulars
noted the claim for economic loss is
“yet to be finalised”. The insurer stated that the particulars were
not provided
within the relevant timeframe and in addition, the particulars
failed to comply with the claimant’s obligations to provide
particulars.
THE REVIEWABLE DECISION
Merit Reviewer certified that the insurer was not entitled to issue a direction
pursuant to s 6.26 of the MAI Act. Such determination
was made essentially on
the basis that the requirements of s 6.25 which deals with the provision of
particulars by the claimant had
been satisfied. The obligation had been met when
the various pieces of evidence were taken into account, including a medico-legal
report of Dr Keller.
Merit Reviewer observes that s 6.26(1) requires the insurer to conduct an
enquiry as to whether the claimant has not provided
particulars pursuant to s
6.25(2) “without reasonable excuse”. In examining that issue the
Merit Reviewer refers to
cl 4.120 of Version 8 of the Motor Accident Guidelines
(Guidelines). The Merit Reviewer states that such clause requires the insurer
take into account all relevant information already available including from any
related statutory benefits claim.
such basis, the Merit Reviewer then considers the information available to the
insurer at the relevant time. The Merit Reviewer
notes that the insurer had
admitted liability for the claim for damages and on such basis he was satisfied
that the insurer had full
details of the motor accident concerned (as required
by s 6.25(2)(a)).
respect of particulars of injuries and disabilities sustained by the claimant
pursuant to
s 6.25(2)(b), the Merit Reviewer refers to the various
certificates of fitness provided and also notes the claimant had signed the
authority as part of the claim form for the insurer to obtain information from
“...any doctor, ambulance service, hospital
or other related service
provider”. The Merit Reviewer notes that from such authority and a similar
one provided in respect
of the claim for damages, the insurer was provided with
various pieces of medical evidence relevant to the claim.
addition, the Merit Reviewer notes that in accordance with various duties met by
the claimant the insurer had in its possession
reports of Benchmark
Rehabilitation and a medico-legal report of Dr Keller dated 7 June 2022.
Merit Reviewer found that such material meant that the insurer had full details
of the injuries sustained by the claimant and
particulars of disabilities and
impairments arising from those injuries such to make a proper assessment of the
full entitlement to damages.
respect of the question whether the insurer had particulars as to any economic
losses and any other losses that are being claimed
as damages as at 30 June
2022, the Merit Reviewer notes the insurer had previously accepted a claim for
statutory benefits which
included a claim for weekly payments for loss of
earnings. The Merit Reviewer notes that he had himself issued a determination in
respect of a dispute relating to the claimant’s pre-accident weekly
Merit Reviewer notes that the insurer possessed various taxation documents in
addition to various certificates of fitness. It
is also noted that the insurer
had a report of Dr Keller, who assessed whole person impairment for physical
injuries as not greater
than 10%. In addition, Dr Keller had provided an opinion
Merit Reviewer therefore found that as at 30 June 2022, the claimant had
provided all relevant particulars as required under s
6.25 of the MAI Act.
Merit Reviewer also made findings in respect of the insurer’s obligations
under s 6.22 of the MAI Act, where it is provided
that an insurer is under a
duty to make a reasonable offer of settlement to a claimant on a claim for
damages as soon as practicable.
The Merit Reviewer found that the insurer failed
to comply with this duty noting there was no information to suggest the insurer
had made an offer of settlement and in circumstances where the Merit Reviewer
found that as at 30 June 2022 the insurer had sufficient
information to allow
for a proper assessment of the claimant’s full entitlement to damages.
SUBMISSIONS
Insurer’s submissions dated 5 June 2023
submissions support the insurer’s application to the President in
submitting that the Merit Review determination of the
single Merit Reviewer was
incorrect in a material respect.
insurer submits that the single Merit Reviewer decision that the insurer was not
entitled to issue a s 6.26 direction is wrong
is submitted that the Merit Reviewer conflated the content of the Guidelines
regarding insurer’s requesting information and
the claimant’s
positive obligation to provide particulars of their claim under s 6.25 of the
question of whether the claimant had provided s 6.25 particulars is submitted to
be a simple one in circumstances where the claimant
indicated in the letter of
27 September 2022 that he would provide particulars of his claims for economic
loss in due course.
insurer relies upon the case of
Atikullah v Sefton
[2001] NSWCA 385
). That case involved a consideration of
Accidents Act 1988
. Such section is similar in its wording to s 6.25 of the
MAI Act. It provides that a claimant is not entitled to commence court
proceedings
until the claimant has provided full details of certain aspects of
the claim (which are similar in terms of the requirements of s
deciding whether the claimant had provided the required particulars under s 50A,
Hodgson JA at paragraph 39:
“in my opinion, there was a breach
of s.50A in respect of the respondent’s Griffiths v Kerkemeyer claim. It
was a significant
part of the claim as formulated in the Statement of Claim, and
was a part which, by 21
October 1999, the respondent was aware of
and intended to make. The fact that the Insurer had some material pertinent to
an assessment
of a claim for Griffiths v Kerkemeyer damages does not affect the
requirement of s.50A that the respondent as Claimant give details
of what she
was claiming: any proper assessment must be on the basis of both what a Claimant
is claiming and other information available
to the Insurer. Because of the
significance of this aspect of the claim, there was in my opinion no need for
the Insurer to call
evidence, that its absence meant that the details supplied
were not sufficient: that was a clear and inevitable inference.”
insurer notes the Merit Reviewer’s finding that the insurer had enough
information to assess damages pursuant to s 6.25
of the MAI Act, and accordingly
a decision was not required as to whether the particulars were relevant or
whether they were provided
in time. The insurer submits that this finding
creates a test that does not exist in law.
particular, it is submitted that the Merit Reviewer erred when he found that any
economic losses and other losses claimed were
relevantly particularised. The
insurer accepts that before issuing the s 6.26 direction, it had a number of
documents and particulars.
However, the material that the insurer possessed
amounts to “evidence” and not “particulars”.
insurer states that “particulars are particularly important documents
given that an insurer may allege fraud against a claimant
for fraudulently
making a claim outlined in their response to particulars. It is entirely
possible that a doctor make [sic] take
an incorrect history”.
insurer submits that the Merit Reviewer was in error when relying on cl 4.120 of
the Guidelines which provides that before making
a request for further
information, the insurer must take into account all relevant information already
available, including any information
from a related statutory benefits claim.
is submitted that the Merit Reviewer erred when he found that relevant
particulars were provided pursuant to s 6.25 either directly
or indirectly by
the provision of authorities to the insurer under s 6.27 of the MAI Act. The
insurer reiterates the submission that
the Merit Reviewer has misconstrued the
terms “evidence” and “particulars”.
Furthermore,
it is submitted that the Merit Reviewer erred in effectively shifting the onus
onto the insurer rather than the claimant
having a positive obligation to
particularise a claim for damages. It is submitted that if such position were
correct, then just
providing authorities would be sufficient and it would be up
to the insurer to “piece together a claim without any further
information”.
addition, it is submitted that information from third parties is also not enough
for an insurer to obtain relevant particulars.
The insurer provides an analogy
of a situation where information received from a physiotherapist could suggest a
claimant is fit
to return to work. However, that would not sufficiently cover a
situation where a claimant could also be suffering an incapacity
psychological injury.
insurer refers to the Merit Reviewer’s findings that medico legal evidence
consisting of a report of Dr Keller addressed
to the insurer contained opinion
as to the claimant’s capacity for employment and on that basis, and in
conjunction with other
material, the insurer had sufficient information to make
its own assessment of damages for past and future economic loss. The insurer
again submits that the Merit Reviewer erred in misconstruing
“evidence” with “particulars”.
addition, the insurer submits that the finding could effectively result in a
consequence whereby the claimant could be restricted
from claiming future
economic loss in a situation where Dr Keller found no ongoing incapacity for
work. Being a situation where the
report constitutes particulars for the
purposes of s 6.25.
the insurer notes that more recently the claimant has served a report from a
psychiatrist who opines the claimant has no
capacity for employment on account
of a psychological injury. In this regard, the insurer states: “Clearly,
the claimant had
not yet provided all relevant particulars of the claim prior to
the insurer issuing the section 6.26 direction as there was no information
a claim for future loss of earnings resulting from any psychiatric injury. This
alone should render the Merit Reviewer’s
certificate incorrect in a
material respect.”
the insurer submits that the claimant bears the onus of particularising their
claim and the claimant did not do so until
such time as she applied to reinstate
insurer admitted liability for the claim on or about 20 September 2021.
by way of notice dated 30 June 2022, the insurer issued a
“direction” under s 6.26 of the MAI Act requiring the
claimant to
provide relevant particulars within three months.
respect of cl 4.120 of the Guidelines, the insurer submits the Merit Reviewer
erred in quoting the clause as it was a misunderstanding
of the issue at hand,
and a mischaracterisation of the nature of the material before the insurer.
Claimant’s submissions dated 11 December 2023
claimant disputes that the Merit Reviewer was in error. It is submitted that it
is crucial to consider the subject provisions
in the context of the intention of
the MAI Act. It is stated:
“The main purpose of these laws is
to ensure a fair and just resolution of each case, rather than punishing
claimants for procedural
mistakes. The Member’s decision, in this context,
demonstrates a fair and equitable approach that places importance on achieving
justice rather than getting caught up in procedural details.”
is submitted that courts have “...frequently prioritised fairness and
overall outcome of legal proceedings over strict adherence
to procedural
rules...” In this regard, the claimant acknowledges a response was
“slightly delayed due to an administrative
claimant submits that the concept of “full details” under s 6.25 of
the MAI Act should be considered in a flexible
and pragmatic manner and it is
important to consider practicality when interpreting statutory requirements
“...as highlighted
by legal precedents”. It is suggested that the
Merit Reviewer’s determination demonstrated an “...appreciation
the ever-changing nature of claims and the challenges of collecting intricate
information”.
reliance on the case of
by the insurer is rejected by the
claimant on the basis that it was relevant to a different legislative framework.
It is suggested
that the “changing landscape may require a fresh
perspective...”
is submitted by the claimant that the Merit Reviewer’s interpretation of s
6.25 “...suggests to strike a balance between
procedural requirements and
equitable considerations”.
is further submitted that the insurer’s differentiation between
“particulars” and “evidence” may
be excessively
inflexible. In respect of the Merit Reviewer’s mention of cl 4.120 of the
Guidelines, the claimant submits that
the such clause emphasises a
responsibility to thoroughly evaluate all pertinent information regardless
whether it is explicitly
identified as “particulars”.
Insurer’s submissions dated 15 January 2024
insurer notes the claimant’s submissions fail to include reference to any
legal precedent to support his argument.
insurer submits that s 6.26 does not allow for the question of proportionality
as argued by the claimant. It is noted that the
section sets out strict
timelines that have significant consequences, and “presumably this is why
an insurer is unable to serve
the notice until 2.5 years have
is further submitted that the claimant appears to misunderstand the nature of
the review application. In this regard, it is noted
that the Merit Reviewer did
not disregard the delay, but found that the particulars had been received and
therefore the s 6.26 notice
was “ineffective”. The insurer states:
“the Act does require the claimant to provide particulars as set out in
s6.25. There is no doubt they can be amended as further evidence is provided,
but 6.25 does place a positive obligation on the claimant
to provide those
particulars.”
insurer also refutes any suggestion that the case of
applicable in a situation where the relevant sections are similar and the
objects of the two separate acts are the same.
is further submitted that there is nothing within the provisions that allows a
Merit Reviewer to “strike a balance between
procedural requirements and
equitable submissions” and if that did occur the Merit Reviewer would be
in error. It is submitted
that the matter cannot be approached other than the
guidance of s 7.13.
insurer submits the claimant’s submissions regarding the comparison of
“particulars” and “evidence”
is wrong at law. It is
submitted that it was not open to decide that other material constituted
particulars, when it had not been
adopted by the claimant as being claimed by
him. It is submitted that the claimant’s approach to the issue is not
by the legislation.
respect of the Merit Reviewer’s reference to cl 4.120 of the Guidelines
the insurer submits such clause is not relevant to
the issues at hand. It is
noted that the clause deals with late claims for damages, which is not a
situation that is present in the
subject matter.
is concluded that the concept of fairness and justice is a two way street, and
the insurer submits that it cannot properly investigate
a claim unless it is
told what the claim is.
FINDINGS AND REASONS
question that the Panel is required to resolve is a reasonably narrow one. That
being, whether the insurer was entitled to issue
a notice pursuant to s 6.26(1)
of the MAI Act. For practical purposes that question requires the Panel to make
a finding whether
the claimant, as at 30 June 2022, had failed without
reasonable excuse to provide the insurer with all relevant particulars about
claim as required by s 6.25 of the Act.
Panel finds that the wording of s 6.25 is such that the legislation places a
positive obligation upon a claimant who makes a claim
for damages to provide the
insurer with relevant particulars. Whilst it is often the case, as is in this
case, that an insurer will
request particulars and state that they are requested
pursuant to s 6.25, the obligation is one placed upon the claimant and not
is a requirement that all four categories of particulars as set out in s
6.25(2)(a) – (d) of the MAI Act are provided by
the claimant.
Panel finds that the claimant had failed, as at 30 June 2022, to provide
relevant particulars, being full details, of “any
economic losses and
other losses that are being claimed as damages” as required by s6.25(2)(d)
of the MAI Act.
is likely best illustrated by the fact that the claimant’s response to a
request for particulars dated 27 September 2022
states that claims for past and
future economic loss are “yet to be finalised”.
is the case that a number of certificates of fitness were within the
insurer’s possession, that set out periods of incapacity
and restrictions
for work. Leaving aside the issue whether this material amounts to
“evidence” rather than “particulars”
the certificates
are relevant to the claimants past economic loss, in the context of a claim for
damages. They would present minimal
assistance to the insurer in making a
proper assessment of the claimant’s entitlement.
report of Dr Keller includes an opinion as to the claimant’s capacity for
employment, however, it does not cover (nor would
Dr Keller be qualified to) any
possible incapacity for employment owing to any alleged psychological injury
caused by the accident.
Evidently, the claimant has since indicated that his
claim will encompass an allegation of psychological injury, given the apparent
service of a psychiatric report.
the Panel rejects the suggestion that the provision of authorities, pursuant to
the claimant’s obligations under
the legislation, satisfies the obligation
of the claimant to provide relevant particulars pursuant to s 6.25 of the MAI
Panel finds that information from third parties, such as that gained
through authorities, does not amount to details of the claim
made. It is noted
that s 6.25(2)(d) provides that the particulars of economic and other losses
that is required is what is “being
claimed as damages”. That is,
what the claimant puts forward as his claim. It is not the case that the insurer
is to gather
information from third parties and then attempt to piece together
what they think is being claimed.
Information
from third parties could not be considered sufficiently reliable in providing
the full picture of the claimant’s
situation. For instance, such material
is unlikely to set out the claimant’s future plans in terms of employment,
accident. It is noted that the assessment of future economic loss is
to be calculated with reference to the claimant’s most
likely future
circumstances but for the injury, in accordance with s 4.7 of the MAI Act. This
is not something that could be sufficiently
assessed on third party material in
the absence of the claimant setting out the claim made. The claimant’s
future plans is
something that only the claimant can particularise.
broadly, the Panel accepts the submission that medico-legal reports and
certificates, and other material from third parties does
not constitute
“particulars” as required by s 6.25. Instead the Panel accepts that
such material is evidence, that assists
in the assessment of the claim. In this
regard, the Panel accepts the findings of the Court in the matter of
as relevant to the issue at hand. Whilst that case was decided
under a different legislative scheme, the wording is very similar
objects of the two legislative schemes are effectively the same.
claimant’s submissions largely focus on the intent of the legislation and
the need to prioritise fairness over procedural
rules. It is true, that it is
incumbent upon the Panel to come to the correct and preferable decision. In
coming to that decision,
the Panel is to consider the relevant material and any
applicable written or unwritten law (s 7.13 of the MAI Act). The Panel is
required to follow the provisions of the relevant legislation. It is not for the
Panel to disregard the express requirements and
obligations of parties as set
out in the legislation. This includes s 6.25 of the MAI Act.
Panel rejects the claimant’s suggestion that the express requirements of s
6.25 of the MAI Act should be approached in a
“flexible” and
“pragmatic” fashion. Such submission is made without any reliable
legal basis.
the Panel does not accept that requiring the claimant to comply with an
obligation is against the objects of the MAI Act.
Indeed, it could be said that
the requirement to provide full details of the claims made promotes the objects
of the MAI Act. For
instance, the framework of time limits, such as those
imposed by s 6.25 and s 6.26 of the MAI Act, is an effective tool in encouraging
the early resolution of motor accident claims and the quick, cost effective and
just resolution of disputes (see s 1.3(2)(g) of the
to Schedule 1 cl 3(a) of the
Motor Accident Injuries Regulation 2017
maximum costs for the legal services provided in connection with a review of a
decision about any Merit Reviewer matter by a
review panel is 16 monetary units.
present value of a monetary unit is $119.96, thereby making the maximum
regulated costs that can be awarded is $1,919.
Panel has found against the claimant, however, that does not preclude the
awarding of costs in his favour. The insurer made the
application for review of
the Merit Reviewer’s decision. The claimant’s representatives did
not initially lodge a reply.
However, following a direction issued by the Panel
submissions were provided. Those submissions are not extensive. The Panel
declines to award the maximum regulated costs. Instead, the Panel
awards an amount of $500 plus GST.
relation to the decision made by a single Merit Reviewer, the Review Panel
revokes the Merit Reviewer’s certificate dated
17 May 2023.
Panel finds that the insurer was entitled to give a direction to the claimant
under s 6.26 of the MAI Act.
amount of the claimant’s costs awarded in this matter is $500 plus GST.
Section 41(2) of the PIC Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter