URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWIC/2025/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:58:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SafeWork NSW v Profect Construction Pty Ltd [2025] NSWIC 19 (4 November 2025)
Industrial Court
New South Wales
SafeWork NSW v Profect Construction Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWIC 19
Hearing Date(s):
14 October 2025
Date of Orders:
4 November 2025
Decision Date:
4 November 2025
(1) I convict Profect Construction Pty Ltd of the offence as
(2) I impose a fine of $45,000.00.
(3) Profect Construction Pty
Ltd is to pay the Prosecutor’s costs of the proceedings as agreed or
(4) Pursuant to s 122(2)
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is
to be paid to the Prosecutor.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW — work health and safety — offences —
category 2 – where crane on work site came into contact
with overhead
power lines causing cabin of the vehicle to be scorched – no person
injured – obvious risk of injury –
where a series of steps could
have been easily and inexpensively implemented to address the risk – some
steps taken to address
the risk which were insufficient to properly do so
– serious offending – strong subjective case – early plea of
guilty - defendant a small family company – unchallenged evidence of
parlous financial state establishing a reduced capacity
to pay a fine –
substantial moderation of fine justified balanced against the need for any
penalty to reflect general deterrence
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Fines Act 1996
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Cases Cited:
[2022] NSWCCA 200
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
(2011) 244 CLR 120
v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd; Attorney General for New South Wales v
Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd [2017] NSWCCA
[2015] NSWCCA 38
(2015) 257 A
Safework NSW v Arkwood Gloucester Pty Limited (No. 2)
[2022] NSWDC
Safework NSW v Onsite Rental Group Operations Pty Limited
[2021] NSWDC
Safework NSW v S G Interior Linings Pty Limited
[2025] NSWDC 249
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
Profect Construction Pty Ltd (Offender)
Representation:
A Mykkeltvedt (Prosecutor)
Solicitors:
SafeWork NSW (Prosecutor)
LegalVision
File Number(s):
2025/00050086
Publication Restriction:
INTRODUCTION
an amended summons filed on 14 July 2025 Profect Construction Pty Ltd (the
defendant) was charged with an offence contrary to
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(the WHS Act) in the following
“On 9 February 2023 at 156 Park Road Dundas in New South Wales [the
defendant], being a person conducting a business or undertaking
who had a health
and safety duty under [the Act] to ensure so far as is reasonably practicable
the health and safety of workers while
the workers are at work in the business
or undertaking, failed to comply with its duty, and the failure to comply with
exposed Peter Psaradellis, a worker, to a risk of death or serious
pleaded risk was particularised as follows:
“The risk was the risk to Peter Psaradellis, a worker, suffering serious
injury or death as a result of exposure to electricity
subsequent to contact
between the vehicle loading crane and overhead power lines.”
maximum penalty for the offence is a fine of 17,315 penalty units, which amounts
to $1,860,843.
Court received, without objection, a Tender Bundle containing a significant
amount of documentary evidence which I have addressed
Tender Bundle contained a statement of agreed facts in the following
Authority to bring Proceedings
NSW (SafeWork), being the regulator as defined by section 4 of the Work Health
and Safety Act 2011 (the Act), is empowered
under section 230(1)(a) of the Act
to institute proceedings in this matter.
Profect Construction Pty
all material times, Profect Construction Pty Ltd (ACN 077 552 446) (Profect) was
a person conducting a business or undertaking
at 156 Park Road, Dundas in New
South Wales.
all material times, Profect conducted a business involving residential
construction.
all material times, Profect was the principal contractor at a construction site
located at 156 Park Road, Dundas (the site), where
a new build of a two-storey
dual occupancy home was under construction.
Kens Sand and Cement
all material times, Kens Sand and Cement Pty Ltd (ACN 632 455 540)
), being a corporation, was a person conducting a business or
undertaking within the meaning of section 5 of the Act.
all material times, Kens’ business or undertaking involved the supply and
delivery of sand and cement products.
all material times, Kens was a contractor of Profect who supplied sand and
cement products to Profect.
The incident
9 February 2023, Kens received an order from Profect to deliver 7 bulk bags of
sand to the site.
order was received by Kens and assigned to be delivered by Peter Psaradellis. It
was loaded onto a 2007 Isuzu FVY tipper 1400
truck (the truck) with a 2007 model
Hiab 122 B-3 Duo model vehicle loading crane fitted (the crane). The
specifications of the crane
included a lifting capacity of 110 KnM (i.e. 11
Psaradellis was not the holder of a high-risk work class CV (Vehicle Loading
Crane) licence, nor had Kens arranged this for Mr
Psaradellis.
Psaradellis arrived at the site shortly before 11.30am on 9 February 2023. Some
bricklayers on site directed him to a gap in the
wall on the first floor
adjacent to Dora Crescent to unload the material.
Mr Psaradellis arrived, there was no designated site supervisor present on
behalf of Profect.
Crescent was designated as the unloading zone for trucks at the site as at 9
February 2023.
Psaradellis parked the truck with the front offside wheel on the nature strip of
Dora Crescent in order to unload. He was not subject
to any supervision in
selecting the appropriate location for unloading.
were low voltage power lines (400/200V AC) along Dora Cres adjacent to the
construction site. The powerlines were approximately
4.33m above the ground
where the truck was parked. They were not de-energised at the time of
to parking the truck in that area and beginning the process of unloading, Mr
Psaradellis had seen the powerlines above but nevertheless
decided to continue
to unload in that area.
were no warning signs in place to indicate the presence of powerlines.
Psaradellis unloaded one bag onto the second storey of the building under
construction. While he was attempting to unload a second
bag, the knuckles of
the crane contacted the overhead powerlines, bringing a live powerline onto the
truck, which was damaged.
investigators attended the site. They observed scorch marks above the
driver’s side door and on the cab. There was
also a scorch mark, and a
piece of cable welded to the mirror support on the driver’s side door.
There were further scorch
marks on the lower mirror mount on the driver’s
side door. The plastic mount cover was melted. The airbag had been deployed,
the driver’s side window was shattered.
was injured.
Guidance Material
Safe Work Australia Guide for operating cranes and mobile plant near overhead
electric lines provides that a ‘no go zone’
should be set up around
overhead electric lines. A separate ‘zone B’ should be set up which
is adjacent to the no-go
zone, and where a crane may only be operated by a
person who is authorised by the Electricity Supply Authority. The guide also
for warning signs around overhead lines.
Endeavour Energy Factsheet on electrical safety for building and construction
workers, and Australian Standard 2550.1-2011 provide
guidance regarding safe use
of cranes, hoists and winches in the vicinity of powerlines. Both documents
indicate that a party responsible
for a given site should establish a safe
loading zone away from power lines and should erect warning signs in relation to
power lines.
Systems of Work prior to the
had the following procedures in place to control risk:
(1) Plant Management Procedure, which specified that risk assessments must be
done and that only licensed people are allowed to use
the allocated plant
belonging to the defendant; and
(2) Emergency Procedures for Electrical Incidents involving crane operations,
which provided for a sequence of action in the event
of an emergency. The site
manager should be notified immediately.
answer to questions from investigators, Mr Uluc, the Director of Kens, stated
that prior to the incident:
(1) Kens did not have any formal safety training or procedures in place;
(2) There was no official induction for workers;
(3) Workers were not trained in relation to the dangers of working in proximity
to overhead powerlines, or in relation to no-go zones;
(4) There was no process for unloading in proximity to powerlines.
with this, prior to the incident, Mr Psaradellis had not received any training
from Kens in relation to crane operations
in the vicinity of
powerlines.
Systems of Work Post Incident
the incident, Mr Psaradellis completed a one-week course to obtain a high-risk
licence in relation to the use of a crane.
the incident and the issue of an Improvement Notice by SafeWork, the area along
Park Road was designated as the unloading
zone for the site, and warning signs
were installed on Dora Crescent.
took a number of post-incident steps in relation to its systems and personnel in
response to improvement notices. These include
the designation of a new loading
zone, warning signage in relation to the powerlines, maintaining a high-risk
work licence register,
and the development of a safe work method
THE EVIDENCE IN THE DEFENDANT’S CASE
affidavits sworn by the sole director of the defendant, Jok On Lee, dated 16
September 2025 (the first affidavit) and 23 September
2025 (the second
affidavit), were read without objection.
first affidavit addressed, in general terms, the financial state of the
defendant which may be summarised in the following table:
FINANCIAL YEAR
PROFIT/LOSS
TOTAL LIABILITIES
CASH ON HAND
TOTAL DEBT LEVEL
$106,649 (L)
$252,306 (L)
$32,829 (L)
$283,135 (L)
$143,370 (L)
$393,006 (L)
$400,672(L)
second affidavit addresses the background of the defendant and the circumstances
of the offending, which may be summarised as
defendant has operated for more than 28 years carrying out residential
construction work across Sydney. It has two direct employees,
namely Mr Lee and
his wife - although Mr Lee’s children assist in a voluntary capacity from
time to time. The defendant engages
subcontractors on a regular basis, up to 40
at any given time.
to the incident giving rise to the proceedings, Mr Lee had attended conferences,
seminars and training courses for the purposes
of keeping the defendant’s
approach to health and safety issues up to date. He has, over the years, also
completed courses
in occupational health and
Mr Lee’s unchallenged
evidence is that the defendant prioritised safety issues, and that this was
reflected in Mr Lee:
(1) personally engaging with workers on site as to the work to be carried out,
the presence of hazardous or dangerous materials,
the location of the evacuation
area, and the location of medical equipment;
(2) monitoring workers to ensure that they were carrying out their duties
(3) ensuring that workers who were identified as being less experienced would
undergo appropriate training;
(4) maintaining a work diary for each job recording the daily schedule of
visiting contractors;
(5) implementing traffic management plans addressing the management of the flow
of people and vehicles in and around the worksite;
(6) implementing plant management procedures which, amongst other things, made
provision for the conduct of risk assessments; and
(7) putting in place emergency procedures and a WHS management plan to be
followed in the event of incidents arising from the operation
relation to the site where the offending occurred, Mr Lee
that he had observed the
presence of power lines close to one side of the site. He said that it was his
practice to instruct delivery
trucks to park parallel and close to the building,
away from the power lines. He also said that he had placed scaffolding around
the sides of the site where the power lines were present, in an attempt to limit
the risk of falls, and stop trucks from unloading.
That said, he expressly
accepted that in light of what had eventuated, those steps were “not the
most adequate system”.
Lee explained
that following the
incident, immediate remedial steps were taken which included:
(1) installing signs warning of the presence of, and the danger posed by,
overhead power lines;
(2) erecting barriers on the scaffolding in an effort to prevent persons from
touching the power lines;
(3) allocating a designated loading zone area and directing workers to ensure
that any unloading occurred within that area; and
(4) consulting with officers from SafeWork NSW and Endeavour Energy about safety
procedures in relation to power lines.
Lee stated that the defendant had co-operated with SafeWork NSW during its
investigation, and that this was the first time that
it had been prosecuted for
this kind of offence.
He explained
that he is now 70 years of age and had migrated from Hong Kong in 1990. He
outlined his contributions to the community
in various respects. Those
contributions are extensive and
impressive.
Lee described himself
filled with remorse
” at what had occurred, and at the
predicament in which Mr Psaradellis had been placed. He said that on any
occasion on which
Mr Psaradellis had come to any of his building sites to make a
delivery, he had always enquired as to his
well-being.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
Submissions of the Prosecutor
written submissions, counsel for the Prosecutor submitted that the
defendant’s breach of duty centred upon its failure to
take reasonable and
practical measures to reduce or eliminate the risk,
(1) developing, documenting and adequately communicating to workers a safe
system for the unloading of trucks using a crane, which
(a) designating a safe unloading zone;
(b) communicating the designation of that zone to workers and visitors in the
(c) installing appropriate warning signage within the vicinity of power lines;
(2) ensuring that the unloading of materials and use of cranes at the site was
subject to supervision sufficient to ensure that the
unloading occurred in a
designated zone.
accepted that in determining the appropriate penalty, the Court was to have
regard to the provisions of the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW) (the Sentencing Act),
and was required to impose a penalty which would give effect to the objects of
the WHS Act, in particular, to the requirement of
ensuring the safety, health
and welfare of workers and others on workplace
submitted that the offence should be regarded as a serious one because:
(1) the deficiencies in relation to the system of work were obvious, and the
measures that ought to have been introduced to address
straightforward;
(2) the risk of contact between cranes and live powerlines was
(3) the responsible party of the construction site, the defendant in this case,
had a responsibility to establish a safe loading
zone away from power lines and
erect warning signs in relation to
that the identified
measures which the defendant ought to have
were capable of easy and
inexpensive implementation and that, had they been taken, the risk would have
been greatly reduced, if not
eliminated. Such risk, he submitted, was an
obvious one, and whilst he obviously accepted that no injury actually ensued, he
that there was nevertheless a very real prospect of Mr Psaradellis
resulted in
catastrophic consequences.
terms of the defendant’s subjective case, counsel raised little issue. He
conceded, in particular, that:
(1) a plea of guilty had been entered which had resulted in a significant
utilitarian benefit, such that the defendant should have
the benefit of a
discount of 25%:
(2) the plea could also be regarded as evidence of the defendant’s
(3) the defendant has no prior
convictions.
Nevertheless,
counsel submitted that it was necessary for any penalty to reflect
considerations of both specific and general
deterrence.
He submitted, in
particular, that the latter was a significant factor in matters of this kind,
and that it was important for the
Court to impose a penalty that would increase
attention to the need not to expose workers to risks to their health and
submissions, counsel clarified that the reference in the agreed
to the fact that Mr
Psaradellis was not the holder of a particular type of licence was not to be
construed as a suggestion that what
had occurred was in any way Mr
Psaradellis’ fault
any fault lay with his employer, Kens Sand and Cement Pty
Without derogating from any
other matter upon which he relied, counsel identified the key aspects relevant
to an assessment of the
objective seriousness of the offending as being the
absence of:
(1) supervision;
(2) a designated “no go” zone;
(3) a safe loading zone; and
(4) warning signs.
counsel accepted that the presence of the powerlines was obvious by reference to
photographs contained in the Tender Bundle,
he submitted that this formed an
important part of any assessment of objective seriousness. He submitted that the
fact that the powerlines
created an obvious risk made it all the more necessary
for the defendant to address the issue
appropriately.
with the written submissions, counsel essentially confirmed the various
concessions which had been made regarding the principal
aspects of the
defendant’s subjective
In light of those matters,
counsel expressly accepted that it would be open to me to find that the
defendant is of good corporate
character, is not likely to reoffend, and has
good prospects of
rehabilitation.
summary, counsel submitted that the principal matters which would inform the
determination of the appropriate penalty
(1) the fact that the risk was obvious;
(2) that numerous measures to address the risk could have been easily and
inexpensively implemented; and
(3) that those measures included implementing a simple system of supervision of
delivery drivers to direct them to an available and
appropriate location at
which to unload, away from overhead power lines, in circumstances where there
were persons on site who could
have fulfilled that supervisory role.
counsel addressed the defendant’s affidavit evidence concerning its
capacity to pay any penalty.
Whilst counsel did not challenge the accuracy of the financial evidence
summarised in the table above, he emphasised that the onus
of establishing any
reduced capacity rested on the defendant. Whilst counsel certainly did not
concede that such onus had been discharged,
he accepted that he was in no
position to challenge the evidence which had been advanced. Ultimately counsel
appeared to accept that
the evidence did, in fact, establish that that the
defendant’s capacity to pay a fine was reduced, but emphasised that it
necessary to weigh that factor against the clear need for general
deterrence.
Submissions
of the defendant
written submissions, counsel for the defendant expressly accepted that the
identified risk was foreseeable.
However, he submitted that this was not a case in which the defendant had
completely abandoned its responsibilities. In support of
that submission, he
cited the matters set out in the second affidavit as evidence of positive steps
which had been taken by Mr Lee
towards the minimisation of the
That said, counsel
accepted that the defendant acknowledged, by its plea, that such measures as
were in place were insufficient,
and accepted that the absence of any
supervision was due to the absence of Mr Lee on
It was submitted that in
all of these circumstances, the present case could not be categorised as one in
which the defendant had,
in effect, taken no steps at all towards addressing
That said, counsel
expressly accepted that the gravity of the risk was objectively
and that the measures
which had been identified as available to the defendant at the time were
reasonably practicable.
terms of the defendant’s subjective case, counsel emphasised those matters
conceded by counsel for the
Prosecutor.
He also relied upon
the assistance provided by the defendant in the
investigation
and pointed out
the remedial steps taken by Mr Lee following the
He accepted that
general deterrence was an important factor on
but submitted that any
need for such sentence to reflect personal deterrence was
Ultimately,
and leaving aside its objective case which is largely undisputed, counsel
summarised the defendant’s position in
the following propositions:
(1) the defendant had, by its plea of guilty, accepted that it ought to have
undertaken the measures which had been identified to
minimise the
(2) notwithstanding that failure, this was not a defendant which was
indifferent, or wilfully blind, to its duties and obligations,
nor was it a
defendant who had completely ignored the need to address
(3) I should conclude that the defendant’s degree of criminality fell in
the “high end of the low
expanded on these matters in oral submissions. He emphasised that the defendant
was, to use the vernacular, a “small
accepted that there was an absence of supervision at the relevant time, and that
this had been brought about by Mr Lee’s
absence from the site, but
emphasised that the defendant was not an organisation which paid no attention at
all to safety issues,
evidenced by the fact that there were some systems in place
beforehand.
That said, counsel
accepted that there were steps which could easily have been taken, but had not
Counsel for the
defendant also pointed to the steps which had been taken by the defendant after
the incident.
terms of the defendant’s financial position, counsel accepted that the
defendant, despite its ongoing losses, continued to
operate but submitted that
the evidence nevertheless established a reduced capacity, as opposed to an
incapacity, to pay a fine.
Counsel took the Court at some length to the evidence in the first
which, he submitted
discharged the defendant’s onus of establishing that it has a reduced
capacity to pay a fine, and that
this was a matter was properly taken into
account on sentence.
CONSIDERATION
is appropriate to commence the determination of an appropriate penalty by
addressing the issue of the objective seriousness of
the offence. The assessment
of objective seriousness is an essential element of the process of instinctive
synthesis, a purpose of
which is the imposition of an appropriate
A sentencing court is
obliged to make plain the conclusion which has been reached following such
assessment and the reasons for
conclusion.
I must carry out the
assessment wholly by reference to the nature of the offending, and without
reference to matters personal to
the present case, the submissions of counsel for the defendant invited me to, in
effect, place the offending at a particular point
within a notional scale of
objective seriousness. Whilst that is not necessarily an uncommon approach, a
failure to adopt it is certainly
not an error. On the contrary, and without
intending in any way to be critical of counsel, it has been recognised that such
an approach
may be unhelpful, to the point where it may be apt to
What the Court must do
in carrying out the necessary assessment is identify the facts, matters and
circumstances that are relevant
to the seriousness of the offending, and which
therefore bear upon the appropriate penalty which is to be
the present case, the fundamental risk posed by the overhead powerlines was
obvious and was one that demanded an appropriate response.
The defendant’s
response was wholly inadequate. There were, as counsel for the Prosecutor
pointed out, a series of measures
that were obvious and easy to implement, and
which could, and should have, been taken. They included, principally:
(1) the development and communication of a safe system of unloading trucks which
included, at the very least:
(a) the creation of a safe unloading zone away from power lines;
(b) the communication of that zone to workers and visitors; and
(c) the installation of appropriate warning signs.
of those measures could have been easily and inexpensively implemented. The
failure to implement them was compounded by the absence
of Mr Lee from the site
at the relevant time, resulting in what was, in effect, an almost total lack of
supervision. In these circumstances,
the observations of Basten JA in
Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty Ltd
Attorney General for New South Wales
v Silver City Drilling (NSW) Pty
“[34] The sentencing judge commenced his consideration with the
proposition that ‘[g]reater culpability attaches to the
failure to guard
against an event the occurrence of which is probable rather than an event the
occurrence of which is extremely unlikely’.
However, the truth of that
proposition depends upon other considerations including (a) the potential
consequences of the risk, which
may be mild or catastrophic, (b) the
availability of steps to lessen, minimise or remove the risk, and (c) whether
such steps are
complex and burdensome or only mildly inconvenient. Relative
culpability depends on assessment of all those factors.”
Honour continued:
“The culpability of the Respondent is not necessarily to be determined by
the remoteness of the risk occurring, nor by a step‑by‑step
assessment of the various elements. Culpability will turn upon an overall
evaluation of various factors, which may pull in different
directions.
Culpability in this case is reasonably high because, even if the pressure event
of the force which occurred might not
be expected to occur often, the
seriousness of the foreseeable resultant harm is extreme and the steps to be
taken to avoid it, which
were not even assessed, were straightforward and
involved only minor inconvenience and little, if any, costs.”
the present case the potential consequences of the risk were high and there were
clear remedial steps which could have been taken
that were neither complex nor
burdensome. They could also have been implemented at minimal cost.
no person was injured as a consequence of what transpired in the present case,
that outcome was, to coin a phrase, more a
consequence of good luck than good
management. In that regard, photographs contained within the tender bundle are
particularly telling.
They demonstrate the damage caused to the truck by the
ignition of the power line, which included the driver side window shattering,
and various areas of the driver side door being
The photographs
provide a stark illustration of the risk which was posed.
all of these circumstances, and even in the absence of any statutory or other
aggravating factors being
identified,
I am driven to the
conclusion that the offending was serious and that the defendant’s
culpability is significant.
for the defendant accepted, as I understood it, that all of the factors
considered above highlighted the need for any penalty
to have regard to general
deterrence. However, in light of the particular subjective factors set out
below, I take the view that
personal deterrence, whilst not completely
irrelevant, has a very limited role to play on
is little in dispute in terms of the defendant’s subjective case.
begin with, it is accepted that the defendant pleaded guilty at a sufficiently
early stage to be entitled to a discount of
There is also no issue
that the defendant is of good corporate
that it is unlikely
to reoffend,
and that it has
good prospects of
rehabilitation.
Further, and
quite apart from the plea of guilty, I accept that Mr Lee’s sworn evidence
of remorse, which he has expressed
on behalf of the defendant and which has not
been challenged, is genuine, and that it reflects an unequivocal acceptance of
responsibility
on the part of the defendant for what
That remorse is also
reflected in the co-operation provided by the defendant in the course of the
investigation, and the steps which
were taken to address the risk after the
relevant events occurred.
previously noted, I accept that the defendant is not a company which failed to
address safety issues at all, in the sense of completely
abrogating its
responsibilities. Some measures were put in place, and some steps were taken, in
an effort to ensure the safety of
those on the site. It follows that this is not
a case in which there was a complete abandonment of responsibility, That said,
defendant’s efforts, whilst laudable in one sense, fell substantially
short of what is required.
have taken all of the factors into account. I accept that, when taken together,
they constitute a strong subjective case. However,
I am also mindful of the fact
that it is necessary to ensure that the weight given to a subjective case, no
matter how strong that
case might be, cannot be permitted to result in the
imposition of a sentence which fails to reflect the objective gravity of the
am satisfied that the defendant has discharged the onus of establishing that its
financial state is such that it has a reduced capacity
to pay a fine. Counsel
for the Prosecutor ultimately did not argue against such a finding. Consistent
with the position taken by
the parties, I have approached that issue in
accordance with the observations of his Honour Judge Russell SC in
NSW v S G Interior Linings Pty
“[78] I am required to have regard to
Fines Act 1996
before imposing a fine. Where an offender seeks to have a fine reduced on the
basis of a limited capacity to pay, it bears
the evidentiary onus of convincing
the court that it should exercise its discretion to limit the amount of the
fine. The offender’s
capacity to pay is relevant but not
Mahdi Jahandideh v R
[2024] NSWCCA 178
substantial fine may still be warranted as a result of the seriousness of the
offence and the need for general deterrence.
Unity Pty Ltd v SafeWork NSW
[2018] NSWCCA 266
Court of Criminal Appeal said:
‘First, and more generally, questions of specific deterrence should take
into account the size and scope of the operations
of the defendant; a fine which
may be crippling to a small business may have virtually no impact on the
financial operations of a
large corporation. The maximum penalty for the offence
is undoubtedly set having regard to such a factor. Secondly, the Court is
required to have regard to ‘the means’ of the defendant, pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
[80] I am satisfied that SG is a small family business, which at the moment has
no work because of the liquidation of its sole customer.
I am also satisfied
from the material tendered that SG has no available assets or income to meet a
large fine. Further, I am satisfied
from the bank statements of Mr and Mrs Guan,
that they are presently unable to provide funds to the company. In those
circumstances
I will moderate the fine significantly, from that which might
otherwise have been ordered. However, the size of the fine still reflects
need for general deterrence and reflects the seriousness of the offence.”
was the position in
S G Interior Linings,
the defendant in this case may
properly be described as a small family business. It has operated at a loss for
some time and there
is no evidence that it has an asset base, or other income,
which can be directed towards the payment of a fine. I am satisfied that
financial penalty which is imposed will create a significant financial burden
for the defendant. It follows that the evidence
supports a substantial
moderation of the fine which might otherwise have been imposed, whilst, at the
same time, bearing firmly in
mind the need for any penalty to reflect
considerations of general deterrence.
I should note that the incident which is the subject of this prosecution
occurred on 9 February 2023. The proceedings were
not commenced until 7 February
2025, almost 2 years later. Notwithstanding the fact that the issue had not been
relied upon as part
of the defendant’s subjective case, I raised with
counsel in the course of the hearing whether the circumstances surrounding
commencement of the proceedings may be relevant on sentence, bearing in mind
numerous determinations of intermediate appellate
Courts, including the Court of
Criminal Appeal in this State, which establish that delay which is not
attributable to an offender
may be a relevant factor on sentence at a number of
different levels.
my invitation, counsel for each party provided further written submissions in
relation to the issue.
short, counsel for the Prosecutor submitted that, leaving aside the fact that
there was no evidence of any adverse impact of any
suggested delay on the
defendant in the present case, the statutory regime which governs the
investigation and prosecution of matters
of this kind addressed the issue. It
was further submitted that, as a general proposition, delay of this kind had
limited application
in cases where the defendant was a corporation rather than a
natural person. Counsel for the defendant generally accepted that position.
these circumstances I will take the issue no further, other than to say that in
my view, it would not be correct to conclude that
there will never be a case in
which delay may not be relevant to sentence.
in reaching my conclusion as to penalty I have had regard to previous decisions
in matters of this general nature, including
Safework NSW v Arkwood
Gloucester Pty Limited (No.
NSW v Onsite Rental Group Operations Pty
those cases involved workers coming into contact with high voltage power lines,
although the circumstances of the offending
were markedly different, and the
consequences significantly more serious, in each case. The same could be said
S G Interiors.
decisions in each have provided some guidance. At the same time, sentencing is
not a comparative exercise. it is well recognised
that no two cases are
factually the same. What is to be achieved in the assessment of penalty is the
consistent application of principle,
not numerical (or in cases of this kind,
equivalence.
convict Profect Construction Pty Ltd of the offence as charged.
appropriate penalty for the offence is $60,000.00, which will be reduced by 25%
to reflect the plea of guilty.
Accordingly,
the fine imposed upon Profect Constructions Pty Ltd is $45,000.00.
make the following orders:
(1) I impose a fine of $45,000.00.
(2) Profect Construction Pty Ltd is to pay the Prosecutor’s costs of the
proceedings as agreed or assessed.
(3) Pursuant to
Fines Act 1996
(NSW), 50% of the fine is to be
paid to the Prosecutor.
10 November 2025 - Typographical amendment of paragraph [59], removing
“is” in sentence 3.
Second Affidavit at [3]
Second Affidavit at
Second Affidavit at [9]
Second Affidavit
Second Affidavit at
Second Affidavit at [22]
Second Affidavit
at [24] – [32].
Affidavit at [33]
Affidavit at [35].
NSW, ‘Prosecutor’s Submissions on Sentence’, Submission in
Safework NSW v Profect Construction Pty Ltd,
2025/00050086, 30 September 2025,
Ibid, [26] –
Ibid, [33] –
[34]; Sentencing Act s
Safework NSW,
‘Prosecutor’s Submissions on Sentence’, Submission in Safework
NSW v Profect Construction Pty Ltd,
2025/00050086, 30 September 2025,
Tcpt, 15 October 2025,
Safework NSW,
‘Statement of Agreed Facts’, Filed in Safework NSW v Profect
Construction Pty Ltd, 2025/00050086, 17 September
2025, [24]-[25]; Tcpt, 15
October 2025, p 7(33).
15 October 2025, p
8(25)-(45).
Tcpt, 15 October
2025, p 9(5)-(35).
October 2025, p 9(35)-10(5).
Tcpt, 15 October 2025, p 10(1)-(20),p
Tcpt, 15 October
2025, p 12(23).
October 2025, p 15(33)-16.
Tcpt, 15 October 2025, p
29(10)-28(15).
Jok On Lee,
‘Defendant’s Outline of Submissions’, Submission in Safework
NSW v Profect Construction Pty Ltd, 2025/00050086,
7 October 2025,
Ibid, [17] –
[20]; [23] – [25].
Ibid, [15] – [16].
Ibid, [21] – [22].
Ibid, [26].
Tcpt, 15 October 2025,
p 17(27)-18(24).
October 2025, p
18(45)-19(6).
October 2025, p 19(23),
19(44)-20(2).
October 2025, p 20(10)-(14).
Tcpt, 15 October 2025, p
21(27)-22(25).
October 2025, p
22(34)-22(42).
October 2025, p 23(1)-25(1).
Tcpt, 15 October 2025, p
26(43)-26(49).
[2022] NSWCCA 200
, [60] (Yehia
[2022] NSWSC
, [10] (Harrison J) (as his Honour then
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
(2011) 244 CLR 120
DH, [33] (Harrison
See Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2017] NSWCCA 96,
Safework NSW,
‘Sentence Tender Bundle’, Filed in Safework NSW v Profect
Construction Pty Ltd, 2025/00050086, 17 September
2025, Photographs 26 and
Sentencing Act s
Jok On Lee,
‘Defendant’s Outline of Submissions’, Submission in Safework
NSW v Profect Construction Pty Ltd, 2025/00050086,
7 October 2025,
Sentencing Act s
Sentencing Act s.
Sentencing Act s
Sentencing Act s
Sentencing Ac s
21A(3)(i) and see Zwam v R
[2017] NSWCCA
[2025] NSWDC 249
example Sabra v R
[2015] NSWCCA 38
(2015) 257 A Crim R 33
and the authorities cited
[2022] NSWDC
[2021] NSWDC
See Hili v The Queen;
Jones v The Queen
(2010) 242 CLR 520
[2010] HCA 45
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (353 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter