URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPB/2009/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
JEDRZEJCZYK [2009] NSWPB 1 (8 July 2009)
JEDRZEJCZYK
[2009] NSWPB 1
Health Care Complaints Commission v Henry Jedrzejczyk
The complaint alleged convictions under section 10(3) of the
Poisons and
Therapeutics Goods Act
1966 and professional misconduct arising from the
circumstances surrounding the convictions. In the period from 1990 until
2003 (the relevant period) the pharmacist was employed in a community
pharmacy as pharmacist in charge and worked without any retail
During the relevant period the pharmacist supplied a customer on a weekly
basis with escalating quantities of benzodiazepines, namely
temazepam (up to
practitioner. The pharmacist also failed
to refer the patient to a medical
practitioner and received, via a procedure designed to evade suspicion,
approximately $30-$40 per
week from the patient for such supplies. Immediately
before being apprehended the pharmacist was being paid between $400 to $500
The pharmacist also permitted the patient access to the pharmacy dispensing
area to remove the drugs she required These supplies were
made in circumstances
where the pharmacist knew or ought to have known that long term use of
benzodiazepines was likely to result
in misuse and abuse and was detrimental to
the patient’s health.
The patient was hospitalised following a seizure. Tests indicated high blood
levels of Temaze and her prescribing doctor contacted
the Pharmaceutical
Services Branch of NSW Health, which resulted in the investigation and
prosecution of the pharmacist.
The complaint also alleged that the pharmacist had misappropriated and self
administered a bottle of Eupypnos tablets without a prescription.
At the Local Court hearing the pharmacist had pled guilty. The Court had
convicted the pharmacist, imposed a 2 year good behaviour
bond and fined the
pharmacist $2,000 and court costs.
The pharmacist elected not to attend the Inquiry, nor was any person present
at the Inquiry to represent the pharmacist.
evidence before the inquiry and the pharmacist’s written apology to the
Board effectively amount to an admission of the
particulars of the complaint and
that those particulars amount to professional misconduct.
that the pharmacist chose not to give evidence before the Board, the Board draws
the unfavourable inference that no evidence
that would have been given that
would have assisted his case regarding his conduct since the complaint. There is
little evidence
of his insight into his conduct and any personal or professional
development since the conduct occurred.
pharmacist was concerned that if he stopped supplying the patient he would be
reported to his employer and he would face dismissal
or deregistration from the
profession. He did not consider his professional duties and considerations for
Ms C’s health to
be paramount to his fear of personal
consequences.
into account the seriousness of the conduct, the pharmacist’s experience,
his underlying motivation for engaging in such
conduct and the
pharmacist’s lack of insight or personal/professional development since
the complaint the Board is comfortably
satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that the pharmacist is guilty of professional misconduct. The pharmacist’s
posed a serious danger to the patient and to the public and the
pharmacist is not fit in the public interest to be registered as
a pharmacist in
NSW and the Board orders that his name be removed from the register of
pharmacists.
the event that the pharmacist applies for registration under the
Practice Act 2006
the Board notes the likely nature of supporting evidence and
activities that will be appropriate.
Findings of a Board of Inquiry held on 22 April 2008 into a
complaint of professional misconduct made under the provisions of the
Pharmacy Act
”) by the Health
Care Complaints Commission (“
the Complainant
”) against Henry
Jedrzejczyk (“
the Respondent
”) a pharmacist registered in New
South Wales.
There was no appearance by the Respondent.
THE COMPLAINT
The Board of Inquiry dealt with a complaint dated 22 August 2007
the Complaint
”) in the following terms:
COMPLAINT ONE
The Respondent has been convicted of offences in New South Wales.
Particulars of Complaint One
At all relevant times the pharmacist was employed by Hurstville Grove
Pharmacy (“the pharmacy”) and was the pharmacist
On 9 February 2006 the pharmacist was convicted in New South Wales of
supply of restricted substance other than by wholesale contrary
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
COMPLAINT TWO
The Respondent is guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of
s. 19D(1)(c) of the Act in that the pharmacist has demonstrated
adequate judgment and/or care in the practice of pharmacy and/or engaged in
improper or unethical conduct related to the
practice of pharmacy.
Particulars of Complaint Two
At all relevant times the pharmacist was employed by Hurstville Grove
Pharmacy (“
the Pharmacy
”) and was the Pharmacist in
a bottle of Temazepam without a prescription.
Ms C advised that she would obtain
a prescription and provide it to the pharmacist later. The pharmacist gave her
the bottle of Temazepam
and said words to the effect “Forget it you
don’t need one”.
1990 to December 2003, the pharmacist continued to supply Temazepam without
prescription to Ms C on approximately a weekly basis
in escalating quantities,
contrary section 10(3) of the Act. Initially, the pharmacist supplied
approximately one to two bottles
(10ml x 25) a week and by 2003 the pharmacist
was supplying approximately forty to sixty bottles per week.
without prescription to Ms C on approximately a weekly
basis in escalating
quantities as set out in Particular 2 when he knew or should have known that
long term use of benzodiazepines
may lead to dependency and/or may be
detrimental to the health, well being and safety of Ms C.
the period the pharmacist supplied Ms C with escalating quantities of Temazepam
without prescription, he failed to refer her
to a doctor or a drug treatment
an unspecified date between 1990 and December 2003 the pharmacist regularly
obtained a financial benefit of about $30 to $40
per week from Ms C when
supplying her Temazepam without prescription.
an unspecified date between 1990 and December 2003 the pharmacist permitted Ms C
access to the dispensary area of the pharmacy
and to take the quantities of
Temazepam she required, contrary to the requirements of clause 30 of the Poisons
and Therapeutic Goods
Regulation 1994 and clause 28 of the
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2002
misappropriated
one bottle of Eupypnos from the Pharmacy for his own use, and/or
administered the contents of the bottle without a prescription.
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE BOARD
The following documents were submitted by the Complainant to the Board of
Inquiry in evidence:
- Tabulated folder containing the various documents
including the complaint, registration details, correspondence, statements and
investigation report from the Pharmaceutical Services Branch with numerous
annexures, statements from Ms C, documents from Kogarah
Local Court including
certificate of conviction and transcript of Local Court proceedings –
Department of Health v Henry Jedrzejczyk,
clinical notes for [Ms C] from St
George Hospital, correspondence between the Health Care Complaints Commission
and Henry Jedrzeczyk
and peer review report and briefing letter
– Letter dated 18 April 2008 and Affidavit of
- Letter dated 18 April 2008 from Health Care Complaints
Commission to the Respondent
- Facsimile from Mr Jedrzejcyk received 22 April
There was no appearance by or on behalf of the Respondent at the hearing
before the Board.
No witnesses were called by the Complainant to give evidence.
THE RESPONDENT
The Respondent was born on 21 September 1951. Following secondary school he
attended the University of Queensland and completed a
Bachelors Degree in
Science. In 1974, at age 23, he moved to Sydney to work at the Kanematsu
Memorial Research Institute as a research
scientist. Between 1981 and 1984 the
Respondent was engaged in designing experiments which could be conducted on the
NASA Space Shuttle.
The Respondent then underwent a bridging course to become a
qualified pharmacist, which he completed in 1984. At that time he was
The Respondent was first registered as a pharmacist in New South Wales on
12 March 1984 and remained registered until 9 January 2008
when his name
was removed from the register pursuant to section 19 of the Act for failure to
pay the roll fee.
PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT
Pursuant to section 19D(1)(a) of the Act a complaint may be made against a
pharmacist that has been convicted in New South Wales of
an offence.
In this matter, Henry Jedrzejczk was convicted by the Local Court at Kogarah
on 9 February 2006 of supply of a restricted substance
other than by
wholesale contrary to
section 10(3)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
. The Board is comfortably satisfied that this Complaint has been
Section 19A of the Act relevantly defines “professional
misconduct”, in relation to a pharmacist, as including:
(a) any "conduct" that demonstrates a lack of adequate:
(i) knowledge, (ii) experience, (iii) skill, (iv) judgment, or (v) care,
by the "pharmacist" in the practice of "pharmacy", and ......
(g) any other improper or unethical "conduct" of the "pharmacist" relating
to the practice of "pharmacy".
There is no category of “unsatisfactory professional conduct”
under the Act. This is in contrast to the position under
section 37 the
Pharmacy Practice Act
(which is not applicable to this Complaint)
and to protective legislation governing other health professionals.
essence of the Complaint is firstly, that on approximately a weekly basis
between about 1990 and December 2003 in what could be
described as escalating
quantities, that is, initially one to two 10 mg by 25 bottles per week,
increasing to about 40 to 60 bottles
per week by the year 2003, the Respondent
supplied a customer, Ms C, with a benzodiazepine, being a Schedule 4 drug and a
restricted substance, the exact substance being Temazepam.
It is further alleged in the Complaint that from an unspecified date between
1990 and December 2003 the Respondent was permitting
Ms C to access the
dispensary area of the pharmacy and to take the quantity of Temazepam that she
required, contrary to the requirements
of clause 30 of the Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act 1994 and Clause 24 of the Regulations.
It is also alleged that the Respondent misappropriated a bottle of Eupypnos
from the pharmacy for his own use and self-administered
the contents of the
bottle without a prescription.
The Complaint also alleges that the Respondent knew or ought to have known
that the long-term use of the benzodiazepines had obvious
adverse effects and
abuse of the benzodiazepines would be detrimental to the health of Ms C. It is
also part of the case that during
the period when the drug was being supplied
from 1990 until 2003 there was a financial gain being received by the Respondent
of approximately
$30 to $40 per week.
The Respondent was prosecuted and convicted by the Local Court at Kogarah on
9 February 2006, pleading guilty to the offence of supply
of a restricted
substance other than by way of wholesale, contrary to the provisions of
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
. In this regard, there is a
certificate of conviction which confirms that on 9 February 2006 the Local
Court, with Magistrate Kennedy
sitting, convicted the Respondent in relation to
the offence that between 1 October 2003 and 20 December 2003 he breached the
section 10(3).
The penalty which was imposed was a
for a period of two years. The Respondent was also fined the sum of $2,000 and
ordered to pay Court costs of $65. The penalty
imposed was in the upper range of
penalties available for the offence.
The Magistrate in the Local Court proceedings was also cognisant of the fact
that these proceedings may yet follow the conviction
and that was something
apprehended at that time.
In evidence before the Board is also the Peer Review report of Ms Jocelyn
Bussing, pharmacist, dated 23 November 2006. Ms Bussing
is of the view that the
Respondent’s conduct greatly deviated from that of a responsible and
ethical pharmacist and that his
conduct fell significantly below that which is
required of his professional and legal role in the supply of medication under
NSW Poisons Regulations and under the
Pharmacy Act
The standard of proof required to establish a complaint in this jurisdiction
is the civil standard. However, because of the seriousness
of the allegations
and the gravity of the consequences, the Board must be comfortably satisfied
that the particulars of the Complaint
have been established
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
In this case, the Respondent has written to the Board advising:
“I would like to advise you that I will not be attending my hearing
at the Pharmacy Board as I do not intend to mount a defence.
However, I would like to apologize unreservedly for my actions in this
entire matter. I made a gross error of judgment in the first
instance with Ms
and then found myself embroiled in a situation from which I lacked
the skills and courage to extract myself.
The emotional and physical toll taken on my wife and myself has been very
hard to bear. I feel unable to endure any further scrutiny
and humiliation and
look forward to this whole sorry episode being put to rest.”
The Board, having considered the evidence before it, and taken in conjunction
with the Respondent’s apology referred to above
which effectively amounts
to an admission of the terms of the Complaint, is comfortably satisfied that the
particulars of the Complaints
have been established and that the conduct
complained of amounts to professional misconduct.
The jurisdiction exercised by the Board is protective, not punitive. There
are dual reasons for this. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
; (1960) 104 CLR at 201-202, the High Court said:
Although it is sometimes referred to as the “penalty of
disbarment” it must be emphasized that a disbarring order is in
punitive in character. When such an order is made, it is made from the public
point of view, for the protection of those
who require protection, and from the
professional point of view, in order that the abuse of privilege may not lead to
loss of privilege.
Pharmacists in private practice have great privileges conferred upon them. A
corollary of these privileges is that obligations are
imposed. There is an
expectation that they will maintain very high standards.
In considering penalty, the Board has not only considered the seriousness of
the conduct, but also the Respondent’s level of
experience as a pharmacist
and his underlying motivation for the conduct complained of.
For about two years following registration as a pharmacist the Respondent
worked as the manager of a pharmacy which primarily supplied
a hospital.
In or about 1988, at approximately age 36, the Respondent began to work for a
pharmacy in Hurstville Grove, Sydney. This is where
the alleged conduct, the
subject of the Complaint occurred.
During the Respondent’s employment with Hurstville Grove Pharmacy he
was primarily left to work as the sole pharmacist on the
premises. After the
first 4 years in the pharmacy, the Respondent was working alone in the pharmacy
without any retail staff.
In evidence before the Board is the report of Tom Jones, psychologist, dated
22 November 2005. That report was prepared at the request
Respondent’s solicitors in relation to the Local Court proceedings. In
that report the Respondent is reported as having
stated that his professional
life as a pharmacist has been one of isolation, working as the sole pharmacist
in a suburban retail
outlet, without having cause to routinely interact with
anybody else in his profession. Further, the Respondent is reported by Mr
to have described his personality as a “loner”.
The conduct, the subject of the Complaint, came to light in or about January
2004 after Ms C, a customer of the Respondent, was admitted
to St George
Hospital following a seizure. Tests showed that Ms C had high blood levels of
Temazepam. Ms C’s doctor notified
the Pharmaceutical Services Branch of
the Department of Health (“
’) and after conducting its own
investigation it was discovered that the Respondent had supplied Ms C with the
Temazepam at
the Hurstville Grove Pharmacy.
On 30 January 2004 the Respondent admitted to the PSB that he had supplied Ms
C with Temazepam tablets over a two year period, and
that over that period the
quantity had increased to 60 bottles per week, each bottle containing 25
tablets. That aggregates to 1500
tablets per week.
Mr Jones states in his report that the Respondent told him that he first
started supplying Ms C with Temazepam in circumstances where
he thought she was
a health care worker - a carer in geriatric services - and thus he regarded her
as a colleague within the health
system. The Respondent told Mr Jones that Ms C
had complained to him that she had chronic difficulty sleeping and the he felt
for her and that he felt that she was a competent and reasonable person
and that the breaking of the rule (of supplying the drug
without a prescription)
did not seem like a big deal at the time. The Respondent also told Mr Jones that
he asked Ms C to bring a
prescription to cover the medication which he had
supplied, but she did not do so. Rather, she returned each week asking for more
supplies of Temazepam without a prescription. Mr Jones reports that the
Respondent then became concerned that Ms C was building up
a tolerance to the
drug, however, by that time he could not stop supplying her because he felt that
if he tried to stop she could
report him to his employer and he could be
dismissed from his employment or de-registered as a pharmacist. Mr Jones further
that the Respondent was aware that Ms C could not stop taking the
medication without adverse consequences, and that, once she was
taking more than
one bottle per week, she could not get this supply from anybody else, without
first explaining to another health
professional how much she had been taking,
and where she had been getting it, and that such explanation would lead to him
being reported
to authorities, thus risking dismissal and de-registration.
Mr Jones reports that the Respondent claimed that he had never had social
had been no sexual
involvement. Mr Jones further reports that the Respondent stated that Ms C did
not threaten to report him to authorities,
but that he believed that if he did
not continue to supply her, outside authorities would become aware of his
behaviour, and he would
be subsequently punished.
The Respondent also told Mr Jones that he did not seek advice on the matter
prior to being apprehended by the authorities partly because
he did not have any
trusted colleagues who were pharmacists, and partly because he believed that if
he were to go to other pharmacists
or professional persons for advice, this
would lead to him being reported, with subsequent adverse consequences for
The Respondent was asked directly by the PSB as to where he thought this was
all going to end, to which he replied:
“I have got no idea. No idea. Because you see the thing is that I
had no idea how many Temaze she was actually taking. As I
say, physically you
could not be consuming 200. So I really don’t know where it was going to
end, either leaving my job or
Regarding payment for the Temaze, the Respondent told Mr Jones that during
the period immediately prior to being apprehended Ms C
was paying between $400
and $500 per week for the supplies.
When asked by the PSB about the modus operandi and how the system had
developed over the years, the Respondent told them that Ms C
would pay by cheque
made out to the newsagency next door so that the proprietor of the pharmacy
would not discover what he was doing.
The Respondent would then arrange for the
cheques to be cashed and the monies would then be fed back into the pharmacy in
small amounts,
bit by bit, to avoid suspicion. The Respondent also admitted to
the PSB that he pocketed about $30 to $40 a week of this money. Mr
Jones reports
that the Respondent described this money as his “tennis money” and
to “compensate me for my anxiety”.
The Respondent was directly asked by the PSB:
“But over a year, and this went on for longer than a year,
didn’t it, but over one year if you are getting $30 or $40
then presumably
you are making about $1,500 to $2,000 a year in the pocket. Is that
And the Respondent said:
“Possibly, yes, but that, I wouldn’t be doing that to
sacrifice my job and my standing and my qualifications for that
There is no evidence before the Board to suggest that there was any
significant incident, occurrence or psychological problem that
initiated the
offence. What seems to have occurred is that the Respondent started to supply Ms
C, albeit without a prescription,
and then found himself digging a hole for
himself over a period of years from which he could not emerge because of fear of
serious harm to himself in the form of dismissal from his employment
and/or professional deregistration. Consideration of his professional
Ms C’s health did not override his fear of consequences for himself.
There are three personal references in evidence before the Board that were
part of the evidence before the Local Court. However, it
is not apparent from
these references as to whether the referees had any knowledge of the conduct,
the subject of the Complaint,
or the purpose for which these references were to
be used. Accordingly, they provide little evidentiary weight.
In considering penalty, the Board has also considered whether there has been
any rehabilitation or reformation of character on the
part of the Respondent.
However, in
Ex parte Tziniolis; Re The Medical Practitioners
(1967) 84 WN (Pt 2) (NSW) 275, Walsh JA said at 286:
"...if a man has exhibited serious deficiencies in his standards of
conduct and his attitudes, it must require clear proof to show
that some years
later he has established himself as a different man...”
very little evidence before the Board as to what insight or personal or
professional development there has been on the part
of the Respondent since the
conduct complained of took place and the explanation of his conduct remains at
best superficial. The
Respondent also did not give evidence before the Board. As
submitted by counsel for the Complainant, critically any explanation to
and any confidence to be placed on whether the Respondent is a fit and proper
person or what his character is, or what standing
he has, should be assessed by
him coming forward to this Board, this hearing, and putting himself forward to
the Board and offering
an explanation so that the Board can be satisfied,
comfortably or otherwise. The Board agrees with this submission. It is what a
pharmacist or doctor or lawyer or other professional tells his own disciplinary
tribunal, or his own peers, which counts in the very
proceedings by which his
conduct is being judged by his own professional body. The Board can also draw an
unfavourable evidentiary
inference with regard to the Respondent’s failure
to give sworn evidence at the hearing in considering the material before
Bowen-James v Walton
(NSWCA, 5 August 1991, unrep);
Association v Meakes
[2006] NSWCA 340
(6 December 2006);
[2007] NSWPB 2
(12 September 2007);
Council of the NSW Bar Association v
[2008] NSWCA 135
(17 June 2008);
[2008] NSWPB 6
October 2008). In this case, the Board draws an inference that there was no
evidence that would have assisted the Respondent’s
case insofar as his
personal and professional development since the conduct, the subject of the
Henry Jedrzejczk failed to renew his registration in January 2008 following
which his name was removed from the register of pharmacists
in New South Wales
for non-payment of renewal fees. Accordingly, it is available to Henry
Jedrzejczk to seek to have his name restored
subject to satisfying the Board
pursuant to
Pharmacy Practice Act
, 2006, (which has now
superseded the Act), that he has the necessary qualifications for registration
as a pharmacist and is of good
character. However, the Complainant in this
matter seeks an order that the Board remove Henry Jedrzejczk’s name from
the register
pursuant to section 20(1) (i) of the Act.
Pursuant to
Pharmacy Practice Act
, 2006 a person
cannot apply for registration (and any such application must be rejected) if:
(a) the person’s registration
is cancelled pursuant to an order of the
Chairperson or a Deputy Chairperson, the Tribunal or the Supreme Court, or (b)
the Chairperson
or a Deputy Chairperson, the Tribunal or the Supreme Court
orders that the person not be re-registered. The only way such a person
again be registered is on a review under Division 3 of
of the order by
which the person’s registration was cancelled.
Pursuant to section 20(3) of the Act:
The Board is not to suspend a person’s registration or remove a
person’s name from the register for having committed an
offence if, having
regard to the nature of the offence or circumstances under which it was
committed the Board is of the opinion
that it does not render the person unfit
in the public interest to be registered as a pharmacist.
The Board is comfortably satisfied that Henry Jedrzejczk is not fit in the
public interest to be registered as a pharmacist in New
South Wales and that his
conduct posed a serious danger to Ms C and to the public. Accordingly, the Board
orders pursuant to section
20(i) of the Act that his name be removed from the
register of pharmacists.
The Board further notes that in the event that Henry Jedrzejczk applies for
registration as a pharmacist in the future it would expect
that he would provide
detailed evidence as to his personal and professional development since the
conduct complained of, including
character references from persons that are
fully aware of the grounds of the Complaint and the findings of the Board and
comment comprehensively on Henry Jedrzejczk’s personal and
professional growth. The Board may also wish to interview Henry
Jedrzejczk face
to face in order to satisfy itself as to what insight Henry Jedrzejczk has
gained and his personal and professional
development since the conduct
complained of. The Board would also expect Henry Jedrzejczk to provide evidence
of current competency
in pharmacy, including evidence of continuing professional
development and training.
The Board directs that a copy of these findings and orders be retained in the
Board’s file for Henry Jedrzejczk to which reference
will be made in the
event that he should make application for restoration to the register of
pharmacists in New South Wales in the
The Board’s order becomes effective one month from the date on which
Henry Jedrzejczk is notified by registered post at his
address as it appears on
the register of pharmacists in New South Wales.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (366 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter