URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMP/2025/855.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:07:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Villanueva v Lifetime Care and Support Authority of New South Wales [2025] NSWPICMP 855; (5 November 2025)
DETERMINATION OF REVIEW
Villanueva v Lifetime Care and Support Authority of New South Wales
[2025] NSWPICMP 855
Mauricia Villanueva
Lifetime Care and Support Authority (CTP Care)
REVIEW PANEL
SENIOR MEMBER:
Susan McTegg
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Margaret Gibson
MEDICAL ASSESSOR:
Dawn Piebenga
DATE OF DECISION:
5 November 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS –
Motor Accidents Compensation Act 1999
treatment and care dispute; domestic assistance; claimant sustained injury in a
motor vehicle accident arising out of a carjacking;
injury to hip, shoulders,
arms, elbows, hands, neck, L4 compression fracture with kyphotic deformity,
chest, pelvis, lower limbs,
and psychological injury; domestic assistance
provided by sister and paid by claimant; Review Panel certified domestic
of eight hours per week was reasonable and necessary and related to
the injury caused by the accident; application by claimant for
increase in care
from 8 hours per week to 12 hours per week; review of certificate of Medical
Assessor (MA) who certified an increase
in hours of domestic assistance from 8
hours to 12 hours per week related to the injury caused by the accident but was
not reasonable
and necessary in the circumstances;
notwithstanding structural progression in vertebral pathology no evidence of
functional deterioration; certificate of MA
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
ASSESSMENT OF TREATMENT AND CARE
Certificate issued under
Accident Injuries Act 2017
Review Panel affirms the certificate of Medical Assessor Castle-Burton dated
13 March 2025.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Mauricia Villanueva (the claimant) was injured in a horrific carjacking on
November 2018.
Villanueva sustained multiple injuries including to her head, shoulders, arms,
elbows, hands, neck, back, chest, hips, pelvis and
lower limbs. She also
sustained psychological injury.
the date of the accident Ms Villanueva was 65 years of age. She is now 71 years
4 September 2019 Ms Villanueva lodged an Application for personal injury
benefits seeking statutory benefits in respect of injury
sustained in the
6 November 2023 Insurance Australia Limited trading as NRMA Insurance (the
insurer) was the relevant insurer with liability
to pay statutory benefits to Ms
Villanueva under the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
(the MAI Act).
However, in accordance with s 3.2(3) of the MAI Act the relevant insurer is now
the Lifetime Care and Support Authority
through CTP Care.
12 March 2020 the insurer accepted liability for statutory benefits after 26
31 May 2022 the insurer declined the claimant’s request for reimbursement
for domestic services provided by Concepcion Villanueva
and Lourdes Tibig, the
claimant’s sisters. On
8 June 2022 the claimant requested an internal
review of that decision.
23 June 2022 the insurer issued a Certificate of Determination – Internal
Review affirming the decision dated 31 May 2022
to decline the request for
reimbursement of domestic services from Concepcion Villanueva and Lourdes
27 July 2022 the claimant filed an application with the Personal Injury
Commission (Commission) seeking a medical assessment to
resolve the treatment
and care dispute between the parties. That dispute was referred to Medical
Assessor Farhan Shahzad.
to Schedule 2, cl 2 of the MAI Act, various matters are declared to be medical
assessment matters, including (b) “whether
any treatment and care provided
or to be provided to the injured person is reasonable and necessary in the
circumstances or related
to the injury caused by the motor accident for the
purposes of section 3.24”.
medical assessment matter is determined in accordance with Division 7.5 of the
MAI Act by a Medical
AND CARE – STATUTORY PROVISIONS
3.24 of the MAI Act refers to an injured person’s entitlement to statutory
benefits for treatment and care as follows:
“(1) An injured
person is entitled to statutory benefits for the following expenses (treatment
and care expenses) incurred in
connection with providing treatment and care for
the injured person-
(a) The reasonable cost of treatment and care,
(b) Reasonable and necessary travel and accommodation expenses incurred by
the injured person in order to obtain treatment and care
for which his statutory
benefits are payable,
(c) If the injured person is under the age of 18 years or otherwise requires
assistance to travel for treatment and care, reasonable
and necessary travel and
accommodation expenses incurred by a parent or other carer of the injured person
in order to accompany the
injured person while treatment and cate for which
statutory benefits are payable is being provided.
(2) No statutory benefits are payable for the cost of treatment and care to
the extent that the treatment and care concerned was not
reasonable and
necessary in the circumstances or did not relate to the injury resulting from
the motor accident concerned.
(d) there will be a need for the services to be provided for those hours per
week and that consecutive period of time and that need
is reasonable in all the
circumstances.”
DOCUMENTS BEFORE THE REVIEW PANEL
Review Panel (the Panel) issued a Direction to the parties on 26 May 2025. The
Panel noted on 18 April 2025 the claimant uploaded
to the portal a bundle of
documents paginated from page 1 to 72 (claimant’s documents).
insurer was directed to upload a bundle of all documents relied upon by the
insurer in the review by 16 June 2025. On 16 June
2025 the insurer uploaded a
bundle of documents paginated from page 1 to 227 (insurer’s
documents).
14 July 2025 the claimant uploaded to the portal an Application to Lodge
Additional Documents (ALAD) with the following additional
statement from
the claimant dated 20 May 2025;
statement from
the claimant dated 13 July 2025;
statement from
the claimant dated 14 July 2025, and
certificate from
Dr Nathan Hartin dated 17 May 2025.
the claimant is self-represented and where the documents sought to be relied
upon are relevant to the issues in dispute between
the parties the Panel has
admitted these documents into evidence.
17 October 2025 the claimant uploaded a letter seeking to rely upon further
information she forgot to mention at the time of the
assessment by Medical
Assessor Piebenga on 22 September 2025. The Panel refuses the claimant leave to
rely upon this letter where
it would be procedurally unfair to CTP Care and
where it was not served more than 14 days before the medical assessment in
Personal Injury Commission Rules
DISPUTE WITH INSURANCE AUSTRALIA LIMITED TRADING AS NRMA
Certificate of Medical Assessor Shahzad
27 July 2022 the claimant filed an application with the Commission seeking a
medical assessment to resolve the treatment and care
dispute between the
dispute was referred to Medical Assessor Farhan Shahzad.
a certificate dated 18 July 2023 Medical Assessor Shahzad certified the request
for payment or reimbursement for domestic services
relates to the injury caused
by the accident and is reasonable and necessary in the
circumstances.
Certificate of the First Review Panel dated 7 February 2024
insurer lodged an application for review of the certificate of Medical Assessor
Shahzad which was referred to a Review Panel comprised
of Member Susan McTegg,
Medical Assessor Dawn Piebenga and Medical Assessor Margaret Gibson (the First
Review Panel).
First Review Panel was of the view Medical Assessor Shahzad conflated the
medical assessment dispute and a merit review dispute.
Under Schedule 2, cl 1
of the MAI Act a dispute about whether the cost of treatment and care provided
or to be provided to the claimant
is reasonable for the purposes of s 3.24(1) of
the MAI Act is a merit review matter.
dispute about the cost of the treatment and care was referred to Merit Reviewer
Cassidy who issued a certificate dated 8 May 2024.
a certificate dated 7 February 2024 the First Review Panel revoked the
certificate of Medical Assessor Farhan Shahzad dated 18
July 2023 and issued a
new certificate certifying as follows:
the need for
domestic assistance for eight hours per week from the date of accident to 6
November 2023 is reasonable and necessary
in the circumstances, and
the need for
domestic assistance for eight hours per week from the date of accident to 6
November 2023 is caused by the accident.
First Review Panel limited the dispute for treatment, namely domestic assistance
6 November 2023 where it would be procedurally unfair to CTP Care to make
a determination after that date where CTP Care was not on
notice of the dispute,
had not been joined to the proceedings or given the opportunity to be
First Review Panel reported pre-accident the claimant and her sister completed
some domestic tasks independently such as shopping,
laundry, cooking, bed making
and cleaning their own bathrooms/bedrooms. They also shared responsibility for
cleaning communal areas
for example, vacuuming and mopping.
First Review Panel concluded as follows:
“137. The medical
evidence concludes that Ms Villanueva has marked osteoporosis in the lumbar
spine and that the healed crush
fracture of the L4 vertebra caused by the
accident has resulted in a kyphosis deformity. Whilst it is likely the
pre-existing osteoporosis
contributed to the fracture and the degree of collapse
and compression Ms Villanueva claims she could stand straight and that she
able to self-care and attend to domestic tasks independently prior to the
accident. Her ability to perform tasks that involve
prolonged standing, walking
unaided, unilateral and bilateral lifting and carrying, reaching above shoulder
height and reaching below
knee height are all limited. She has not returned to
driving and therefore community access is also limited.
Villanueva continues to undertake self-care activities independently, albeit at
a reduced frequency and providing she can pace
relies on her sister(s) to perform all the cooking and domestic duties including
but not limited to, cleaning, laundry, and shopping.”
First Review Panel found that the following domestic assistance was reasonable
and necessary in the circumstances:
(a) meal preparation 20 minutes per day or 2.3 hours per week;
(b) dishes 10 mins per day or 1.17 hours per week;
(c) stripping and changing bedding 20 mins fortnight = 10 mins per week or 0.17
hours per week;
(d) laundry 2 loads at 20 mins per load = 40 mins/week or 0.67 hours per
(e) vacuuming 30 mins/week or 0.5 hours per week;
(f) sweeping and mopping 40 mins/week or 0.67 hours per week;
(g) heavy cleaning bathrooms - 30 mins/week or 0.5 hours per week;
(h) rubbish management 10 mins/week or 0.17 hours per week, and
(i) shopping 45 mins/week or 0.75 hours per week.
First Review Panel also considered one hour per week (on average) for community
access was reasonable and necessary.
DISPUTE WITH CTP
17 May 2024 CTP Care approved domestic assistance for eight hours per week at
$35 per hour from 22 March 2024 to 21 March
31 May 2024 CTP Care refused to approve domestic assistance at a rate of $60 per
hour. A dispute concerning the cost of care was
referred to Merit Reviewer
Cassidy and is not a dispute for consideration by this Panel.
5 June 2024 Ms Villanueva sought an internal review. She requested an increase
in domestic assistance from 8 to 12 hours per week.
Care issued an Internal Review Certificate dated 19 June 2024 declining to
approve an increase from 8 hours to 12 hours per week
of domestic
assistance.
Villanueva filed an application in the Commission for determination of that
dispute. The dispute was referred to Medical Assessor
Certificate of Medical Assessor Kenna
Assessor Kenna issued a certificate dated 5 December 2024 in which he certified
that he was unsure if the request for an increase
in hours from 8 hours per week
to 12 hours per week related to the injury and whether it was reasonable and
necessary in the circumstances.
Medical Assessor Kenna recommended that the claimant be independently assessed
by an occupational therapist.
Thereafter,
the dispute was referred to Medical Assessor Castle-Burton.
CERTIFICATE UNDER REVIEW OF MEDICAL ASSESSOR CASTLE-BURTON
a certificate dated 13 March 2025 Medical Assessor Castle-Burton certified as
The following treatment and care:
the request for
total hours of domestic care (provided by Concepcion Villanueva) to be increased
from 8 hours per week to 12 hours
per week is not reasonable and necessary under
the circumstances, and
the request for
total hours of domestic care (provided by Concepcion Villanueva) relates to the
injury caused.
following treatment disputes were referred to Medical Assessor Castle-Burton for
assessment:
whether the
request for total hours of domestic care (provided by Concepcion Villanueva) to
be increased from 8 hours per week to
12 hours per week is reasonable and
necessary under the circumstances, and
whether the
request for total hours of domestic care (provided by Concepcion Villanueva) to
be increased from 8 hours per week to
12 hours per week relates to the injury
caused by the accident.
Assessor Castle-Burton reported Ms Villanueva submitted she experienced chronic
excruciating back pain which was worsening
and deteriorating. She relied upon a
Dr Hartin dated 23 May 2023 and an MRI report of 13 June 2023
which stated the L4 vertebral fracture with compression is greater than
where it was only said to be 50% at the time of scans on 6 November 2018.
Assessor Castle-Burton assessed Ms Villanueva in the home she now shares with
her sister Concepcion at Westmead on 27 February
2025 whilst the assessment
undertaken by Medical Assessor Piebenga and the occupational therapy assessment
undertaken on
21 August 2023 took place in the claimant’s previous
Assessor Castle-Burton reported the claimant’s functional presentation was
essentially the same as that described in
the Panel’s certificate of 7
February 2024, and in the report of the occupational therapist in the Initial
Needs Assessment
24 August 2023. She concluded there was no physical
change representing functional deterioration to warrant an increase from 8 to
hour per week. Her assessment of the claimant’s reasonable and necessary
care was eight hours per week for meal preparation,
cleaning bathroom,
vacuuming, cleaning of common areas, mopping floors, laundry, sheet changes,
shopping and community access/transportation.
claimant lodged an application for review of the medical assessment of Medical
Assessor Castle-Burton on 22 April 2025 within
30 days of the date on which the
certificate of Medical Assessor Castle-Burton was made available to the
20 May 2025 the delegate of the President being satisfied there was reasonable
cause to suspect that the medical assessment was
incorrect in a material respect
referred the medical assessment to the Review Panel (the Panel).
127 to 130 of the Personal Injury Commission Rules 2021 (PIC Rules) are made
pursuant to Part 5 of the PIC Act. A review panel
determines how it conducts and
determines the proceedings and may determine the proceedings solely based on the
written application.
review is by way of a new assessment of all matters with which the medical
assessment is concerned. However, the insurer having
conceded that the treatment
and care did relate to the injury resulting from the accident the Panel is only
required to determine
if the treatment and care was reasonable and necessary in
the circumstances.
THE EVIDENCE CONSIDERED BY THE PANEL
Statement of Ms Villanueva
Villanueva provided a statement dated 27 March 2025 in support of the
application for review. She also provided letters dated 20
May 2025 and 13 July
2025 which incorporates both evidence and submissions.
stated objective evidence of her deteriorating condition is provided by the MRI
of her lumbar spine dated 13 June 2023 which shows
> 70% compression at L4
whereas the MRI of 6 November 2018 only showed > 50% compression at L4.
Villanueva stated the MRI of 15 March 2025 shows that the L4 vertebra is now
non-stop excruciating pain
which is making moving very hard.
reports experiencing more severe and intense excruciating pain which has meant
not only could she not sleep but she could not
get up from bed. Ms Villanueva
states her medication namely Pregabalin has increased from 25mg to 75mg twice a
Villanueva states before the injury she cooked her own Filipino meals, she
cleaned her own home, she washed her dishes, she washed
her clothes and did her
laundry, she did her own grocery shopping and she watered her plants. She
states before the accident her
sister Concepcion did not perform domestic duties
for her. In particular Ms Villanueva stresses
Medical Assessor Castle-Burton
did not take into account the time required to cook Filipino hot meals, which Ms
Villanueva states
is one hour per meal or a total of three hours per day.
Villanueva states the intense and chronic excruciating pain she experiences
means she is unable to perform even the most basic
personal care without
assistance, for example getting dressed, taking off clothes, putting on and
taking off shoes and socks, toileting,
showering, washing her back and lower
extremities. She states she cannot bend, stretch out or twist her body, pick up
things accidentally
dropped on the floor, take her BP, prepare a hot milk drink,
a hot water drink, or a hot water bottle for constipation and other
domestic care.
Villanueva states she cannot sleep because of the intensity of the pain and nor
can she get up from her bed because of the pain.
As a result Dr Ong, the
claimant’s general practitioner prescribed an additional pain killer
Lyrica Pregabalin 25mg which
has since been increased to 75mg.
Villanueva describes pre-injury recreational and social activities she enjoyed
and participated in and which she can no longer
of Concepcion Villanueva
Concepcion Villanueva provided a statement dated 19 March 2025 in which she
describes providing physical and psychological care
to the claimant in addition
to care and domestic services. She states she gives the claimant fluids to help
combat constipation,
she listens to the claimant’s stories to fulfil her
psychological needs, she consoles and comforts the claimant and provides
with a warm milk drink. She reported providing the claimant with personal
hygiene including washing, brushing and cleaning the
claimant’s back and
lower extremities. She helps the claimant put on her panties, pants and socks.
She also described assisting
the claimant when she feels heart burn, shortness
of breath, difficulty in breathing, dizziness and fatigue.
Concepcion Villanueva states she provides domestic assistance of 23 hours per
week for the following:
1.5 hours per day or 10.5 hours per week;
dishes and pots - 3.5 hours per week;
washing utensils
– 1.75 hours per week;
vacuuming/dusting
- .5 hours per week;
mopping - .5
hours per week;
1.5 hours per week;
making/changing - .5 hours per week;
bins and rubbish
management - .25 hours per week;
grocery shopping
– 1 hour per week;
cleaning - .5 hours per week;
GP waiting time
and travel – 1 hour per week;
taking BP (blood
pressure) - .5 hours per week;
support and
listening during panic attacks or nightmares - .5 hours per week, and
personal care -
.5 hours per week.
daily diary has been provided showing the meals cooked each day and domestic
services rendered for the period 7 November 2024 to
21 March 2025.
it is asserted domestic assistance and care has been provided for 23 hours per
week the claim made is for 12 hours per week.
Treating medical
18 February 2025 Dr Ong issued a certificate in which she reported the main
complaints were:
excruciating back pain;
unable to get up
from bed due to intense/or severe back pain, and
her back pain
injury is worsening and or
deteriorating.
Ong stated the claimant required 12 hours per week of domestic and nursing care
assistance.
Dr Sean Suttor, orthopaedic specialist
18 December 2019 Dr Suttor reported Ms Villanueva had marked osteoporosis in the
lumbar spine.
He also noted the
trauma caused a fracture which resulted in her coronal and sagittal imbalance.
He concluded given the marked osteoporosis
he did not think any surgical
intervention was likely to succeed in correcting her deformity.
a report dated 3 February 2020 Dr Suttor stated the healed crush fracture of the
L4 vertebra with resulting kyphosis deformity
and positive sagittal balance was
related to the accident.
concluded the pre-existing osteoporosis contributed to the fracture and the
degree of collapse and compression. Dr Suttor
reported Ms Villanueva was able to
self-care but would have limitation of domestic duties as they relate to
physical activities due
to her lower back pain and inability to stand for
extended periods.
Dr Nathan Hartin, orthopaedic specialist
17 November 2020 Dr Nathan Hartin reported spinal deformity radiographs
performed on 16 September 2020 demonstrated compression
fracture at L4 where
there is significant local kyphotic deformity creating a trajectory to
significant positive sagittal balance.
He agreed with Dr Suttor that surgery
would be inadvisable given the claimant’s significant osteoporosis. He
stated surgical
correction would require a spinal osteotomy through the L4 level
and instrumentation extending from L2 to the pelvis. He considered
the high risk
of instrumentation failure and the risk of the surgery itself meant the risks of
surgery would outweigh any potential
benefits. He described her injury as
4 March 2025 Dr Hartin reported Ms Villanueva’s low back pain had
deteriorated and was accompanied by paraesthesia extending
down the lower
extremities in a non-dermatomal
distribution.
generalised deconditioning about the lower extremities. He noted knee reflexes
were symmetric and ankle reflexes absent.
25 March 2025 Dr Hartin reported the dominant symptoms are those of axial back
He considered fusion
contra-indicated given severe osteoporosis. He stated the low back pain relating
to the kyphotic deformity and
spinal imbalance was not easily remediable.
23 May 2023 Dr Hartin reported Ms Villanueva felt her lumbosacral kyphotic
deformity had been deteriorating over
He reported there was no
radicular pain into the lower extremities and no neurologic features. He
reported Ms Villanueva had difficulty
standing erect and had a fixed kyphosis at
the thoracolumbar junction. Dr Hartin ordered updated investigations.
12 June 2023 Dr Hartin reviewed the updated
He noted Ms Villanueva
had severe lumbar kyphosis relating to an L4 fracture affecting her ability to
stand erect and her daily activity
tolerance. He encouraged Ms Villanueva to
remain active within the limitations of her symptoms. He noted her persistent
related to the lumbar deformity, positive sagittal balance, the
inability to stand erect and impaired activity tolerance.
Hartin provided a certificate dated 17 May 2025 in which he
“Ms Villanueva has an L4 malunion and significant
kyphotic deformity. This causes severe back pain and severe activity limitation.
It would be reasonable for Ms Villanueva to be provided with 12 hours per week
of domestic and personal care
assistance.”
Rehabilitation Services assessment of Patrick Callaghan, 24 August
Callaghan undertook an activity of daily living assessment on 11 August 2023 at
the claimant’s then home at
Villanueva reported experiencing a mild worsening in symptoms over the last
12-month period noting an MRI scan in June 2023 indicated
a worsening in wedge
compression. She also reported ongoing psychological symptoms including low
mood, anxiety and reduced volition
for self-care, productivity and leisure
tasks. She was engaged in fortnightly psychology treatment via telehealth.
Villanueva lived with her retired sister Concepcion who is her primary
caregiver. He reported she was living in a two-storey home
with three bedrooms
upstairs, a study/bathroom downstairs, two bathrooms, and tile flooring.
Callaghan reported Ms Villanueva had some limitations but was independent in
dressing, grooming, bathing/showering and toileting.
Again, subject to
limitations he reported she was independent in toilet transfer and chair/bed
transfers. He reported Ms Villanueva
mobilised using two walking sticks
although she reported her mobility tolerance had worsened over the preceding 12
months due to
an increase in pain in her lower back and lower limbs. She could
walk approximately 50m in total but had difficulty ascending or
stairs, stating she only utilised the internal staircase approximately twice a
was noted Ms Villanueva did not have the functional capacity and relied on her
sister for the preparation of all meals, for cleaning
of the bathrooms and
kitchen on a weekly basis, for vacuuming and mopping, for laundry and shopping.
Callaghan recommended the continuation of domestic assistance currently provided
by Concepcion. He anticipated she provided a
minimum of eight hours of care per
Ms Villanueva.
lumbosacral spine, 21 November 2019
– the reported
1. Wedge compression fracture L4
– no acute signs.
L45 paracentral herniation contracting right L5 nerve root and associated severe
right foraminal stenosis.
L1/2 herniation with annular tear, no
lumbosacral spine, 13 December 2019
“There is an L4 crush fracture associated with
severe loss of anterior vertebral body height. There is grade 1 anterolistheses
of L3 on L4 by approximately 5 mm. There is focal lumbar kyphosis centred at
L4, as well as a lumbar curvature convex to the
lumbar spine, 13 June 2023
“There is a chronic L4 vertebral crush fracture
associated with up to 70 % of anterior loss of vertebral body height with an
associated vertebral kyphotic deformity, without evidence of associated cauda
equina compression. Multilevel spondylotic changes
described.”
– low dose X-ray spine, 13 June 2023
– the report
– The vertebral bodies have been numbered using the standard of
nomenclature of seven cervical, twelve thoracic and
five lumbar type
Mild broad thoraco-lumbar kyphosis convex to the right. Using the references
of the superior endplate of T4 and the inferior end plate
of L4, the Cobb angle
measures 20 degrees.
Straightening of the normal cervical lordosis and thoracic kyphosis.
Straightening of the normal lumbar lordosis with a focal kyphotic deformity
centred on L4.
Superior endplate fracture of the L4 vertebral body with up to 65% loss of
vertebral body height anteriorly.
Grade 1 retrolisthesis/retropulsion of the posterosuperior aspect of the L4
vertebral body relative to L3 measuring 3mm.
Vertebral body heights within the remainder of the spine maintained.
Intervertebral disc heights within the cervical spine are maintained.
There is pelvic retroversion:
Pelvic incidence
– 61 degrees.
Sacral slope
– 27 degrees.
Pelvic tilt
– 34 degrees.
Kyphosis L1/S1 – 10 degrees.
Marked positive sagittal balance: SVA measures 182mm.
Positive coronal balance: C7-CSL lies 81 mm to the right of the midline at
level of S1.
Overall sagittal spine-pelvic alignment is imbalanced with compensatory
mechanisms by pelvic retroversion and knee flexion (13 degrees).
With the patient standing, the right acetabulum lies 3 mm superior relative
to the left.”
Whole spine, 17 March 2025
– the report
C6/7 spondylosis
and mild to moderate posterior disc bulge;
Moderate left
C7/T1 foraminal narrowing with possible left C8 nerve root compression;
Mild T11/12 and
very mild T12/L1 posterior disc bulges. No nerve root contact in the thoracic
lumbar spondylosis, and
L1/2 moderate
central posterior disc protrusion and mild spinal canal stenosis, mild L2/3
posterior disc protrusion, marked L4 anterior
wedging and possible compression
of the right descending L5 nerve root are similar to MRI
10 June 2023.
whole spine – EOS, 20 March 2025
– the findings were
recorded as follows:
“Longstanding wedging of the body of L4
is again noted with 60 percent loss in height anteriorly, unchanged from
previous. As
a consequence there is a prominent lower thoracic kyphosis with the
spinal column and upper body angled anteriorly by approximately
32 degrees.
There is an associated thoracolumbar scoliosis to the left. The Cobb angle
measurement of this, measured on the frontal
view, is likely to be exaggerated,
given the upper body
Medico-legal assessments
Dr Uthum Dias, occupational physician
Dias assessed the claimant and provided a report dated 16 October
He reported she has
continued to suffer from debilitating symptoms of lower back pain, stiffness and
discomfort and associated pins
and needles radiating down both legs. She also
suffered from tension headaches, fatigue and psychological comorbidity because
the accident.
Dias reported Ms Villanueva can undertake self-care activities but has to pace
reported Ms Villanueva lived with her two older sisters and relies on them to
perform all the cooking and domestic cleaning duties
at their home. She is also
unable to do grocery shopping.
Dias reported Ms Villanueva walked with a stiff antalgic gait pattern relying on
a four pronged walking stick. He described “a
bent kyphotic posture”
and noted she sat throughout the history taking component of the assessment
leaning forward indicating
significant discomfort in her lumbar spine.
Dias diagnosed an acute closed head injury and soft tissue injuries to the left
shoulder, left elbow, right and left hips, both
legs and both feet and toes. He
also reported:
“Ms Villanueva suffers from chronic severe
lower back pain, stiffness and discomfort with an associated chronic right L5
radiculopathy
and an associated L3/L4 anterolisthesis (grade 1 – 5mm)
secondary to an acute severe L4 crush fracture with a (52% loss of
body height) and secondary significant focal lumbar kyphoscoliosis.”
reported as a result of her lower back pain Ms
Villanueva:
“had to rely on her sisters to perform all the
cooking and domestic cleaning duties at their home. ... She has also not been
able to perform grocery shopping duties on a consistent basis since the subject
incident and relies upon her older sisters to perform
grocery shopping
Dias concluded Ms Villanueva had required approximately eight hours of domestic
assistance per week on a regular basis over the
previous 23 months and was
likely to continue to require approximately seven hours of domestic assistance
per week on an indefinite
Dr John Bosanquet,
orthopaedic surgeon
Bosanquet assessed the claimant and provided a report dated 29 October
He reported Ms Villanueva
lived with her two sisters and was not doing any cooking or cleaning. He
reported prior to the accident
Ms Villanueva provided her share of domestic
examination he reported:
“This revealed a very wasted and
frail woman, measuring approximately 150cm and weighing around 45kg. She was
flexed to at least
45º and walked slowly. She had a marked kyphosis and a
scoliosis to the right. Thus, her lumbar spine movements were restricted.
on the couch, her straight leg raise on both sides was to 60º. There was no
deficit in her lower limbs and her reflexes
were present. She was tender over
the L4 spinous process where there was a kyphotic prominence.”
Bosanquet concluded Ms Villanueva’s restrictions were difficulty with
prolonged sitting or standing and driving distances.
He reported she required
assistance with activities of cleaning, shopping, cooking, and washing and would
require assistance in the
future. He specifically stated she would require
assistance with vacuuming, dusting, cleaning the bathroom, washing, and hanging
out the washing and noted the assistance would be required for the long term.
Medical Assessments
Medical Assessor Ian Cameron, 3 July 2021
Assessor Cameron assessed the claimant on 22 June 2021 and provided a
certificate dated 3 July
concluded soft tissue injury to the toes, feet, legs, left elbow, left shoulder,
hips, head, cervical spine, and thoracic spine
had resolved.
assessed 20% whole person impairment (WPI) in respect of the L4 compression
fracture of the lumbar spine caused by the accident.
He assessed 0% WPI in
respect of scarring.
Medical Assessor Doron Samuell, 31 August
Assessor Samuell assessed the claimant on 19 August 2021 and provided a
certificate dated 31 August
He certified the claimant
had sustained post-traumatic stress disorder caused by the accident resulting in
a WPI of 26%.
SUBMISSIONS
Claimant’s submissions
claimant provided submission in support of the Application for review.
claimant submits the Medical Assessment Certificate of Medical Assessor
Castle-Burton dated 13 March 2025, is incorrect on the
basis of the Medical
Assessor’s alleged assertion that the applicant has “no evidence of
weakening and deterioration”.
Ms Villanueva submits on the contrary, she
has objective evidence of weakening and deterioration of her condition,
(a) a comparison of the radiological evidence taken on 6 November 2018, when
compared with that of 13 June 2023, demonstrates an
increase in the compression
of her L4 fracture from 50% to 70%;
(b) an MRI taken of the applicant’s lumbar spine on 15 March 2025
demonstrates that while there has been a reduction of the
compression of the
fracture, the fracture is impacting her L4/5 nerve root;
(c) reports of Dr Nathan Hartin dated 4 March 2025 and 25 March 2025 indicated
the applicant has an absence of reflexes of her ankles
and toes which she
submits are evidence of weaking and deterioration, and
(d) the applicant’s general practitioner, Dr Julie Ong, has increased her
medication to compensate for an increase in pain
and therefore further weakening
and deterioration.
Villanueva relies upon the certification provided by Dr Ong that she requires 12
hours of domestic assistance and care. Ms Villanueva
states the opinion of Dr
Ong should be given significant weight where she has been treating the claimant
for over three decades,
has seen the claimant multiples times and is aware of
the claimant’s limitations and impairments.
Villanueva provided further submissions by letter dated 20 May
stated objective evidence of her deteriorating condition is provided by the MRI
of her lumbar spine dated 13 June 2023 which shows
> 70% compression at L4
whereas the MRI of 6 November 2018 only showed > 50% compression at L4.
Villanueva stated the MRI of 15 March 2025 shows that the L4 vertebra is now
non-stop excruciating pain
which is making moving very hard.
submissions dated 14 July 2025 refer not only to the certificate of Dr Ong but
also the certificate of Dr Hartin who states
it would be reasonable for Ms
Villanueva to be provided with 12 hours per week or domestic and personal care
assistance.
Insurer’s submissions
Care provided submissions dated 12 July
Care notes, in accordance with the prior decision of the Commission, that it
does not dispute that the applicant is entitled to
the provision of/and
reimbursement for attendant care services in accordance with s 3.24(2) of the
Care submits the claimant has failed to provide persuasive evidence which
supports a deviation from the determination of the Commission
that eight hours
of attendance care services was reasonable and necessary.
is noted that Dr Dias, occupational physician in his report dated 16 October
2020 recommended the claimant would require approximately
seven hours of
domestic assistance per week on an indefinite basis.
is made to paragraph 106 of the certificate of Merit Reviewer Cassidy where she
“the Review Panel’s examination findings, the
documents from the applicant’s sisters and the applicant’s own
evidence is that assistance is being provided with cooking, cleaning, laundry,
shopping and bedmaking. The applicant was said to
be independent in toileting
and grooming. The type of care being provided is not nursing care but domestic
Care provided submission dated 9 August
The claimant asserted the
deterioration in her condition as evidenced by the MRI scan of 10 June 2023
which demonstrated >70%
compression at L4 led to a requirement for assistance
with showering, toileting, dressing, picking things up from the floor, heavy
lifting and medication management. However, CTP Care notes the Activities of
Daily Living Assessment Report dated 24 August 2023
reported she was independent
with limitations with respect to dressing, grooming, bathing/showering and
CTP Care notes at the time of her assessment by the Review Panel the claimant
reported she could shower herself, but she
didn’t want to shower. It was
also reported the claimant demonstrated independent transfers on and off her
couch and mobilising
to the toilet. She was also observed to independently
transfer on and off the toilet slowly and carefully. The Medical Assessor
reported Ms Villanueva remained independent with personal care.
respect to meal preparation CTP Care notes Ms Villanueva has submitted that due
to the compression fracture of her L4 vertebra
her body does not function as
well causing her to lose her appetite. To combat this, she only wants to eat
freshly cooked hot Filipino
meals cooked by her sister and as a result her meal
preparation requirements are approximately 10.5 hours per day. However, at
time of the assessment by the Medical Assessor as part of the review it was
“Concepcion has prepared enough food for two people.
Ms Villanueva noted that it does not take her sister a lot of extra time
was preparing her own meals previously. She added ‘we eat the same
Care disputes there is sufficient evidence to support an increase in domestic
care to 12 hours per week.
THE ASSESSMENT
Review of imaging
Assessor Gibson reviewed the imaging and noted some progression in the severity
of the spinal condition over time, although
she also noted this would be
expected in any case as the claimant ages.
reviewing the reports of the MRI scan of 17 March 2025 in comparison to the
13 June 2023 study, the radiologist comments that the L5 nerve root
compression is similar, however there does appear to be a new
annular tear at
L1/2, as this was not noted on the previous imaging. Comparing the X-rays whole
spine 20 June 2023 and 20 March
2025, the radiologist comments that the L4
compression is unchanged, however it has increased in comparison with earlier
Panel notes both her treating doctors, namely her general practitioner and
orthopaedic surgeon have concluded her symptoms and
restrictions are increasing
over time. Dr Hartin in his statement dated 4 May 2025 states Ms
Villanueva’s low back pain had
deteriorated and there were absent ankle
reflexes. Dr Ong appears also to be of the same view, and
Villanueva’s medication for pain has been increased over time. These
practitioners who have consulted the claimant over time
have been seeing her
over time, were of the view her situation is worsening, and she requires more
Assessor Kenna had recommended an occupational therapy report, as the actual
number of hours required cannot be assessed based
only on medical evidence and
whilst the imaging studies and examination findings assist with establishing
impairment, the need for
domestic assistance is a disability question.
Assessment by Medical Assessor Piebenga
Assessor Piebenga conducted her assessment of Ms Villanueva on 22 September 2025
to determine whether her domestic care needs
should be increased from 8 hours to
12 hours per week.
assessment took place at her residence with her sister Ms Concepcion Villanueva
present throughout.
General presentation and home
environment
Villanueva presented as a petite 71-year-old woman with chronic pain, evidenced
by careful, guarded movements and visible discomfort
during positional changes.
She was cooperative and provided detailed responses, although she was somewhat
repetitive in emphasizing
the impact of her injuries.
current two-storey home is significantly more suitable for her needs than her
previous Woodcroft residence. The main level contains
her bedroom with ensuite
(equipped with shower chair and over-toilet aid), an open-plan kitchen/dining
area, and wide tiled corridors.
This layout improvement has eliminated the need
to climb 15 stairs to access a bathroom, directly improving her showering
from "every three months" to one to two times
Physical presentation and functional
Villanueva demonstrates significant postural abnormalities consistent with her
L4 compression fracture: fixed forward flexion of
45°, inability to achieve
upright posture, marked thoracolumbar kyphosis, and slight scoliosis.
ambulates using two walking sticks with slow, deliberate gait, reduced step
length, and visible pain behaviours. These findings
are identical to
observations by Mr Callaghan in August 2023 and Medical Assessor Castle-Burton
in March 2025.
assessment revealed severe constant pain (9/10 at rest, 10/10 with movement) at
the L4 level, managed with Osteomol 665mg TDS,
Pregabalin 25mg BD, and monthly
Actonel. Standing tolerance is limited to two to three minutes with support. She
cannot bend to pick
up items from the floor, carry objects while walking, lift
more than 1-2 kg, or reach low cabinets or overhead shelves.
following photographs show a comparison between Ms Villanueva’s earlier
presentation on 9 January 2024 and her recent presentation
on 22 September
[IMAGE UNABLE TO RENDER]
Photos 1 and 2: Photos taken on 9 January 2024 (previous assessment)
[IMAGE UNABLE TO RENDER]
Photos 3 and 4: Photos taken on 22 September 2025 (current assessment)
[IMAGE UNABLE TO RENDER]
Photos 5 and 6: Mobilising with two walking sticks (9 January 2024)
[IMAGE UNABLE TO RENDER]
Photos 7 and 8: Mobilising with two walking sticks (22 September 2025)
Personal care
Villanueva is essentially independent with personal care tasks when using
adaptive equipment, though tasks are performed slowly
with discomfort. She
showers one to two times weekly with occasional assistance from her sister for
washing her back and lower legs
(cannot reach due to restricted range of
motion). She independently manages toileting, dressing (in seated position), and
This represents notable improvement from 2022 when she accessed
bathroom "only twice per year" at her previous residence, directly
attributable
to environmental modifications and appropriate equipment.
[IMAGE UNABLE TO RENDER]
Photos 9 and 10: Independent with toilet transfer using Over Toilet Aid (OTA)
9 January 2024 and 22 September 2025
[IMAGE UNABLE TO RENDER]
Photos 11 to 13: Independent with seated transfer from couch 9 January 2024
22 September 2025 and shower stool on 22 September 2025
Assessor Piebenga considered Ms Villanueva's independence could be further
enhanced through provision of a long-handled sponge
(for washing back and lower
extremities), dressing stick/reacher, and sock aid with long-handled shoehorn.
Strategic reorganization
of her wardrobe combined with training in compensatory
techniques would significantly reduce reliance on caregiver assistance.
Ms Villanueva demonstrates capacity for independent personal care with adaptive
equipment, Medical Assessor Piebenga recognized
that incidental assistance may
occasionally be required. This includes assistance with occasional transfers
when pain levels are
elevated, retrieving clothing items from areas outside her
accessible range despite wardrobe reorganization, assistance during showering
when balance or pain is compromised, and other brief personal care supports that
arise intermittently. Such assistance is typically
brief (one to two minutes per
instance) but occurs sporadically throughout the week. Medical Assessor Piebenga
therefore recommended
an allocation of 15 minutes per week for incidental
personal care assistance, acknowledging that while
Ms Villanueva has
established capacity for independence in these areas, the unpredictable nature
of chronic pain and her functional
limitations may necessitate occasional
Domestic tasks
Villanueva's functional limitations have remained remarkably consistent across
assessments from June 2022 through September 2025,
despite moving to a more
accessible home and the passage of nearly three years. While imaging shows
progression of vertebral compression
(50% in 2019 to 70% in 2023), this
structural deterioration has not translated into functional regression. She
presents with the
same mobility limitations, standing/walking tolerance, and
inability to perform domestic tasks as documented since her
Meal preparation, cooking and washing
Pre-accident,
Ms Villanueva prepared traditional Filipino meals using fresh ingredients,
estimating two hours per day initially, though
at reassessment she claimed 21
hours weekly (1 hour × 3 meals × 7 days) and "sometimes up to 5 hours
for one meal." Her
sister Concepcion separately prepared her own meals while
working full-time as a registered nurse.
Ms Villanueva is completely reliant on her sister for meal preparation.
Concepcion stated: "before Mauricia's accident,
I would spend 15 to 20 minutes
making breakfast and 45 minutes for lunch and dinner, approximately 2 hours a
day. Now I cook for
both of us but there has been no increase in the time it
takes me to cook for one person or two." Medical Assessor Piebenga observed
Concepcion preparing a traditional Filipino lunch with fresh protein and
vegetables. Regarding dishes, Ms Villanueva claimed it takes
45 minutes per
meal, though Concepcion acknowledged being "a clean freak" who can take "over an
hour to wash a small number of dishes."
Ms Villanueva can access the kitchen and refrigerator using walking sticks, she
cannot remove items safely or carry anything
limitations (inability to stand >2-3 minutes, carry objects while using
sticks, reach low/high
shelves) create genuine barriers to meal
preparation.
Assessor Piebenga concurred with Medical Assessor Castle-Burton's allocation of
30 minutes daily (3.5 hours weekly) for meal
preparation and dishes. The
critical principle is that reasonable and necessary care refers to additional
time taken, not total time
spent. Concepcion was cooking her own Filipino meals
pre-accident and continues to do so. The additional time of approximately 10
minutes per meal appropriately captures incremental time to prepare one extra
portion (particularly when using rice cooker and slow
cooker allowing task
co-mingling), plate and deliver meals, complete additional washing up, and
provide fetch/carry assistance throughout
Pre-accident,
Ms Villanueva drove independently to West Point Shopping Centre weekly, managing
all physical aspects independently.
Concepcion shopped for herself four times
weekly (twice to fruit shop in Wentworthville, twice to Westmead
Woolworths/Coles), spending
15-20 minutes in store plus driving time.
Villanueva is now completely reliant on her sister for shopping. However,
Concepcion continues shopping four times weekly as she
did pre-accident. The
frequency and duration remain unchanged.
Assessor Piebenga agreed with Medical Assessor Castle-Burton's allocation of 45
minutes weekly. The critical factor is identifying
incremental additional time
directly attributable to Ms Villanueva's injury, not total shopping time.
Concepcion's shopping frequency
is unchanged. There is no extra travel time,
parking, or trolley management time. Based on Concepcion's own estimate of 15-20
per shop, the incremental time to select items for a second person is
realistically less than 10 minutes per trip. Across four shopping
trips weekly,
this represents approximately 30-40 minutes additional time. The allocation of
45 minutes weekly generously captures
the reasonable additional time to shop for
two rather than one, accounting for item selection, checkout processing, and
Cleaning tasks
Pre-accident,
Ms Villanueva and Concepcion shared cleaning responsibilities equally.
Villanueva claimed she completed: light cleaning 10 minutes daily (70 minutes
weekly), vacuuming weekly (30 minutes), sweeping/mopping
weekly (40 minutes),
her own bathroom cleaning weekly (20 minutes each), alternating shared bathroom
fortnightly (20 minutes).
Villanueva now relies entirely on her sister for all cleaning. However,
Concepcion described herself as "a clean freak" who chooses
to clean frequently
and meticulously, admitting to cleaning two unused upstairs bathrooms and
vacuuming unused upstairs areas twice
weekly, "to keep busy." Medical Assessor
Piebenga’s observations confirmed the home was immaculately clean and well
consistent with the observations of both
Mr Callaghan in 2023 and
Medical Assessor Castle-Burton in 2025.
Assessor Piebenga concurred with Medical Assessor Castle-Burton's allocation of
70 minutes weekly (20 minutes vacuuming/general
tidying, 20 minutes bathroom
cleaning, 30 minutes mopping), recognizing the need to differentiate between
reasonable and necessary
care and tasks undertaken by choice. It is not
reasonable to fund cleaning of unused bathrooms or areas not accessed by either
The care reasonably required relates to Ms Villanueva's
bedroom/ensuite, shared common areas downstairs, and routine kitchen/laundry
tidying - tasks previously shared that are now completed solely by
Concepcion.
Laundry and bed linen changes
Pre-accident,
Ms Villanueva completed three loads weekly (lights, darks, linens). She is now
entirely dependent on her sister for
laundry and bed linen changes, as she
cannot carry laundry from her bedroom, bend to load/unload the top-loading
machine, hang items
outside, or manage the physical demands of changing bed
linen. She noted: "I can fold it when I am sitting on the couch. I try to
this on days when I am feeling good. I know this is one thing I can do,"
demonstrating insight and willingness to contribute where
currently completes approximately three loads weekly for Ms Villanueva plus
weekly bed linen changes. Ms Villanueva noted
increased night perspiration
requiring more frequent changes of nightwear and sheets.
Assessor Piebenga supported the allocation of three loads weekly:
sorting/loading (5 minutes), hanging (10 minutes), folding
(5 minutes) = 20
minutes per load (1 hour total), plus weekly bed linen change (20 minutes),
totalling 1 hour 20 minutes weekly.
This fairly reflects additional support
required while recognizing Ms Villanueva's capacity to contribute with folding
Community access and transportation
Villanueva has not driven since her injury and has surrendered her driver's
license. She experiences significant anxiety with car
travel and exacerbation of
back pain with sitting. She relies entirely on Concepcion for transport,
primarily limited to monthly
GP visits at Rooty Hill (1.5 hours round-trip plus
0.5 hour waiting time) and occasional specialist appointments.
Pre-accident,
Ms Villanueva was highly active as a parish catechist coordinator, teaching
scripture full-time voluntarily, and managing
her own travel including
international trips. She no longer attends church, social functions, or group
gatherings, attributing this
to anxiety, low mood, self-consciousness regarding
her posture, and social withdrawal.
Assessor Piebenga found there was a need for the allocation of one hour weekly
for community access support. This captures
average additional time for medical
appointment travel, recognizing variation between weeks while representing a
practical estimate
of time reasonably required for her current level of
community access, without extending to social transport she is not presently
engaging in.
Comparison with previous assessments
key observation is the remarkable consistency in Ms Villanueva's reported
functional abilities across occupational therapy assessments
over nearly three
years. Despite the passage of time and change to a more accessible home, her
functional limitations have remained
essentially stable. While she has
demonstrated improvement in personal care (particularly showering frequency) due
to environmental
modifications, her capacity to engage in domestic tasks
requiring standing, walking, bending, lifting, and carrying has not meaningfully
imaging demonstrates progression of L4 vertebral compression from 50% (November
2019) to 70% (June 2023) - documented structural
deterioration of approximately
20 percentage points over 3.5 years. However, this structural change has not
been accompanied by corresponding
functional deterioration. Ms Villanueva
presents with the same mobility limitations, standing/walking tolerance, and
inability to
perform domestic tasks as consistently documented since her
Assessor Castle-Burton's assessment of 27 February 2025 provides valuable
corroborating evidence. Medical Assessor Piebenga
noted her findings aligned
closely with the findings of Medical Assessor Castle-Burton; identical postural
abnormalities (fixed 45°
flexion, marked kyphosis), identical mobility
patterns (slow, pain-producing, reliant on two sticks), identical transfer
observations
(extremely slow with significant discomfort), and identical
functional limitations. Both assessments found Ms Villanueva essentially
independent with personal care when using equipment but unable to participate
meaningfully in domestic tasks.
concordance between two independent occupational therapy assessments conducted
one year apart in different home environments provides
strong evidence regarding
Ms Villanueva's actual functional capacity and care needs. Both assessments
concluded eight hours per week is reasonable and necessary.
DETERMINATION
Alleged deterioration in function
Villanueva's submission emphasized deterioration citing progression of vertebral
compression (50% to 70%), worsening "chronic excruciating"
back pain, and
increased pain medication (Pregabalin addition). The key question in determining
care is not whether she experienced
progression of vertebral pathology (imaging
clearly demonstrates this), but whether structural progression resulted in
regression from her established baseline disability level.
indicates Ms Villanueva reached a functional plateau following her injury,
documented by multiple medical specialists: Dr
Suttor in February 2020 concluded
her condition had "stabilised" and in October 2020 Dr Dias concluded her
"physical injuries have
stabilised and she has reached maximum medical
improvement." The assessment of Medical Assessor Piebenga demonstrated her
abilities remain at this established plateau level. There is no
evidence of functional regression despite structural progression.
increased pain medication, Pregabalin addition represents a modification to pain
management but does not objectively demonstrate
functional deterioration. Ms
Villanueva’s self-reported pain levels (9/10) are consistent with previous
assessments.
Hours of care
Villanueva's submission included diaries documenting her sister providing
approximately 23 hours weekly of domestic care, which
is presented as evidence
that eight hours weekly is inadequate. The Panel notes several issues arise with
relying on self-reported
(a) concurrent activities - many activities recorded occur simultaneously with
tasks Concepcion would perform regardless of Ms Villanueva's
presence including
preparing household meals, cleaning common areas, and shopping for groceries;
(b) reasonable efficiency - diary entries suggest time allocations exceeding
reasonable expectations, with meal preparation time
substantially exceeding
Ms Villanueva's own pre-accident time and shopping time exceeding reasonable
duration given proximity to shops, and
(c) distinction between care provided and care required - family members may
choose to provide assistance beyond what is objectively
necessary due to
affection or desire for comfort, but the test is what objectively needs to be
provided, not what is actually being
has ceased working as a registered nurse and is available at home full-time. She
may naturally provide companionship, prepare
elaborate meals, maintain the home
to exceptionally high standards, and anticipate needs before assistance must be
requested. While
these caring behaviours are admirable, they exceed the
threshold of reasonable and necessary care for compensation purposes.
appropriate comparison is between Ms Villanueva's pre-accident contribution to
household tasks (approximately 50% share as both
sisters maintained the home
together), her current inability to contribute due to injuries, and the time
reasonably required to complete
her share of tasks. On this basis, the Panel
considers eight hours weekly represents reasonable and necessary allocation to
Ms Villanueva's lost contribution.
are required to pay reasonable cost of treatment and care needs. In determining
whether treatment and care is reasonable
and necessary in the circumstances, the
Panel has considered:
Ms Villanueva's
genuine functional limitations caused by accident injuries;
the extent to
which these limitations prevent her from completing pre-accident domestic tasks;
reasonably required to complete these tasks on her behalf;
consistency of
findings across multiple independent assessments;
the absence of
functional deterioration despite structural progression, and
the need to
distinguish between care actually provided versus care objectively
currently approved eight hours weekly:
consistently recommended across multiple occupational therapy assessments,
namely the assessment of Mr Callaghan in August
2023, the first assessment by
Medical Assessor Piebenga in 2024, the assessment of Medical Assessor
Castle-Burton in February 2025
and the assessment of Medical Assessor Piebenga
of 22 September 2025;
substantial support for Ms Villanueva's domestic care needs;
acknowledges her
genuine functional limitations caused by the accident-related injuries, and
appropriate compensation for care provided by her
The Panel affirms the certificate of Medical Assessor Castle-Burton dated 13
March 2025.
Insurer’s documents p
Section 7.20 of the MAI
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Rule 128 of the PIC Rules.
Claimant’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Claimant’s documents p
Claimant’s documents p
Claimant’s documents p
Claimant’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Claimant’s documents p
Claimant’s documents p
Claimant’s documents p
Claimant’s documents p
Claimant’s documents p
Claimant’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Insurer’s documents p
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (622 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter