URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2019/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Turner [2019] NSWMHRT 4; (4 December 2019)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO TURNER AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
TRIBUNAL ON
31 MAY 2019
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2019] NSWMHRT 4
Mental Health Inquiry
s 162 Application to Publish
or Broadcast Name
Judge Richard Cogswell SC
DATE OF HEARING:
15 October 2018
1. The applicant is a journalist with an Australian television station. He
applied on behalf of the television station for the Tribunal’s
publish or broadcast the name of Turner in connection with proceedings before
the Tribunal which will be tomorrow at X
Hospital. The application is made under
section 162
Mental Health Act 2007
. The application is opposed by
Mr Turner through his lawyer Mr Callum Hair. I fixed the television
station’s application to
be heard by me this afternoon, as a preliminary
issue to determine before I preside at Mr Turner’s review tomorrow at X
THE LEGISLATION
Section 162
Mental Health Act 2007
reads as follows:
162 Publication of names
(1) A person must not, except with the consent of the Tribunal, publish or
broadcast the name of any person:
(a) to whom a matter before the Tribunal relates, or
(b) who appears as a witness before the Tribunal in any proceedings,
(c) who is mentioned or otherwise involved in any proceedings under this
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
whether before or after the hearing is completed.
Maximum penalty:
(a) in the case of an individual—50 penalty units or imprisonment
for 12 months, or both, or
(b) in the case of a corporation—100 penalty units.
(2) This section does not prohibit the publication or broadcasting of an
official report of the proceedings of the Tribunal that includes
the name of any
person the publication or broadcasting of which would otherwise be prohibited by
this section.
(3) For the purposes of this section, a reference to the name of a person
includes a reference to any information, picture or material
that identifies the
person or is likely to lead to the identification of the person.”
3. Section 162 is contained in chapter 6 of the Act which deals with the
Mental Health Review Tribunal and is contained in
(Procedures of the
Tribunal) which also contains section 151 of the Act. Section 151 provides
as follows:
151 Procedure at meetings of Tribunal to be informal
(cf 1990 Act, s 267)
(1) Meetings of the Tribunal are to be conducted with as little formality
and technicality, and with as much expedition, as the requirements
of this Act,
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
, the regulations and as
the proper consideration of the matters before the Tribunal permit.
(2) In determining any matter relating to a forensic patient, correctional
patient or other patient or a person detained in a mental
health facility, or
any matter relating to a community treatment order, the Tribunal is not bound by
the rules of evidence but may
inform itself of any matter in such manner as it
thinks appropriate and as the proper consideration of the matter before the
(3) The proceedings of the Tribunal are to be open to the public.
(4) However, if the Tribunal is satisfied that it is desirable to do so
for the welfare of a person who has a matter before the Tribunal
other reason, it may (of its own motion or on the application of the person or
another person appearing at the proceedings)
make any one or more of the
following orders:
(a) an order that the hearing be conducted wholly or partly in
(b) an order prohibiting or restricting the publication or broadcasting of
any report of proceedings before the Tribunal,
(c) an order prohibiting or restricting the publication of evidence given
before the Tribunal, whether in public or in private, or
of matters contained in
documents lodged with the Tribunal or received in evidence before the
(d) an order prohibiting or restricting the disclosure to some or all of
the parties to the proceedings of evidence given before the
Tribunal, or of the
contents of a document lodged with the Tribunal or received in evidence by the
Tribunal, in relation to the proceedings.
Section 162 prohibits the publication or broadcasting
of the name of a person involved in Tribunal proceedings or other material that
may identify any such person, except with the consent of the Tribunal.
(5) The President or a Deputy President or the chairperson of a meeting of
the Tribunal may administer an oath to any person giving
evidence before the
(6) The President or a Deputy President of the Tribunal has, in the
exercise of his or her functions as a member, the same protections
and immunity
as a Judge of the Supreme Court has in the performance of his or her duties as a
4. Mr Hair tendered before me this afternoon extracts from social media
comments following the publicity which the television station
gave earlier this
year to Mr Turner’s trial. He had been charged with murder following the
death of the victim. The Supreme
Court found Mr Turner not guilty by reason of
mental illness on that charge.
5. Mr Hair also called evidence from Dr A, Mr Turner’s treating
psychiatrist. Dr A said that after the publicity earlier this
Turner was very distressed, anxious and worried and extremely concerned about
the safety of his relatives. He also felt
unsafe in the community. Dr A also
gave evidence that other patients at X Hospital were concerned and members of
the staff became
quite anxious. In fact, some staff refused to escort patients
or attend escorted patients and particularly Mr Turner. Mr Turner,
Dr A said, is
“still pretty upset” and has changed his leave plans. After the
publicity earlier this year he did not
go anywhere for weeks.
6. Dr A later gave evidence that a significant concern in this case was Mr
Turner’s absence of consent. The point in this context
was that some
patients may consent to their history of proceedings in the Mental Health Review
Tribunal being the subject to publicity
whereas Mr Turner does not want his
story to be published. He wants to stay out of the media. Dr A also compared the
publication
of details concerning Mr Turner’s psychiatric condition (which
may be contained in reports) with somebody’s personal
medical information,
for example prostate surgery, being published in the media.
SUBMISSIONS
7. The journalist supported his application by written submissions which also
contained additional evidentiary material. His application
was for the
Tribunal’s consent to publish or broadcast Mr Turner’s name as part
of a news report through various media
8. He pointed out that the victim’s death “is a notorious event
widely reported on”. An anniversary is approaching
and provided a
“timely opportunity to examine the current regime for dealing with persons
affected by mental health issues
who intersect with the criminal justice
system.” The purpose of the broadcast was “to provide a fair and
accurate report
of Mr Turner’s upcoming review hearing” to highlight
“how the various interests of mental health patients, criminal
responsibility and community safety are balanced and managed in the current
system.” The community would be interested in a
better understanding of
such issues. It will also touch upon the community interest in mental health
9. He sought “permission to film the hearing” (that is, the
review at X Hospital tomorrow). An alternative was to identify
Mr Turner in
reporting on the hearing.
10. In his submissions, the journalist reviews the considerations referred to
in the Practice Direction about the purposes of section
162. He noted that
hearings are open to the public in any event and he would not be obtrusive.
Details have been widely publicised
and the application would not likely affect
free disclosure of the details. The Tribunal could be closed for the purposes of
evidence about Mr Turner’s personal health information which is
unlikely to be needed by him in any event. He referred to the
wide dissemination
of information and reporting on the killing of the victim by Mr Turner. He also
referred to a public submission
to a public hearing by Mr Turner’s
parents. That is in the public domain. It made reference to Mr Turner and his
involvement
in the death of the victim. There is “already a high degree of
notoriety surrounding [patient], including allusions to his
involvement with
mental health institutions and the mental health system.” Hence there is
unlikely to be any further detriment
as a result of granting the application. He
points out that the legislation “makes it difficult to communicate to the
the reasons behind any potential release of [patient] and the
consideration at play.”
11. He refers to the principle of open justice. The broadcast “is
intended to be a fair an accurate news report of the hearing,
intended to
contain only those details of the hearing that are necessary to achieve [its]
12. The journalist provided the submission by Mr and Mrs Turner to the public
hearing as well as an extract from reporting earlier
this year (unrelated to the
13. Mr Hair supported his opposition in written submissions. He argued that
the onus is on the television station Network “to
persuade the Tribunal as
to why they should be permitted to report” on the review.
14. He made reference to the objects of the
Mental Health Act
principles for care and treatment contained in
of that Act. He made
reference to the decision of Adams J in
A v Mental Health Review
[2012] NSWSC 29
and reported decisions of the Tribunal on its
15. He pointed out that his client was opposed to the granting of the
application which, he argued, is a significant consideration.
His client is
likely to be less open during the review if he knows that there will be a public
report on the review. This could extend
into the future. He referred to the
protection of the safety of the public as an object
(section 40)
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act
and argued that there is a direct
relationship between his client’s mental state “and his level of
risk to members of
the public” so that “permitting the publishing
would be contrary to the objects” of the
Mental Health (Forensic
Provisions) Act
. Other participants in the hearing would be identified by
the filming.
16. The reporting by the applicant earlier this year of the events
surrounding the death of the victim brought about a “substantial
vitriol expressed online by members of the public, particularly in the ...
area.” There were threats of harm and
the location of the unit was
identified. More could be expected by a further report and it “increases
the risk of vigilantism”
which would place his client, “other
forensic patients and members of staff from [X Hospital] at risk.”
17. Promoting the public interest of keeping the community informed about
Tribunal procedures could be achieved by attending a hearing
and reporting
without identifying the parties as well as meeting Tribunal staff.
18. He referred to two published reports regarding section 162 applications
and noted the significance of the fact that, in both,
the patients had
ORAL SUBMISSIONS
19. Mr Hair in his submissions this afternoon referred to the adverse impact
on his client’s health of this publicity and relied
upon the evidence of
Dr A. He argued that it was not in his client’s interests, so far as his
rehabilitation was concerned.
Indeed it was not in the broader community’s
interest that his client’s rehabilitation be jeopardised. He also referred
to the fact that other patients are concerned and affected by the publicity. He
expressed concern about the fact that personal details
of his client’s
medical and psychiatric condition would be published which is different to the
publicity he has already attracted
through his trial for murder where he was
found not guilty by reason of mental illness. He reminded me of the objects of
the legislation,
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act
Mental Health Act
being aimed towards the rehabilitation of forensic
patients. He acknowledged the public interest in a case such as this and the
interest in being better informed about procedures but contrasted this
with information provided about particular patients. He later
suggested three
avenues which are available for media reporting on the general issue of
procedures in the Mental Health Review Tribunal.
They are the published
decisions (which are anonymised) made by the Mental Health Review Tribunal.
Second is the avenue of communications
between the media and officials of the
Mental Health Review Tribunal. Third is the fact that tomorrow’s
proceedings are open
and can be attended provided, of course, participants were
not identified.
20. The journalist, on the other hand, emphasised the frustration members of
the public feel by the fact that they have little or
no knowledge of how a
particular person who was exposed to publicity some years ago as a result of a
very serious event but was then
referred to the Mental Health Review Tribunal.
So the public has no ongoing knowledge of that person’s progress. He
to the confidence of the public in their need to feel safe. He
emphasised his and his employer’s interest in wanting to be
part of the
process and to better understand how a forensic patient such as Mr Turner is
being monitored and dealt with after referral
to the Mental Health Review
Tribunal. He argued that it would be a service to the Tribunal and the public if
proceedings could be
openly reported by reassuring the public that there are
procedures and monitoring in place which can reassure them about the reliability
of the process. As is currently the case, he argues that he cannot report
anything meaningful, for example about how a patient such
as Mr Turner has
improved over the years. The public’s interest, he said, is how a person
who has, as Mr Turner did, admitted
to a notorious homicide without infliction
of punishment or conviction proceeds after the verdict. The question is what has
happening to a person such as Mr Turner since then. He referred to lifting
the “veil of secrecy” to provide accurate
information to the
community. The journalist also emphasised that his position was not so much one
of neutrality but was in Mr Turner’s
favour. This is because it would
enable him to report progress made by Mr Turner and, in addition, the reasons
for any leave which
Mr Turner is permitted including information about risk
assessments or other ways of judging how a patient such as Mr Turner may
enabled to re-join the community for periods of time. This would be in
Mr Turner’s favour rather than against him. Again
he emphasised the
legitimate public interest in the notorious event which involved the death of
the victim.
CONSIDERATION
21. In determining this application, the Tribunal starts with the status quo
section 162
which is that a “person must not, except with the consent
of the Tribunal, publish or broadcast the name of any person”
proceedings relate or who is connected with the proceedings. In this case
Mr Turner has not agreed to the television station’s
application,
thereby saying that he wants the protection afforded to him by the legislation
to be maintained and that there should
be no exception. The Tribunal must
therefore decide whether or not there should be an exception.
22. Mr Hair has led evidence to the effect that there will be an impact on
Mr Turner. It will be an unfavourable impact upon him as
a patient. There
will also be an unfavourable impact on other patients at the hospital where Mr
Turner is a patient. In addition,
it will unfavourably impact on members of the
staff of that hospital. Against this is the public interest in the media
the public of Mr Turner’s progress, the nature and conditions of
his leave and the evidence of any risk assessments. This reflects
a legitimate
role of the media in a case such as this. Mr Hair argues that this interest is
accommodated, although in a confined
way: people can sit in on the hearing. This
statutory access plus the evidence of impact on Mr Turner are significant
23. There is force in Mr Hair’s arguments that his client is less
likely to be forthcoming during the review if he knows that
it is being publicly
reported. The processes of the Tribunal require openness and frankness.
Assessments have been made and need
to be reported on. Confidentiality
encourages the necessary frankness during a Tribunal review which is, in itself,
an important
public health process. Knowing that what you say will not be
confidential and could be published or broadcast is hardly likely to
to a fruitful engagement. A patient is likely to be guarded and less ready to
admit to failures or setbacks.
24. The process of bringing someone from a psychotic killer to a well and
contributing member of the community is not an easy one
in any event. It is a
refined and delicate therapeutic process, as is any psychiatric intervention in
the life of an individual.
It is quite different from the process of sentencing
which requires the public assessment by a judicial officer in open court of
legislative and common law factors. Then there is an appropriate punishment
imposed for the breach of the public’s peace. It
must be remembered that
in former days forensic patients were simply locked up indefinitely and removed
from the community. Instead,
nowadays the focus of the legislation is on a
forensic patient’s wellness, treatment and rehabilitation back into the
The public’s safety is protected not by indefinite removal of a
forensic patient, but by a process (which can be long) of treatment
rehabilitation until they are ready to re-join the community.
25. This perspective of the process gives weight to Mr Hair’s
submission that it is not in the broader community’s interest
client’s rehabilitation be jeopardised. Also, this process of treatment
and rehabilitation takes place within the
environment of a mental health
facility, so that events such as publicity may detrimentally affect that
environment (as the evidence
suggests in this case) and therefore impact on the
progress of the particular patient and other patients. There is also force in
Hair’s point that reporting or broadcasting his review may unfavourably
interfere with his client’s mental state.
26. Cases such as this provide a classic example of the tension inherent in
conflicting public interests. This is not at all unusual.
In this case, the
conflicting public interests are, on the one hand, the public interest enshrined
Mental Health Act
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions)
of public mental health patients, specifically forensic patients,
regaining their health and re-joining the community as rehabilitated
citizens. On the other hand, there is a legitimate public interest in a
notorious and tragic breach of the public peace.
(To describe what happened in
this case in such terms sounds neutral. This is because the charge of murder
resulted in a verdict
of not guilty by reason of mental illness.) The public has
an interest in any breach of its peace. Some breaches will be relatively
This was extreme and took the form of a shocking homicide. The public and media
interest in the events in this case is hardly
surprising.
27. The tension between those two public interests has been resolved by two
provisions of the legislation.
Section 162
Mental Health Act
provides that individuals are not to be identified in the proceedings.
(in the same part of that Act) provides that proceedings are to be open
to the public. This means that the legislature has determined
that the public
interest of patients becoming rehabilitated members of the community is
preserved by prohibiting publication of their
health details and progress. But
the public interest in a tragic event such as the one in this case is preserved
because members
of the public, including the media, are able to attend the
regular reviews of the patient who was responsible.
28. It is hardly surprising that striking the balance would cause a degree of
frustration amongst various people. A patient may be
frustrated and annoyed that
their progress through the Tribunal can be open to anyone, including the media,
who cares to come along
and watch. The reassurance they receive is that no
details about them or about information disclosed within the Tribunal can be
outside the hearing. On the other hand, members of the public, as the
journalist points out, will be frustrated by hearing of a notorious
public event such as the one in this case, but then finding that they cannot
follow the progress of the person responsible
after they are referred to the
Tribunal, unless they themselves attend the Tribunal’s reviews of that
person. It will also
be frustrating for members of the media that they may
attend these hearings but not report to the public what they see and hear.
this is the balance that Parliament has struck between these two competing
29. I will make some further observations about these frustrations. They may
or may not be helpful to the media. It seems to follow
from the legislation
that, once a case reaches the Tribunal, the topic or narrative or
‘story’ for public or media attention
must be limited to the
which are used
in an anonymous range of cases
to assess the ongoing progress of patients. The focus cannot be on the
progress of a particular patient
. In other words, so far as the media are
concerned, they can attend as many hearings as they like and report in general
the thoroughness and reliability (or otherwise) of the processes used
by the Tribunal. What the media cannot do is follow and then
publish the story
of a particular patient, unless the patient consents and the Tribunal too
consents. It probably provides little
comfort to the media to point out that
there are available on the Tribunal website information and reports about the
Tribunal processes,
opportunities to meet members of the Tribunal and personal
attendance at reviews. Nevertheless, these are the options which are
30. One option that was mentioned by Dr A may be worth considering by the
media. Perhaps one particular patient would be prepared
to consent to the media
following their story and progress through the Tribunal. Of course the fact of
consent by the patient may
be controversial. There may be questions of capacity.
There may be questions about the impact on the mental health of the patient
which would need to be determined by the Tribunal. (See Adams J’s remarks
A v Mental Health Review Tribunal
[2012] NSWSC
The Tribunal would need to determine the application under
section 162
unaffected by these observations by me. But it could be explored as a possible
avenue to give more publicity to the processes of
the Tribunal, along with the
personal story of a particular patient.
DETERMINATION
31. I accept the evidence that identifying him and publicising his progress
through the Tribunal reviews will have an unfavourable
impact on Mr Turner, on
his participation in the review and on his therapeutic environment. I am not
satisfied that I ought to consent
in this case to the television station’s
application through the journalist to broadcast and publish tomorrow’s
proceedings
concerning Mr Turner. It is for the reasons I have outlined
that I refuse the application.
His Honour Judge
Richard Cogswell SC
Dated 4 December 2019
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (347 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter