URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCHT/2010/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v STOKER [2010] NSWCHT 2 (25 August 2010)
CHIROPRACTORS ACT 2001
CHIROPRACTORS TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER
HCCC V STOKER [2010] NSWCHT
Complaint Health Care Complaints Commission
Respondent Kristin Scott Stoker
Cedric Vass (Chairperson)
(Chiropractor Member)
Daniel Kostur (Chiropractor Member)
Berglund (Lay Member)
DATE AND PLACE OF HEARING
1 June 2010, Sydney
DATE OF DECISION
25 August 2010
REPRESENTATION
Ms S McNaughton Barrister instructed by the Health Care
Complaints Commission
MR K Dailly Barrister instructed by Mr D Thompson,
CHIROPRACTORS TRIBUNAL – Chiropractor convicted of an offence –
rendered unfit in public interest to practise chiropractic
– not of good
character – failure to notify the Registration Board within 7 days after
LEGISLATION CITED
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
Chiropractors
Summary Offences Act 1988
LIST OF CASES
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
(1938) 60 CLR 337;
Clyne v New South Wales
Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
Austin v Chiropractors Registration
Board of New South Wales
(2009) NSWCHT 2
Saffron v Commissioner of
[1991] FCA 363
(1991) 30 FCR 578
HCCC v Franks
(2007) NSW NMT 4
(2009) NSWNMT 3
HCCC v Bryan
(2009) NSWPST 1
NSWMT 29th April 2010;
HCCC v Abad
(2009) NSWNMT 23
(2008) NSWNMT 22
A Solicitor v Council of the NSW Law
(2004) HCA 1
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal has decided
Tribunal is satisfied that Kristin Scott Stoker (the Chiropractor) was on the
18th May, 2007 in Sydney convicted of one count
of exposing his person in or
within view from a public place under the provisions of
Summary Offences Act 1988
, and Complaint One is therefore proven to the
extent of the conviction. However, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the
Chiropractor
is unfit in the public interest to be registered as a
Chiropractor.
Tribunal does not find Complaint Two proven, but does find Particulars 1, 2 and
3 of Complaint Two proven. In the circumstances,
and taking into account
relevant considerations, the Tribunal does not find that the Chiropractor is not
of good character.
Tribunal does find that the Chiropractor failed to notify the Chiropractors
Registration Board within 7 days after conviction
but in the circumstances the
Tribunal does not find Complaint Three proven that he is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
in relation to that failure.
Tribunal imposes the following condition of registration in the interests of
public safety and confidence: For a period of two
years from this date the
Chiropractor when assessing or treating any female patient under the age of 45
years there must be present
in the treatment room for the duration of the visit
an adult female person unless the patient is accompanied by a parent or guardian
who is male and the patient consents.
The conviction
the 18th May, 2007 the Chiropractor was convicted in the Downing Centre Local
Court under
Summary Offences Act 1988
for the offence of
obscene exposure. The Chiropractor was ordered to undertake 50 hours of
community service.
Chiropractor appealed the Decision to the District Court and the Appeal was
heard on the 12th November, 2008. The Appeal was dismissed
and the Judge
convicted the Chiropractor pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing
Procedure) Act 1999
and ordered him to enter into a good behaviour bond for a
period of six months.
Facts leading up to the conviction
factual circumstances of the offence were that on the 27th September, 2006 the
Chiropractor, it was accepted went to a suburban
shopping centre in the
afternoon and he went to a shop Diva, which is a costume jewellery shop, with a
view to looking for a gift
for his partner. A young lady, approximately 18 years
old at the time, was working in the shop and she was the Complainant in the
police proceedings.
evidence of the Complainant as accepted by the Judge in the District Court
Appeal was:
Chiropractor, just prior to going into the shop, was staring at her from two
locations outside the shop and she felt uncomfortable.
(b) When the
Chiropractor went into the shop she again felt uncomfortable.
Chiropractor was looking at some display cases and when she moved to pick up a
piece of jewellery off the floor he moved so
that when she was getting up she
was faced with his fully exposed penis.
(d) She was
shocked and fairly shortly thereafter got the attention of a security guard.
Chiropractor’s account which was not accepted by the Judge was different.
(a) He did not
stare at the Complainant.
(b) He was some
four to five metres away from her and noticed that she was looking at his groin
area and he apprehended there was
something wrong and then realised a small part
of his penis was exposed.
attempted to rectify the situation in the shop.
Chiropractor left the shopping centre, according to the evidence, in a hurried
fashion, running pursued by the security guard,
and as a result lost his wallet,
He went home had a shower, changed his clothes, including putting on underpants,
and then went back
to the shopping centre to look for his wallet.
was recognised by the security guard and apprehended.
Chiropractor’s explanation to the Police in a record of interview was that
his penis was partly showing because his pants
zipper was faulty and it had come
apart from the bottom. He was also not wearing any underpants, which was not
unusual for him. This
fault of the zipper was verified by the police when they
examined his pants later that day, and was noted in the court documents.
Honour after considering all the above mentioned matters preferred the
Complainant’s evidence and said in her Judgment “it
account that in my view that raises any reasonable doubt in my mind”.
Chiropractor’s background
Chiropractor was born on the 4th May 1976 so he is presently 34 years of age.
After completing his secondary education he attended
Macquarie University. He
obtained a Bachelor of Science Degree on the 12th May, 1999 and a Master of
Chiropractic Degree on the 19th
April, 2001 He also obtained from the Nature
Care College of Remedial Massage Certificate Level 1V.
receiving his qualification he worked for a number of Chiropractors until the
middle of 2004, when he went overseas for 6 months
with his then partner. When
he returned he opened a joint business with his brother who is a qualified
massage therapist and others.
In the year 2007 they moved the business to
premises in George Street, Hornsby. Those premises are owned by the
Chiropractor, his
brother, and their parents. While his brother has recently
left the business, the Chiropractor continues to practise from those premises
with a number of therapists.
Honour in Her District Court Judgment on dealing with the Chiropractor’s
prior good character said “a very significant
matter is the
accused’s prior good character. His good character was attested to by a
significant number of witnesses. His
de facto, his father, his mother, his aunt,
cousin, brother, and there, were, in addition five friends”.
Nature of jurisdiction
Tribunal is entitled to inquire into what may be described as personal
misconduct as distinct from professional misconduct to
determine whether or not
the Chiropractor is a man of good character. Ex parte T Ziniolis N.S.W. Court of
Appeal Holmes JA said in
that case “Good character is not a summation of
acts alone but relates rather to the quality of the person. The quality is
judged by acts and motives, that is to say behaviour and mental and emotional
situations accompanying that behaviour. However,
character cannot always be
estimated by one act or class of act. As much about a person as is known will
form the evidence from which
the inference of good character or not of good
character is drawn.”
Tribunal must be concerned to make sure that the public knows that the standards
and reputation of the chiropractic profession
are being maintained.
Determination
of good character must be made at the present time. Counsel for the Plaintiff
submitted that the Chiropractor continues
to deny his culpability for the
offence and therefore he has demonstrated no insight into his offending and no
remorse and no contrition.
The Tribunal notes that he does admit his penis was
exposed but not to the extent that has been proven. The Tribunal will deal with
the remainder of the submission when considering the report of Dr C Lennings
dated the 2nd May 2010 relied upon by the Chiropractor.
Report of Dr Lennings, Psychologist
read the curriculum vitae of Dr Lennings the Tribunal has determined that he is
an eminently qualified forensic psychologist
with approximately 32 years
experience. He has provided expert evidence, assessments and training in the
field of risk assessment
and clinical decision making in risk assessments.
He reported that the Chiropractor was apologetic towards the victim
although noting that the distress caused by the commission of
the offence was
not intentional.
With regard to notification of the fact of conviction he reports that the
Chiropractor did not appear to have attempted to evade his
responsibility of
informing the Chiropractor’s Registration Board and did appear to have
understood the gravity of the situation.
Tests conducted by Dr Lennings revealed that the Chiropractor has good
impulse control. The static 99 score, which is a prediction
recidivism, place the Chiropractor in the Moderately low risk category. That is
described as if 16 out of every 100 offenders
would be expected to re-offend
over a 15 year period.
Additionally Dr Lennings undertook a dynamic risk assessment and he states
the following in his report
Dynamic risk
risk was assessed with the Sexual Violence Risk – 20 (SVR-20). The SVR-20
is an example of a structured risk assessment
tool that seeks to identify an
offenders standing on a set of criminogenic and sex-offender specific variables.
Structured clinical
assessments generally use a more inclusive approach than
actuarial approaches, sampling a wide number of variables from both static
dynamic risk factors known to be predictive of sexual recidivism and/or violent
crime recidivism. Dynamic risk factors refer
to those variables that can be
moderated by treatment or supervision, such as employment status, suicide or
homicidal behaviour and
ideation, remorse and denial. The risk assessment
developed by this measure divides risk up into three broad areas of Psychosocial
Adjustment, Sexual Offences and Future Plans. These risk factors allow a guided
assessment of the potential for sexual violence.
Stoker does not reveal much in the way of dynamic risk factors. There is no
significant criminal history and anti-social behaviour.
As best as can be
adduced on the basis of information available to me there is no pattern of
sexually deviant behaviour nor high
sex drive. Although he continues to deny the
criminal offence empirical studies have consistently failed to find a
relationship between
denial and later recidivism. The factors that might
indicate some risk relate to the current uncertainty in his relationship, and
his unwise binge pattern of alcohol use on the weekend.
is an absence of personality factors that might elevate specific risk. For
instance Mr Stoker does not appear as either impulsive
or narcissistic. He does
not have a mental illness nor a personality disorder. He is approximately
anxious but does not suffer from
chronic anxiety. He is neither lonely nor
excessively driven to seek out relationships. There is no evidence of using
sexual behaviour
as a form of emotional self-soothing.
the basis of the risk assessment Mr Stoker presents as a low risk. The
assessment of risk must also consider the environment in
which risk occurs. That
is risk is a transaction between the proclivity to offend and the opportunity to
offend. In a situation where
there is low proclivity but high opportunity, even
low risk may be of concern. Mr Stoker runs a business that requires him to be
one with people who, as a matter of the treatment they receive, means he has
access to legitimate physical touch. He works within
a practice in which other
people are present, and opportunities for complaint exist. Thus the environment
does produce some elevation
of risk, but not at a level that a management plan
could not be envisaged that would modify the risk inherent in the nature of Mr
Stoker’s work environment.
Formulation
Stoker presents as a young man who has embarked on a professional and
entrepreneurial career as a Chiropractor. He reports a benign
childhood with no
obvious criminogenic risk factors. Until the offence it seems he was a man of
exemplary character and with a good
professional record. There remains only one
source of complaints against him, that being the offence of wilful and obscene
Mr Stoker reports a stable life style, good friendships, strong family
and social support, and other than some unwise binge alcohol
use no obvious risk
factors for further offending. It is notable that Mr Stoker continues to assert
his innocence, but despite this
forming a particular of the complaint against
him, such an assertion remains unrelated to any consideration of risk of further
part of this assessment has been to try and understand how the offence occurred
(given I cannot assume it did not), no clear
explanation presents itself. There
seems no psychological reasons why the offence took place, and it may be assumed
to be a moment
of impulsive behaviour, one in which judgment was
uncharacteristically impaired. There is an absence of any sense of premeditation
and as noted Mr Stoker reports only an average sex drive with no obvious sexual
deviation. He was not lonely or sexually frustrated
at the time. Thus the
offence remains unexplained. In general, the literature suggests that low risk
offenders are quite unlikely
to re-offend with a sexual offence once they have
been caught for an offence. By contrast other crimes such as property offences
and even violent offences have higher recidivism rates.
Lennings further opined that it is a general principle in risk assessment that
it forms part of an equation, the other part being
risk management. Dr Lennings
states in paragraph 42 of his report:
Although it is not my role to opine on the findings of the
Tribunal, it seems to me that an approach to Mr Stoker that took into account
risk management principles and sought to modify future risk by a mix of
education and/or supervision would be a coherent strategy
for the level of
assessed risk.
considering all the evidence and also taking notice of the following facts:
(a) The offence
was committed on the 26th September, 2006, and the Chiropractor has been
practising as a Chiropractor since that time.
(b) The offence
was a one off offence. He did not come under notice from any authority nor is
there any evidence of him committing
any offence prior to the 26th September,
2006 or since of a like nature.
(c) Her Honour
in the District Court found that prior to the offence committed on the 26th
September, 2006 the Chiropractor was of
good character.
(d) There was
no evidence before the Tribunal to suggest that apart from the offence the
Chiropractor was not of good character.
Tribunal finds that Complaint One is proven to the extent of the having been
convicted of an offence, however, with a condition
on practice, finds that the
practitioner is able to remain registered.
Tribunal finds Particulars 2 of Complaint Two proven, and notes the ongoing
reluctance of the Chiropractor to admit the facts
of wilful and obscene exposure
as proven and upheld at Appeal.
Tribunal has concluded that even though there is a very low risk of the
Chiropractor re-offending by exposing his person to a
young female the Tribunal
will impose the condition set out earlier on his right to practise. The Tribunal
accepts the opinion expressed
by Dr Lennings. The Tribunal notes that the
offence was not committed in the practice setting. The Tribunal considers that a
of the presence of a chaperone for visits by female patients under 45
years of age for a period of two years will ensure public safety
adopting this course will maintain public confidence in the profession.
circumstances in relation to the Chiropractor failing to notify the Registration
Board within 7 days of his conviction as required
(1) (a) of the
Chiropractor’s Act are such that the Tribunal finds that the breach has
been committed but does not find that
he is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct. The Chiropractor was represented by a Solicitor, a Mr.
Byrne. The conviction
was recorded on the 18th May, 2007. Mr Byrne’s
letter notifying the Board was dated the 27th May, 2007. The Board should have
received notification on Friday the 25th May, 2007, but did not receive it until
Monday the 28th May, 2007. The Tribunal is of the
opinion that The Chiropractor
was aware of his obligation to notify the Board and relied upon his Solicitor
whose letter was in fact
only one working day late. The Tribunal therefore finds
that the Chiropractor is not guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
relation to Complaint 3.
Dated: 25 August 2010
______________________
Cedric Vass
Chairperson
______________________
Daniel Kostur
Chiropractor Member
______________________
Chiropractor Member
______________________
Catherine Berglund
COMPLAINT ONE
The practitioner has been convicted of an offence and the circumstances of
the offence are such as to render the chiropractor unfit
in the public interest
to be registered as a chiropractor:
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
On 18 May 2007 in Sydney, NSW, the practitioner was convicted of one count of
exposing his person in or within view from a public
place contrary to
Summary Offences Act 1988
COMPLAINT TWO
The practitioner is not of good character:
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
On 18 May 2007 the practitioner was convicted of one count of exposing his
person in or within view from a public place contrary to
Summary Offences Act 1988
On 17 May 2007 at the Downing Centre Local Court, whilst giving evidence
under oath at the hearing of the prosecution of himself for
the offence of
wilfully and obscenely exposing his person within view from a public place, in
contravention of
Summary Offences Act 1988
practitioner falsely denied that he had so wilfully and obscenely exposed his
person on 26 September 2006 at North Sydney
The practitioner contravened
section 21(1)(a)
of the Act by failing to notify
the Board in writing within 7 days after conviction.
On 18 May 2007 the practitioner was convicted of one count of exposing his
person in or within view from a public place in contravention
Summary Offences Act 1988
On 28 May 2007, the Board received a letter dated 27 May 2007, from Ian Byrne
lawyer for the practitioner advising the Board of the
conviction.
COMPLAINT THREE
The practitioner has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
contrary to
of the Act in that he has contravened
section 21(1)(a)
the Act by failing to notify the Board in writing within 7 days after
conviction;
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT THREE
On 18 May 2007 the practitioner was convicted on one count of exposing his
person in or within view from a public place, in contravention
Summary Offences Act 1988
On 28 May 2007, the Board received a letter dated 27 May 2007, from Ian Byrne
lawyer for the practitioner advising the Board of the
conviction.
INDEX OF DEFENDANTS DOCUMENTS
DESCRIPTION
Statutory declaration from Kristin Stoker
Statutory declaration from John William Stoker
Psychologist report from Dr Chris Lennings dated 2 May 2010
Court Attendance Notice dated 18 November 2009 for traffic matter
Copy criminal record. Printed 25 October 2009
Copy traffic record. Printed 25 October 2009
Copy certificates – Bachelor of Science, Master of Chiropractic,
Diploma of Remedial Massage, Member of Chiropractic and Osteopathic
Australasia
Copy letter from Ian Byrne dated 3 November 2008 re transcript
INDEX OF PLAINTIFF’S DOCUMENTS
Registration certificate (to be provided)
Statutory Declaration from Chiropractor’s Board re Complaint
POLICE BRIEF OF EVIDENCE
NSW Police Facts Sheet
26.09.06 17
Statement from Sarah Kowalski
26.09.06 20
Statement from Constable Sean Campbell
10.11.06 22
Statement from Constable Nathan Inwood
26.09.06 24
ERISP transcript of Police Interview Kristin Stoker
26.09.06 27
COURT DOCUMENTATION
Local Court Hearing Transcript
District Court Transcript re Appeal
Judgment re Appeal
Certificate of Appeal
CORRESPONDENCE FROM RESPONDENT
Letter from Collins & Thompson Solicitors - On behalf of Respondent re
intent to Appeal
Letter from Collins & Thompson - Solicitors
SECTION 40 CORRESPONDENCE
$40 letter from HCCC to Respondent
Letter from Collins & Thompson - Solicitors re $40 response
OTHER DOCUMENTS
NSW Chiropractor’s Registration Board - Code of Professional Conduct
CHIROPRACTORS TRIBUNAL
Matter No: CH05/2009
INQUIRY INTO COMPLAINTS AGAINST A CHIROPRACTOR
Complainant:
Health Care Complaints Commission
Chiropractors:
Kristin Scott STOKER
Cedric Vass, Chairperson
Date of reasons for decision:
25 August 2010
Complainant:
Sarah McNaughton, Barrister, instructed by Ragini Lewis,
Health Care Complaints Commission
Chiropractor:
Kristin Scott STOKER represented by Mr K Dailly,
Barrister, instructed by Mr D Thompson, Solicitor
COSTS ORDER
The Tribunal after the completion of the Hearing
received a letter from the Health Care Complaints Commission dated the
of June, 2010. The Solicitors for the
Defendant Chiropractor were contacted and invited to make submissions if an
Order for costs
was opposed. No submissions have been received as at
The Tribunal Orders that the Defendant Chiropractor pay the costs of the
Plaintiff Health Care Complaints Commission in relation to
the subject
proceedings. If agreement cannot be reached in relation to those costs
then the Plaintiff is granted liberty to apply
to the Tribunal upon the giving
of 7 days notice in writing to the Defendant’s Solicitors.
Cedric Vass
Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (456 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter