URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPST/2012/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:09:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC v WHYTE (No 1) [2012] NSWPST 2 (1 February 2012)
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (NSW) No 86a
PSYCHOLOGY TRIBUNAL OF NSW
INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 167
STEPHEN JAMES WHYTE
MATTER NUMBER: PS 02/2011
REGISTRATION NUMBER: PSY
REASONS FOR DECISION
SUPPRESSION ORDERS APPLY
___________________________________________________________________
CITATION: HCCC v WHYTE (No 1)
[2012] NSWPST 2
PARTIES: Stephen Whyte
(Respondent) – represented by Mr S J
Walsh of counsel instructed by Mr T Kulukovski, solicitor, Thompson Cooper
Health Care Complaints Commission
(Complainant) represented by Ms S
McNaughton of senior counsel instructed by Ms R Lewis, solicitor, Health Care
Complaints Commission.
FILE NUMBER: PS02/2011
TRIBUNAL: Ms Joanne
Muller (Chairperson)
Ms Elisabeth Shaw (Psychologist
Mr Peter Champion (Psychologist Member)
Jacqueline Milne (Lay Member)
DATES OF HEARING: 31 October, 1, 2, 3 and 4 November 2011
DATE OF FINDINGS: 1 February 2012
ORDERS (in summary): Overall finding of professional misconduct. Specific
Findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct made with
respect to Particulars
1, 2, 3(ii), 6 and 7 and of professional misconduct with respect to Particulars
3(i), 4 and 5. Orders and
costs reserved.
CATCHWORDS: Psychologist – unsatisfactory professional conduct
– professional misconduct – boundary violations –
allegations
of sexual relationship with former client.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
No86a (National Law)
– s139 B, s139E, clause 7 of Schedule
Evidence Act 1995
REASONS FOR DECISION
(Re Particulars and Complaint only)
Introduction
Psychology Tribunal (Tribunal) convened at the Health Professional Councils
Authority (HPCA) Hearing Room in Sydney on 31 October,
1, 2, 3 and 4 November
2011 to conduct an inquiry (Inquiry) into a Complaint (exhibit 1) made by Ms
Karen Mobbs, Director of Proceedings,
Health Care Complaints Commission (HCCC),
dated 7 December 2010 in relation to a registered psychologist, Stephen Whyte
(the Respondent).
Complaint alleges that the Respondent breached professional boundaries during
therapy sessions and then sought contact with the
client through the
‘dating site’
known as ‘RSVP’. The Complaint
further alleged that the Respondent then engaged in a social relationship which
a sexual relationship.
Respondent substantially denied the Complaint in his statement (exhibit R1)
apart from (in substance) Particulars 3(i) and 4.
The parties submitted that
should the Tribunal consider the imposition of Conditions on Registration and/or
a period of suspension
that an opportunity for further submission be made
available to them after the Tribunals Findings are published. This document sets
out the Tribunal’s findings and the matter will be re-listed for further
submissions.
The Complaint
Complaint before the Council alleged that the Respondent:
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of section 139B of the National Law, in that the
psychologist
(i) demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice
or purported practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
Between 19 April 2008 and 26 July 2008 Client A was a client of the
psychologist, who was working as a psychologist at the READ Clinic
and was also
a partner in the business. The psychologist consulted from the Gosford READ
Clinic and various clinics in Sydney.
19 April and 26 July 2008, the psychologist provided therapy or other
professional psychology services to Client A. During
the course of these
sessions, the psychologist failed to observe appropriate boundaries in that
(i) Disclosed
personal information to Client A;
(ii) Disclosed
his personal mobile phone number to Client A;
(iii) Indicated
that he would like to see Client A socially;
(iv) Suggested
that Client A should join the internet dating service ‘RSVP’ of
which he was also a member.
19 April and 26 July 2008, the psychologist failed to observe or follow
appropriate therapeutic or professional practice in
inappropriate advice regarding treatment of rheumatoid arthritis to Client
derogatory comments about a professional colleague to Client A;
the end of the counselling relationship and/or therapeutic relationship, the
psychologist failed to observe appropriate
boundaries in that he:
(i) In November
2008, re-established contact with the ex-client, Client A through the internet
dating service ‘RSVP’;
(ii) In January
2009, advised that there should be a six month waiting period following
termination of therapy prior to the commencement
of a sexual relationship with
the ex-client but that did not apply because he had not really assisted the
ex-client, Client A;
November 2008 and July 2009, engaged in a personal relationship with the
ex-client, Client A;
January and April 2009, engaged in a sexual relationship with the ex-client,
November 2008 and July 2009, failed to refer Client A to another appropriate
practitioner for therapy and advice on pain management
which he provided to
November 2008 and July 2009, inappropriately disclosed confidential information
relating to other clients to the ex-client,
COMPLAINT TWO
Has been guilty of professional misconduct within the meaning of section 139E
of the National Law, in that the psychologist has:
(i) demonstrated that the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the psychologist in the practice of psychology
is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
(ii) engaged in improper or unethical conduct in the course of the practice or
purported practice of psychology.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT TWO
As per Complaint One.
Appearances
per headnote.
Suppression Orders
Chairperson made a Suppression Order in relation to the names of the Client A
and various witnesses associated with her in accordance
with provisions of
Clause 7 of Schedule 5D of the National Law. The names as indicated in the
schedule annexed hereto and marked
‘C’ and any information that may
identify them is not to be published. Annexure ‘C’ is attached to
the original
Reasons for Decision held by the
documents received into evidence in this matter are set out in Annexure
‘A’ hereto.
A, Mr B (a friend and work colleague of Client A), Professor Dianna Kenny (peer
reviewer), Ms Robyn Banach (a referee for the
Respondent) and the Respondent
gave evidence before the Tribunal.
Denials of the Respondent
Respondent denied the Particulars of the Complaint save to say that he provided
Client A with ‘counselling’ for three
consultations (19 April 2008,
3 May 2008 and 26 July 2008), that Client A made contact with him through RSVP
on or about 15 November
2008 and he met her for coffee at the Wyee Nursery on 29
November 2008 and at the Halekulani Bowling Club on 16 December 2008 and
a number of occasions between January and July 2009. The Respondent denied that
he made inappropriate remarks during consultations,
that he advised Client A to
use ‘RapiGel’ (also referred to as Rapid Gel) to treat her arthritis
and that the relationship
was sexual (rather than just social).
Background information
Background of the Respondent
Respondent was born in 1956 and is currently married (although it appears
estranged from his wife) with two children. He commenced
working as an
infant/primary school teacher and District School Counsellor. He completed a
Graduate Diploma in School Counselling
(Nepean College of Advanced Education), a
Masters of Counselling Psychology at the University of Western Sydney and a
Graduate Certificate
in Health Psychology from the Charles Sturt University. He
commenced employment as an Infants/Primary School Teacher prior to becoming
District School Counsellor within the Department of Education. The Respondent
also taught psychology and communication subjects
at TAFE. In 1998 he commenced
to work part time as a counsellor with the Disabilities Assessment Centre in
addition to his previous
work. In 2000 he also became to his CV ‘Head
Psychologist’ with the Australian Medical Co-operative. Work at the READ
Clinic was added in 2002.
Respondent was first registered as a psychologist in 1991. As at the time of the
Inquiry he was registered until 30 November 2011.
the time of the matters subject of the Complaint occurred the Respondent was
working at the READ Clinic (the Clinic) at Gosford
every Wednesday and every
second Saturday. On the other days of the week he worked at Parramatta, McGraths
Hill, Liverpool and Blacktown.
He no longer works at the READ Clinic and has
replaced this with work at 6S Health at Mingara.
the CV (exhibit 37) provided by the Respondent in November 2009 the current
positions listed are:
Psychologist with Australian Medical Co-operative
Counselling
Psychologist with READ Clinic
Psychologist
with the Disability Assessment Centre
Partner at the
READ Clinic
CV also records that the Respondent was an associate member of the Australian
Psychological Society (APS) between 1992 and 2003.
Respondent’s CV records he has annually attended conferences and/or
workshops. The providers of the conferences/workshops
and the level of
specification as to the subject matter and substantive learning are unclear from
Respondent is involved in two community organisations.
Background of the Complaint
Psychologists Registration Board of New South Wales (the Board) received letters
dated 29 July 2009 (exhibit 3A) from Client A
and dated 22 July 2009 from Ms M
S, a psychologist, regarding the conduct of the Respondent (annexure A to
exhibit 8).
M S recounted in her letter details of conversations she had with Client A
during a residential course (Certificate IV in Counselling)
where Client A was a
student (Ms M S was involved in delivering the course). The letter records that
Client A informed Ms M S that
she had had a relationship with the Respondent and
that this had only recently
‘begun to distress her’
advised Client A to seek the assistance of a treating psychologist to address
the issues raised by the relationship with
the Respondent.
is also a statement (exhibit 9) from one of the other teachers (Ms S T) in the
residential course which records a conversation
with Client A regarding comments
made to her by the Respondent during counselling sessions and the referral to Ms
email was also forwarded to the Board by Client A’s subsequent treating
psychologist (Ms R Z) on 19 August 2009. Ms R Z commenced
treating Client A on
27 July 2009. Ms R Z noted that Client A had only recently
that her relationship’
with the Respondent was
‘inappropriate’
Irvine-Rundle, a registered psychologist and the Clinical Manager of the READ
Clinic, also wrote to the Board. Her letter dated
27 July 2009 is annexure D to
her statement (exhibit 23). The letter records that the Respondent admitted to
Ms Irvine-Rundle that
he had a social relationship with Client A which commenced
some three months after the date of the last consultation following a
‘reconnection’
through RSVP. Ms Irvine-Rundle records that
the Respondent stated the relationship was platonic and that he agreed that even
level the relationship was inappropriate. The letter records that the
READ Clinic had appointed Professor Ashley Craig to supervise
the Respondent on
a fortnightly basis for a period of 12 months and decided to limit his cases to
child and family cases with a maximum
of six cases per day.
Background of Client A
A was referred to the Respondent from her workplace for counselling regarding
her behaviour, which he recorded as
‘aggressive’
Respondent recorded in his clinical notes that Client A related the behaviour to
her pain issues resulting from arthritis.
clinical notes made by the Respondent (such that they are) record that Client A
informed him during the first therapy session
that she had shot dead her first
husband, her second husband had been an
‘alcoholic’
third husband had been a
‘cross dressing paedophilic gay’
(clinical notes form part of exhibit 36). The Respondent’s notes also
record that Client A had a
‘difficult childhood’
and had had
previous psychological treatment.
balance of the evidence before the Tribunal records further details of her
difficult childhood, of more recent issues arising
in her birth family resulting
in her brother being incarcerated for child sex offences, that Client A has
three children to whom
she provided considerable support, had a workplace injury
that resulted in her retraining and just prior to consulting the Respondent
had a car accident.
the time of her referral to the Respondent Client A worked as a Support Worker
in mental health with a case load of 68 clients.
The clients all had diagnosed
mental illness, mostly Borderline Personality Disorders.
Evidence before the Tribunal
Evidence from Client A
a result of the HCCC following up the letter from Client A to the Board dated 29
July 2009 (exhibit 3A) the HCCC interviewed Client
A on 8 September 2009. The
letter provided a detailed account of Client A’s background.
3 to 41 of the Client A’s statement reads (exhibit 3):
got diagnosed in about April 2007 with rheumatoid arthritis and it was very
aggressive. It affected my work as I was having trouble
walking and with my
wrist. I was also going through a stressful court process with my brother and I
wasn’t coping. My boss
put me on light duties and suggested I see a
psychologist.
Read Clinic is linked to my workplace, New Horizons, so I went there for
counselling. I wanted a male psychologist and they gave
me Stephen Whyte. I
went to see him in early 2008. During our first visit I gave Stephen an outline
of why I was there and what
my problem was. I told him about my arthritis and
how I couldn’t move. I also told him about my brother and that he was in
jail and I felt it was my fault. Stephen seemed to be listening and taking
notes. He started talking about a friend of his who
had arthritis. He asked me
ointment would help. I later
did try it and it is actually for animals. It
didn’t help my arthritis.
then talked about my family. I told him that I had been to the Read Clinic
before and saw [Respondent’s work colleague],
another psychologist. I
told him it didn’t work out with her as a therapist. He asked why and I
told him that I had made
her cry. I said she was too soft. Stephen said he
didn’t know why she is a counsellor. He told me he was a much better
than [Respondent’s work colleague]. I told him that I hate
people feeling sorry for me. We talked about my background that
married 3 times and I was untrusting of people. I told him I fall into the
wrong relationships. He asked how I would
know if I found the right
relationship. I told him that my partner would make me feel pretty or smart or
special. We went over
the 1 hour session time.
googled Stephen and noted he does pain management at the Read Clinic. So I
decided to try what he advised me. The Rapid Gel made
me sick, the exercise
made me swell up.
told me he was a bit different to other psychologists. He told me his
philosophy was that he just wanted to help people.
He told me to make another
appointment with him.
second session with Stephen was different because he mainly talked about
himself. I said that I had just bought a RAV 4 and he
said he used to have one
and he had given it to his daughter. He noted my address which at the time was
[omitted] and we worked
out we lived near each other and he lived in [omitted],
which is three streets away. I since moved from that address in Budgewoi.
told him he looked like Jack Nicholson. I would then call him
“Jack”. We chatted and bantered about things. He
told me he was
single. He said people like us are destined to be on our own and have
“friends”. It was after this that
I thought that I shouldn’t
have relationships so I ended the one I was currently in.
also told me he owned a house in Victoria. He said he had 2 older kids. He
gave me his card and wrote his mobile phone on
the back. It was [omitted]. He
told me that he gives all his clients his mobile number.
this session I told him I was going away to Burrinjuck Dam. Stephen said to me
when I was away to text him to tell him I was
ok. He asked me to take time to
rethink my core beliefs and values and this was linked to why I have low self
esteem. He asked
me to make another appointment. I missed the next appointment
and the next 3. I just didn’t turn up. I just felt a bit creepy
rang me at home on the day of one of my missed appointments and asked me if I
was ok because I hadn’t texted him. He
said he was sorry if there was any
misunderstanding between us and I should come back for a follow up appointment.
I booked an appointment
for 26 July 2008. He only works on Saturdays and
Wednesdays at the Read Clinic. His house in Budgewoi is a holiday house. He
works and lives in Sydney.
26 July 2008 my daughter dropped me off at the Read Clinic and the session with
Stephen went for almost 2 hours. He gabbled on
pain management. He said if I applied my thoughts more I would heal. He told
me to exercise and
lose weight and that I should not take so much medication.
Stephen told me about his bad neck. He told me he was one year older
He gave me advice about medical management of my arthritis.
this session Stephen also asked me where I lived because I had changed address.
I told him. I also told him I had just bought
a pushbike and was going to ride
around the area. He said he would love to go riding with me. I told him about
how I loved the
theatre. He said he wanted to take me to the theatre.
this visit I told him I had low self-esteem. Stephen told me to get more
confidence I should joint RSVP an online dating service.
He told me he was on
it and he said it would be good exercise to enhance my dating skills. He told
me it was safe, in your own
told me to make another appointment for follow-up. He made the appointment for
29 November 2008 at 8:30am. When I got in
the car with my daughter I told her
‘that guy just hit on me. He told me he wanted to take me to the
theatre’. Later
that day, after I discussed it with my daughter, I
decided to cancel my appointment. I texted Stephen and cancelled it and said
didn’t need one.
September 2008 I went on RSVP and built a profile. My name was
‘notintogames’. I posted a picture and gave my
details. I got so
many replies. I went on a few dates. One profile kept coming up all the time
‘Psych08’ but without
a photo. Psych08 had been viewing my profile
at lot. Psych08 said he lived in Budgewoi. I sent him a link and asked him to
a photo. He sent me a password to unlock his photo –
‘Roxy3roo’. When I looked at the photo – it looked
Stephen Whyte – who I always called Jack. I sent him an email and said
you look like someone I know as Jack.
emailed me back and told me he did know me and that I had seen him at Read
Clinic and that he had scared me off. He gave
me his mobile number and asked me
to ring him. I rang him and asked him if he knew it was me. He said yes and
wanted to meet up.
rang Stephen on 18 November 2008 and we arranged to meet at the Wyee Nursery for
coffee on 29 November 2008 (instead of my appointment).
I texted him on 26
November to confirm our meeting at Wyee Nursery on 29/11/08. At our meeting
Stephen told me he owned a large
chunk of Read Clinic. He told me that his
friend had just died and that he was going to do things that made him happy.
and I were there for about 2 hours. Stephen said he wanted to see me
again. He had this big thing about whether or not he had helped
therapy sessions. I said yes, although I don’t think he did.
the nursery Stephen said he was disappointed I didn’t invite him to a
party that my kids had held for me. He said because
he had helped me so much he
should have been invited. Stephen told me he felt a connection with me and he
felt that I wasn’t
actually a client. He said I had all the answers
myself. He was really confusing me. He said to me ‘you don’t know
it, but you actually are quite attractive’. He said he would love to
catch up with me again. I said yes.
November and December 2008 Stephen and I emailed each other through RSVP. He
then gave me his personal email address [omitted].
kept in contact by email. On Tuesday 16 December 2008 we met for Christmas
drinks at the Halekulani Bowling Club because we were
both members. I should
not have gone because I was sick from a new medication. He bought me several
bourbon and cokes and I got
had the odd text after that. He texted me on New Years Eve.
Friday 9 January 2009 we went to the bowling club again. I drank too much. We
talked about our professional relationship and
he said that normally a
psychologist had to wait 6 months before they could have a sexual relationship
with a client. But then he
said it didn’t count with us because he
didn’t really help me. I then went to a friend’s house. Stephen
texting me to come back to his house. He texted his address
went to Stephen’s house and stayed until about 1am. He kept filling up my
glass with wine. He said I was too drunk to drive.
He said to me “I will
have to seduce you to make you stay here.” That was the first time we had
went home in the early hours and I fell down the stairs going to my car. I was
so sick the next day.
texted me a lot after that. The days that I was going to meet him he texted me
a lot. The next time I met him was Tuesday
20 January 2009. It would have been
told me he had
been sick and hung over after we last met. He said he had been
hung over at work and he had to deal with the crazies all day.
He calls his
clients “the crazies”.
went to Stephen’s house on Saturday 7 February 2009 and Friday 27 February
2009. On all these occasions he would text me
and ask me to come over or meet
him. We had sex on these occasions. Our dates would always start off with us
talking about RSVP.
He had encouraged me to keep dating through RSVP. So I was
seeing other people on dates.
also talked about my medication. He gave me a book called ‘Dying for a
Cure’ by Rebecca Beddoe. This talks about taking
too much medication and
how bad it is for your body. We would also talk about my family, my upbringing
and childhood. He told me
he had been abused as a child as well. He told me a
priest had molested him as a child.
told me that he had another ‘friend’ in Sydney. I didn’t want
to know too much so I didn’t ask questions.
He had told me about his
daughter and his son, his mother and his brother. During our meetings Stephen
would provide psychotherapy
to me. On one of the occasions he came to my house
Stephen wrote down a summary of the teachings he was doing with me called
of Thinking’ to change my core beliefs. This is attached
to my statement at Annexure B.
also met Stephen on other occasions during March and April 2009. I keep a
detailed diary. In my diaries I have noted my personal
meetings and contact
with Stephen. At Annexure C is a summary that I have prepared from my diaries
of my personal and sexual contact
with Stephen Whyte over the period from July
2008 to July 2009. I have provided the Commission with my original diary for
the period.
We had sex on a total of 7 occasions, always at his house. Every
time Stephen and I met we drank too much. We were also having
sex with people
this time I also gave Stephen an award because he was complaining that he never
got one, and I had. A copy of the award I
gave him is at Annexure D to my
statements. He said he wanted to take it to work and show other people.
noticed that I would meet Stephen on Tuesday nights and every second weekend but
the text messages would be all the time.
18 April 2009 things went bad because I found out he had contacted a work
colleague of mine through RSVP. I emailed Stephen
and told him I didn’t
want to see him again. He had crossed the line. He emailed he told me that he
removed his profile from
RSVP for me. I thought he had done that for me. I
removed my RSVP profile as well about a week later.
started to see each other again, and he built up our relationship. I felt
Stephen being hesitant so I wrote him a letter. I told
him how much he had
gave him this letter and a thank
you card at the bowling club on 16 May 2009.
He had wanted to help me with all his psychobabble. He always wanted validation
he helped me. So I wrote the letter to boost his ego.
2 June 2009 Stephen came to my house. We were talking and he told me about a
client of his that had a background of domestic violence.
He meets her at the
pub for their sessions. Stephen asked me if I would meet with her, but I
didn’t answer him.
started to talk about my kids. He kept pushing to meet my daughter. He asked
me to show him a photo. It got me thinking
and I felt it was an intrusion. At
that time I was learning about ethics and boundaries in my course at TAFE. I
went to see my
tutor, who is a psychologist. I told her the whole story about
Stephen. She said it was not appropriate and it sounds like he was
went to a residential counselling course in Canberra from 18-20 July 2009. I
spoke to Ms M S, one of the trainers about my relationship
with Stephen. I had
realised he never took me out anywhere. It frightens me that he wants to meet
my kids. Ms M S said it was
totally inappropriate. She asked me to tell her
his name, and she advised me she would have to report him. I told her his
M S rang and told me she was making a complaint on Monday 20 July 2009. She
asked my permission to put my name to the complaint.
came over to my house on Tuesday 21 July 2009. I told him about the residential
and that it was confronting and that we had
talked about my childhood. Stephen
said it was very unethical. I told him that I wanted to be the most important
person in the
world to someone and he said, “Oh, well we all want
that”. I made up my mind that this is not what I wanted.
next day I told my boss what had happened with Stephen and the complaint that
was going ahead. She said she would speak with
the Read Clinic because of the
link with our work. On 27 July 2009, my manager and I went to the Read Clinic.
We met with Heather
Irvine. She was very concerned and wanted validation of the
relationship.
told her some information that Stephen had given me about his colleagues at the
Read Clinic and some clients. He had told me confidential
information about
common clients we had and I repeated this to Heather. She told me Stephen was a
valued employee. After this meeting
Heather rang Stephen and told him not to
number of documents prepared by Client A also came into evidence in addition to
her personal diary for the 2009 year. Two versions
of her diary came into
evidence. One version was a colour photo copy made by the HCCC investigators at
the time they took the initial
statement from Client A. The second was the
original diary that was produced upon request during the Inquiry. Alterations
the diary between 8 September 2009 and the date of the Inquiry were the
subject of significant cross-examination.
A provided a further statement signed on 11 October 2010 (dated 30 September
2010 (exhibit 6)). This statement provided details
regarding her contact with
the Respondent via RSVP and other matters. Client A corrected paragraph 30 of
her statement dated 8 September
2009 as follows:
In my statement 8/9/2009, paragraph 30 and also in my statement
July 2009, I stated that on page 2, second
paragraph that “It was always at his house in Budgewoi and always after a
wine.” These statements are missing the fact that on 24h February
2009 (Note no. 16 in purple diary 2008-2009), Stephen and
I did in fact meet at
Jenny Dixon Beach, Nora Head, drank champagne that Stephen had brought along and
had sex on the beach. I did
not include this in my original statement as I
wrote this statement with the intension (sic) to direct the reader to the impact
how I was feeling betrayed at that time. In hindsight, it should have read
“Each time was instigated by Stephen with almost
every time at his
A also stated that as a result of the matter being reported to the Board and the
ensuing investigation that her employer became
aware of her past history, which
had not been known in her workplace previously.
Letter to the Respondent
Respondent provided a copy of a letter he received from the Respondent (the
‘Hey’ letter - part exhibit 46). The Respondent
stated that to the
best of his memory he received this document from Client A when they were at a
bowling club in late May 2009.
The Respondent states that the letter
‘does clearly show that in the treatment of
‘Hey’ letter from Client A to the Respondent includes extremely
detailed accounts of many personal tragedies suffered
by Client A and her
family. The letter concluded by stating that she thanked the Respondent for
‘not giving up on me and for riding this wave with me’
footnote states that she intended to work through her issues one by one and if
‘overwhelmed’
she felt comfortable to seek help so
that he should not
‘change your number’
Clinical notes re Client A from previous treating
psychologists
27 are clinical notes made by Mr Matthew Stanton. Mr Stanton is a registered
psychologist who works at the READ Clinic. These
notes record that Client A was
born in 1963. It appears Client A was referred to Mr Stanton in 2002 for pain
management for an injury
she received at work in 2001 to her shoulder and neck.
These notes record Client A had been prescribed lithium carbonate. The notes
also contain an entry that Client A was
‘in control of her OCD which
developed through abuse’.
Clinical notes re Client A from previous treating
psychologists
Respondent supplied a copy of the four pages of clinical notes he had made
regarding Client A with his letter to the HCCC received
3 November 2009 (part
exhibit 36). The history recorded by the Respondent is set out above under the
heading Background of Client
front page of the file records Client A’s name, the name of her employer
as well as dates of attendance (including the dates
on which she had
appointments but failed to attend). Client A attended on 19 April 2008, 3 May
2008 and 26 July 2008. She failed
to attend appointments on 28 May 2008 and 17
clinical notes also record difficulties in the life of Client A’s son, her
current studies in the Certificate IV in Mental
Health and the work issues that
had precipitated her referral for counselling.
Statement of Mr B
B provided a statement to the HCCC dated 25 March 2011 (exhibit 7). Mr B has
worked for the same organisation as Client A for about
8 years as a Community
Support Worker. He holds a Certificate III in Mental Health and Nursing (this
being the Assistant-in-Nursing
qualification).
B recalls that the Respondent commenced working at the same organisation shortly
after he did and they were located in the same
office for about 5 years. They
are friends and socialise together. He states that they still ‘keep in
touch’ as friends.
6 to 14 of his statement read:
2-3 years ago – I think it would have been in either 2008 or 2009 –
I remember Client A telling me about a man she
was seeing. She told me that he
had initiated the relationship, and she liked that. She was very keen on him.
She said he was
very nice and very thoughtful. She told me that they would text
each other and she would go over to his place on weekends and sometimes
the week for drinks or dinner. She didn’t tell me where he lived. She
said she couldn’t tell me too much about
him “because of his
work”, but she didn’t tell me what work he did.
A told me that she had a sexual relationship with this man.
far as I know, this was the only man Client A was involved with at the time. I
remember her saying how happy she was about the
relationship, because she
hadn’t had a man in her life for quite a while.
remember there was one occasion over this period when Client A invited a group
of us (myself, my partner, and a couple of work friends)
to go to the snow with
her. She said the man she was seeing had offered her the key to a place down
there, I think it was in Jindabyne.
But then at the last minute, it all fell
through. This would have been in either mid-2009 or mid-2008.
don’t recall the name of the man Client A was seeing at this time, and I
never actually met him. I remember there were a
number of occasions when Client
A said she had invited him to come out with the group of us, but he didn’t
show up. It actually
became a bit of a joke among the group, to speculate about
whether the guy actually existed.
this period (approximately 2008/2009), I remember Client A also telling me that
she has having counselling. I can’t
remember for sure, but I think it may
have been to do with some anger issues. Client A was very outspoken, and she
was always getting
pulled up at work for saying the wrong thing. I remember her
telling me “Oh I’m being sent to counselling again”
“Not again, what for this time?”
one day, Client A told me that the man she had been seeing was actually her
counsellor. I was shocked. I said “This shouldn’t
be happening.
It’s a breach of professional boundaries.” I don’t know when
this was exactly, but I think it was
around the time we were planning to go to
A subsequently told me that she felt used by the counsellor. She recalled how,
every time she would try to take the relationship
further, he would back off.
She also recalled how he would always ask her to his place but wouldn’t go
to hers. She was upset
and angry about their relationship. She was really
pissed off.
know Client A to be a very honest, genuine person who always tells the facts. I
do not consider her to be at all nasty or vindictive.
I noticed that she became
angrier over the time about the counsellor’s actions, but her story
didn’t change.
Oral evidence of
B gave evidence on the second day of the Inquiry. He adopted the statement he
had made to the HCCC (exhibit 7).
B confirmed that he did not know the name of the person Client A was in a
relationship with as she had not told him (T111). Client
A had said that she
could not tell Mr B much about the person she was having a relationship with
because of the work that he did.
Mr B did not find out he was a
counsellor/psychologist until after the relationship had ended.
B stated that he recalled a number of occasions when Client A told him that she
had invited the ‘man’ to go out with
a group of people (for dinner
or drinks) and he did not show up (T112 – 113). This occurred within six
months or so of Client
A meeting the ‘man’.
cross-examined about Client A’s conduct at work, Mr B stated:
you give us some examples of occasions on which you saw these anger issues
manifesting themselves at work?
think she was misrepresented as far as her anger’s concerned. She’s
very outspoken and she didn’t – I guess,
take people’s crap.
She’d tell them exactly what she thought and they misconstrued that as
to your observations, what sort of circumstances would trigger this sort of
outspoken behaviour from Client A?
management had pulled her up for anything at work she might have said something
or done something. I just felt that she was targeted
and they were always
having a go or picking on her about her work ethics and she would stand up and
let them know what she was doing
wasn’t wrong, but I guess voices were
you say that to your observation, Client A was sensitive to criticism?
wouldn’t say she was sensitive to criticism, but she was always being
criticised, and so she would always stand up for herself
and what she believed
Statement of Ms M S
M S provided a statement to the HCCC dated 24 September 2009 (exhibit 8). Ms M S
is a registered psychologist and lecturer. Client
A was one of her students in a
Certificate IV in Christian Counselling and Communication Skills course which
commenced in February
2009. The course included a residential component which
was held on 17-19 July 2009. During this residential Client A informed Ms
that she was in a sexual relationship with the Respondent.
M S records the following at paragraphs 5 and 6 of her statement:
A approached me privately about this matter, following some informal group
discussion about the nature of professional boundaries
in counselling. She
didn’t give me a lot of detail about her relationship with Mr Whyte. Her
recollection was that the sexual
relationship began less than six months after
he began treating her. She seemed embarrassed at the time and did not want to
a lot of detail. She hoped to get my opinion on whether I thought it
was acceptable.
informed Client A that I would need to report this matter to the
Psychologists’ Registration Board (the Board), and she gave
me permission
to pass her details on to the Board.
noted above Ms M S wrote to the Board on 22 July 2009 making notification
regarding the conduct of the Respondent reported to her
by Client A.
Statement from Ms S T
S T provided a statement to the HCCC dated 12 November 2009 (exhibit 9). Ms S T
is a Family and Adolescent Counsellor who works
in private practice and also
lecturers in the Certificate IV in Christian Counselling and Communication
Skills course.
4 to 8 of her statement read:
this year, probably about 6 months ago, Client A came and spoke to me about the
professional conduct of a psychologist she
had seen. Client A approached me
teach in the course
tends to bring up issues for people. I can’t recall
the actual material I was teaching that morning, but it may have been
professional boundaries.
A told me that, during one counselling session with this psychologist –
possibly the first session she attended –
he told her “You’d
really look good in a swimsuit”. This comment shocked her. She seemed
really bothered by it.
can’t specifically recall any other details of this conversation with
Client A, but my understanding at the end of it was
that the psychologist had
been interested in having a personal relationship with her.
A did not tell me the name of the psychologist.
informed Client A that there are systems designed to protect clients in these
sorts of situations. Because I was about to go on
Maternity Leave, I suggested
that she speak to one of the other trainers on the course if she wanted to take
the matter a step further.
Statement of Ms R Z
R Z provided a statement to the HCCC dated 8 October 2009 (exhibit 10). Ms R Z
is a registered psychologist working in private
practice as well as a lecturer
in the Certificate IV in Christian Counselling and Communication Skills course.
Client A is one of
her clients.
A commenced counselling with her on 27 July 2009 having been referred by Ms M S.
The counselling related to an inappropriate
relationship with the
Respondent.
R Z wrote to the Board on 19 August 2009 regarding the conduct of the Respondent
(a copy is annexed to the statement at exhibit
R Z gave the following account of her counselling sessions with Client A at
paragraphs 7 to 14:
initially saw Client A twice a week, but am now seeing her approximately weekly.
She has attended about 9-10 appointments with me
I first started seeing Client A, she was very highly distressed, almost
psychotic. She had only recently found out that her
relationship with Stephen
Whyte was inappropriate. She was paranoid, fearful and distrusting. She had
begun obsessively checking
on her grandchildren at pre-school to make sure they
were safe. She had seen her GP and been prescribed antidepressant medication.
I was really quite concerned about her. I thought she may even need to be
hospitalised.
A told me that her first contact with Stephen Whyte had been at READ Clinic.
She said that she had attended approximately
3 counselling sessions with him at
READ Clinic. Then, a short time after that – maybe 1 or 2 months –
she was on a dating
website and she connected with him on that.
A has told me that her personal relationship with Stephen Whyte was on a
friendship basis, and also a physical/sexual basis;
that she visited his home;
and that they often drank a fair bit of wine together.
have documented this information in my clinical notes. A copy of my clinical
notes is attached to this statement and marked
A’s level of distress has settled down quite a bit over the time I have
been counselling her. She still has a degree
of anxiety and depression, but
minimal psychosis. She has been able to return to work and seems to be coping
with normal life.
was a little sceptical about Client A’s story at the very beginning, and
conscious of the need to keep an open mind. But
her story has remained
extremely consistent, without any deviations, and I have no reason to disbelieve
what she has told me about
her relationship with Stephen Whyte.
my professional opinion, the psychotic and obsessional behaviour Client A was
exhibiting when I first started counselling her was
a temporary phenomenon,
directly linked to the situation with Stephen Whyte.
clinical notes attached by Ms R Z also record that on 27 July 2009 that Client A
reported to her that her arthritis was now worse
as the Respondent suggested
‘not take the medication that was prescribed to her’
(page 145). Also in this session, Ms R Z recorded that Client A stated that the
Respondent suggested that they could have an intimate
relationship because
professionally
‘it didn’t count as he hadn’t helped
(page 145). Client A recounted to Ms R Z that the Respondent
would send her a text message and she would take ‘lots of wine’
to his home and they would end up having sexual intercourse. The notes record
that the Respondent had told her she was
‘great, beautiful
which she loved hearing and that
‘he knew what to
. The notes also record that the Respondent spoke to Client A
R Z noted that Client A had a significant previous history of trauma and of the
situation with the Respondent she stated
‘this appears to have
lifted the lid off everything’
‘opened Pandora’s
(page 147). On 31 August 2009 the notes record that Client A
stated that she felt that the Respondent had taken advantage of her lack
boundaries due to her history of abuse. A reading of the notes of Ms R Z would
not, in the Tribunal’s view, on the face
of it support a formal diagnosis
of psychotic illness. For the session held on 7 September 2009 Ms R Z (page 149)
records that Client
A stated that the Respondent suggested that she did not take
the prescribed medication.
Statement of Client A’s daughter
A’s daughter provided a statement to the HCCC dated 1 December 2009
(exhibit 11). Paragraphs 5 to 11 of her statement
time ago, I’m not sure exactly when it was, Mum told me she was seeing
Stephen Whyte (Stephen) for counselling. I would
sometimes give her a lift to
her appointments, or pick her up afterwards.
after she started this counselling, maybe after the first or second appointment,
I remember Mum said to me “this counsellor
I’m seeing reckons I
shouldn’t live with anybody or commit to a serious relationship for at
least 2 years”. I
said are you going to stop dating for 2 years? She
said “no – just not commit to anyone”.
day soon after this, I picked Mum up after an appointment with Stephen at the
place in Hills St. When she got in the car, she
said to me “something
weird just happened”. I said what? She said “he asked me if it
would be weird if he took
me to the theatre”. She didn’t know how
to read this comment. I told her I didn’t like the sound of it, and it
didn’t sound very professional. But Mum had a lot of other things going
on her life at the time, so I think she just brushed
some point, Mum stopped seeing Stephen for counselling. Not long after that,
maybe 2-3 months, she told me they had been chatting
on RSVP. She initially
told me she wasn’t going to answer his messages, then eventually she did,
and they started seeing each
other. Mum would tell me that she had been out to
dinner with Stephen, or that she had been over to his house. I remember they
used to go to the bowling club, and I think Doyalson’s. I remember she
also told me he owned a holiday house.
is not usually much of a drinker, but while she was dating Stephen she drank a
lot. I remember one day she had a hangover. She
told me she had been at
Stephen’s the night before. She said to me: “Last night was
terrible. I was naughty –
I drove drunk.”
few things happened with Stephen that bothered Mum. She said he had told one of
her friends (who was also seeing him for counselling,
with her son) that he was
seeing her. Also he answered an ad, I think through RSVP, to a lady that Mum
was working with. Mum started
to wonder whether she could trust him.
Mum went away to her counselling course and it was after this that she made a
complaint about Stephen.
Statement of Ellida Hafouri
Hafouri provided a statement to the HCCC dated 10 November 2009 (exhibit 12). Ms
Hafouri is the Customer Support Manager for ‘RSVP’.
dating website. The role includes approving profiles, looking for suspicious
text, assisting police and other investigation
authorities. At the time of the
statement she had been working in this role for two years.
5 to 17 of her statement explain how the RSVP system works.
paragraph 18 Ms Hafouri states that she was asked by the HCCC to look into
provided) and the
Respondent (a user name of psych08 and an email of swpsy@optusnet.com.au were
provided). The email addresses correspond
to those accepted as belonging to
either Client A or the Respondent.
Hafouri undertook various searches as a result of the request from the HCCC. She
found records that showed the profile for Client
A’s account was
originally created on 15 September 2008 and closed on 19 April 2009. A new
profile created on 29 April 2009
was still active as at the date of the search
(9 and 10 November 2009). There were no records of contacts made with the
profile as the records were more than 90 days old (and were therefore
wiped from the system) and there was no contact from either
psych1 or psych08
and the new profile.
Hafouri located a username ‘psych1’ attached to the
Respondent’s email, swpsy@optusnet.com.au. It had been registered
never activated or logged in to. The date of birth attached to this profile was
1 January 1963 and the location was Bankstown.
way of another search, Ms Hafouri located a psych08 profile attached to the
email address clinpsyamcl@hotmail.com. The date of
birth registered for this
account was 27 December 1961. The account was created on 16 February 2008 and
closed on 19 April 2009.
The user was located in Budgewoi.
paragraphs 24 to 27 Ms Hafouri provides details of another search she
10 November 2009 I was shown a document by Investigation Officer Carol Cook. A
copy of this document is attached to this statement
as Annexure B. I can see
that this is a printout of a notification email from RSVP. This is what goes to
a users (sic) email to
notify them that there is a message in their in box on
their profile. This email indicates that psych08 has sent Client A’s
name an RSVP email that can be accessed from her profile. Since there is a link
for Client’s A’s user name to access
psych08’s profile this
indicates to me that there was definitely a member with the user name psych08
who was active on RSVP
at the time the email was sent. The email also says that
all contact with psych08 is free until 15 December 2008. So since the
channel closed on that date it is safe to assume that this notification was sent
30 days prior to this date. I can’t
determine who initiated this
communication between psych08 and Client A’s user name. I can see that
psych08 has initiated
this email but there have been other communication between
them previously. At this time it was still completely free to send a
didn’t need to be a paying member of RSVP to do this. For this reason
there is no way I can tell who started the
prior to 15 December 2008 there was contact between Client A’s user name
and psych08.
10 November 2009 I checked the kiss history for the closed profile of Client
A’s user name. I can see that Client A’s
user name sent a kiss to
psych08 on 14 November 2008. The kiss message was ‘Can I see your photo,
I’d like to put a
face to the name’. this was a preformatted kiss
message. There was a reply kiss from psych08 on 15 November 2008. It said
‘I’m interested and looking forward to receiving your emails
soon’. From the details I have for these profiles
this was the first
checked the photos for each profile. The closed profile for Client A’s
user name had 3 photos, which were visible to all
members. Users have the
option to hide their photos. The profile photo for psych08 had one photo, which
was hidden. A copy of
this photo is attached to this statement as
may have been other contact between psych08 and Client A’s user name over
the period April 2008 and July 2009, but I have
no way of confirming this from
our computer records.
Hafouri was asked to provide further information regarding information that
would have been visible to other users or people searching
the site regarding
the psych08 profile for the period 16 February 2008 and 19 April 2009 (see file
note – exhibit 13). Ms Hafouri
provided further information by email on 23
march 2010 (exhibit 14) regarding the profile attached to psych08 as follows:
Birthday 27/12/1961
SOMEBODY WITH A GREAT AND FUNNY PERSONALITY THROW ME ONE OF YOUR FABULOUS
KISSES AND YOU WONT BE DISAPPOINTED!
IM WILD AND ENTERTAINING ALWAYS FULL OF HUMOUR ALWAYS PUSHING BOUNDARIES
RISK TAKING ALSO LOVE RELAXING WITH THE RIGHT PEOPLE. ENJOY
GOOD WINE AND FOOD
LOVE TO EXERCISE AND THE BEACH, IN MY SPARE TIME IM A SURF LIFE SAVER
Nothing in particular like all sorts of music and performers
Most things interest me but I do like reading books about eastern
philosophy.
Anything but drama and thrillers are probably on top of my list.
Interested in sorts of sports. Love to snow ski and in summer at the
beach. Try to get to the gym at least twice a week.
Ideal Partner
Someone who doesn’t take life too seriously and likes to laugh.
Enjoys good food and wine and looks after themselves. Must
conversationist and reasonably intelligent and open minded. Hopfully the person
will enjoy being spontaneous variety is
the spice of life.
Statement of Gary John Coulthart
Coulthart provided a statement dated 11 October 2009 to the HCCC which included
an Expert Certificate under section 177,
Evidence Act 1995
(exhibit 15).
Coulthart is the Managing Director of a company that consults in areas including
to computer and mobile telephone forensics. His
qualifications and experience
are set out in paragraphs 3 and 4 of his statement. Terminology and protocols
employed by Mr Coulthart
in his forensic examinations are set out in paragraphs
5 to 8 of his statement.
Coulthart was provided with two mobile telephones and a laptop computer and
asked to forensically examine them. Various documents
and reports located as a
result of this examination are annexed to the statement.
from the Respondent’s mobile telephone to Client A’s mobile phone
address Client A as
‘my gorgeous trusted friend’, ‘my good
‘my trusted wise noble friend’.
record is only of one side of a SMS conversation between them. However, one set
of exchanges between them were suggestive of the
Respondent indicating interest
in being in a warm bed with Client A. Another message asks Client A if she was
up to a glass of wine
followed by a message nine minutes later indicating that
he could bring a bottle to her
‘place if that is ok’
Statement of Angela Greathead
Greathead provided a statement to the HCCC dated 2 June 2010 (exhibit 20). Ms
Greathead has worked as the full-time (Monday to
Friday) receptionist at
Liverpool AMCL (Australian Medical Co-operative Limited) since February 2004.
She states she is the only
receptionist and the only person by the name of
Angela at AMCL.
Greathead stated that the Respondent is the only psychologist working at AMCL
and that he attends every Thursday. As at the date
of her statement she had
known the Respondent for six years but only in the context of work.
Greathead stated that she does not have internet access at work and that she had
never discussed the website ‘rsvp.com’
or assisted him to access or
upload information onto that website.
File note of the telephone interview of Alisha Lawford
Lawford spoke to a HCCC investigator on 3 June 2010. A File Note of this
interview forms exhibit 21. Ms Lawford works full-time
as the receptionist at
Millennium Allied Health Bankstown. She also worked there as a massage
Lawford stated that she was familiar with the ‘rsvp.com’ website as
she had met her husband on the site. She had recommended
it to all her
colleagues at Millennium.
Lawford is recorded as having stated that she had never assisted anyone to
access or upload information onto the website.
Statement of Angela Abifares
Abifares provided a statement to the HCCC dated 4 June 2010 (exhibit 22). Ms
Abifares works as a massage therapist as well as helping
out with reception at
Millennium Allied Health Bankstown. Ms Abifares knows Ms Lawford, the full-time
receptionist at Millennium.
5 and 6 of her statement read:
2 years ago, after Alisha had a break up with her boyfriend, I suggested to her
as a joke that she should join rsvp.com. I
sat down with her at work one day
and watched her put her details onto the rsvp.com website. Alisha is now
married to a man she
met on rsvp.com.
have suggested rsvp.com to other colleagues at Millenium, but I don’t
recall ever assisting any of them to access or upload
information onto the
Statement (and other evidence) of Heather
Irvine-Rundle
Irvine-Rundle provided a statement to the HCCC dated 7 December 2009 (exhibit
23). Ms Irvine-Rundle is a registered psychologist
who has worked (on and off)
at the READ Clinic in Gosford since 1998. As at the date of her statement she
had been the Clinical Manager
of the service for about a year. This role
involved dealing with concerns and complaints about how cases are managed and
clinical competence matters.
Irvine-Rundle statement at paragraphs 4 to 18 reads:
are 22 psychologists working at the READ Clinic. The majority of them are
contractors. There is no compulsion on any of them
to attend professional
supervision, but we provide an Adult supervision group and a Child and Family
supervision group, which they
can choose to attend. These supervision groups
are held fortnightly. Each clinician also has at their disposal 2 individual
supervision sessions per year, with either the Child and Family or the
Adult team leader (both of whom are psychologists). The cost
of this is covered
by the READ Clinic. None of this is compulsory, unless there is a complaint, in
which case the clinician is requested
to attend supervision.
Stephen Whyte (Stephen) has been a psychologist at the READ Clinic for 4 years.
He attends the Clinic two days per week (including
Saturdays). He mainly sees
Child and Family clients, but also works with adults with pain presentation.
This is a particular area
of interest for him.
is also one of the partners at the READ Clinic. There are twelve partners
altogether.
have known Stephen for about 3 years, through the READ Clinic. We don’t
actually work there on the same days, so I don’t
normally run into him
other than at social functions, supervision groups of professional development
evenings. I don’t have
any direct knowledge of Stephen’s psychology
practice, but I haven’t had any significant issues or concerns about his
professional conduct come across my desk since I have been Clinical
26 July 2009 a former client of Stephen’s Client A, attended the READ
Clinic, wishing to make a formal complaint about him.
that day (26 July 2009) I had a meeting with Client A, during which she made a
number of allegations against Stephen. I took notes
during the meeting. A copy
of those notes is attached to this statement as
had not previously met Client A and did not know anything about her prior to
our meeting on 26 July 2009 Client A told me that after their second counselling
session, Stephen had given her his mobile
phone number. She told me that she
had stopped taking her pain medication at Stephen’s advice. She also told
me that at their
last counselling session, Stephen had told her he would like to
take her to the theatre but this would be unethical. Client A told
me that, in
September 2008 (when she was no longer seeing him for counselling), Stephen
arranged to meet up. At that
meeting, he told her he had felt a connection with her from the first time he
saw her. After this,
they met up a few times at the Halekalerney (sic) Bowling
Club, she went to his house about 10 times, and he came to her house twice.
Client A told me that Stephen said he could see her as “friends with
benefits”, and they had a sexual relationship.
She told me that he sent
her text messages starting “my gorgeous trusted friend”.
A said that Stephen had also disclosed information to her about other clients,
as well as colleagues from READ Clinic. For
example, a female psychologist at
READ Clinic who Stephen said had had a breast enlargement. I knew the person
Client A was referring
to, and that person had had a breast enlargement. It
seemed to me that Client A had nothing to gain by telling me these things.
don’t believe there’s any way she could have known this information
without Stephen having told her. Client A also
said Stephen had told her he saw
some of his clients in pubs because they didn’t like coming to READ
meeting with Client A on 26 July 2009, I rang Stephen and arranged to meet with
him to discuss her complaint. During this phone
call, Stephen agreed to
immediately cease all contact with Client A. I took notes during this phone
call. A copy of those notes
is attached to this statement as
following day (27 July 2009) I met with Stephen at the READ Clinic. I took
notes during this meeting. A copy of those notes
is attached to this statement
our meeting on 27 July 2009 Stephen admitted having had a social relationship
with Client A, which commenced some 3 months
after their last counselling
session. He told me that they had reconnected with each other through the RSVP
website, but it was
never more than a platonic friendship. He told me he would
call her regularly to let her know he was coming up to the Coast, and
meet up with her. He told me they would meet at the bowling club, or he would
go to her home for a glass of wine. He
also told me that they sent each other
regular text messages. He described these messages as
“supportive”.
this time I told Stephen that meeting someone with an abuse history like Client
A in a pub or any other setting where alcohol is
consumed was inappropriate. I
felt that he should have had a better awareness of this, given his level of
experience as a psychologist.
our meeting, Stephen absolutely denied having had a sexual relationship with
Client A. He seemed genuinely shocked by this
allegation. He also denied
advising her to go off her pain medication, or disclosing information to her
He also denied meeting any clients for
therapy in a pub setting.
have since checked our records (appointment book and off-site charge records)
and found no evidence of Stephen having provided therapy
to any READ Clinic
clients off-site after hours.
didn’t confront Stephen with any of the specific details Client A had
given me about other clinicians at READ Clinic (e.g
the woman who’d had a
breast enlargement). I thought it best to leave this for the Board or other
investigative body to pursue.
27 July 2009 I wrote a letter to the Psychologists’ Registration Board,
notifying them of Client A’s complaint. A
copy of that letter is attached
to this statement as
30 July 2009, I met with the READ Clinic Chairman John Irvine (John) and Senior
Partner Warwick Irvine (Warwick) to decide a way
forward in response to this
complaint. John took notes during this meeting. A copy of those notes is
attached to this statement
6 August 2009 Warwick, John and I met with Stephen at the READ Clinic to
formally advise him of the action to be taken as a result
of this complaint.
Stephen was accompanied to this meeting by a support person, Sharon Reid, who is
another psychologist at the
Clinic. John took notes during this meeting. A
copy of those notes is attached to this statement as
this meeting, we made some recommendations to Stephen about supervision. In
particular, we recommended that he meet fortnightly
with the Adult team leader
for supervision in relation to maintaining appropriate professional boundaries
with clients. It is my
understanding that Stephen has not yet taken up this
READ Clinic has had one other complaint about Stephen, about 2 years ago. That
complaint was from a school principal who felt
that something Stephen might have
said to a family hadn’t been particularly helpful at the time. I
wasn’t Clinical Manager
when this complaint was made and so was not
directly involved in dealing with it.
Irvine-Rundle wrote to the Board on 27 July 2009 to give notification of Client
A’s complaint.
paragraphs 21 to 23 Ms Irvine-Rundle provides details of meetings held with the
Respondent on 30 July 2009 and 6 August 2009. Mr
John Irvine and Mr Warwick
Irvine were also at these meetings. As a result of these meetings a
recommendation was made that the Respondent
undertake fortnightly supervision
with the ‘Adult team leader’ in relation to maintaining appropriate
professional boundaries
with clients. Ms Irvine-Rundle stated that as far as she
was aware this advice had not been taken up by the Respondent.
Irvine-Rundle was only aware of one other complaint regarding the Respondent.
The matter appears unrelated to the current issue
before the Tribunal.
indicated above, various handwritten notes are attached to the statement of Ms
Irvine-Rundle. Annexure A is the handwritten note
of the conversation with
Client A that occurred on 26 July 2009 (pages 281- 283). This document records
Client A informing Ms Irvine-Rundle
of details of the relationship. The
following notes are included in this record:
He gave me phone no. – I rang him
We set up a meeting. He told me he felt a connection with me from the
time he first saw me.
Met a few times 3-5 at Halekalerney (sic) Bowling Club. – he was
really charming. Realise now he knew what to say
Told me things about other clients
Told me about other professionals – eg. breast enlargement
Told me he saw a lot of clients from home or at pubs b/c they didn’t
like READ Clinic
Always @ his house (10 times) – he’s been to my house twice.
* told me he could see me as “friends with benefits”
Remember drinking
Sent me so many texts – “my gorgeous trusted friend” how
it started.
Last session
: Must have been 2 hours.
We talked about himself most of the time.
Talked about not being pretty/smart/witty funny.
Said he’d like to take me to the theatre but unethical.
Told me he was abused as a child too
Told my daughter immediately that I thought I’d been “hit
Talked about “Jack Nicholson” – said he’d looked
– he gave me his mobile number.
He came to my house on Tuesday night, asked me to cook for him this
Thursday (27.7.09). I told him “no”.
Only “date” was @
– we had sex there
b/c he said it was one of his fantasies.
Feel like a complete joke to him. That he couldn’t care about me.
C to the statement of Ms Irvine-Rundle is a record of her interview with the
Respondent on 27 July 2009. The note includes
the following points (page
RSVP was the way
we met – met for coffee in end Nov/Dec @ Garden Centre. – met on
& off after that time.
hindsight this was inappropriate
Tuesday. Had glass wine & left.
Remember it
being a +ve relationship.
Never had a
sexual relationship.
requesting to go off pain med
Denied talking
Denied talking
Denied meeting
clients for therapy in “pub setting”.
the letter written by Ms Irvine-Rundle to the Board, further details of the
complaint made by Client A are provided. These details
Respondent had suggested to Client A that she cease all prescription medication
and rely upon ointments and physiological
strategies to manage her pain;
Respondent told Client A that he was also having a sexual relationship with a
woman in Sydney and that he had to ‘re-educate’
the other woman
Client A had
gone along with this position as she wished to please the Respondent; Client A
was not permitted to ring or text the
Respondent without an initial text from
the Respondent permitting her to do so which Client A had interpreted to be a
result of the
Respondent not wanting his children or other partner to know about
their relationship;
Respondent had discussed another of his clients, who was a work colleague of
Client A with Client A. This made her concerned
that he would discuss her issues
with other clients including those in her workplace.
Respondent had spoken in negative terms about the skills of one of his
colleagues at the READ Clinic and discussed a cosmetic
procedure undertaken by
another colleague.
F to Ms Irvine-Rundle statement records the meeting held with the Respondent on
6 August 2009. The Respondent is recorded
as accepting the Clinic’s
requirement to attend supervision, the limiting of his practice to child and
family cases and to
six consultations per day. He is further recorded as having
indicated he would be taking action regarding his own mental and physical
HCCC file note records a telephone conversation between an investigator and Ms
Irvine-Rundle (exhibit 25). Ms Irvine-Rundle advised
that as at 8 June 2010 the
Respondent had not acted upon the recommendation that he undertake formal
supervision with a senior psychologist.
She further advised that she had become
aware that the Respondent was seeing adult female clients, including one with
appointments
at 7.00am despite the direction of the Clinic Chairman.
another HCCC file note (exhibit 26) records Ms Irvine-Rundle advice to a HCCC
Investigator that the clinical records regarding
Client A held by the READ
Clinic for treatment provided by their psychologists would have been accessible
by the Respondent had he
sought Client A’s permission.
Medical Reports – Dr Simon Smith
Smith examined the Respondent on 22 April 2010 at the request of the Health Care
Complaints Commission. His report dated 25 April
2010 (exhibit 44) stated that
the Respondent was circumcised, did not have his public hair shaved at the time
of the examination
and that no physical signs were observed of a vasectomy. Dr
Smith stated that the Respondent informed him that the vasectomy was
15 years earlier and Dr Smith opined that it would not be surprising for there
to be no visible scars after the elapse
of such a time.
Peer Review Evidence – Professor Dianna Kenny
HCCC provided the Tribunal with two reports from Professor Kenny (exhibits 30
and 34). Professor Kenny is a Professor of Psychology
at the University of
Sydney and a consultant psychologist. Her CV forms exhibit 32.
the first report dated 23 December 2009 Professor Kenny notes the discrepancies
in the versions of events between the Respondent
and Client A. She states that
she bases her opinions on the version of events presented by Client A.
opinions of Professor Kenny are set out under the headings regarding Findings
Evidence of the Respondent
Letter (and CV) from the Respondent received by the HCCC 3 November
HCCC wrote to the Respondent on 16 September 2009 (exhibit 35) providing details
of the matters complained of by Client A. The
Respondent addressed the issues
raised in this letter in an undated written document received by the HCCC on 3
November 2009 (exhibit
this statement with respect to Particular 1(i) the Respondent stated:
I do not recall intentionally disclosing any personal
information during the three sessions with Client A. However I do recall Client
A asking personal questions which I avoided answering.
this statement with respect to Particular 1(ii) the Respondent stated:
I do not recall ever giving my mobile to Client A but more importantly,
encouraging her to text me between sessions. Notwithstanding,
my mobile number
is easily obtainable and clients do make contact with therapists via emails at
the Clinic.
this statement with respect to Particular 1(iii) the Respondent stated:
I never made any suggestion or intention of wanting to meet
socially. Quite the contrary, in the last session, Client A made it clear
she had only come to the session to say goodbye. She said she no longer needed
that it would be nice to catch
up socially at some time. To which I replied that I couldn’t do that.
She appeared quite disappointed.
this statement with respect to Particular 1(iv) the Respondent stated:
I never encouraged Client A to join an internet dating service.
In fact, it never came up in discussion. I later discovered that
Client A was
at the time and before the sessions, actively using the dating services. She
was also participating in dates arranged
via the dating service. At the time of
the first session, I don’t believe I was a member of the service.
this statement with respect to Particular 2(i) the Respondent stated:
I can recall Client A discussing her medical condition. I
remember mentioning that I knew of some people with the same condition
gel to assist in pain relief. I also clearly recall explaining to Client A that
she should consult her treating Doctor when
treating her condition. At that
point, Client A made it very clear to me that she wanted to manage her condition
without medication
and she didn’t trust Doctors. I didn’t pursue
the topic as I thought it was a very sensitive matter.
this statement with respect to Particular 2(ii) the Respondent stated:
I did not make derogatory remarks about the named colleague.
The colleague is a good friend of mine and I would never demean her.
recall Client A describing her counselling time with my colleague. She had
great delight in telling me how she brought my
colleague to tears. Client A
reported that any therapy was of no use to her and she only attended counselling
because her supervisor
insisted that she obtain some help with her anger and
emotional outbursts.
this statement with respect to Particular 3(i) the Respondent stated:
I recall that around October 2008, Client A made contact with me
via rsvp. I couldn’t contact her via email as I was never
a financial
member of the site.
this statement with respect to Particular 3(ii) the Respondent stated:
I do not recall ever having said that comment. However, after
the first meeting at the Nursery, we both agreed it would be nice to
again in the future. At no time did Client A indicate or suggest that she was
uncomfortable meeting socially again. During
the next 7-8 months, we met
probably 6 times again socially.
this statement with respect to Particulars 4 and 5 the Respondent stated:
The relationship with Client A started out as a social
relationship and remained a social relationship. Most meetings were at the
local bowling club which involved catching up type talk and each would part
company and go their own way. The talk was always pleasant
and friendly. The
content of the discussion varied and was of a general nature.
this statement the Respondent made the following comment that relates to part of
Particular 6:
At all times when we met socially, there was no treatment
provided. In fact, the only treatment provided was the first two sessions
the READ Clinic. During the third session, treatment was not provided as Client
A only came to say goodbye. The content of the
meetings were about very general
topics such as politics, sport, weather, local current affairs, what Wyong
council was doing or
not doing, etc.
this statement with respect to Particular 7 the Respondent stated:
During the course of our social interaction, I never disclosed
information about other clients. However, Client A did bring up a
knew I was seeing. The only information that was exchanged was what Client A
disclosed about the client. I keep all
client information confidential.
Respondent also provided a CV to the HCCC (exhibit 37). Relevant details are
included under the heading of Background to the Respondent
Record of Interview with the Respondent 16 March 2010
Respondent attended an interview with HCCC investigators. A transcript of this
interview is found at exhibit 40.
entire interview is considered by the Tribunal. The Respondent confirmed that
his date of birth was in fact 27 December 1956.
He stated that his working week
was divided between the central coast and Sydney and that he worked out of
several business premises
six days per week.
Respondent was asked about the RSVP site and he replied as follows:
RESPONDENT: Okay. Well, I actually didn’t put in my
details to that. One of my secretaries at Bankstown actually did that
of a joke. So I just, out of curiosity then, sort of continued on, just on
occasions just looking at the site. No real
big deal. I never subscribed to
the site in terms of paying for anything. So I think the procedure was that you
had to buy certain
stamps or something, as a way of communicating with other
people on the site. So I never did that. I guess that could be validated
the site itself; I’m not sure. I’ve used it more as a curiosity
than anything else. Yeah.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: Do you have any idea when you’ve – you say
it was the secretary that entered the information on the
RESPONDENT: Mm-hmm.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: Okay, what was her name?
RESPONDENT: Angela. I can’t remember – I don’t know her
last name, but she’s at the Bankstown office.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: What’s the name of the practice at
RESPONDENT: Millennium.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: And when did that occur, as far as entering those
RESPONDENT: I’ve got no idea. 2008 sometime, I would imagine.
Probably, I’m guessing, maybe mid-year 2008, something
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: You’ll have to bear with me; I know very little
RESPONDENT: I don’t know a lot either.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: Is there any personal details that you had provided to
Angela to upload that information?
RESPONDENT: Other than my name?
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: Yeah. As I said, I know very little about...
RESPONDENT: Yeah. No, just your name and it’s just date of birth,
perhaps. That’s about it. It doesn’t disclose
much, I mean, for
obvious reasons.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: Did you have to put any photographs or anything like
that in there?
RESPONDENT: You can, but I didn’t.
Respondent later stated that some profiles on RSVP had photographs posted with
their profiles (399). Later in the interview the
Respondent was asked the
following question (and the Tribunal notes that the Respondent made no mention
of the fact that his RSVP
posting had a passworded photo of him available at any
time during the interview):
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: You mentioned, when you were talking about the RSVP, when
she contacted you she said something like, “Is
RESPONDENT: Yeah.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: How would she have – I was a bit confused, because
I think you said you didn’t have a photo up there.
So how would she have
known it was Jack?
RESPONDENT: I don’t know. It might have been something that I said in
the email back or something like that. No actually,
I think it had more to do
with my profile. Yeah, she recognised something in my profile, I think, and
that was it.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: Do you know what that might have
RESPONDENT: I have no idea. Can’t even remember what I put in the
Respondent stated that he had two email addresses. One was a home email address
‘no-one would know’
and the other was a work email. Both
email addresses were through Optus. The work email commenced with
and he could not recall the home email address.
Respondent stated that he thought Client A had tried to ‘shock’ him
with matters such as the story of her shooting
dead her first husband and of
bringing another therapist to tears. He stated that it was only with hindsight
that he considered these
matters may have significance with respect to Client
A’s mental health as he had been focussed on the anger management issue
for which she had been referred.
the interview the Respondent stated that he had communicated with Client A by
way of SMS (text messages). The Respondent gave
the following evidence regarding
the nature of these text messages:
It might have been, like, you know, “I’m at the
bowling club. Do you want to come for a drink?” or something like
It wasn’t anything – I mean, sometimes I would send a general text
to a lot of people, and I might include her
in that. But yeah, just, that was
relevant matters are recounted below with respect to each Particular of
this interview with respect to Particular 1(i) the Respondent stated:
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: Now, Client A has made allegations
I’ve outlined to you regarding the disclosure of personal information
during those consults. Do you recall any disclosure of personal information,
your own personal information, in those consults?
RESPONDENT: No, not at all.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: Have you disclosed personal information to her since
RESPONDENT: Since – during the consultations? No.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: Okay. So you didn’t disclose any during the
RESPONDENT: Yeah.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: After the consults had finished, do you recall
disclosing any personal information to her?
RESPONDENT: When we met socially?
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: Yeah.
RESPONDENT: Personal information? Not really, because I’m a very
private person, so I don’t generally talk much about
myself. But, I mean,
not intentionally, anyway.
Tribunal notes the evidence elsewhere in the documentation that Client A had two
photos on her ‘public’ profile of
RSVP. In this interview with
respect to Particular 3(i) the Respondent stated:
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: That contact was made, and how did that RSVP
RESPONDENT: She contacted me. At first I didn’t know who it was
because she called me “Jack”, and I just had no
idea and the reason
why she called me Jack because she used to say to me that I looked like Jack
Nicholson, and then she –
and just from there – yeah, it was just a
few – passing of a few emails, and we just decided to meet up. I
exactly remember how it occurred, but I think it was a Saturday
afternoon and, yeah, we just decided to catch up for a cuppa –
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: You said that she had contacted you, and there was no
photographs of you on the site. You said you hadn’t
uploaded photographs.
So it was just a blind contact from her point. Is that correct?
RESPONDENT: Yeah, because when she contacted me she didn’t, - I
don’t – she said, “Is that Jack?” right,
and that just
threw me completely because she was seeing me, calling me that, right, and I
think I just – I might have sent
something like that.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: And this “Jack” she referred to,
she’d obviously brought that up during a counselling session?
RESPONDENT: Yeah. A lot of people do, and I get very embarrassed by
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: So at that point in time, when she provided that
RESPONDENT: I sort of – no, I was a bit puzzled. I didn’t
quite know who it was, no. When I just – because this
person had taken an
interest, I just sort of sent back and said, “Yes, whatever,” you
know, but I didn’t quite
know until she actually pointed out who it
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: So you’ve said yes to – she says,
“Is that Jack?”
RESPONDENT: Yeah.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: Has she come back again with another response, or is
that when the email started, or how did it occur?
RESPONDENT: That’s probably when it – yeah, the email started.
I think there was only one or two, maybe one email.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: And when you say “email”, can you email on
the RSVP site?
RESPONDENT: Yeah.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: And you say that when that contact occurred, the back
and forward with the emails – was that on that particular
day or within
hours or within a couple of weeks, or when did that occur?
RESPONDENT: Probably a couple of weeks.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: So there was initial contact over a couple of weeks
before you actually met.
RESPONDENT: Yeah, I don’t think we met until a few weeks later.
Yeah, something like that.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: Obviously, prior to the meeting, you’re now
aware of who she is.
RESPONDENT: Prior to meeting? Yeah.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: So you knew it was an ex-patient.
RESPONDENT: Yeah.
Respondent also stated the following during the interview with respect to the
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: No, just an example here, you’ve got
Client A, who’s a patient. She’s made some statements
during three
counselling sessions. You’re not really sure – you haven’t
had enough time to make a full assessment
of her. She’s made some
statements which are fairly shocking, and then you’ve started to meet her
on a social basis.
What’s your guidelines as far as your professional
practice – as far as dealing in a personal environment with a
RESPONDENT: Well, while I’m dealing with her therapeutically, you
have no contact with them other than what you’re doing
therapeutically.
My usual guidelines – I guess this one came about because it was just
chance – it just came through
RSVP by chance. But normally I
wouldn’t have any contact.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: When you say by chance, she’s contacted you by
chance, but you’ve actually returned the contact.
RESPONDENT: Yeah.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: So it wasn’t by chance you’ve actually
progressed that contact.
RESPONDENT: Yes.
this interview with respect to Particulars 4 the Respondent agreed he had met
Client A in around November 2008 in a Nursery and
then met her on a further
seven or eight occasions up until July 2009, mostly at the Bowling Club. As to
the nature of the first
post consultation meeting the Respondent stated:
Had a cup of coffee, just chatted in general. No real – just general
conversation. Nothing, in general. I mean, how I was
going, I think I might
have mentioned a bit about, you know, a friend passing away and all that, but
that was – and we just
chatted a bit about the nursery, about the area,
what I was doing, what she was doing, and that was it, and we just parted
Respondent described the relationship as follows (page 411).
Well, I thought it’s a good, friendly relationship. The thing I liked
was just her intelligence, and just we talked about all
sorts of things. It was
friendly, very friendly. It wasn’t a relationship that you sort of
– it was casual. It was
very casual. It wasn’t one of those
relationships where, you know, you had this person as being your support or
anything like
that. It was just somebody that you caught up, had a chat,
to visits to Client A’s home the Respondent stated:
I went there once. She didn’t like people going to her home, so I
didn’t impose in any way. I went there to pick up
a book, so I picked up
a book, sat and had a cuppa. That was it.
Tribunal notes at this point the evidence regarding a text message sent by the
Respondent to Client A offering to bring a bottle
of wine to her home but takes
this no further. The Respondent also stated during the interview that Client A
had been to his home.
On one occasion it was for the purpose of showing him a
book. On the other occasion Client A dropped in one night after she had been
a party and they had a ‘cuppa’ (page 412). The Respondent also
stated that they had met in around February 2009 on
one occasion at a beach.
this interview with respect to 5 the Respondent denied the allegation that there
had been a sexual relationship and stated that
‘just a casual
relationship’
(page 414). The Respondent then answered the following
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: As far as with your clients in general, do
you usually meet with clients on a social basis?
RESPONDENT: No.
HCCC INVESTIGATOR: Why was she different, that you met her on a social
RESPONDENT: I don’t know. I just – I guess in some ways
it’s just – sparked an interest in her intellect,
that’s all,
just the things that she did. She did a lot of drama and, you know, she just
seemed to come out with these things
that were quite surprising in terms of
characteristics. But no, I don’t – I try and keep work and social a
asked why he thought Client A would make allegations regarding there being a
personal and a sexual relationship the Respondent
I think she just wanted to get rid of me. There’s a couple of reasons.
I told her I was going to the snow, and I think she
got quite upset about that.
And that just coincided with the same weekend, and then after that she made the
allegation. So the
two of them went together. I didn’t see much of it,
but she seemed quite upset that I – she assumed that I had promised
might teach her how to ski at some stage. Well, I never made the promise. And
then she went on to say that she had organised
her own ski trip and, you know,
was a bit cranky about the whole thing.
I mean, the other thing is she used to come to me – like, it would be
at the club – and she’d come and say, “Yeah,
I just got rid of
another guy.” So it seemed to be, you know, somebody that she’d met
on RSVP, and she said, “Yeah,
and I just got rid of him, I just told him
off and I just done this,” and, like, it seemed to be a bit of a
And in some ways, too, we’re talking about – and I didn’t
realise this till later on, but she did extreme things.
Like, here’s
somebody that – you know, she shot dead her husband. In the middle of the
night, she’d go out with
people and – I can’t remember what
she called it, but they go into paddocks where cows are standing and they do
to the cow, and it would drop to the ground. I don’t know what
it actually is. But they were all extreme behaviours. And
then towards the end
of the friendship she was saying, you know, she was coming, and just opening up
a bottle of wine and drinking
a bottle of wine straight from the fridge. So I
started to think there’s warning signs
Respondent stated that he could have told Client A intimate details of his own
personal appearance (page 419) but that she had
never seen him naked (page
Letter from Respondent in response to the
letter from
HCCC wrote a
letter to the Respondent on 22 April 2010 (exhibit 45).
The Respondent replied in an undated letter received by the HCCC on 24 May
(exhibit 46).
this statement with respect to Particular 1(ii) the Respondent stated:
In all cases when with any client the use of my mobile number would be for
therapeutic reasons only. In the case of the complainant
if I recall accurately
it was only used as feedback on the replacement thought for her anxiety that she
was practicing at the time.
Also at the time she was going camping on her own
so it was also used as a safeguard if she had trouble managing her anxiety. I
want to make it very clear that I would never give my mobile to a client for any
other reason. I would also like to make note that
my mobile is listed in the
White Pages. Something that I had forgot about until the investigation which
brought it to my attention.
this statement with respect to Particular 4 the Respondent reinforced his
position that the relationship with Client A was a
‘casual social
relationship’
(page 440).
respect to Particular 5 the Respondent stated:
At no time did the relationship become a sexual one. It always
remained a casual social catch up type of relationship. I’m
surprised that the investigation came to the conclusion that it was sexual.
Since I have no idea as to what information was
used to arrive at that
conclusion I can only guess at this stage.
I’m assuming that since I was questioned about the plan and layout
of my house that it had something to do with the complainant
being able to
describe the layout including the location of the bedroom. I was asked at the
interview if the complainant had a key
to my house. At the time my answer was
no however I forgot to mention that the complainant did have knowledge of a key
under a pot
at the front door that was used by the cleaner and any other person
I authorised to use my place. Having also remembered that on
a number of
occasions over the past 12 months I have entered my place and noticed things had
been moved. This probably occurred
5-6 times over that period. I didn’t
make much of it at the time but now I feel someone has been in my place
unauthorised
over the past 12 months. Also since then I have now identified
some things that have gone missing such as, some DVDs and books.
Also on one
occasion I entered my premises to find the back sliding door not locked. At the
time I didn’t take much notice
of it but now I feel that it has more
implications than I first thought. Also if the complainant had spent
considerable time in
my bedroom she would also be able to identify an unusual
feature. Also from the back of my house the layout of the dwelling can
viewed through an expanse of sliding doors. The expanse is approximately 9
metres across.
I will also assume the medical examination on the
April 2010 was used to make a determination as to
the nature of the relationship. My understanding of the results of the
examination
suggests that the only way the complainant could have knowledge
Since I cannot remember the content of every conversation over such a period
I’m assuming that’s what took place.
This situation is consistent
with what I tell my friends and family. I have no hesitation in informing
people that I have undergone
a vasectomy as I’m a strong advocate for men
taking responsibility in the area of contraception. All my family and friends
know I have had a vasectomy. In fact I have convinced a number of male friends
to have the procedure. As for being circumcised
the complainant would have been
aware that I was of the Catholic faith and that being circumcised when I was
born was the ‘norm’
rather than the exception. So even at worst it
was a 50/50 guess but with knowing I was Catholic and the era I was born
almost a certainty that I would be circumcised. Also if a sexual
relationship was to have occurred then the complainant should have
been able to
identify three distinct bodily features in that region. I have no idea of the
significance of the pubic hair examination.
I have also enclosed a copy of a card and envelope given to me by the
complainant. It was addressed ‘You from Me’. The
inside of the
card says, ‘Stephen Thanks to you I can come out of the water I’m
safe on shore at last.’ I hardly
think that this represents a very close
relationship but rather just a good friend and perhaps a caring person.
I have also enclosed a letter given to me by the complainant. To the best
of my memory it was given to me at the bowling club late
in May 2009. It is a
condensed account of the complainant’s life but more importantly how in
the two treatment sessions I
had with the complainant I was able to help her. I
was not aware of her thoughts till the complainant gave me the letter. However
the letter does clearly show that in the treatment of the complainant I was of
Respondent stated that he had concerns
‘about being emotionally
to be interviewed by the HCCC and that he had
intimidated’
the interview he realised that he was
‘not fully responsive to the
questioning’
and that he believed that his concentration and memory
were impaired. Further, he had attended contrary to medical advice. Later
letter the Respondent details stress that he suffered in November 2008 relating
to the sudden death of a close friend which
ultimately resulted in him seeking
treatment for reactive depression in mid-2009. This was further exacerbated by
the death of his
‘very best friend’
in February 2010. At this
time he became aware of symptoms such as loss of motivation, concentration and
memory difficulties, sleep
disturbance and mood problems. He stated that he had
continued with treatment and had made lifestyle changes to help with the
Depression. He concludes by stating that it had become obvious to him
that in November 2008 his
‘decision making was in all probability
compromised by what I was experiencing emotionally at the time.’
letter from the Respondent includes the following statement regarding the report
from the peer reviewer:
I do not have problems with the concept of peer review, however
in this instance there are two issues I wish to draw to your attention:
The identity
of the Expert opinion remaining unknown.
Providing a
balanced view on how one practices their profession.
If the Expert opinion was obtained from the R.E.AD. Clinic I
would have major concerns about the objectivity of the opinion. The
this concern is that I have over the past 9 months been in dispute about the
payment of an account within the partnership.
I have experienced extreme
pressure to conform to their demands for payment otherwise they have covertly
threatened to send a not
so favourable report to the HCCC. Those exerting
pressure and threats are senior members of the clinic and partnership. I have
enclosed some emails that provide evidence of their covert threats to have the
account settled otherwise unfavourable reports could
be submitted to the
registration board and the commission. I would consider this type of behaviour
from colleagues as being very
questionable.
I also believe that if an Expert opinion is obtained to assess my
character and practice as a psychologist then how I conduct myself
practise should also be assessed. This would allow for a balanced view of how I
conduct my psychological practise. I believe
that I’m a very caring
compassionate practitioner with a great desire to help people. I have over the
past 20 years provided
considerable time and service free of charge to those
that need assistance. I have never refused help or not treated someone because
they cannot pay for the service.
Respondent enclosed with this letter a copy of a typed letter given to him by
Client A (the ‘Hey’ letter - see details
above under the heading
Evidence of Client A) and a handwritten note from Client A.
number of emails appear to be exchanges between the Respondent and senior
partners of the READ Clinic in November 2009 were provided
in evidence. On 11
November 2009 an email was sent to the Respondent from a senior partner of the
READ Clinic. The email from the
senior partner asked after the
Respondent’s health, noting that it had been of concern to the Respondent,
particularly after
the ‘complaint’ had been registered. The email
details other ways in which the senior partner had attempted to contact
Respondent. The email then details three matters the senior partner wanted to
raise with the Respondent. The first matter was
an inquiry as to whether or not
the Respondent had paid the invoice for the time spent by the Practice Manager
of the READ Clinic
investigating the complaint of Client A. The cost of this
time is explained in a further email. The second matter was payment by
Respondent for treatment sessions provided by another psychologist in the
practice to Client A (this is later explained to be
for issues arising from the
relationship between the Respondent and Client A). The final matter raised was
an enquiry as to how the
supervision with Ashley Craig, discussed at the earlier
meeting, was progressing.
Respondent replied to this email on 12 November 2009 (page 453). He indicated
that he had received the invoice for the Practice
Manager’s time and
stated that he would pay this account. As to the payment of the account for
further treatment to Client
A the Respondent expressed concerns. He stated that
it was his recollection that he would not make such a commitment based on his
concerns regarding admissions of guilt. As to the supervision, the Respondent
stated that there had been
‘some informal supervisions
discussions’
and that these would continue into the new year.
an email dated 21 November 2009 (page 456) the Respondent stated that he had
been able to obtain supervision
‘from a number of sources’,
including supervision in Sydney. When asked in oral evidence to provide
details of this supervision the Respondent indicated it was
relationships counselling he had undertaken (T275.34 – 276.19):
Q. On page 456, "I have been able to gain supervision from
a number of sources including some peer supervision in Sydney." I'm just
wondering was that from Sharon Reid or Peter Watt?
A. No, actually that's - it's a mis-print, it actually should
be I was getting some counselling, so I was getting some counselling
Q. Who were you receiving counselling from?
A. It was from the therapy centre over at Miranda.
Q. Was there anyone in particular?
A. Ellie - I can't remember her last name.
Q. Is that the relationship counsellor?
Q. That's the relationship counsellor?
Q. So when you're saying there "including some peer supervision in
Sydney" what you're referring to--
A. Yeah, so I must have been at the time receiving it, when I wrote
Q. There was actually the relationship counselling?
Q. So were you receiving any peer supervision in the true sense of peer
supervision?
A. Well peer supervision would have been with Sharon and Peter and also
Linda at that time, because I still would have been at the
READ Clinic.
Q. Were there any psychologists with whom you were engaging in peer
supervision in Sydney?
in his cross-examination the Respondent had given the following evidence
(T247.48 – 249.10):
Q. I'm coming to my final topic. You spoke to the READ Clinic
at various times about these allegations and also had written correspondence
with them, didn't you?
A. I did. Written correspondence - I think they did the
Q. But did you write back at all?
A. There were some emails, but they were in reference to some money that
I owed the READ Clinic.
Q. Was it only about money?
A. From my perspective it was only about money. I think they had some
alternative agendas.
Q. You, though, have annexed to your submissions some correspondence
between yourself and the READ Clinic, haven't you?
Q. It's the case, if you turn, for example, to page 452, about
halfway down the page there's a suggestion, although it's put in some
third person language, that you had agreed to get ongoing fortnightly formal
supervision?
A. We hadn't agreed on anything.
Q. Can you turn then to page 455? Do you see the third dot point on
that page, although small, it says - although we don't know
from, but presumably someone at the READ Clinic:
"As you will recall, part of our game plan following the complaint, in
addition to the offer of counselling sessions for the lady,
was that you offered
to take up some supervision sessions with Ashley Craig. I assume that has been
happening but would welcome
your response detailing the frequency of that
supervision."
A. Those agreements were never - they're agreements that they
made up, and I never got in writing from them, and I never agreed to
However, I did approach Ashley Craig to seek some supervision, because we were
very close. Unfortunately, because of his
availability and that, we tried, but
it didn't eventuate.
Q. Well, you address the issue yourself, don't you, at page 456,
towards the bottom of the page:
"On the issue of supervision, I'm happy with what has transpired over the
last couple of months. I have been able to gain supervision
from a number of
sources, including some peer supervision in Sydney, as well as I've been
concerned about my health, et cetera."
A. Well, I sought that for myself.
Q. Then on page 460 - so just to set the scene, that was
21 November, the one on page 460 is 26 November 2009, it's
apparently from
the READ Clinic to you - not certain who it is. The
second paragraph, third sentence:
"What I think is missing is reassurance from our end that you have
adequately addressed the issues that resulted in your relationship
with [Client
A] post therapy. Catching up for brief conversations with Ashley and engaging
in some peer supervision with both colleges
in Sydney is a huge leap from the
agreed fortnightly supervision with a designated supervisor."
Do you see that?
Q. So, is it at least clear from this document that the READ Clinic
understood that you were to have the fortnightly supervision
of a designated
supervisor?
A. No, whoever wrote this email had that.
Q. So that was wrong?
A. As I said, we never had an agreement. There was no agreement, and
that was the issue, is that we were in some sort of disagreement
over certain
email dated 26 November from a colleague familiar with the Respondent’s
situation the following advice is provided:
[Omitted] has just copied me into the email trail between the two of you
on this matter. I accept and acknowledge that you have given
the clinic so much
of your time and expertise. I really do value that but I have some concerns
regarding your interpretation of
the recommendations we agreed to at the meeting
we had together.
These concerns mainly relate to your impression of what READ’s needs
were under the circumstances. I think you may have addressed
your own needs and
made the lifestyle choices that are right for you. What I think is missing is
reassurance from our end that you
have adequately addressed the issues that
resulted in your management of your relationship with Client A post-therapy.
up for brief conversations with Ashley and engaging in some peer
supervision with a designated supervisor (Ashley Craig).
Reference of Ms Robyn Banach
Banach provided two versions of a reference dated 19 September 2011. It was the
later version that was relied upon by the Respondent
and came into evidence. Ms
Banach also gave evidence on the third day of the Inquiry. This evidence
clarified the reason why she
had provided an amended version of her reference
being as a result of further questions from the Respondent’s counsel and
desire to make the reference sound more professional.
Banach initially met the Respondent in her role as Practice Manager at the READ
Clinic. Ms Banach was also an active partner in
the READ Clinic Partnership
until 2 February 2010 when she resigned. Apart from some occasional tardiness
submitting client reports
and statistical information for use by the practice
she was not aware of any other complaints regarding the Respondent’s
Ms Banach stated that the Respondent was on the Board of Directors for
the READ Clinic and had been
‘earmarked’
to take over from
the Chairman of the Board.
Banach stated that at some stage Ms Heather Irvine-Rundle took over some aspects
of her role when she was appointed as the Clinical
Manager and the Board so that
she had less contact with the psychologists in the practice. Ms Banach also
stated that there were
during the relevant period. She could not recall whether the Respondent worked
in the ‘adult team’ or the ‘child team’ but assumed he
worked in both as he worked with families and adults
Banach stated that she considered the Respondent to be ‘
a compassionate
psychologist with many years experience
(sic)’. Her reference
As I am unaware as to the nature of the current complaint, I
would have no hesitation in recommending his professional services to
appropriate people.
Banach gave evidence that her role at the READ Clinic was administrative and
when asked how she would know whether or not someone
was a good psychologist she
gave the following response (T142.1-8):
I’ve worked with a number of psychologists over a number
of years and I would gauge how the clients would come out of the offices
those psychologists. I would gauge the hours of work that they were prepared to
put in over and above once they’ve seen
a client, if they needed any
additional information or if they wanted to refer them to an additional service.
I would gauge that
on whether that psychologist was a good psychologist or not.
Usually the happiness of the client when they walked out of the door
demeanour of the client.
at the time she gave evidence before the Tribunal Ms Banach said she was still
unaware of the nature of the complaint against the
Respondent. When a very brief
description of the conduct (which included the details of a social and sexual
relationship forming
a psychologist and a client) was given to Ms Banach stated that she would
recommend the Respondent until the allegations were proven against him
Banach explained the comment in her reference that the Respondent was a
‘very private person’
. Ms Banach stated that the Respondent
would not engage in personal discussion and protective of his
By way of example she stated that she was aware that the
Respondent was married with two children from the standard forms listing
details completed by the Respondent for the purpose of working at the READ
Clinic. Later in her cross-examination Ms Banach
stated that she rarely saw the
Respondent at work or Board meetings but they crossed paths in the
. She also confirmed she did not socialise with the
Respondent.
Banach gave the following evidence at T146.1 – 147.8:
you able to tell the Tribunal your understanding of what Mr Whyte’s
specialties are?
specialties were anxiety and depression in adults, and with children, he was
excellent with children with behavioural disorders
and working with families to
do you know he was excellent if you never – if you rarely saw
the reason I know he was very good at what he did because we did never receive
any complaints about him, and we did from time
to time receive complaints about
the other psychologists in the practice.
it’s not the case that you were necessarily – you personally would
receive the complaint, isn’t that right?
many years I would until Heather because within that role of clinical manager,
it was me who would field those initial complaints,
whether it be a phone call
or a letter that would always land on my desk.
since Heather became the clinical manager she would handle the complaints
wouldn’t she?
it fair to say she was clinical manager from about early 08?
I can’t exactly remember the time frame that she became that clinical
manager, I thought it was more towards July.
makes you say that?
I went away for one week, I took a week of the school holidays off, and when I
came back I had an email saying that she had
been appointed clinical
was news to you was it?
you didn’t know you were having some of your role taken away?
that upset you?
you say that you didn’t know Mr Whyte very well and rarely saw him at
work, why is it that you were prepared to provide a
personal reference for
a good question, because I feel that Stephen is a good psychologist,
they’d never had any complaints about him,
and that was the reason. The
dealings that I have had with Stephen have always been professional, and that
was the reason that I
provided the report or the reference.
he ask you to provide it?
I got that request through his solicitor.
that come out of the blue that request or had you been – had it been at
least raised with you first by someone else?
was really out of the blue.
Dr Khan dated 9 March 2010
Khan is a general practitioner who works in McGraths Hill. He provided a
document titled ‘To Whom It May Concern’.
The content of this
document reads:
Stephen Whyte has recently experienced a traumatic loss. He is
currently suffering from sleep disturbance problems and concentration
difficulties. His symptoms are characteristic of a reactive depression.
At this stage it is extremely important that Mr. Whyte is not placed in
positions that could be very stressful for him. Any such
situations may
compromise his medical status.
Respondent’s Draft Statement dated 6 October 2011
Respondent served a draft statement dated 6 October 2011. This document came in
to evidence as exhibit R2.
Respondent addresses the paragraphs in the statement made by Client A dated 8
September 2009 (exhibit 3).
Respondent records that Client A was referred to him by her employer as she was
having problems with anger management (paragraph
7). The Respondent also records
that Client A informed him during that first consultation that she had shot her
first husband. He
was also aware from this first consultation that Client A had
pain issues as a result of arthritis. Client A also informed him that
studying for a Certificate IV in Mental Health at TAFE.
Respondent then makes comments under the heading ‘Additional
evidence’ at paragraphs 72 to 74 as follows:
the benefit of hindsight, I now see that it was unwise of me to allow a social
relationship to develop with Client A given that
I had until 26 July 2008 been
in a professional relationship with her.
was deeply affected by the loss of my friend [omitted] in November 2008 and the
news that my other good friend, [omitted], had been
diagnosed with terminal
cancer. [He] passed away in February 2010. I was also working long hours and
commuting between Sydney and
the Central Coast, where I did not have a support
network or group of friends. Looking back, I see I was lonely.
May 2009 I realised that I was feeling depressed. I was having difficulty
concentrating at work and I was starting to have motivational
problems. I
sought help from my GP, Dr Khan. In about June/July 2009 I was prescribed
andipressants (Zoloff, 100mg). I found them
to be of benefit. I attended
counselling at the Caringbah Sutherland Family Relationship Centre for
approximately 6 months. I found
that to be of assistance. I made lifestyle
changes and started exercising six times per week at the gym, which I am
continuing.
I have reduced my workload and no longer take on as much as I did
previously. I changed my diet and I am now eating more healthily.
psychological condition has improved markedly since May 2009, however, I do
continue to experience stress as a result of these
proceedings.
Tribunal notes that the Respondent and Client A give a similar account of the
first treatment session. The Respondent maintains
that he made no mention of the
gel/ointment and there is nothing in Client A’s statement to indicate she
made a mention of
anger as an issue.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 5 (Particular
2(ii)) both the Respondent and Client A agree
that there was talk of previous
the counsellor crying.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 7 the
Respondent denies he said that he was different to other
psychologists.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 8 (Particular
1(i)) the Respondent denies any of these statements
were made and refers to his
clinical notes to detail what occurred during the session.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 9 (Particular
1(i) & (ii)) the Respondent stated that he
gave his mobile number to Client
A because she was going camping and that it was not uncommon for him to give it
to clients in case
they needed to contact him between sessions. Client A’s
statement was that the Respondent told her that he gives it to all
his clients.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 11 the
Respondent denied that there had been any discussion
during the telephone call
he made to Client A when she missed an appointment regarding her texting him or
there having been a misunderstanding
between them.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 12 the
Respondent does not accept the two hour length stated
by Client A for the final
treatment session, he also does not accept that there was anything other than a
‘review’ being
a discussion of how she was managing her thoughts on
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 13 (Particular
1(iii)) the Respondent denies the entirety of
the contents thereof. The
Respondent recalled that at the end of the third session Client A said to him
that she thought it would
be nice for them to go out socially and that he had
replied that he would not be able to do that.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 14 (Particular
1(iv)) the Respondent denies discussing RSVP
with Client A. He accepts that he
has a profile on RSVP in which he
from time to
time. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent was a member of RSVP from 26 July
2008. In his statement received by the
HCCC on 2 November 2009 (exhibit 36) the
Respondent stated that Client A was using RSVP before and at the time of the
sessions (page
356). The Respondent also stated in the letter received by the
HCCC on 2 November 2009 that he
‘didn’t believe I was a member of
the service’
i.e. RSVP at this time.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 15 the
Respondent relied upon the appointment card (the original
of which was not
produced to the Tribunal) in his assertion that there was no further appointment
made for Client A. Further, the
Respondent denied that he had ‘hit
on’ Client A during the consultation as Client A reported to her daughter
was picked up from the consultation.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 16 the
Respondent denied that he had been looking at Client
A’s RSVP profile in
‘notintogames’
was when he received the massage asking him
“Are you Jack?”
. The Tribunal notes that Client A had two
photos of herself visible with her profile and the Respondent had his profile,
the Budgewoi
location and the user name Psych08 as identifying features.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 18 the
Respondent agreed that he met Client A at the Nursery
but denied the specifics
of the conversation as recorded. He stated that he had told he details of
friends that had recently died
and now realises looking back on this
conversation that he was feeling
‘vulnerable and lonely’
the time. He further stated:
I have a previous history of depression going back to 1997, when
I underwent a 18 months of treatment and was on medication.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 19 the
Respondent stated that he did not agree that he said
any of the things
attributed to him. He agrees that the party organised by Client A’s
children was raised later in time.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 20 the
Respondent could not recall how they exchanged email
addresses, stating that it
could have occurred after they met at the Nursery. The Tribunal notes that there
was RSVP email contact
between them prior to the meeting at the Nursery.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 21 the
Respondent agreed that he met Client A at the Bowling
Club. He denied buying her
drinks or having any knowledge of her being sick as a result of the prescription
medication she was taking.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 22 the
Respondent stated that the text he sent to Client A
on New Year’s Eve was
the generic text that he sent out to approximately 20 people.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 23 the
Respondent only accepts that he met Client A at the
Bowling Club in January but
does not accept the balance of the paragraph (Particular 3(ii)). The Respondent
stated that he was of
the view that the professional relationship between
himself and Client A had ceased at the time of the third appointment (29 July
Respondent denied the content of Client A’s statement at paragraphs 24 and
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 26 the
Respondent denied he texted Client A
considered it to be occasional. Although he cannot recall the date on which
Client A brought a book called ‘Flea Circus’
to his home he did not
believe that it occurred on 20 January 2009. The Respondent denied the balance
of paragraph 26.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 27 the
Respondent denied that he had sex with Client A or encouraged
her to keep dating
through RSVP. The Respondent recalled that Client A informed him that she was
dating through RSVP. The Respondent
agreed that Client A had invited him for
dinner one night in around February 2009 and that she was upset when he
indicated he was
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 28 the
Respondent denied talking to Client A about her medication
or giving her a book
Dying for a Cure
and still has his copy of this book. He denied
telling Client A that he had been molested by a priest when he was a boy,
he told her that he had been hit by a priest.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 29 the
Respondent denied that he was having a sexual relationship
‘friend in Sydney’
at the time he spoke to Client A. He
recalled discussing their respective children and he visited her home on one
occasion, which
he believed was in about July 2009. The Respondent denied that
the document referred to by Client A as “Analysis of Thinking’
anything to do with ‘teaching’. Rather, he had created the document
when they were having a discussion about behavioural
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 31 the
Respondent agrees that he met Client A on a number of
occasions in early 2009
but denied having sex with her, drinking too much or having sex with other
people on RSVP. He recalled that
Client A stated she was dating other people on
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 32 the
Respondent agreed he usually saw Client A on a Tuesday
evening or every second
weekend as these were the times he was on the central coast. He denied sending
text messages ‘all the
Respondent denied the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 33. He
stated that he may have contacted someone on RSVP
around that time but would not
have known who he was contacting or that it was a colleague of Client A’s.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 34 the
Respondent agrees he continued to see Client A on a
social basis. He stated that
he was not aware that Client A had written the
to boost his ego or that she considered their conversations to be
‘psychobabble’
. He also stated that he was not seeking
validation as a therapist from Client A.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 35 apart from
agreeing that he attended Client A’s home
in about June 2009 he denied the
balance of the paragraph.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 36 the
Respondent agrees that they both spoke of their children
including asking to see
‘out of politeness’
but denied pressing to meet one
of Client A’s daughters.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 39 the
Respondent accepts that he went to Client A’s
2009, having been invited for dinner. He agrees that they discussed the
residential course that Client
A had attended but did not recall suggesting that
the course was in any way unethical.
respect to the content of Client A’s statement at paragraph 41 the
Respondent denies that he divulged confidential information
regarding clients to
respect to the content of Client A’s statement dated 30 September 2010 the
Respondent denied that he suggested to Client
A that they go to the theatre,
that she join RSVP, that a further appointment was made for Client A to consult
him on 29 November
2009, that he knew the RSVP profile belonged to Client A when
he received the email asking ‘Is that you Jack’, that Client
to his home in January 2009, or that he had sex on a beach with Client A. The
Respondent’s other denials included providing
counselling to Client A
after 26 July 2008 and recommending the gel/ointment to Client A.
Oral Evidence of the Respondent
Respondent gave evidence before the Tribunal over two days. The Tribunal has had
regard to the entirety of this evidence but will
not summarise it in this
document given the substantial amount of evidence summarised elsewhere.
Submissions
Submissions of the HCCC and comments
written Outline of Submissions handed up by the HCCC on 4 November 2011 is
reproduced in Annexure B hereto. The HCCC submitted
that Client A had an
unusually disturbed past, that she did not present as manipulative, that she
gave evidence in a credible and
calm manner, she was co-operative, helpful and
honest, she readily conceded matters not in her favour. By way of an example the
conceded that she must have applied the white out to her diary and
did not show any signs of embarrassment regarding this matter.
to the suggestion that Client A was motivated by revenge, such motivation could
not have arisen until after July 2009 when Client
A attended the residential
course and came to the view that the relationship was inappropriate. Up until
that point Client A believed
it to be a normal adult relationship and the
comments she made to others during that period must be viewed in that context.
HCCC made submissions regarding the two RSVP accounts that were set up by the
Respondent. In one he was referred to as Psych08
and in the other Psych01. Both
listed his date of birth making him younger than he actually was. The HCCC
submitted that this along
with the content of the profiles were indicative of
the Respondent looking for a sexual partner by way of the dating service.
to the text messages the evidence of the Respondent was that he did write the
messages and the HCCC submitted that they were in
and of themselves highly
flirtatious and indicative of a sexual relationship and not consistent with the
evidence of the Respondent
that he was not sexually attracted to her (rather his
evidence was that he was attracted to her intellect). The text messages were
just general conversation between two friends. Further, the HCCC submitted that
it was incredulous that the Respondent had never
thought of a sexual
relationship with Client A.
HCCC also submitted that the knowledge of the Respondent’s personal life
(such as the fact that he had had a vasectomy and
that he was not circumcised)
would more naturally flow from there being a highly flirtatious or sexual
relationship. The HCCC also
noted that Client A was not cross-examined about the
three distinct bodily features that the Respondent claimed would have been
had she seen him naked. The HCCC also pointed to the length of time the
Respondent took to answer the question regarding where he
may have ‘skinny
dipped’ which provided Client A with an opportunity to see him naked in
public. The Respondent was only
able to give the Tribunal the name of one
location in Queensland that such an opportunity may have been provided but there
evidence that Client A was at that location. Further, Client A was not
asked if she had ever seen the Respondent skinny dipping.
HCCC submitted that the Respondent’s evidence that he was suffering from
depression which resulted in a loss of libido is
not supported by the evidence
that he was a member of RSVP, the contents of the text messages or his quest to
find friends.
HCCC also pointed to the unsatisfactory nature of the evidence given by the
Respondent to the HCCC Investigators where he omitted
to mention in any way
despite a number of opportunities the fact that he had a photo attached to his
HCCC submitted that the Respondent changed his evidence regarding the ‘Hey
letter’. On the first day he stated that
he had not taken much notice of
the letter. On the second day he stated he had not even read the letter until
after he became aware
of the allegations made against him. The Respondent stated
that he considered that the letter had come
‘out of the
. The HCCC submitted that the letter indicated that Client A was
engaged with the Respondent on a very deep level. The HCCC submitted
was a large gap between the type of conversation the Respondent indicated he had
with Client A during this period (e.g.
local council issues) and the issues
detailed in the ‘Hey’ letter. This was another factor that the HCCC
submitted was
indicative of the fact that the relationship had become an
intimate sexual relationship.
Tribunal notes the Orders submitted as appropriate by the HCCC. The Tribunal
also notes and accepts the submissions made in paragraphs
1 to 6 regarding the
relevant law.
Tribunal notes the admissions of the Respondent as set out in paragraph 7 of its
submission.
HCCC made submissions regarding the acceptance of Client A’s evidence over
the Respondent’s evidence in paragraphs
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC regarding the demeanour of
Client A, her ready concession of certain matters
put to her under
cross-examination not necessarily helpful to her case, and the credible accounts
of her actions.
Tribunal accepts the evidence the HCCC submissions set out as to the supporting
evidence. The Tribunal notes that the evidence
of Client A’s daughter went
unchallenged (as she was not called for cross-examination). The evidence of
Client A’s friend
was subjected to cross-examination. It was clear from
the evidence of Client A’s friend that he corroborated the substance
Client A’s evidence regarding her having a personal and sexual
relationship with a counsellor at the READ Clinic (T114).
The evidence of Client
A’s friend was not clear as to the time frames of the relationship which
is understandable in the context
of the nature of their relationship (i.e. work
colleagues) and therefore in these circumstances any discord regarding the
of events does not in the Tribunal’s view detract from the
to the objective evidence set out in paragraph 12 of the HCCC submissions, the
Tribunal is of the view that this should be accepted.
Tribunal is of the view that there was little in the evidence of Client A that
would allow anything other than a favourable view
to be formed regarding her
being a witness of truth.
HCCC made submissions detailing the reasons why the Tribunal should reject the
evidence of the Respondent at paragraphs 14 to
HCCC made submissions regarding the Respondent’s evidence that he was not
interested in Client A or looking for any sexual
partner at the time should be
rejected on the basis of the evidence set out in paragraph 15. The Tribunal
accepts the submission
of the HCCC in this regard. The evidence of
‘Angela’ was that she did not recall playing any role in the
creation of
any RSVP profile for the Respondent (and the other Angela denied
that she even had internet access at work). Neither of the women
called Angela
was called to give evidence before the Tribunal. The Tribunal is of the view
that the RSVP profile was of a ‘romantic’
nature and clearly
indicative of him using this service to seek a partner. The Tribunal notes at
this point (exhibit 14 – page
163) that the profile headline reads
‘SOMEBODY WITH A GREAT AND FUNNY PERSONALITY THROW ME ONE OF YOUR
FABULOUS KISSES AND YOU WON’T BE DISAPPOINTED!’.
The Tribunal
also notes that under the heading
‘Ideal Partner’
Respondent sets out a comprehensive description of the partner he is seeking.
This includes the comment
the person will enjoy
being spontaneous variety is the spice of life’
. In the ‘Main
Text’ of the profile the Respondent records that he is ‘WILD AND
ENTERTAINING ALWAYS FULL OF HUMOUR
ALWAYS PUSHING BOUNDARIES RISK
TAKING.....’
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC in paragraph 16 of its
submissions. The Tribunal finds this part of the Respondent’s
evidence to
be inconsistent, contradictory and lacking in credibility.
Tribunal accepts the contents of paragraph 17 of the HCCC’s submissions.
The Tribunal is reinforced in its view that the
evidence of Client A should be
preferred to the evidence of the Respondent where they differ.
respect to the matters set out in paragraph 19 the Tribunal makes the following
The Tribunal
accepts the comments made at the first dot point. The Tribunal also notes the
evidence of the Respondent that he did
‘intentionally divulge
information’.
The Tribunal
also notes that the Respondent wrote his mobile telephone number onto the back
of the business card. This could be interpreted
as a more personal overture as
it was not part of the printed material. Further, when the initial consultation
had been for work
related issues there was not a clear clinical justification at
that particular point in time to provide her with his mobile telephone
The Tribunal
notes that the evidence supports that the Respondent was in fact a member of
RSVP (with two memberships) at the time
he suggested to Client A that she join
The Tribunal
notes that the Respondent did resile from the position set out in his complaint
response (exhibit 36). In his oral evidence
he stated that his colleague typed
this document for him and that he did not proof read it prior to signing. In his
oral evidence
he initially stated that he did not mention the gel to Client A
then later recalled saying something about it.
The Tribunal
notes and accepts the submissions made regarding the Respondent making
derogatory comments regarding professional colleagues.
The Tribunal
notes and accepts the submissions made by the HCCC regarding the contact through
RSVP. The evidence given by the Respondent
to the HCCC investigators
demonstrates a significant lack of frankness on the part of the Respondent
regarding the photo on RSVP.
The Tribunal
notes and accepts the HCCC submissions regarding the conversation around the six
month waiting period.
The Tribunal
accepts Client A’s version of the personal relationship between herself
and the Respondent between November 2008
and July 2009.
The Tribunal
accepts the submissions made by the HCCC regarding the existence of a sexual
relationship between the Respondent and
Client A during the period January and
April 2009.
The Tribunal
notes and accepts the HCCC submission regarding his failure to refer Client A on
for pain management.
The Tribunal
notes and accepts the HCCC submissions regarding the disclosure of confidential
information regarding other clients.
general terms the Tribunal found much of the Respondent’s evidence to be
evasive, self-justifying and at times implausible.
Submissions of the Respondent and comments
written Outline of Submissions handed up by the HCCC on 4 November 2011 is
reproduced in Annexure B hereto. The Tribunal notes
and accepts the submissions
made in paragraph 1.
to the contents of paragraph 2, the Tribunal notes with respect to sub-
paragraph (a) that Client A was referred to the Respondent
in his capacity as a
registered psychologist and that the Respondent provided her with psychological
treatment (on the evidence of
the Respondent this was substantially CBT). With
respect to sub-paragraph (b) the Tribunal notes that the Respondent (identified
) had been viewing the profile of Client A on RSVP ‘a
lot’. Client A was aware that ‘psych08’ lived at Budgewoi.
During the psychological treatment the Respondent had disclosed to Client A
where he lived (which was in close proximity to where
Client A resided). The
Tribunal notes that Client A’s photo was up on her profile. Client A then
merely sent a link to ‘psych08’
requesting a photo. In response to
this request the Respondent forwarded Client A a password (roxy3roo) to unlock
access to the photo
he had on his profile. It is Client A’s evidence that
she became aware that ‘psych08’ was the Respondent after
the photo and then she sought confirmation from the Respondent. Client A stated
that when the Respondent responded to
this request he indicated he had known her
and that he was the psychologist who had ‘scared’ her off. With
sub-paragraph (c) the Tribunal notes that the Respondent and Client A
drank alcohol at the Halekulani Bowling Club.
Tribunal notes the submission made at paragraph 3 of the Respondent’s
submissions.
Tribunal notes and accepts the statement of the law set out in paragraphs 4, 5
Respondent sets out aspects of Client A’s evidence that he submits the
Tribunal would find troubling in paragraphs 8 to
respect to paragraph 9 the Tribunal accepts sub-paragraph (a). With respect to
sub-paragraph (b) the Tribunal accepts that there
are inconsistencies in the
manner in which Client A used asterisks in her diary. The Tribunal also notes
that this is in fact the
evidence of Client A, i.e. that she did not use them
consistently or for one purpose alone. With respect to sub-paragraphs (c) and
(d) the Tribunal notes that this is consistent with Client A’s evidence
that she did not use the asterisks in a consistent
manner. With respect to
sub-paragraph (e) the Tribunal notes that Client A gave evidence regarding the
whiting out of entries in
the diary after her attention was drawn to the
‘original’ copy of her diary that had been taken (with Client
permission) at the time she was interviewed by the HCCC investigators.
In these circumstances there was no value with respect to
her case in making
such alterations. With respect to sub-paragraph (f) the Tribunal notes that
Client A’s evidence was that
she had made an error as to the date on which
they met at the beach. The Tribunal also notes the evidence from the Facebook
regarding the timing of this incident. With respect to sub-paragraph (g)
the Tribunal is of the view that the evidence of Client
A with respect to the
asterisks denoting the occasions on which sexual intercourse occurred with the
Respondent is supported by other
evidence such as her informing her work
colleague of having a sexual relationship.
Tribunal notes, with respect to the submission made in paragraph 10, that Client
A was not asked to provide the reason why she
undertook the task of reducing the
Facebook entries to one page.
respect to the submission made at paragraph 11, the Tribunal notes that Client A
stated she had only just thought of the record
that she had in the email to her
friend after she had commenced giving her evidence. Client A was not asked
whether the material
she had deleted detracted from the contents of the entries
regarding her meeting with the Respondent at the beach.
respect to paragraph 12 of the Respondent’s submissions the Tribunal
accepts that the Facebook conversations do not in
and of themselves provide
proof of there being a sexual relationship between her and the Respondent. It is
however, a contemporaneous
record of the information being provided by Client A
to her friend. The only conclusion to be drawn from the content of the messages
was that she was having an intimate relationship with her
‘therapist’.
respect to the inconsistencies between the evidence of Client A and her friend
as set out in paragraphs 13 to 16 of the Respondent’s
submissions, the
Tribunal notes comments already made regarding the lack of recall of Client
A’s friend with respect to the
timing of information provided to him by
Client A. Client A’s friend was not able to place precise or even close
most of the information provided to him by Client A. Given the nature
of the evidence of Client A’s friend the Tribunal relies
upon the nature
of the information given to him by Client A and does not rely upon the times
placed upon the conveyance of that information
(which for the best part was not
able to be firmly fixed by Client A’s friend).
Tribunal notes the inconsistency in the evidence of Client A and her friend with
respect to whether or not the Respondent had
been invited to any of the
Respondent’s work functions.
to the submission made in paragraph 15 of the Respondent’s submissions,
the Tribunal does not accept that Client A’s
friend gave all of his
evidence in a clear and direct fashion or appeared clear in all of his
recollection. The Tribunal’s
observation of Client A’s friend was
that he did the best that he could to fix occurrences in time but had the
recollection
expected of a work colleague to whom there was little or no
significance of dates. The Tribunal accepts that Client A’s friend
not attempt to put a gloss on his evidence or present facts in a particular
light. There was certainly nothing in the Tribunal’s
observation to
suggest that he had conferred with Client A regarding his evidence.
respect to the submission made at paragraph 16 the Tribunal once again notes the
discrepancies and lack of precision regarding
the timing of events given in the
evidence of Client A’s friend. The balance of the paragraph dealing with
the manner in which
Client A may have seen the relationship with the Respondent
from the first consultation is the very reason why codes of conduct and
caution against personal relationships of any nature with clients.
to the submission regarding the text messages made in paragraph 17 of the
Respondent’s submissions, the Tribunal accepts
that it is difficult to
read them as having anything other than a flirtatious and sexual connotation.
While these messages alone
would not allow the Tribunal to conclude a sexual
relationship existed at the time it does allow the Tribunal to conclude that
was at least a sexualised relationship at the time. The Tribunal accepts
the submissions made in sub-paragraphs (a) to (e).
Tribunal notes and accepts the contents of paragraph 18 of the
Respondent’s submissions. The Tribunal is of the view that
inconsistency of this nature does not take the matter very far given the weight
of the evidence.
Tribunal notes paragraph 19 of the Respondent’s submissions. Once again
the Tribunal notes that the evidence that the Respondent
(by way of his RSVP
identity ‘Psych08’) viewed Client A’s profile, which included
her photo, on a number of occasions
before she made the request for the
Respondent’s photograph. It is the view of the Tribunal that even if this
was viewed as
Client A making the first ‘overture’ to the Respondent
he had access to her photo (in fact there were three photos available
A’s Facebook profile – see page 157, exhibit 12) and had made
several visits to her profile prior to her request
for the photo. However, the
evidence accepted by the Tribunal is that Psych08 had viewed Client A’s
profile on a number of
occasions in circumstances where her photo and profile
was available. This must be viewed, in the Tribunal’s view, as the
initiating the inappropriate contact.
respect to the submissions made in paragraph 20 of the Respondent’s
submission, the Tribunal is of the view that there
is no evidence that Client A
has ‘demonised’ the Respondent. Dr Kenny’s evidence was
speaking in the hypothetical
and is one of the foundations for the element of
the codes of conduct and ethics that cautions against personal relationships
clients (or previous clients). The Tribunal notes that the conduct of the
Respondent was an abuse of the therapeutic relationship
and mistreatment as he
took advantage of her vulnerabilities. Further, the Tribunal notes that between
the time of the Facebook entries
and the complaint Client A received advice from
mental health professionals regarding the professionally inappropriate nature of
the relationship. The Tribunal notes the evidence of Client A (T108.16-39)
regarding this issue as follows:
Q. You mentioned just then and you mentioned yesterday the
notion of an abusive relationship.
Q. Can you tell the Tribunal what that meant to you, when those words
A. Yes. I was just so upset because every time someone talks to me about
this relationship - and especially at that time - they
always put the word "abuse" in. And I thought it was a nice adult relationship
and suddenly it's an abusive relationship and I was
- I was gutted. I
was upset because I didn't - I just felt foolish because even now,
every time someone mentions this relationship
they put the word "abuse" in. And
with my history I - I didn't even see it coming. I didn't see it. I
was happy. But everyone
still classes it as an abusive relationship.
Q. You said you felt foolish. Why do you say that?
A. Because I should have - I should have known I - I
guess. I was angry with myself because I trusted this man. I trusted him.
thought - I honestly believed that it was a normal adult relationship,
and he led me to believe that. And he said everything
was fine, everything was
great, but everyone else says it's not. Everyone else is saying it's an abusive
relationship, an abuse
of power. I thought it was nice. But I'm never going to
be able to have a normal relationship because I keep doing things wrong.
this is just another example.
to the submission made in paragraph 21 of the Respondent’s submissions the
Tribunal does not see any evidence that could
be characterised as Client A being
‘motivated by a desire to lash out at, and punish’
Respondent. The Tribunal notes in passing that Client A was not the person who
initiated the formal complaint process. The Tribunal
has also indicated above
the reasons why it prefers the evidence of Client A to that of the
Respondent.
Tribunal notes the submission made by the Respondent at paragraphs 22 and 23.
The Tribunal notes that this matter is not the subject
of a Particular of
Complaint. However, one of the reasons why extreme caution should be exercised
with respect to the formation of
any other relationship after the formation of a
therapeutic relationship is any conduct such as the discussion regarding
of Thinking” and/or her childhood could be construed as a
continuation of the therapeutic process.
Tribunal notes the submission made by the Respondent in paragraph 24. Although
this conduct is not viewed by the Tribunal as in
itself amounting to
unsatisfactory professional conduct, the Tribunal has expressed the view that
the manner in which it was provided
and the reasons for which it was provided
would indicate the conduct was inappropriate (see evidence of Dr Kenny T122).
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 25 of the Respondent’s
submission. The Tribunal notes the evidence of the
Respondent regarding his
understanding of the use of the gel/cream and his knowledge of people who had
used it to good effect. The
Tribunal also notes the special interest the
Respondent listed in his CV with respect to pain management.
Tribunal notes the submission made at paragraph 26 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal accepts Client A’s
evidence that the disclosure
was made during the course of the treatment sessions. The Tribunal notes that
the Respondent gave evidence
that he may have made such a comment but denied
identifying the colleague. It is certainly information that was known to the
and would not be expected to have been known to Client A.
Tribunal notes the submission made in paragraph 27 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal notes that the clinical
records of the Respondent are
not comprehensive. By way of an example the Tribunal notes that there is no
record of the Respondent
providing his telephone number on a card for Client A
in anticipation of her travelling to Burrinjuck Dam. From a clinical perspective
the notes lack a clear referral question, contain no indication of her
assessment or treatment needs, no clear case formulation or
treatment plan, no
record of medications or previous treatment, no provisional diagnoses. The
Tribunal prefers the evidence of Client
A with respect to the issue of the
disclosure of personal information.
Tribunal notes the submission made at paragraph 28 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal is of the view that this
evidence does assist the
Tribunal as her evidence records the allegations made by Client A about the
Respondent’s conduct.
Tribunal notes the submission made at paragraph 29 of the Respondent’s
submissions. The Tribunal accepts that the submission
made to the effect that
the mere fact of Client A making such statements to others does not make the
content of the statement true.
They are however contemporaneous records of what
Client A was saying to others at various times. It is far-fetched to submit that
Client A was making statements to her daughter at the time of the consultations
after the eventuation of the
relationship between Client A and the Respondent.
the oral submissions made on behalf of the Respondent the evidence of Client A
is that she was distracted by noises of birds outside
her home and felt
pressured while giving her statement to the HCCC on 8 September 2009 and that
allowances should therefore be made
for inconsistencies. The evidence of Client
A would allow the Tribunal to conclude that she used an asterisk (*) in her
denoting several matters.
Respondent’s submissions then highlighted difficulties in the use of the *
by Client A (see around T308). By way of example
Client A did not use an
asterisk on the day she met the Respondent at the beach but she positively
asserted that sexual intercourse
occurred on that day. The Tribunal accepts the
submission of the Respondent that they are not a reliable indicator and has not
solely upon the * notations made by Client A in reaching the finding with
respect to Particular 5
Findings in relation to the Particulars of
Tribunal accepts the submissions made by the HCCC that the purpose of the
Respondent utilising the RSVP service was for the purpose
of meeting women with
a view to a sexual relationship rather than merely a way in which he could meet
friends (as submitted by the
Respondent). This is clear from the
Respondent’s RSVP profile set in the documents.
Tribunal notes the Respondent admitted that he did not see the possibility of
Client A suffering from a disorder such as (Borderline/Complex
PTSD) or see the
‘red flags’
Tribunal places no weight on the fact that Client A did not seek to rely upon
the text messages until after they were retrieved
forensically. This is
indicative of the view of the Tribunal that Client A did not make any attempts
the Respondent. Further, the evidence she gave
prior to the messages becoming available was consistent with the contents of the
messages when they became available.
Tribunal is troubled by the reason given by the Respondent for providing the
mobile phone number to Client A and the manner he
gave it to Client A. As the
next appointment was fixed for one month in the future this would be
inconsistent with the Respondent
having concerns for Client A’s welfare.
Further, if he does provide his mobile number to all of his clients as was
on his behalf it would be quite curious that the number was not
printed onto the card rather than the Respondent having to handwrite
onto a card.
Tribunal is not persuaded that the whiting out of some entries in Client
A’s diary is of any significance in the context
of the evidence in this
matter. The HCCC had a copy of the diary as it was on the date she was
interviewed by the HCCC Investigators
and she admitted making alterations after
Tribunal notes that the Respondent stated that he had not read the entirety of
the evidence served upon him by the HCCC or indeed
the entirety of his
letters/submissions to the HCCC. This is of significant concern given the
gravity of an Inquiry into a Complaint
of professional misconduct made by the
Particular 1
respect to Particular 1, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A that
during the course of the provision of psychological
services by the Respondent
he disclosed to her personal information, his mobile telephone number, that he
indicated he would like
to see her socially and suggested that she join RSVP.
The Tribunal accepts the criticism of Professor Kenny that the conduct falls
significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or experience (noting her reservation
regarding the reasons
for the provision of the mobile telephone number). Professor Kenny expressed
strong criticism of this conduct.
The Tribunal is of the view that the conduct
demonstrates that the judgment possessed and care exercised by the Respondent is
significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training and experience and that the conduct is
improper and
unethical in the course of the practice of psychology. The Tribunal is
reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established and that it amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 2
respect to Particular 2, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A that
during the course of the provision of psychological
services by the Respondent
he gave her inappropriate advice regarding treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and
made derogatory remarks
A. The Tribunal notes that Professor Kenny was only asked to comment upon
conduct detailed in Particular 2(i). The Tribunal accepts the criticism of
Professor Kenny that the conduct falls significantly
below the standard expected
of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience. Professor
Kenny expressed strong
criticism of this conduct. With respect to Particular
2(ii) the Tribunal notes that making derogatory comments about a professional
colleague is contrary to acceptable professional conduct as indicated by Clause
4(vi) of the Code of Professional Conduct 2004 (NSW
Psychologist Registration
Board). The Tribunal is of the view that the conduct demonstrates that the
judgment possessed and care
exercised by the Respondent is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level of
and experience and that the conduct is improper and unethical in the
course of the practice of psychology. The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that
this Particular is established and that it amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Particular 3
respect to Particular 3, the Tribunal notes the partial admission of the
Respondent and accepts the evidence of Client A that
in November 2008 contact
between them was re-established through RSVP and that in January 2009 the
Respondent informed Client A that
there should be a six month waiting period
following the termination of therapy prior to the commencement of a sexual
relationship
with an ex-client because he had
‘not really assisted
. The Tribunal accepts the criticism of Professor Kenny regarding
Particular 3 (i) that the conduct falls significantly below the
expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience.
Professor Kenny expressed strong criticism
of this conduct. The Tribunal notes
the oral evidence of Professor Kenny was that any form of non-therapeutic
relationship within
the two year time frame is by and large considered
inappropriate (T123.32-34). Further, she stated that given the particular
of Client A that there would be a ‘
total and permanent
injunction against any form of social relationship’
(T125.1-3). The
Tribunal is of the view that the conduct demonstrates that the knowledge, skill
and judgment possessed and care exercised
by the Respondent is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an equivalent level
of training and
experience and that the conduct is improper and unethical in the
course of the practice of psychology. The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that
this Particular is established and that it amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct. The Tribunal finds the
conduct set out in Particular 3(i)
is of such a serious nature that it may warrant the removal the suspension or
deregistration of
the Respondent and therefore a finding of professional
misconduct is made.
Particular 4
respect to Particular 4, the Tribunal notes the admission made by the Respondent
with respect to this Particular and notes there
is no real contest between his
evidence and the evidence of Client A. The Tribunal accepts the criticism of
Professor Kenny that
the conduct falls significantly below the standard expected
of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience. Professor
Kenny expressed strong criticism of this conduct. The Tribunal is reasonably
satisfied that this Particular is established and that
it amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct. The Tribunal is of the view that the
conduct demonstrates that the knowledge,
skill and judgment possessed and care
exercised by the Respondent is significantly below the standard reasonably
expected of a psychologist
of an equivalent level of training and experience and
that the conduct is improper and unethical in the course of the practice of
psychology. The Tribunal finds the conduct set out in Particular 4, in the
context of the vulnerabilities and characteristics of
Client A that were known
to the Respondent by the end of the three psychological treatment sessions, is
of such a serious nature
that it may warrant the removal the suspension or
deregistration of the Respondent and therefore a finding of professional
Particular 5
respect to Particular 5, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A that a
sexual relationship occurred between Client A and
the Respondent January and
April 2009. The Tribunal accepts the criticism of Professor Kenny that the
conduct falls significantly
below the standard expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience. Professor Kenny expressed strong
criticism of this conduct. The Tribunal is of the view that the conduct
demonstrates that the knowledge, skill and judgment possessed
and care exercised
by the Respondent is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent level
of training and experience and that the
conduct is improper and unethical in the course of the practice of psychology.
The Tribunal
is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is established and
that it amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct. The Tribunal
conduct set out in Particular 5 is of such a serious nature that it may warrant
the removal the suspension or deregistration
of the Respondent and therefore a
finding of professional misconduct is made.
Particular 6
respect to Particular 6, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A that
during the course of the provision of psychological
services by the Respondent
he did not refer her on for therapy and advice on pain management which he had
provided to her. The Tribunal
accepts the criticism of Professor Kenny that the
conduct falls significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner of an
equivalent level of training or experience. Professor Kenny expressed strong
criticism of this conduct. The Tribunal is of the view
that the conduct
demonstrates that the knowledge, skill and judgment possessed and care exercised
by the Respondent is significantly
below the standard reasonably expected of a
psychologist of an equivalent level of training and experience and that the
improper and unethical in the course of the practice of psychology.
The Tribunal is reasonably satisfied that this Particular is
established and
that it amounts to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Particular 7
respect to Particular 7, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Client A that
during the course of the provision of psychological
services by the Respondent
he inappropriately disclosed to her information relating to other clients to
Client A. The Tribunal accepts
the criticism of Professor Kenny that the conduct
falls significantly below the standard expected of a practitioner of an
level of training or experience (noting her reservation regarding the
reasons for the provision of the mobile telephone number).
Professor Kenny
expressed strong criticism of this conduct. The Tribunal is of the view that the
conduct demonstrates that the judgment
possessed by the Respondent is
significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a psychologist of an
equivalent level of training
and experience and that the conduct is improper and
unethical in the course of the practice of psychology. The Tribunal is
satisfied that this Particular is established and that it amounts to
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Considerations relevant to Orders
Tribunal has made findings of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect
to Particulars 1, 2, 3(ii), 6 and 7 and of professional
misconduct with respect
to Particulars 3(i), 4 and 5. The Tribunal is also of the view that the conduct
in Particulars 1, 2, 3(ii),
6 and 7 when considered together constitute conduct
of such a serious nature that it may warrant the suspension or deregistration
the Respondent from the Register and therefore a finding of professional
misconduct is made in that regard.
if the Tribunal had only made findings with respect to Particulars 3(i) and 4
the Tribunal would be of the view that the appropriate
orders open to the
Tribunal would be de-registration or a period of suspension, a reprimand
followed by practice with registration
subject to extensive conditions.
Tribunal is mindful of the mandate to be protective and not punitive in the
orders it makes. Where there are possible orders and
conditions available to the
Tribunal that would allow the Tribunal to fulfil its roles (protection of the
public safety etc) this
is the path that will usually be taken by a Tribunal
unless there is an issue of permanent unfitness.
Tribunal has grave concerns regarding the conduct of the Respondent. The
vulnerability of this client did not appear to register
at any level with him
during the three consultations despite the history provided. The Respondent then
held out what appeared (quite
reasonably) to Client A as a genuine friendship,
which in the circumstances of her life story, could be characterised as utterly
thoughtless, opportunistic and/or cruel.
the conduct of the Respondent demonstrates significant flaws that require
remediation, he is not, in the Tribunal’s
view, in an irredeemable
position if he applied himself fully to remediation. The Tribunal looks to
matters such as the Respondent’s
reaction to the peer review evidence of
Professor Kenny to indicate his potential to develop insight and commence
remediation. Although
in some ways it may be considered extraordinary that the
Respondent only started to have insight into his conduct upon hearing the
evidence of Professor Kenny during the Inquiry, at another level, it can be seen
as a result of the disjointed manner in which the
Respondent has conducted his
professional practice over many years. Having regard to all of the
circumstances, the Tribunal is of
the view that if the Respondent indicates his
willingness to genuinely engage in the processes required by the imposition of
on his Registration and undertakes to the Tribunal to diligently
comply with them then the Tribunal considers that an Order of de-registration
may not be required.
an issue that conditions on registration will need to address is the manner in
which the Respondent has conducted his practice.
The Respondent’s constant
travelling between practice locations has taken its toll on him, physically and
emotionally.
is the Respondent’s evidence that he has suffered from some form of
depression, at least on and off, since 1997. He stated
that antidepressant
medication formed part of the treatment therefore. He also stated that he had
some form of therapy which appeared,
on his evidence, to be relationships
counselling. It is also the Respondent’s own evidence that at times he was
so emotional
that it impacted upon his ability to appropriately function. By way
of example the Tribunal notes the Respondent’s comments
regarding the
impact his emotional state had on the interview with the HCCC investigators.
There was no evidence before the Tribunal
of any consistent treatment for the
Respondent’s depression. The depression appears to have impacted upon his
work as a registered
psychologist for some time. It is imperative that all
health service providers, in particular registered psychologists, do not work
under such impairment, not only for the safety of their patients but also for
their own safety and wellbeing. The Tribunal is of
the view that given the
length of time the Respondent states this has been an issue for him that he will
need some time to initially
address and stabilise and then will need to remain
vigilant to ensure ongoing control.
purpose of a period of suspension will be to allow the Respondent to focus on
his own issues and have progressed to a point that
his treating practitioner may
be able to express a view as to whether or not it is appropriate for the
Respondent to return to work.
A period of suspension will also allow the
Respondent to put in place appropriate employment arrangements, appropriate
arrangements, appropriate supervision arrangements and consider
appropriate continuing professional development.
the claim by the Respondent that he was not part of the ‘hard core’
that would not respond to supervision, the
Tribunal is of the view that the
Respondent has not demonstrated by his conduct that he was even willing to
accept supervision voluntarily.
The evidence from the READ clinic was that
supervision was offered. It is for this reason that the Tribunal formed the view
if conditions on registration were imposed in the alternate to
de-registration that the supervision provision would be stringent,
intense and
structured.
the parties indicated at the conclusion of the Inquiry that if the Tribunal was
minded to consider making orders imposing a period
of suspension followed by
conditions on registration that they wished to make further submissions with the
knowledge of the Tribunal’s
findings, the matter will be relisted for this
Publication
A copy of this Reasons for Decision
document is to be forwarded by the Registry to:
1) The Respondent and his legal advisor,
2) The HCCC,
3) The Psychology
Council of New South Wales,
4) The Psychology Board of Australia,
READ Clinic,
7) The Australian Psychological Society,
7) as the Council
and Board see fit.
Dated: 2012
___________________
Joanne Muller
___________________
Elisabeth Shaw
___________________
Peter Champion
___________________
Jacqueline Milne
Annexure A: Index of Documents in evidence
Annexure B: Written Outline of
Submissions handed up by parties 4.11.11
Annexure C: Schedule of Names
HCCC v WHYTE (No 1)
INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
Health Care Complaints Commission
Registration Certificate
Statement of Client A including Annexures:
to psychologists Regulation Board
“Analysis of Thinking”
of meetings with Mr Whyte
of “Award” given by Client A to Mr Whyte
from Client A to Mr Whyte
of Mr Whyte’s house by Client A
on Mr Whyte by Client A
Copy of Client As personal diary records- July 2008- July 2009
HCCC file not of transcript conversation with Client A
Statement of Client A including Annexures:
written by Client A
assistance program
management plan by Mr Whyte
Certificate
created by Client A for Mr Whyte
of bed purchased by Client A
article- regarding trial of Client A
WITNESS STATEMENTS
Statement of Mr B
Statement of Ms M S
Statement of Ms S T
Statement of Ms R Z
Statement of Client A’s daughter
Statement of Ellida Hafouri
HCCC File note of telephone conversation with Ellida Halfouri
16.03.10 - 23.03.10
Email from Ellida Hafouri regarding above request
Expert Certificate - Gary Coulthart (MCAA Pty Ltd) regarding forensic
examination of Client A’s mobile phones and home computer
HCCC file note of conversation with Mr Coulthart requesting additional
information.
Emails from Mr Coulthart in response to above request.
Email to Mr Coulthart requesting additional information.
Emails from Mr Coulthart regarding additional information requested by the
08.12.09 & 11.12.09
Statement of Angela Greathead
HCCC file note of telephone conversation with Alisha Lawford
Statement of Angela Abifares
Statement of Heather Irvine-Rundle
Email from Ms Irvine-Rundle
HCCC file note of telephone conversation with Ms Irvine-Rundle
CLINICAL RECORDS
s34A Notice requiring production of clinical records (plus HCCC file
Clinical records held by READ Clinic in respect of Client A, produced under
s34A Notice
Letter to Professor Dianna requesting report
Letter to Professor Kenny enclosing additional documentation.
Expert report by Professor Kenny
Statement of Connection
Professor Kenny’s Curriculum Vitae.
Letter to Professor Kenny requesting supplementary report
Supplementary report from Professor Kenny
HCCC Letter to Mr Whyte
Complaint response from Mr Whyte (undated, but received on 3 November
Mr Whyte’s Curriculum Vitae.
s34A Notice to Mr Whyte requiring interview with the HCCC
HCCC file notes, emails relating to Mr Whyte’s receipt of, and
compliance with the above s34A Notice.
Transcript of s34A interview conducted with Mr Whyte by the HCCC
Electronic recording (audio CD) of above interview.
HCCC file note of telephone conversation with Mr Whyte
Letter of instruction to Dr Simon Young regarding medical examination of Mr
Report by Dr Young
letter to Mr Whyte
submission from Mr Whyte (undated, but received on 24 May 2010).
GUIDELINES / POLICIES
NSW Psychologists Registration Board Code of Professional Conduct
NSW Psychologists Registration Board policy: Psychologists and sexual
behaviour in professional relationships
The Australian Psychological Society Code of Ethics, September 2007.
One page of print out of Client A’s Facebook entries
Tab No. Document Date Page
R1. Report of Dr
Khan 9.3.11 1
R2. Statement of Stephen
Whyte 6.10.11 2
R3. Reference letter of Robyn
Banach 19.9.11 16
R4. Client A’s Diary 2008/2009
HCCC v WHYTE (No 1)
WRITTEN OUTLINE OF SUBMISSIONS HANDED UP BY PARTIES
OUTLINE OF WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS PREPARED ON BEHALF OF THE
Introduction
Complaint which is the subject of these proceedings before the Tribunal is dated
7 December 2010 (the Complaint). Both unsatisfactory
professional conduct
under s139B of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law Act (NSW)
(“the National Law”)
and professional misconduct
under s139E of the Act are alleged. The matters complained of raise serious
issues from the perspective
of the protection of the public, the maintenance of
standards within the psychology profession and the maintenance of public
in the psychology profession.
Health Care Complaints Commission (“the Commission”) submits that
the Tribunal should be comfortably satisfied that
each particular as alleged is
proved and that the matters alleged amount to professional misconduct.
Commission seeks orders:
That Mr Whyte be deregistered for a minimum period of 18 months;
That Mr Whyte be prohibited from providing therapy, psychotherapy, hypnotherapy,
mental health services, welfare services (as
Care Complaints Act 1993
, counselling and/or any alternative
healing/health care/ therapies unless and until he is re-registered as a
psychologist; and
General Principles
“Disciplinary
proceedings against members of a profession are intended to maintain proper
ethical and professional standards,
primarily for the protection of the public,
but also for the protection of the profession”:
per the Court of
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 637. Conduct must be
measured against what is reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent
level of training and experience
and by the standard of the profession. In
the Court made the following
“The gravity of professional misconduct is not to
be measured by reference to the worst cases, but by the extent to which it
departs from proper standards. If this is not done there is a risk that the
conduct of the delinquents in a profession will indirectly
establish the
standards applied by the Tribunal.”
is well established that the jurisdiction exercised by this Tribunal is
protective, not punitive. In
Clyne v New South Wales Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1960) 104 CLR 186
at 201-202, the High Court said:
Although it
is sometimes referred to as the ‘penalty of disbarment’ it must be
emphasised that a disbarring order is in
no sense punitive in character. When
such an order is made, it is made, from the public point of view, for the
protection of those
who require protection, and from the professional point of
view, in order that abuse of privilege may not lead to loss of
the primary role of the Tribunal is protective, it also has a role in
maintaining public confidence in the profession and
maintaining the reputation
of the profession. Orders of the Tribunal may operate to have a general
deterrent effect for other members
of the profession.
trust placed in psychologists is analogous to that placed in medical
practitioners because of the necessity for the client to
disclose highly
personal information to the psychologist in the course of treatment. In a
passage cited with approval in
Health Care Complaints Commission v
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
at 638, Priestley JA
Richter v Walton
(Court of Appeal, 15 September 1993,
unreported):
The degree of trust which patients necessarily give
to their doctors may vary according to the condition which takes the patient to
the doctor. Even in regard to the most commonplace medical matters, the trust a
patient places in a doctor is considerable. In some
cases, of which the present
seems to be an example, the patient’s trust cannot help but be almost
absolute. The doctor’s
power in regard to the patient in such cases is
also very great. I do not mean power in the abstract way but as a matter of
the extent of the power will vary according to the temperament of the
patient, but the doctor with some patients and for limited
periods, because of
the relationship in which they are temporarily placed, is in a position to do
whatever the doctor wants with
the body of the patient. This is one of the
reasons why doctors are subject to correspondingly great obligations and are
to maintain high standards; all this being very much in the public
standard of proof is the civil standard as stated in
Briginshaw v.
[1938] HCA 34
(1983) 60 CLR 336
at 362-3. However by
reason of the seriousness of the allegations and the gravity of the consequences
the Tribunal must be comfortably
satisfied that the matters in the complaint
have been established.
Court of Criminal Appeal has cautioned against the use of “comfortably
satisfied” as implying that matters must be
proved according to a higher
standard than that of the balance of probabilities:
Gianoutsos v
(2006) NSWLR 539 at 547-9 applied by the
Medical Tribunal in
In re Dr Suman Sood
[2006] NSWMT 1
More recently, in
Polglaze v Veterinary Practitioners Board of
[2009] NSWSC 347
the Court confirmed that at common law there are only two standards of proof,
the ordinary civil standard of proof upon a balance
of probabilities and the
criminal standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt.
standard is not a third standard or proof.
Rather it is concerned with the quality or sufficiency of the evidence necessary
to discharge
the civil standard.
Consideration
the particulars are in dispute,
that the respondent disclosed his personal mobile phone to Client A;
that in November 2008, the respondent re-established contact with the ex-client,
client A through the internet dating service
that between November 2008 and July 2009, engaged in a personal relationship
with the ex-client, Client A.
Why Client A’s evidence should be
Commission submits that so far as the balance of the particulars are concerned,
the evidence of Client A should be preferred over
that of the respondent, for
the reasons set out below.
Commission points firstly to her demeanour. Client A was calm, credible, and
consistent, not hysterical or self-serving. When
in re-examination she was
asked about her relationship with the respondent, rather than angry or vengeful,
she was sad because, she
stated, words to the effect, that she thought it had
been a proper relationship and she was disappointed that she came to learn it
was being described as abusive. She readily conceded in cross-examination
matters which were not necessarily helpful to her case
– for instance that
she was not consistent in her asterisks in her diary, and that she had
subsequently deleted some matters
from her diary, likewise in relation to the
Facebook entries. Her explanation for these latter activities was credible.
Tribunal, however, is not left to consider Client A’s demeanour in a
vacuum. Important aspects of her evidence are supported
by other evidence.
supporting evidence is powerful because it undermines the suggestion that these
allegations were recent inventions or concocted
because of revenge following the
discovery of the ‘abusive’ nature of the relationship following the
residential counselling
course in July. It includes:
from her daughter, [Client A’s daughter] (Tab 11), in relation to:
respondent’s comment that people like him and Client A shouldn’t
commit to anyone comment, [6];
respondent’s comment about the theatre, after another appointment
RSVP contact
Stephen – been at his home, had been drunk at his home and drove drunk
and oral evidence from [Mr B] (Tab 7) which indicated that Client A told him (to
the effect that whilst the relationship was
on foot) she was having a sexual
relationship with a man with a job which meant she could not say too much (the
man was someone who
he later found out was her therapist).
also includes more objective evidence. This more objective type includes:
from RSVP in relation to the dates on which both ‘psych08’ and
‘notintogames’ closed their accounts
(ie the same date: 19 April
2009) powerfully supporting Client A’ account that this was done following
her being upset that
the respondent had contacted another woman via RSVP.
messages from Client A’s phone:
The tone of at
least some of the messages from the Respondent;
The content of
the messages, especially those proximate to the Client A’s purchase of a
bed (the purchase being is objectively
proved by the receipt at page
Facebook messages. These support Client A’s account. It is acknowledged
that this material has not been produced by Facebook,
but rather by Client A.
However, there was no suggestion that she had concocted these entries just prior
to the hearing. Client A
readily admitted that she had deleted some intervening
entries in order to print out the relevant entries on one page. The fact that
two of the dates (January 20, 2009 and February 24, 2009) relating to sexual
encounters are supported by Facebook entries made the
following day is
supportive of Client A’s account, especially when it is considered this
document was apparently not used
by Client A when preparing her statements in
this matter.
is submitted that the Tribunal would be comfortably satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that the particulars have been proved
based on Client A’s
evidence, both in its content and the way it was delivered, and because, in
important respects, it is
supported by other evidence.
Why the Respondent’s evidence should be rejected
is also submitted by the Commission that the denials of the Particulars by the
Respondent should be rejected. The Tribunal would
be troubled by many aspects of
the Respondent’s evidence and ultimately reject the critical aspects of
his evidence as not
Commission points to a number of matters in considering the credibility of the
Respondent. First, the Respondent’s contention
that he was not interested
in Client A or was looking for any sexual partner during this time sexually at
all should be rejected
for a number of combined reasons which include the
even on his evidence he joined RSVP himself first, prior to “Angela”
from Bankstown joining on his behalf.
his evidence about why he failed to tell the HCCC interviewers he had a photo on
the RSVP site (albeit password protected)
is not credible;
whilst he said it was for friendship only, this suggestion does not sit
comfortably with him using RSVP to meet women, reducing
his age for the user
name he created, or the nature of the profile created for him for the second
user name. Even if “Angela”
created it for him, according to the
Respondent, she had been told that it was for meeting “friends”
the text messages, especially those on 7 July 2009, are seriously suggestive of
a sexual relationship with the recipient of
the messages. That the Respondent
says he has ‘no idea’ what they are about is incredible,
notwithstanding the absence
of the responding text. At the very least, the text
messages show the sender of the messages exhibiting sexual interest towards the
topic which illustrates the Respondent’s lack of credibility is his
evidence about the nature of the relationship he
had with Client A. He gave
evidence about the casual nature of the relationship. He later said Client A was
a good friend. He was
cross-examined about the nature of the matters he said he
discussed with Client A. Over the course of the cross-examination, it became
apparent that the impression he was attempting to create in the documents and
other evidence that the relationship was casual, and
the topics they discussed
were of a ‘general’ nature, was a false impression. In fact it
gradually emerged that a whole
range of matters, far from a
‘general’ nature, were discussed. His answers in relation to the
“Hey” letter
at page 24ff and elsewhere at one point that “he
didn’t take much notice of it”, and at another time that he
read until months later and the complaint had been laid are not
credible on any view of their relationship. His evidence on the nature
relationship was inconsistent, contradictory and incredible.
the Respondent’s evidence that he did not know the extent to which Client
A was infatuated with him or really keen
on him until the hearing itself is not
credible, given the content of the Commission’s evidence which he had
responded to over
a number of different occasions.
these general matters can be looked at together to reject the Respondent as a
witness of truth.
to more specific issues, the Commission points to the following matters as to
why Client A’s account should be preferred
over that of the
Respondent:
Disclosure of personal information/wanting to see
client A socially
A’s failure to attend the third and fourth sessions accords with her
account that she found the Respondent ‘creepy’
in the context of her
evidence that he had disclosed personal information in the second session; the
respondent did not note in his
notes why she failed to attend.
noted above, [Client A’s daughter]’s evidence indicates Client A
at the time
and wanting to see the client socially. Her evidence was not
challenged.
Disclosure of personal mobile phone
Respondent admits this. Client A’s evidence is in accordance with the
Respondent’s evidence. However, the context
in which it was given over,
ie, the breaking down of the professional relationship to the personal
relationship, and the stage it
was provided, make it
inappropriate.
Suggestion re RSVP membership
Respondent was a member at the time its alleged he suggested this. In all the
circumstances, including the matters referred to
above in relation to RSVP,
Client A’s version should be preferred.
Inappropriate
advice re rheumatoid arthritis
Respondent initially stated he mentioned people who had used a gel
In evidence he resiled from this account. Based on this, together with his
clear interest in pain management evidence from his CV,
it is submitted that the
Respondent’s account should be rejected.
comments about professional colleague
A’s evidence should be preferred in relation to her account of what the
Respondent said about [a work colleague] in the
context of Client A’s
overall account, and the credibility issues referred to above in relation to the
Respondent. It can also
be noted that the Respondent admits to making a comment
acknowledged this is in a different context) that the Ms Irvine-Rundle’s
notes recorded that the Respondent admitted to mentioning
Re-establishing contact with Client A through
admitted, although some details are in dispute. The Commission submits that the
Tribunal would prefer Client A’s evidence
given the Respondent’s
lack of frankness in relation to the existence of his photo on the RSVP site,
amongst other matters.
6 month waiting period
conversation
A’s account should be accepted for the general credibility reasons
referred to above. Client A’s diary provides
some support. The timing fits
in broad terms. The Respondent’s answer about his knowledge of the two
year waiting period was
not spontaneous, and appeared rehearsed (reference to
regulations and the like).
Personal relationship between November
2008 and July 2009
admitted, although some details are in dispute. The Commission submits that the
Tribunal would prefer Client A’s evidence
given the Respondent’s
changing and contradictory evidence in relation to the nature of the personal
relationship.
Sexual relationship between January and April
the general reasons referred to above in relation to credibility, Client
A’s account should be preferred. In addition,
the following matters should
be noted and/or emphasised:
Client A knew
naturally flow from a sexual relationship,
the failure to
test Client A in relation to three matters which were apparently important in
relation to intimate details,
the oddness of
the Respondent’s answer in relation to whether or not Client A would have
seen him naked,
the content of
the text messages on 7 July 2009
the account by
[Client A’s daughter]
the account by
the consistency
of Client A’s account
diary notes (and Facebook)
The details
Client A knew about the Respondent and the Respondent’s house
incredibility of the Respondent’s evidence that he had never even
considered a sexual relationship with Client A in circumstances
where they were
both effectively single, similar in age, and Client A was not unattractive and
was sexually active and available.
Also to be noted in relation to this are the
sexual nature of the Respondent’s text messages, his joining of RSVP,
Failed to refer client A to another appropriate
practitioner for therapy and advice re pain management
the general reasons referred to above in relation to credibility, Client
A’s account should be preferred.
Inappropriately disclosed
confidential information relating to other clients
the general reasons referred to above in relation to credibility, Client
A’s account should be preferred.
OUTLINE OF WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS PREPARED ON
BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
The Complaint
Complaint alleges that the Respondent (“Mr Whyte”), a psychologist,
has been guilty of unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional
misconduct in the practice of psychology. The particulars alleged in relation to
each count are the same.
Broadly, it is alleged that he:
(a) Disclosed
personal information to Client A, disclosed his personal mobile phone number,
indicated that he would like to see Client
A socially and suggested that Client
A should join the RSVP internet dating service during the course of 3
counselling sessions between
19 April and 26 July 2008 (and thereby failed to
observe appropriate boundaries);
inappropriate advice regarding treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and made
derogatory comments about a professional colleague
during the course of the
counselling sessions (and thereby failed to observe or follow appropriate
therapeutic or professional practice);
(c) Re-established
should be a six-month waiting period
before commencing a sexual relationship
(and therefore failed to observe appropriate boundaries following the end of the
counselling
relationship);
(d) Between
November 2008 and July 2009 engaged in a: (i) personal; (ii) sexual relationship
with Client A;
(e) Between
November 2008 and July 2009 failed to refer Client A to another practitioner for
therapy and advice on pain management;
(f) Inappropriately
disclosed confidential information relating to other clients between November
2008 and July 2009.
Nature of the Dispute
is not (and never has been) disputed that:
(a) Mr Whyte
provided Client A with counselling over three consultations on 19 April 2008, 3
May 2008 and 26 July 2008;
(b) Client A
made contact with Mr Whyte through RSVP on or about 15 November 2008;
(c) Mr Whyte
and Client A met for coffee at the Wyee Nursery on 29 November 2008 and at the
Halekulani Bowling Club on 16 December
2008, and on a number of occasions
between January 2009 and July 2009 thereafter;
Mr Whyte has consistently maintained that he did not make the inappropriate
remarks Client A attributes to him during the
consultation sessions, he did not
advise that she use RapiGel to treat her arthritis and that his relationship
with Client A was
social, not sexual.
Onus of Proof
the Tribunal has also noted in previous decisions, the
standard applies
That is, that where proof is required of any fact, the Tribunal must feel an
actual persuasion of its occurrence or existence
” before it
can find the alleged fact as found. The test is one of “
satisfaction
”, and the degree or extent to which the Tribunal must be
satisfied is dependent on the nature and seriousness of the allegation
proved, including “[t]
he seriousness of an allegation made, the
inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of
the consequences
flowing from a particular
, the Court was required to determine whether the respondent, a
married woman, had engaged in adultery. The evidence relied on by
the husband
was circumstantial. The Court noted the need for caution, saying:
Upon an issue of adultery in a matrimonial cause the
importance and gravity of the question make it impossible to be reasonably
of the truth of the allegation without the exercise of caution and
unless the proofs survive a careful scrutiny and appear precise
and not loose
and inexact. Further, circumstantial evidence cannot satisfy a sound judgment of
a state of facts if it is susceptible
of some other not implausible
explanation...
a case such as the present in which the complaint relies to a large degree on
circumstantial evidence (such as prior allegations
made by the complainant to
third parties which are said to be consistent with the allegations now made (CB
139 & 151), suggestive
statements made to a third party on Facebook (Ex 50),
and flirtatious or suggestive text messages after the event (CB 181-2) it is
particularly important to keep in mind Justice Dixon’s statement
]n such matters "reasonable satisfaction" should
not be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences.
Everyone must feel that, when, for instance, the issue is on which of two dates
an admitted occurrence took place, a satisfactory
conclusion may be reached on
materials of a kind that would not satisfy any sound and prudent judgment if the
question was whether
some act had been done involving grave moral
delinquency
present case involves serious allegations of impropriety, and the potential
consequences (loss of the right to practice as a psychologist)
are particularly
grave. The need for caution in accepting evidence proffered by way of inexact
proofs, indefinite testimony or indirect
inferences is correspondingly
Evidence of Client A
Evidence of a Sexual Relationship
are a number of aspects of Client A’s evidence that the Tribunal would
find troubling in relation to the evidence relied
on by Client A on this
A has produced a detailed schedule (CB 21) identifying each occasion on which
she and Mr Whyte met. Further, she has identified
on which of those occasions
she had sex with him. Her evidence in chief was that she prepared the schedule
at CB 21 on 8 September
2009 when representatives of the HCCC attended her home
to take a statement. She had her diaries available to her on this occasion.
identified using an asterisk on the summary schedule those occasions on which
she says she and Mr Whyte had sex. Her evidence
in cross-examination was that
she identified those occasions by reference to a corresponding asterisk which
she placed in her diary.
However the Tribunal would have serious reservations
(a) It is clear
that Client A has used asterisks for purposes other than to denote a sexual
relationship. Examples appear at diary
entries dated 9 July 2008 (CB 34), 14
July 2008 (CB 35), 4 October 2008 (CB 47), 24, 25 & 26 October 2008 (CB 50),
October 2008 (CB 51), 10, 11, 12 & (possibly) 13 December 2008
(CB 57). Other examples are the asterisks which appear at the
entries dated 1,
2, 3, 4 and 5 March 2009 (CB 67-68), which Client A explained in
cross-examination was to signify that she had a
period on those days.
(b) Asterisks
appear on those diary entries dated 15, 16, 17, 23 and January 2009 in relation
to [Mr PB], yet Client A's evidence
in cross-examination was that her
relationship with [Mr PB] ended on 5 January 2009 and she did not have a sexual
relationship with
him thereafter (notwithstanding the fact that the entries
record her staying overnight at his house and on one occasion (17 January
going with him to a "
" in Newcastle). Her explanation in
cross-examination as to why asterisks appear in relation to those entries after
5 January 2009
was that she would sometimes mark the asterisk before she went to
see [Mr PB] in anticipation that they would have a sexual relationship.
cross-examination, she said that she only did this in the case of [Mr PB]. That
explanation it is submitted is hardly credible
and smacks of a justification to
explain away an inconsistency after the event.
(c) There is no
asterisk next to the entry relating to meeting Mr Whyte on 20 January 2009, nor
any record of the location of that
meeting, yet Client A alleges in her summary
schedule at CB 21 that she met Mr Whyte had his house on that day and that they
(d) There is no
asterisk next to the entry that records meeting Mr Whyte at Jenny Dixon Beach
(24 February
2009, CB 41)
, yet Client A alleges that she had sex with Mr Whyte
on that occasion;
(e) Asterisks
have been covered up in the diary using liquid paper or white correction tape.
This is most troubling. In cross-examination,
Client A agreed that she would
have been the person who covered these in her diary. She was unable to say when
she did this: when
pressed she said that it was after the first occasion on
which the HCCC representatives came to her house to take a statement (ie
September 2009); she thought it was before she prepared her second statement but
then said that she really couldn't remember. More
importantly, she was unable to
explain why she covered up the asterisks. One explanation is that she thought to
cover up markings
that were inconsistent with the case she wished to make.
(f) The word
" appears above the asterisk and the acronym used to identify Mr
Whyte the letters used by Client A to identify Mr Whyte in the copy
diary entry
dated 10 March 2009 in the Commission Bundle (CB 69), however it has been
covered up using correction tape in the original.
Again, Client A was unable to
explain when this occurred or the reason why. Again, the covering up of evidence
in a document proffered
by the complainant herself as evidence in this hearing
is most troubling.
(g) Taking the
above into account, the Tribunal would not be satisfied that the asterisks that
are said to denote occasions on which
Mr Whyte and Client A had sex were made
contemporaneously. The Tribunal would also have concerns about the reliability
of the diary
records generally.
Facebook Extract
A has produced a document containing selected information from her Facebook site
(Ex 50). In producing the document she deleted
entries. She claims she did so in
order to enable the document to be printed on a single page. She did not explain
why it was necessary
to do so or why, for example, she could not have printed it
on two sheets of paper.
such evidence should be produced for the first time on the second day of the
hearing, in incomplete form and having been edited
by the complainant herself is
cause for concern. The Tribunal would give the document little or no weight.
comments recorded by Client A in the Facebook extract are, in any event,
incomplete and at best only suggestive of a sexual relationship.
Whilst they
have presumably been tendered as a prior consistent statement to support Client
A’s assertion that a sexual relationship
took place, in view of Mr
B’s evidence that Client A had made a similar assertion to him (ie that
she was having a sexual relationship
with a man later identified as Mr Whyte
– see below) as early as two weeks after the first counselling session
(which is clearly
untrue), it is more probable that the Facebook conversation is
another example of Client A telling a friend that she was having a
relationship with her therapist, and is not evidence of the truth of that
Inconsistencies with Mr B's evidence
A's evidence in cross examination was that she had told Mr B that she was seeing
Mr Whyte at the time of his "
jewellery party
" on 15 November
, and that Mr
Whyte was her therapist. Mr B’s evidence on the other hand, was very
different. He said in cross-examination that
Client A had told him a couple of
weeks after her first consultation (ie around the end of April 2008) that Client
A had started
a relationship with the man he was later told was her therapist,
that Client A said that she was “
” on him and that
the relationship was sexual. Further, Mr B's evidence (CB 135 [6]) was that
Client A had not told him the
identity of the man she was seeing and that she
couldn't tell him too much about "
because of his work
", and did not tell
him what work he did.
further inconsistency with Mr B's evidence is that whereas Mr B states (CB136
[10]) that there were a number of occasions when Client
A said she had invited
the man she was seeing (ie Mr Whyte) to come out with a group of work colleagues
and that he didn't show up,
whereas Client A said in cross-examination that she
had never invited Mr Whyte to go out with her work colleagues, nor told Mr B
that she had.
B’s evidence on these points should be accepted in preference to that of
Client A. Mr B gave his evidence in a clear and
direct manner. He appeared clear
in his recollection. He did not try to put a gloss on his evidence or present
facts in a particular
light. He had no personal involvement in the proceedings
and no reason or motive to do so – if anything he was, to his credit,
concerned for Client A and her welfare.
Client A had told Mr B that she had started a sexual relationship with Mr Whyte
from around the end of April 2008 is startling
– her own evidence is that
there was no sexual relationship until 9 January 2009 (CB 21). It suggests that
it was Client A,
not Mr Whyte, who saw the therapeutic relationship into
something more, and that she did so from the time of the first consultation
19 April 2008. It is perhaps consistent with Professor Kenny’s depiction
of an individual who is desperate for a trusting
relationship and idealises her
therapist, only to demonise him later when he cannot live up to those idealised
expectations (RXN,
afternoon, Day 2).
Text messages
text messages relied on by the HCCC sent by Mr Whyte to Client A dated 7 July
2009 (CB 182) are suggestive rather than probative.
It is difficult to read them
otherwise than as having a flirtatious and sexual connotation, however it must
be kept in mind that:
(a) Client A
herself does not allege that she and Mr Whyte were having a sexual relationship
by this time;
(b) Only one
side of the “conversation” was produced from the mobile phone;
(c) There are
gaps between the messages of 10 to 20 minutes and it has not been established
how many intervening messages there were
between, for example, the message
I’ll go to bed with a partner to make it warm and
interesting
” at 7:53 and the message “
Luv 2 try it out with u
(d) Client A
made no mention of the text messages until they were retrieved from her phone by
the expert retained by the HCCC (See
statement, CB
93). It was only then that she proffered her “side” of the
conversation;
(e) However,
even if the Tribunal finds that the text “conversation” was as
alleged by Client A, the fact that flirtatious
messages were sent on 7 July 2009
does not mean that Mr Whyte and Client A were in a sexual relationship between 9
January and 3
April 2009.
Other Inconsistencies
A's evidence was that Mr Whyte had made a follow-up appointment for 8:30 AM on
29 November 2008 at the third consultation on
26 July 2008 (CB 11 [15]), however
she made no note of this and her diary (exhibit R4). Mr Whyte's clinical notes
clearly state no
follow-up appointment was required and no further date has been
noted in the list of appointments on the front of the counselling
A originally stated in her letter to the Psychologist Registration Board (29
2009, CB 16)
that Mr White had approached her on RSVP. She later qualified
her evidence to state that she sent him a link (called a "kiss" on
requesting that he send his photograph.
Client A’s Evidence
were a number of features of Client A’s evidence that lend support to
Professor Kenny’s profile of a person who
idealises then demonises her
therapist. The gift of the “Community Service Award” (CB 22), the
poem (CB 23), the “Thankyou” Card (CB 449),
Client A’s statement to Mr B that Mr Whyte would “
” every time she tried to take the relationship further (CB 136
[13]) are consistent with the idealisation phase, just as the
comprehensive and
personally and professionally damaging nature of the allegations made in the
complaint and Client A’s readiness
to use terms such as "
mistreatment
" (XXE, afternoon, Day 1) to describe a relationship she was
boasting about to a friend on Facebook six months earlier are consistent
the demonization phase. As Professor Kenny said in response to questions from
the Tribunal, “
revenge is often the motivation for taking the process
a vulnerable person would feel outrage at
their therapist and need to lash out
” (afternoon, Day 2).
being a strong possibility that allegations were motivated by a desire to lash
out at, and punish, Mr Whyte, the Tribunal should
reject Client A’s
evidence where it is uncorroborated by reliable independent
Continuing Treatment:
is very little evidence to support the allegation Mr Whyte continued to give
Client A psychological treatment or counselling
between November 2008 and July
2009. The only objective evidence put forward is a note titled "Analysis of
Thinking" (CB 20), however
in cross examination Client A stated that this was a
document which Mr Whyte wrote when he came to her house (ie on 2 June or 21
2009) and that he said that at the time that these were concepts he was
considering using in relation to his practice. The Tribunal
would infer that it
was a document that was to be of general application and was not indicative of
"treatment" been provided to Client
A's evidence about the "treatment" she says she received during this period is
extremely short in terms of detail. Other than
general statements about talking
would conclude that
Mr Whyte was providing her with professional counselling or
treatment. Mr Whyte has consistently said that he did
Disclosure of Mobile Phone Number
Whyte accepted that he gave Client A his mobile phone number. He did so because
she had appeared anxious during the second consultation
session and she had told
him that she was going away on her own to Burrinjuck Dam the next day and may
need to speak to him. It is
submitted that, viewed in context, this would not of
itself amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Inappropriate Advice re Treatment: RapiGel
A’s allegation that Mr Whyte had recommended that she use RapiGel should
be viewed with some scepticism. Mr Whyte’s
evidence was that he did not do
so and that he had no particular knowledge of RapiGel. Conversely, Client A
appeared to know quite
a good deal about this ointment. She said in response to
a question asked by the Tribunal (afternoon, Day 1) that it was a topical
ointment, that a lot of people use it for osteoarthritis but that it would not
Information about a work colleague
A said in response to a question asked by the Tribunal (afternoon, Day 2) that
Mr Whyte told her that a work colleague had
had a breast enlargement. Mr Whyte
accepted in cross-examination that he may have made such a comment during one of
their social
meetings. However, he denies that he ever identified the woman in
question and says that the comment was made in the context of a
discussion about body augmentation prompted by an advertisement on television.
Alleged Disclosure of Personal Information etc
is no objective evidence in support of the allegations in relation to disclosure
of personal information, that Mr Whyte indicated
that he would like to see
Client A socially, the suggestion that Client A join RSVP or the making of
derogatory remarks about a professional
colleague. Client A alleges that these
were things said during the counselling sessions, however there is no mention of
these matters
in Mr Whyte’s notes (CB 362 et seq), the first record made
by Client A of these allegations was after she had decided to make
a complaint
these things.
Other witnesses
evidence of [Ms S T], the counsellor on the residential counselling course to
whom Client A made an allegation in July 2009 (CB
), does not
assist. All that one can draw from her evidence is that the allegation was made
by Client A at the time.
the evidence of [Client A’s daughter], Client A’s daughter, to the
effect that Client A had told her following
the first or second counselling
session that Mr Whyte had suggested that she not commit to anyone and had asked
if he could take
her to the theatre (CB 151) is evidence only that Client A said
these things to her daughter. In view of the fact that Client A had
around the same time that she was having a sexual relationship with her
therapist, it is not surprising that she would
say similar things to her
daughter. That does not make them true.
Accordingly,
the Respondent submits that the evidence does not support particulars 1 (i)
(disclosure of personal information to Client
A), 1 (iii) (indication by
Respondent that he would like to see Client A socially), 1 (iv) (suggestion by
Respondent that Client
A should join RSVP), 2 (i) (giving inappropriate advice
re treatment of arthritis), 2 (ii) (making derogatory remarks about a
professional
colleague), 3 (ii) (advising Client A that there should be a
six-month waiting period before commencing sexual relationship), 5 (engaging
a sexual relationship with Client A) and 7 (inappropriately disclosing
confidential information relating to other clients to Client
A), and the
Complaint in relation to those particulars should be dismissed.
Respondent accepts that contact was established between himself and Client A in
November 2008 through RSVP, and accepts that particular
3 (i) of the Complaint
has been made out.
Respondent accepts that he engaged in a personal relationship with Client A
between November 2008 and July 2009, and accepts that
particular 4 has been made
Respondent accepts that he provided his mobile phone number to Client A during
the second counselling session (particular 1 (ii)),
however says that it was not
inappropriate to do so in the circumstances.
Respondent agrees that he did not refer Client A to another practitioner for
therapy and advice on pain management between November
2008 and July 2009,
however denies that he was under a duty to do so, the professional relationship
having ceased four months earlier
in July 2008.
the Tribunal has consistently noted in previous
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is protective, not punitive.
is submitted that deregistration is not an appropriate order in the
circumstances of this case.
Whyte has shown a degree of insight. He accepted that he should not have
commenced a social relationship with Client A in November
2008 in view of her
history and the potential for confusion on her part as to the nature of their
relationship. Mr Whyte accepts
missed the red
”. He accepted in response to questions asked by the Tribunal
(afternoon, Day 3) that he did not consider at the time of the
consultations
whether Client A may have been suffering from Borderline Personality Disorder.
He said that he had not done a lot of
work in diagnosing psychopathology. He
would not have been assisted by the scant information provided by the READ
Clinic at the time
of referral as to the client’s history.
Whyte has frankly acknowledged that he was probably suffering from depression
during the latter part of 2008 and 2009. He had lost
2 close friends (Ex R2, p
14 [73]-[74]) and was working long hours and commuting between Sydney and the
Central Coast, where he had
few friends. He sought help from his GP in May 2009
(before the complaint was made (Ex R2, p 14 [74]) and was prescribed Zoloft from
June or July 2009. He has made some changes in his life in terms of reducing his
workload, eating more healthily and exercising more.
He has sought relationship
counselling. He accepted in response to questions from the Tribunal that he
needs to do more.
is the first complaint of this kind that Mr Whyte has faced in over 20 years of
Kenny was firmly of the view that supervision would assist, and counselling
would be of benefit. In response to questions
from the Tribunal, she considered
this to be the case “
”. Her evidence should be
accepted. Mr Whyte has accepted that he needs to put in place a system for
supervision. He accepted
that he would benefit from counselling. He would be
prepared to submit to requirements for supervision and counselling for such
as the Tribunal considers appropriate.
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 361-362 per Dixon
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
at 368-9 per Dixon
[1938] HCA 34
at 361-362 per Dixon
recorded the jewellery party as having occurred on this date (CB
allegation was that Mr Whyte had said to her during a counseling session that
she would look good in a
HCCC v Schubert
[2009] NSWPST 6
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.11 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter