URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCC/2003/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:51:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Buckwell v Andre Porebski & Associates Pty Ltd [2003] NSWCC 13 (26 February 2003)
NEW SOUTH WALES COMPENSATION COURT
CITATION: Buckwell v Andre
Porebski & Associates Pty Ltd [2003] NSWCC 13
Pauline S Buckwell
Andre Porebski & Associates Pty
CASE NUMBER: 1099 of 2002 of 2003.00
CATCH WORDS:
LEGISLATION CITED:
CORAM: Neilson J
HEARING: 26/02/03
EX TEMPORE DATE: 26/02/2003
REPRESENTATIVES
FOR APPLICANT:
Mr B A Batchelor instructed by Shaw
McDonald Pty Ltd appeared for the applicant.
FOR RESPONDENT:
Talintyre instructed by Church & Grace appeared for the
respondent.
1. Mrs Pauline Sinclair Buckwell of Potts Point, claims weekly payments of
compensation between 22 February 2001 and 22 April 2001
and lump sum
compensation under s 66 for 18 per cent impairment of her back, 5 per cent loss
of efficient use of her left leg at
or above the knee and 5 per cent loss of
efficient use of her right leg at or above the knee and a consequential lump sum
and suffering, anxiety and distress resulting from that impairment and
those losses. However, as the case has been presented and
argued, the claim for
the loss of efficient use of the applicant’s right leg at or above the
knee is not pressed, and rightly
so, in the light of the oral evidence of the
applicant herself.
2. The applicant has been married for many years to an architect and has
worked for many years in architectural practices essentially
doing clerical and
administrative work. Her husband had an architectural practice at Mount
Victoria where the applicant and her
husband lived full-time until some time in
late 1995 or early 1996. At that time, the applicant and her husband moved to
Sydney where
they live part-time and part of each week, perhaps at weekends, the
applicant and her husband return to their property at Mount Victoria.
3. When the couple moved to Sydney, the applicant initially worked for one
and a half years for the Royal Australian Institute of
Architects and in
February 1998, commenced working for the current respondent which also conducts
an architectural practice. The
applicant worked for the respondent 3 days
during each week, which is the same number of days that she used to work with
Australian Institute of Architects. The applicant was classified in
the respondent’s employ as both a personal assistant and
manageress. The applicant would do all forms of secretarial work and
receptionist work as well as managing the respondent’s
accounts and
4. The applicant worked at a desk. Immediately in front of her was a
keyboard and a Commander telephone, which she used to operate
the telephone
system for the respondent’s office. The computer monitor was on the
applicant’s right hand side but only
slightly off centre. Immediately to
the applicant’s left she kept the office register and on the left of that
was kept the
day message book. In the day message book, the applicant would
record incoming telephone calls which had to be returned by other
personnel in
the respondent’s practice and any other form of message which some other
person had to attend to.
5. On 20 February 2001, an event occurred at work. There is no doubt that
the event arose in the course of the applicant’s
employment. At issue in
this case is whether the applicant’s employment was a substantial
contributing factor to the event.
At the relevant time, the applicant was
standing up behind her desk on the left side of where she normally sat. She
needed to fetch
the day book and stretch right over her desk in order to grasp
the day book. In the process of bending over whilst attempting to
grasp the day
book, the applicant coughed and felt a tearing sensation on the left side of her
back and felt that her left shoulder
was somehow forced down.
6. It is clear the applicant in that event injured her low back. The
applicant sat down and took some Panadol and waited for a period
approximately half an hour before leaving her employer’s premises and
going home. The applicant was absent from work
between 22 February 2001 and 22
March 2001 and it is common ground that she was totally incapacitated during
that period. The applicant
returned to work on restricted duties between 23
March 2001 and 24 April 2001. It is agreed that the difference between her
weekly earnings but for injury and what she actually earned during that
period is the sum of $272 per week.
7. The medical evidence persuades me that the applicant had antecedent to the
event on 20 February 2001 degenerative disc disease
affecting her lumbar spine.
At the time of the event now in question, the applicant was 63 years of age.
The medical evidence also
persuades me that on 20 February 2001, the applicant
tore the annulus fibrosis of the L4/5 disc.
8. Dr John Stephen, an orthopaedic surgeon, qualified by the respondent,
accepted the applicant had sustained low lumbar disc damage
and pointed out in a
supplementary report of 24 January 2002 that what happened to the applicant was
that she sustained a tear of
the annulus of the low lumbar disc as a result of
bending forward and
. Dr Stephen thought that the applicant
had sneezed, because a sneeze is recorded in a report of the applicant’s
general practitioner
which has made its way into evidence and a copy of which
seems to have been before him.
9. However, the applicant’s undoubted evidence to me is that she
coughed. In my view, nothing turns on the distinction between
coughing and
sneezing. What is clear from the opinion of Dr Stephen is that the tear of the
annulus of probably the L4/5 disc was
a result of bending forward and coughing.
I have identified the L4/5 lumbar disc as CT scan of the lumbar spine indicates
that disc typical of chronic degeneration and also mild bulging of the
disc at that level. It seems highly likely to me that the
annulus fibrosis of
the L4/5 disc was torn in the event of the applicant’s leaning forward and
coughing on 20 February 2001.
10. The causal factors which I identify in the occurrence of the event of 20
February 2001 are firstly the presence of pre-existing
asymptomatic
degenerative disc disease. Secondly, the act of bending forward and thirdly,
the coughing event. The presence of the
pre-existing condition cannot be a
factor for which the employer is liable. There is no suggestion that the factor
of coughing was
causally related to the applicant’s work. However, the
bending forward, the forward flexion to the left which the applicant
was an activity which her employment required her to do.
11. I have a number of opinions, some of which are of assistance and some of
which are not on the question of substantial contributing
factor. Dr Raymond
Wallace, an orthopaedic surgeon qualified by the applicant’s solicitors,
The worker’s employment was a substantial contributing factor to her
injury. She describes no pre-existing injury at her lumbar
12. The doctor’s ipse dixit that the worker’s employment was a
substantial contributing factor to the injury is of no
assistance to me
whatever. It is his duty to outline his reasoning so I can test his reasoning
against the facts proven in evidence.
Davie v The Edinburgh
Magistrates
. The second sentence from the quotation which I have just made
seems to indicate to me that as the applicant had not previously
sustained an
injury to her lumbar spine that by that very fact the employment was a
substantial contributing factor. The doctor
seems to conflate the provisions
of s 9A and s 68A. It is to be borne in mind that in s 68A, the Court must
deduct any proportion
of the loss that is due to any previous injury or that is
due to any pre-existing condition or abnormality.
13. In Dr Stephen’s primary report, that is that of 11 January 2002, Dr
Stephen says this:
In my opinion, there are no pre-existing problems which might have
contributed to Mrs Buckwell’s back problems.
14. I am unable to accept that because, as I have already pointed out, there
is clearly pre-existing degenerative disc disease. It
is clear, however, that
Dr Stephen did not in that opinion, turn his mind to the current issues. There
is before me a supplementary
report from Dr Stephen bearing date 24 January
2002. In that report, Dr Stephen says this:
What happened to Mrs Buckwell was that she sustained a tear of the annulus
of a low lumbar disc as the result of bending forward and
sneezing. This is
what happened at work. It could easily have happened at home but it happened to
happen at work.
She then had discogenic back pain. Discogenic back pain is frequently
exacerbated by carrying heavy objects such as shopping bags.
It is true that everybody aged 64 has some pre-existing degenerative
change. In other words, this would be much less likely to have
occurred to her
if she were 30 years old than if she were 64 years old.
15. I think it important to note at this stage that Dr Stephen was clearly of
the view that the tearing of the annulus of the L4/5
disc resulted from the act
of bending forward and then coughing. In other words, it was not merely
fortuitous that at the time that
she did, the applicant felt low lumbar back
pain. However, that is the opinion expressed in the respondent’s case by
McGill, a consultant rheumatologist. Dr McGill said this:
The acute exacerbation which occurred in February 2001 was typical of the
natural history of degenerative lumbar disc disease. Although
the exacerbation
commenced while she was at work, it was not caused by her work duties and would
have occurred regardless of whether
or not she had been at work. There is no
injury or event that one could connect to her work duties. The cough (or sneeze
was described
in a report by her general practitioner in an undated letter
provided with the documentation) may have slightly altered the timing
onset of the exacerbation but neither the cough/sneeze nor the fact that she was
bending over her desk at the time, were significant
causative factors.
16. The applicant’s solicitors also qualified Dr Richard Evans, a
specialist physician who does a large amount of work in orthopaedics.
report of 17 February 2003, Dr Evans said this:
It is difficult to determine the probability that the injury, or a similar
one, would have occurred in any event, at the same time
or stage of her life if
she had not been engaged in that employment. It was not simply that she
coughed, but that she coughed as
she was leaning forwards, a combination that
would place a significant strain on her back. Had she not coughed as she leant
the protrusion may not have occurred. Many people have degenerative
intervertebral discs, but are not unfortunate in suffering this
protrusion. A degenerative disc can gradually settle, and may cause minimal or
no symptoms. Thus I do not think it can
be stated that it is more likely than
not that this event would have occurred had she not been engaged in that
employment. As you
state, the employment does not create any
, but it was an unfortunate conjunction of circumstances
combined with the presence of a degenerative disc. Thus, although I do not
whether the event would have occurred anyway, I do not consider that it is more
likely than not that it would have. I confirm
that her employment was a
substantial contributing factor to the event.
17. What is clear from the opinions of Dr Stephen and Dr Evans is that the
annular tear of the pre-existing degenerative disc was
the result of a
combination of two factors, the act of leaning forwarding and coughing. If the
applicant had not coughed whilst
leaning forward, the disc would not have torn.
This activity of bending forward over her desk to reach the book is probably an
that the applicant would have performed a number of times a day for
almost 3 years of her employment.
18. However, what is also clear to me is that the mere act of coughing might
not have caused the tearing. If the applicant had been
lying down whilst she
coughed, the tear would not have occurred. If she had been merely seated
upright in her chair, the tearing
would not have occurred. It appears to me
that both the bending forward, the forward flexion and the cough were necessary
in itself was insufficient to cause the damage to the L4/5 disc.
19. The existence of the pre-existing degenerative disc disease clearly
weakened the disc and made it vulnerable or prone to tearing.
However, the disc
could have been degenerate for a long time prior to the event of 20 February
2001. It is to be recalled on the
evidence before me, that the applicant was a
keen tennis player before moving to Sydney in late 1995, early 1996 and did not
any problems playing tennis with degenerative disc disease. Equally the
applicant was a keen gardener up until the event now in
question, one might
hazard the observation that a keen gardener at Mount Victoria would probably in
the course of gardening perform
more strenuous activities than the clerical work
in an architect’s office. However, that strenuous activity had not caused
a problem in the applicant’s back before.
20. Therefore I conclude that both the event of leaning forward and the
cough were necessary for the occurrence of the tearing of
the applicant’s
lumbar disc. It must be borne in mind that the applicant’s work required
her to lean forward over the
desk to grasp the book. That factor arose out of
the employment. It therefore appears to me that the applicant’s injury
arose out and in the course of her employment. The theories of causation
in law have changed over the years. Once upon a time,
it could be seen that the
immediate precipitating event was the cough and therefore that causation was not
established at all. However,
here it appears to me that both the bending
forward and the cough were necessary and as the applicant’s bending
forward was
required for the damage to be done, the injury arose out of the
employment.
21. To put it in other terms, the incapacity and the loss resulted from an
event that the applicant was required to do in the course
of her work. The
respondent has pressed its contention that the applicant’s employment was
not a substantial contributing
factor to the injury. Mr Talintyre, for the
respondent, points out that in the judgment of Mason P in
Mercer v ANZ
Banking Group Ltd
[2000] NSWCA 138
(2000) 20 NSWCCR 70
at par (15) that s 9A(3),
two matters that are nondeterminative"
. He points out that the
non-determinative nature of the provisions of s 9A(3) was adopted by Meagher JA
Supair Pty Ltd v Sweeney
[2000] NSWCA 319
(2000) 20 NSWCCR 514.
S 9A(3) provides that
a worker’s employment is not to be regarded as a substantial contributing
factor merely because the
injury arose out of or in the course of the employment
or arose both out of and in the course of the employment. As I have stated
previous judgments, the provision is not felicitously expressed. Clearly, it is
intended to mean that a substantial contributing
factor does not exist merely if
(i) arose in the course of the employment;
(ii) arose out of the employment or
(iii) arose out of and in the course of the employment.
22. Mr Talintyre submitted that as both Mason P and Meagher J A have said
that those matters are non-determinative. Decisions such
v Woolworths Ltd
[2000] NSWCC 16
(2000) 20 NSWCCR 283
Healey v Delta Electricity
[2000] NSWCC 21
(2000) 20 NSWCCR 491
and the decision of Burke J in
Jadoul v Qantas Airways
[2001] NSWCC 175
(2001) 22 NSWCCR 229
at paragraph 16 where findings have been made that
where the injury arose out of the employment, a substantial contributing factor
was established by that very fact are incorrect. I am able to accede to that
submission. That is because it is abundantly clear
from what fell from Mason P
in 31 to 37 under the heading,
"A substantial contributing
factor is not equivalent to an injury arising out of the employment"
in his Honour’s view, which was a view concurred in by Meagher and Beazley
JJA, that the requirement was a substantial
contributing factor is established
by a lesser causal test than that arising out of the employment.
23. Therefore, when, in the same judgment, Mason P says that whether injury
arises out of the employment is not determinative is really
indicating that it
does not determine that it is not a substantial contribution factor rather than
it is determinative that it is
a substantial contributing factor. In the
alternative, Mr Talintyre argued that
is incorrectly decided and
essentially adopted and expanded the criticisms of
recorded by me
in 12 to 17.
24. Of course, the correctness of
itself is now open to some
doubt, when one considers the inherent criticism of it involved in the judgments
Dayton v Coles Supermarkets Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWCA 153
(2001) 22 NSWCCR 46.
view, the tearing of the applicant’s L4/5 disc on 20 February 2001 was a
result of injury which both arose out of
and in the course of the
applicant’s employment, a substantial contributing factor is, by that
finding, established.
25. If I be wrong in that, I should consider the various matters referred to
in s 9A(2). S 9A(2) gives examples of matters to be
taken into account for
determining whether the worker’s employment was a substantial contributing
factor to an injury but does
not limit the matters to be taken into account in
determining whether the employment was a substantial contributing factor. The
specific matters referred to in s 9A(2) I shall itemise and deal with
separately. The first is the time and place of the injury.
Here, the injury
happened at work during working hours and is clearly in the worker’s
favour. The second matter to be taken
into account is the nature of the work
performed and a particular task of that work. The applicant’s work was
clerical work
and the particular task that she performed at the time of the
injury was one that her employment required her to do. However, the
not inherently dangerous or one which, one might think, was liable to cause a
back injury like, for example, shearing, bricklaying
or heavy labouring.
26. This second consideration does not particularly assist me because it is
not clear to me whether that Parliament intended that
one merely analyse whether
when the injury happened the applicant was doing something that was required of
her in the course of her
employment, or whether Parliament intended that one
take into account the particular risks or hazards of a particular
employment.
27. The third matter to be taken into account is duration of the employment.
That may be a very important consideration, where, for
example, somebody has
developed degenerative disc disease and the argument is whether the work caused
the degenerative disc disease,
is more likely that, for example, labouring work
over 20 years is more likely to cause degenerative disc disease than labouring
work for a mere 2 or 3 months. It is not clear to me that the third
consideration is an applicable one in the current matter.
28. However, it is to be borne in mind that the applicant had worked for the
respondent for 3 years and would have performed this
task many, many times over
that period and had not previously suffered any symptoms whilst doing it.
29. The fourth matter to be taken into account is the probability that the
injury or a similar injury would have happened anyway at
the same stage in the worker’s life if he or she had not been at work or
had not worked in that employment.
The question here I suppose is whether the
applicant’s degenerative disc disease was going to become symptomatic at
inevitably, where the applicant’s case could be described as an
injury waiting to occur. I have already quoted the medical
practitioners’
views on that issue. Many people die and after death are x-rayed and it is
ascertained that they have degenerative
disc disease. However, those who have
died were asymptomatic throughout their lives. It is impossible really to state
on the evidence
whether the applicant would have become symptomatic or not at
the time that she did, or whether she may have remained symptom-free
years into the future.
30. The fifth matter to be taken into account is the worker’s state of
health before the injury and the existence of any hereditary
risks. Here the
only relevant factor to take into account is the pre-existing degenerative disc
disease, due not doubt either to
some constitutional propensity or the mere
attrition caused by daily life or perhaps by the process of degeneration which
in the late third decade as I understand it. However, in this case it is
clear that the applicant had been asymptomatic for her
whole life antecedent to
the event when she was 63 years of age. Again, whether she would have become
asymptomatic in the future
is a question for speculation and one that cannot now
be ascertained.
31. The sixth matter to be taken into account is the worker’s lifestyle
and his or her activities outside the workplace. Here
the applicant had
activities outside the workplace which would be thought to be more strenuous.
They are gardening at Mount Victoria
and prior to her move to Sydney, late 1995
or early 1996, the playing of tennis. However, those activities did not cause
the applicant
any symptoms, making more significant in my view, the event of 20
February 2001, the event when the applicant was leaning over to
reach for the
day book and coughed. That consideration appears to me to be in the
worker’s favour. All told, such matters
as are mentioned in s 9A(2) tend,
in my view slightly in favour of the proposition that the applicant’s
employment was a substantial
contributing factor.
32. During the course of argument with counsel for the respondent, I raised
the proposition that s 68A and s 9A(2) had similar considerations
requires causality between the employment injury and the employment itself. S
68A requires me in assessing compensation
under s 66 to deduct any proportion of
a loss that is due to any previous injury or due to any previous pre-existing
condition or
abnormality. In other words, it was looking at causation of the
loss relevant to the injury. Both provisions tend towards causation.
heartened to have had referred to me the decision of his Honour Judge Burke in
Hoskin v Western Area Health Service
(2001) 22 NSWCCR 1.
At paragraph 14
his Honour said:
Secondly, the degree to which an employment activity was a substantial
contributing factor to a particular injury can be indicated
assessments as to the causation of the injury. The injury in this matter was a
marked aggravation of a degenerative back
condition and resulted in a L4/5
protrusion. Both parties have submitted that Dr Collins correctly assessed the
degree of loss and
a deduction under s 68A of the Act. He assessed a 20 per
cent impairment of the back and a s 68A deduction of one-third. The fall
responsible for two-thirds of the consequent impairment. If it was an
`employment’
fall then it obviously contributed substantially to
the consequential back disability which constituted the injury.
33. In the current matter we have similar facts to those in
There there was an injury which could be categorised as an aggravation of a
degenerative back condition, resulting in the current
case in the tearing of the
L4/5 disc, rather than a frank protrusion of the disc. The facts are
34. Here, I have a number of assessments of a deductible proportion under s
68A. Dr Evans says the deductible proportion is only
10 per cent. Dr
Stephen’s reports are silent on the issue and Dr McGill tells me that no
part of the impairment results from
any employment injury, that he would not
accept that the applicant had any employment injury, which is contrary to my
finding. More
significant is the fact that the report of Dr Evans of 17
February 2003 refers to a report of Dr Frank Machart, an orthopaedist,
2002, who felt that half the applicant’s impairment and loss was due to
degeneration and half to the injury. At
Common Law that would not be evidence
of that opinion of Dr Machart. Under the
Evidence Act
, it is evidence of that
opinion of Dr Machart. It is common ground between the parties that Dr Machart
was qualified by the respondent.
35. I am able, as I said, to accept the opinion of Dr McGill. I am then
faced with the assessment of Dr Evans of a 10 per cent deductible
proportion and
of Dr Machart of a 50 per cent deductible proportion. If either of those
deductible proportions be accepted, then
the applicant’s employment was
clearly a substantial contributing factor. However, the presence of
pre-existing degenerative
disc disease is merely a predisposing factor. The act
of bending forward that is forward flexion and the act of coughing were both
needed to cause the tearing of the disc as I have previously stated, each is
necessary but in itself insufficient.
36. It appears to me that the opinion of Dr Evans that the deductible
proportion is only 10 per cent is insufficient weight to the
presence of the
pre-existing condition and the necessity of the cough. However, it appears to
me that the opinion of Dr Machart
is closer to the mark and accordingly, I have
no hesitation in accepting that the extent of the deductible proportion is 50
of any loss or impairment that I find.
37. My finding that the applicant sustained injury arising out of and in the
course of her employment and in the alternative, that
the employment was a
substantial contributing factor to the occurrence of the injury indicates that
the applicant is entitled to
the awards shown on the wages schedule, Exhibit A.
The only remaining question is the extent of the impairment of the
applicant’s
back and the loss of efficient use of her left leg at or above
38. The applicant is still incommoded by symptoms which she had not had in
the past. Those symptoms have persisted now for some 2
years. I accept that
there is some permanent impairment of the applicant’s back. Dr Wallace
and Dr Stephen both say the applicant
has a 12 per cent impairment of her back.
Dr Evans put the impairment at 20 per cent. Because of the great variations in
assessments
of impairment of the back, one necessarily needs to provide some
rules of thumb as a gauge for weighing the evidence.
39. I have just been reminded that Dr McGill has made an assessment of
impairment of the back of 10 per cent. As I said, it is necessary
some rules of thumb which I have set out in numerous judgments since 1994 -
apparently no-one ever reads them - where
there is pre-existing spinal
degenerative disease or an abnormality such as spondylosis or spondylolisthesis,
impairment is generally
in the order of 15 per cent. Where there is a low
lumbar disc protrusion not requiring surgery, the impairment is generally in the
order of 20 per cent. Where it is necessary to practise laminectomy with a good
result, the impairment is generally in the order
of 25 per cent. Where is it
necessary to practise laminectomy and fusion, depending on the result, the
impairment is between 30
per cent and one-third of a most extreme case.
40. Bearing in mind the symptoms which the applicant told me, I accept that
she has a 15 per cent permanent impairment of the back.
The applicant also
complains of symptoms affecting her left leg. The assessments I have of the
loss of efficient use of her left
leg are of 5 per cent from each of Dr Wallace
and Dr Evans.
41. Dr McGill did not think that there was any loss of efficient use of the
applicant’s left leg at or above the knee. There
has never been any
neurological deficit and I am unable to accept the applicant has true sciatica.
Her left thigh is affected and
it appears to me that the appropriate finding is
of some referred pain affecting the applicant’s left leg. In those
circumstances,
I have no hesitation in accepting the applicant has a 5 per cent
loss of efficient use of the left leg at or above the knee.
42. My findings under
must be reduced by the deductible proportion of 50
per cent, so that the applicant is entitled to awards of 7.5 per cent for
impairment of her back and 2.5 per cent loss of efficient use of her
left leg at or above the knee.
43. I am told from the Bar table that my findings under
do not entitle
the applicant to lump sum compensation under s 67 for pain and suffering,
anxiety and distress resulting from that
impairment and that loss.
44. I have inquired of counsel for the parties whether any further reasons
for judgment are required and I am told that none are so
45. For those reasons, I make an award for the applicant for $544 per week
from 22 February 2001 to 22 March 2001 pursuant to
I make an award for
the applicant of $272 per week from 23 March 2001 to 24 April 2001 pursuant to s
40. I make an award for the
applicant for $4,500 for 7.5 per cent permanent
impairment of the back (15 per cent before s 68A). I make an award for the
of $1,875 for 2.5 per cent loss of efficient use of the left leg at or
above the knee (5 per cent before s 68A).
46. I make a general order under s 60.
47. I order the respondent to pay the applicant’s costs
48. I certify an additional conference - $200.
49. The respondent applies for a stay of proceedings. There is no evidence
to support the submission put that the proceeds of judgment
may be frittered
away by the applicant. The inference I draw from the applicant’s
background and circumstances is that she
is not impecunious or that she is in
any way liable to waste the proceeds of the current litigation. In view of the
lack of evidence,
the application for a stay of proceedings is refused.
A Batchelor instructed by Shaw McDonald Pty Ltd appeared for the
Mr D I Talintyre instructed by Church & Grace appeared for the
respondent.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (37 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter