URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPIC/2025/578.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:06:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Smith v Blacktown City Council [2025] NSWPIC 578; (27 October 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION OF MEMBER
Smith v Blacktown City Council [2025] NSWPIC 578
Terrance Charles Smith
RESPONDENT:
Blacktown City Council
Adam Halstead
DATE OF DECISION:
27 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
WORKERS COMPENSATION -
Workers Compensation Act 1987
claim for medical expenses; carpal tunnel syndrome; nature of employment;
whether disease injury; whether consequential condition
to accepted cervical
spine injury;
– carpal tunnel syndrome not consequential to
cervical spine injury; disease injury that developed concurrently with cervical
spine injury; proposed treatment is reasonably necessary as a result of the
work-related injury; respondent ordered to pay the costs
of, and incidental to,
the recommended surgery.
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
The Personal Injury Commission (Commission) determines:
applicant sustained a disease injury, bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, in the
course of employment with the respondent, which
is deemed to have occurred on 11
January 2018.
staged carpal tunnel release surgery as proposed by Dr Rohit Kumar on
March 2024 is reasonably necessary as a result of the disease injury sustained
by the applicant.
The Commission orders:
respondent is to pay the costs of, and associated with, the bilateral staged
carpal tunnel release surgery, pursuant to
Workers Compensation
A brief statement is attached setting out the Commission’s reasons
for the determination.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
applicant, Terrance Charles Smith, was employed by the respondent, Blacktown
City Council, as a backhoe operator for about 17
years to October 2019. It was
previously determined, by the former Workers Compensation Commission (WCC) on 15
October 2019, that
the applicant suffered cervical spine injury in the course of
his employment and that surgical treatment be provided. He underwent
surgery for
that injury on 13 March 2020. The applicant now seeks surgery to treat bilateral
carpal tunnel syndrome that is claimed
to have arisen as either a consequence of
the cervical spine injury or from the nature of his employment, or both. The
claim is disputed
by the respondent on the basis the surgery is said not to be
reasonably necessary as a result of workplace injury.
applicant commenced proceedings in the Personal Injury Commission (Commission)
on 21 July 2025 when an Application to Resolve
a Dispute (ARD) was lodged in
relation to the disputed claim.
PROCEDURE BEFORE THE PERSONAL
INJURY COMMISSION
matter was before the Commission for arbitration hearing on 12 September 2025.
The applicant attended and was represented by Mr
King of counsel, instructed by
Carroll and O’Dea Lawyers. The respondent was represented by Mr Stiles of
counsel, instructed
by Sparke Helmore Lawyers, and a delegate of its insurer was
am satisfied that the parties to the dispute understand the nature of the
application and the legal implications of any assertion
made in the information
supplied. I have endeavoured to bring the parties to the dispute to an
acceptable settlement and am satisfied
that the parties have had sufficient
opportunity to explore settlement. They have been unable to reach an agreed
resolution of the
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
applicant sought leave to amend the ARD, which was not opposed by the
respondent, so as the surgery sought is “bilateral
carpal tunnel
release” and that the date of injury be pleaded as the following
alternatives, either separately or in combination:
11 January 2018
(deemed), on the basis of the determination of the WCC with respect to disease
injury of the cervical spine also deemed
to have occurred on that date;
11 January 2018
(deemed), where carpal tunnel is a condition consequential to cervical spine
31 October 2019
(deemed), the applicant’s final day of employment with the respondent,
13 March 2024,
the date a request was made for the carpal tunnel release
was granted and the ARD is taken to be amended accordingly. It is the
respondent’s position that the relevant dates would
be 11 January 2018 or
31 October 2019 should the applicant’s condition be determined as
consequential to cervical spine injury
or a disease injury that arose in the
course of employment.
parties request a determination about whether the bilateral carpal tunnel
release surgery requested by the applicant is reasonably
necessary as a result
of workplace injury. In particular, whether the applicant’s bilateral
carpal tunnel condition is a disease
injury contracted in the course of
employment and/or has arisen as a consequence of his cervical spine injury,
specifically, the
surgery undertaken to treat that injury.
following documents were in evidence before the Commission at the arbitration
hearing, without objection, and considered in making
this determination:
(a) ARD and attached documents of 114 pages;
(b) Reply and attached documents of 181 pages (Reply);
(c) Application to Lodge Additional Documents made by the respondent on
August 2025 with attached documents of 628 pages (ALAD-R), and
(d) Application to Lodge Additional Documents made by the applicant on
September 2025 with attached documents of 2 pages (ALAD-A).
was no application to call oral evidence or cross-examine any witness at the
Applicant’s statement evidence
applicant relies on four statements, dated 22 January 2018, 18 July 2019,
7 November 2024 and 30 July 2025, that were
prepared in relation to the current disputed claim for compensation and his
prior claim
for cervical spine injury.
nature of his work as a backhoe operator for the respondent is described by the
applicant as him having spent about 95% of the
time operating the machine, being
heavily jolted and jarred through forwards, backwards and sideways movements
with constant shuddering
to his first statement an incident occurred on 15 January 2003 that involved his
head striking the cabin ceiling of the
backhoe he was operating at the time when
it “hit [a] speed bump” and he became “aware of numbness in
hands” afterwards.
The applicant recalls that “a few years” after that incident there
was “numbness and tingling” in his hands
and that “as time
went by ... the numbness in [his] hands and tingling was also more
noticeable”.
the time of making his 18 July 2019 statement, the applicant had ongoing
“numbness and tingling to both
His more recent
evidence, as recounted in the 7 November 2024 statement, is
years of my employment with the [respondent] as an operator, I worked in cold
environment [sic] and in machinery
that heavily vibrated me constantly
throughout the day... The machine that I drove had controls being a joystick
which I operated
with both hands and so my hands were constantly being vibrated
whilst in the course of my work over many years.
It is hard for me to recall exactly when I first noticed symptoms of numbness
and tingling and pain in my hands. I can say they weren’t
present before
the 2002 injury. However I certainly recall the symptoms .... following this
is noted that statement refers to an injury on 15 January 2002. There appears to
be a typographic error with respect to the date,
which presumably should read 15
January 2003 given the content of his earlier statement made on 22 January 2018.
There is no evidence
of a 2002 injury, which was before his employment commenced
with the respondent during December 2002. The 22 January 2018 statement
refers to not having suffered any injury “prior to 16 January 2003”,
which would exclude the incident described
in detail said to have occurred on 15
January 2003. That date reference also appears to be an error. When the
statement evidence
is read as a whole, it appears the only relevant incident is
that described for 15 January 2003 when the applicant struck his head
cabin ceiling of the backhoe he was operating at the time.
latest statement evidence provided by the applicant, on 30 July 2025, is that he
“continue[s] to experience numbness in
the fingers” as well as pain
in the knuckles and restricted use of his hands, including difficulty with grip
applicant was referred to receive specialist treatment from Dr Rohit Kumar,
plastic, reconstructive and hand surgeon. In his 25
July 2024 report, Dr Kumar
diagnosed the applicant with “features clinically consistent with
Bilateral Carpal Tunnel Syndrome”
that had been “confirmed by nerve
conduction studies and evidence of pathology at C5, C8 segments”. He
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome can have a more central cause (c-spine) as is evidenced
by this study.
[The applicant] has had cervical spine surgery under Workcover. It is thus
quite feasible for the carpal tunnel syndrome (bilaterally)
to be exacerbated or
a secondary consequence of the primary c-spine injury and therefore, this injury
would be the main contributing
Given the significant levels of symptoms experienced by [the applicant], the
carpal tunnel release procedures are more than reasonably
necessary for
Associate Professor Brett Courtenay
Professor Brett Courtenay, orthopaedic surgeon, was qualified by the applicant
to conduct an independent medical examination.
In relation to the
applicant’s history, it was reported on 3 October 2024
always had problems with numbness in his hands but that really did not improve
after he had his neck operated on. That
was a single level cervical fusion at
C3/4 done on 13 March 2020 at Westmead Private Hospital. Subsequent to that he
has had his
left shoulder operated on, on 5 October 2022. He has noticed however
despite some initial improvement after his neck fusion that
his hands became
progressively worse. He has had a lot of problems with his left hand more than
the right though he is right hand
Professor Courtenay formed the opinion that the
applicant’s:
carpal tunnel syndrome, the left worse than the right are a direct consequence
of the type of work he was doing and
the length of time he was doing it. There
was certainly in the work he as doing a significant amount of vibration. There
question in the American Guidelines of causation about whether or not
repetitive use causes it, however there is a lot of evidence
to support the
quite consistent vibration is a very causative factor and even now when he uses
the whipper snipper it is a factor
that aggravates. So for that reason it is
certainly my opinion that his carpal tunnel syndrome is directly related to the
work he was doing, the vibrations and the use of the joysticks and that
he was doing that for a period of 18 years. Also carpal tunnel
syndrome in men
who are not doing this type of work is generally very unusual and certainly is
consistent as I believe it is related
to the work that he was doing.”
response to specific questions, Associate Professor Courtenay
the nature and conditions of his employment, particularly the use of a backhoe,
particularly the amount of work involved
with rock crushing to represent the
main contributing factor to the development and to the aggravation of underlying
carpal tunnel
syndrome of both wrists the left worse than the right.
I do not believe it is a secondary consequence of any primary injury to his
cervical spine. It is the cervical spine sensory for carpal
tunnel is different
levels. For that reason I do not believe that it is directly related however as
the cervical spine came about
with the use of the backhoe and its aggravation of
pain I believe this was happening at the same time and there has been a
injury for the same reasons as his neck and the same reason he had
his left shoulder operated on.”
supplementary report was provided by Associate Professor Courtenay on 4 March
2025, wherein he
note the comments there that there is a comment it came from the cervical spine.
Technically and anatomically I would not
expect that. I think it is far more
likely that the carpal tunnel was a separate condition and most definitely
related to the gripping
of the equipment to the work that he was doing and the
repeated physical activities. There is always some debate about what is actually
a cause of carpal tunnel. It is less likely in men than in women but it
certainly can be from constant pressure over the wrist and
certainly the work
that he was doing, the jarring of the equipment in my opinion would certainly be
consistent with that occurring.
So for that reason I do believe that it is appropriate for him to be
considered and I do believe that the bilateral carpal tunnel
releases are
reasonably necessary for the work related condition. It is just that I think it
is associated but secondary and due
to the nature and conditions of his
employment and it has been aggravated and failed to respond from his cervical
Dr Bhisham Singh
orthopaedic and spine surgeon attending to the applicant’s cervical spine
Dr Bhisham Singh, reported to the treating general practitioner on
16 October 2023
ongoing symptoms of numbness in the hands, and as you know, he has disease in
the cervical spine. He has previously
had C3-4 ACDF, and has had decompression
there. He does have disease lower down with foraminal stenosis. This is likely
responsible
for pins and needles in his hands, however, he does have positive
Tinel’s sign at the wrist, worse on the right side, and it
is important to
rules out carpal tunnel syndrome before we proceed with his surgical option of
further cervical spine surgery.”
Singh noted during a consultation on 16 May 2017 the applicant with prior
“pins and needles and numbness in his hands for
quite some time” but
those had “abated
Dr Roger Rowe
respondent qualified Dr Roger Rowe, orthopaedic surgeon, to conduct an
independent medical examination of the applicant. Dr Rowe
provided reports on
several occasions, initially with respect to the applicant’s cervical
spine and more recently focussed
on issues associated with the current dispute.
Some of the earlier reports are however pertinent as they contain relevant
such as that of 26 February 2018, prior to the applicant’s
cervical spine surgery on 13 March 2020, when it was recorded the
said that he has a tingling sensation in the right side of the neck and
supraclavicular region. This may radiate to both
hands especially to the middle
fingers and especially at night. He is able to relieve this sensation by moving
his fingers.”
27 October 2021, in referring to the applicant’s history and
“current status”, Dr Rowe noted, referring to his
left arm, the
and needles in the middle and ring fingers on an intermittent basis. This seems
to occur mainly when lying on his
left side. He said that after his relatively
recent one hour lawn mowing session, he developed pins and needles in both hands
respect to the applicant’s then current treatment and status two years
later, Dr Rowe reported on 25 October 2023
consulted Dr Singh a couple of weeks ago. He said that Dr Singh has requested
some electrical tests to establish whether
his current sensory symptoms in both
hands are the result of carpal tunnel syndrome or are arising from the neck.
He said that both hands have pins and needles and numbness in the ulna three
digits. These symptoms occur on an intermittent basis.
The symptoms may occur at
any time whether he is in bed or with sitting and especially when mowing the
lawn or operating a whipper
snipper. He clarified that he does not have the
sensory symptoms in the thumb or index finger of either hand.”
the same report, Dr Rowe
Smith has already undergone C3/4 discectomy and fusion. His current symptoms
seemed to be largely related to pins and numbness
and numbness in both hands,
the precise cause of which is yet to be determined. Mr Smith is under the
impression that it may be carpal
tunnel syndrome but this is unlikely as it is
the ulnar side fingers that are affected rather than the median side fingers.
He indicated that electrophysiological studies have been requested and this
is reasonable to clarify the diagnosis. If the diagnosis
is simply carpal tunnel
syndrome or compression of the ulnar nerve at the wrist, this is easily released
surgically. If the symptoms
are not related to peripheral nerve compression, the
symptoms may well be arising from the neck. It is noted quotations for proposed
extensive cervical spinal surgery.”
a secondary report of 25 October 2023, Dr Rowe considered
noted in my main report of even date, Mr Smith is currently being further
investigated with electrophysiological studies.
If these electrophysiological
studies demonstrate significant carpal tunnel compression, then this should be
treated surgically and
presumably cure the condition. Surgical treatment on the
cervical spine should not even be actively considered until the precise
of origin of the symptoms has been determined. Extensive cervical spinal fusion
will make no difference to carpal tunnel
syndrome. On this basis, at the moment,
the proposed extensive surgical treatment on the cervical spine is not
reasonably necessary.”
Supplementary
reporting of Dr Rowe on 23 April 2024 was that the
has pins and needles affecting the ulnar three digits. Whether these are arising
from the neck is uncertain as they are
not a reflection of carpal tunnel
carpal tunnel release has been proposed, presumably with the support of the
electrophysiological examination which
has been referred to by Dr Singh and Dr
Kumar. Dr Singh mentioned that this condition was found to be severe on the left
slightly less severe on the right side. The actual report of the
electrophysiological examination was not available. An unusual feature
whilst the electro-physiological examination apparently indicates carpal tunnel
syndrome, his symptoms are in the ring and
little finger which are not supplied
by the median nerve.
Overall, it is my assessment that he would be better avoiding further surgery
and thus overall, I would consider bilateral carpal
tunnel release not
reasonably necessary.
Notwithstanding my comments above, if Mr Smith is significantly troubled by
paraesthesia in his hands, it may be worthwhile allowing
bilateral carpal tunnel
release in the hope that it would alleviate his symptoms. If it was to alleviate
his symptoms, he may not
require cervical spinal surgery. Nevertheless, I would
not be confident in this regard.
As indicated above, it is my opinion that he would probably be better off
avoiding bilateral carpal tunnel release but if it is accepted
treatment was to be undertaken, I do not see any nexus between the need for such
surgery and his employment. It is also
noted that he has not undertaken any work
for around four and a half years since he ceased working on 31 October
CONSIDERATION AND FINDINGS
applicant’s case is pleaded and argued with reference to various dates and
in several alternatives or combinations of events.
He need only establish one of
those for the application to succeed. For the reasons that follow, I am
satisfied the applicant sustained
a disease injury to his wrists in the course
of employment with the respondent.
Consequential
it is therefore unnecessary to consider the various alternatives argued by the
applicant, the claim of a consequential condition
arising from cervical spine
injury following surgery is nonetheless relevant for brief examination.
submitted by the respondent, the applicant had been complaining of symptoms with
his hands for some time. Reference was made to
2017 as an early date, however
the applicant himself refers to relevant symptoms “a few years
after” the incident on
15 January 2003. He also makes reference to his
hands being affected on the occasion of that incident. The reporting of
Professor Courtenay and Dr Rowe refers to the presence of symptoms
prior to the surgery. There is substantial evidence the applicant
experienced
symptoms relevant to the condition for which surgery is sought well before the
cervical spine surgery on
13 March 2020. It is a condition that could not
have been consequential to that surgery in those circumstances.
is noted Dr Kumar thought it “feasible for the carpal tunnel syndrome
(bilaterally) to be exacerbated or a secondary consequence”
cervical spine surgery, but he did not provide an explanation for that opinion
or describe any mechanism by which that may
have occurred. The timing of the
surgery discounts it being a “secondary consequence” and while
exacerbation may be relevant,
that assumes prior existence of the condition.
Associate Professor Courtenay decisively rejected the proposition of the
being consequential to the surgery, although he did accept there may
have been some aggravation; again prior existence is relevant.
On the available
evidence, I consider it unlikely the condition affecting the applicant’s
wrists was a consequence of his cervical
spine injury and related
Disease injury
4(b)(i) of the
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act)
provides that a disease that is contracted by a worker in the course of
employment is “disease injury” if employment was
contributing factor. In
[2020] NSWWCCPD 9
, Snell DP reviewed
various prior presidential determinations about the meaning of “main
contributing factor” and identified
that it “involves consideration
of whether there were competing causal factors” for a disease injury.
applicant contends the work he performed as a backhoe operator was the main
factor that caused the bilateral carpal tunnel condition.
His statement evidence
outlines in detail the type of work he performed daily and the persistent
exposure to “jarring”
in the machine as well as vibration using
controllers, “joysticks”, to operate the backhoe apparatus.
respondent’s submissions were mainly directed at the applicant’s
condition not being a consequence of cervical spine
injury. I accept that
premise. The reasonable necessity for the treatment as a result of workplace
injury was nonetheless disputed.
to the nature of the applicant’s work, Associate Professor Courtenay
considered the wrist condition to be directly
related to his employment given
the requirement to grip joysticks, with the associated vibration, over 18 years
and repeated physical
activity. He thought the constant jarring and pressure on
the applicant’s hands were the most likely cause of the condition
thought to be an unusual diagnosis for a male. In refuting the suggestion the
condition was consequential to the applicant’s
cervical spine injury,
Associate Professor Courtenay reasoned that the conditions had developed
concurrently but presented sequentially.
Although he did accept, consistent with
the view of Dr Kumar, that the cervical spine surgery may have
“aggravated” the
wrist condition. He did not identify any likely
cause for the applicant’s carpal tunnel syndrome other than employment
the respondent.
Rowe did not conclusively assess the applicant with carpal tunnel syndrome, but
he accepted if that were the diagnosis then it
could be “easily released
surgically”. Should it be present, Dr Rowe considered it “should be
treated surgically
and presumably cure the condition”. He accepted carpal
tunnel release surgery may avoid the need for the applicant to have
cervical spine surgery. However, he thought there was no “nexus”
between the applicant’s need for carpal
tunnel surgery and his employment,
without further explanation.
nature of the applicant’s work functions is not in dispute. His hands and
wrists were subjected to persistent physically
demanding activity over many
years. The extent of any effect or contribution from the incident on 15 January
2003 is unclear, but
it would in any case have occurred in the course of his
employment. The cogent opinion of Associate Professor Courtenay provides
causal connection between his backhoe operating duties and the applicant’s
carpal tunnel syndrome. He referred to medical
evidence that links
“consistent vibration” with carpal tunnel syndrome as a cause. I am
reasonably satisfied that his
medical opinion establishes, on balance, that the
nature of the applicant’s physical work was the most likely cause of the
is no evidence the applicant engaged in other activities during the relevant
period that may have contributed to, or caused,
the condition. In the
circumstances, the applicant’s work is more likely than not the main
factor that contributed to the condition
in his wrists. I am satisfied carpal
tunnel syndrome developed over a period of time in the course of the
applicant’s employment.
Accordingly, it is accepted as a disease injury
for the purposes of s 4(b)(i) of the 1987 Act.
was previously determined by the WCC that the applicant’s cervical spine
injury was deemed to have occurred on 11 January
2018. There is no reason the
date the applicant’s carpal tunnel syndrome is deemed to have occurred
should be different. Associate
Professor Courtenay considered those injuries
developed “at the same time”. The medical records leave no doubt the
had symptoms of the condition on that date. It is reasonable for that
date to be accepted in circumstances where the applicant had
been reporting it
to medical practitioners as a symptom resulting in some degree of incapacity to
his hands and wrists, such a continuing
numbness, albeit not always at the same
level of intensity. It is noted the respondent accepted that if the nature of
was found to be the cause of the applicant’s injury then the
date adopted by the WCC would be relevant. The applicant’s
carpal tunnel
syndrome disease injury is deemed to have occurred on 11 January
Reasonably necessary
60 of the 1987 Act provides for the reasonably necessary treatment of workplace
injury. The applicant has the onus to establish,
on the balance of
probabilities, the provision of surgery is reasonably necessary as treatment for
his carpal tunnel syndrome. I
must have a “a sense of actual
persuasion” that the reasonable necessity exists and that it results from
the injury as
Nguyen v Cosmopolitan Homes Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWCA
Yucel v AAES Pty Ltd t/as Roadtrack
[2015] NSWWCCPD 51.
concept of reasonable necessity of a particular treatment was considered by
Roche DP in
Diab v NRMA Ltd
[2014] NSWWCCPD 72
The fundamental question: “is it better that the
worker have the treatment or not?” That is, are there reasonable prospects
that the worker’s situation will be improved or ameliorated by the
was made clear by Roche DP, citing various authority, in
Murphy v Allity
Management Services Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWWCCPD 49
) that in order
to satisfy the test of causation implied by the expression “result
of”, it is not necessary to establish
the work injury was the only, or
even a substantial, contributing factor to the need for medical treatment. It is
sufficient to establish
only that the injury “materially
contributed”.
commonsense examination of the causal chain is required to determine whether the
need for the claimed treatment arises as a result
of the work-related injury:
Kooragang Cement Pty Ltd v Bates
applicant is not required to prove the requested surgery is absolutely
necessary, only that it be reasonably so:
summary, I must determine whether it is reasonable and preferable for the
applicant to have the surgery requested. In making that
determination, relevant
considerations include the suitability of the treatment, availability of
alternative treatment (and the potential
effectiveness of those), cost of the
proposed treatment, potential effectiveness of the proposed treatment and the
acceptance by
medical experts of the treatment as being appropriate and likely
to be effective.
am reasonably satisfied that the applicant’s employment has materially
contributed to the need for surgery:
. This is made clear in the
various medical opinion, which is generally consistent about the need for the
proposed surgery. Even though
Dr Rowe suggests it would be better for the
applicant to avoid surgery, he considered that if the applicant were to be
“significantly
troubled by paraesthesia in his hands” then “it
may be worthwhile allowing bilateral carpal tunnel release in the hope
would alleviate his symptoms”. The applicant’s most recent statement
confirms the condition remains a concern
and has “worsened”. His
treating doctors and the independent medical examiners concur the proposed
surgery is an appropriate
form of treatment to treat carpal tunnel syndrome.
According to Dr Singh, carpal tunnel release is necessary prior to any further
cervical spine surgery, which has been under active consideration given ongoing
problems with that injury.
have weighed the matters identified in
and consider the evidence
supports a finding the proposed treatment is reasonably necessary in the
circumstances for the purposes
s 60 of the 1987 Act. On balance it is
better than not for the treatment to proceed. Accordingly, the respondent is
liable to meet
the cost of the surgical treatment recommended by Dr Kumar in his
letters dated 6 and 13 March
that is, “bilateral
staged carpal tunnel release”.
applicant sustained a disease injury to his wrists, carpal tunnel syndrome, in
the course of employment with the respondent over
several years that is deemed
to have occurred on 11 January 2018. He is entitled to the cost of and
incidental to surgery to treat
ARD p 2 at [5] and
ARD p 5 at [7] and
ALAD-A p 1 at
Reply pp 53 to
Reply pp 68 and
Kooragang Cement Pty
Ltd v Bates
(1994) 10 NSW CCR 796.
Rose v Health Commission
[1986] NSWCC 2
ARD pp 32 and
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.08 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter