URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:05:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HCCC V DAVIS (NO 1) [2013] NSWNMT 17 (19 September 2013)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Matter No: 028/2013
CITATION: HCCC V DAVIS (NO 1)
[2013] NSWNMT
INQUIRY INTO A COMPLAINT AGAINST A
Complainant
Health Care Complaints Commission
Andrew James DAVIS
O’Neill (Deputy Chairperson)
Kathleen Dixon (Nurse Member)
Constable (Nurse Member)
Sandra Everett (Lay Member)
Date and Place
3, 4 and 5 September 2013, Sydney
Date of Order and
Reasons for Decision
19 September 2013
Representation
Complainant Ragni Mathur, barrister, instructed by Monica Richmond,
solicitor, for the Health Care Complaints Commission.
Respondent Colin McGee, barrister, instructed by Kathleen Doust, solicitor,
NSW Nurses’ and Midwives’ Association
Complaint against a nurse – conduct towards
residents of an aged care facility - unsatisfactory professional conduct –
professional misconduct – non-publication order – stage one findings
and reasons for findings
Legislation cited
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
ss. 3A, 139B,
REASONS FOR DECISION
The Tribunal’s findings and orders
Tribunal made findings that the greater part of the conduct alleged against
Andrew James Davis in a Complaint dated 30 April 2013
and lodged by the Health
Care Complaints (HCCC) with the Tribunal was unsatisfactory professional conduct
of a sufficiently serious
nature as to justify the suspension or cancellation of
Mr Davis’s registration as a Registered Nurse and so professional
misconduct.
In particular:
Tribunal found that all the allegations in Particular 1 relating to Patient A
proved. It also found that the conduct so proved
against Mr Davis was
unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature as to
justify the suspension or cancellation
of Mr Davis’s registration as a
Registered Nurse and so professional misconduct.
Tribunal found that all the allegations in Particular 2(a) and (b) relating to
Patient B proved, but not Particular 2(c). It also
found that the conduct so
proved against Mr Davis was unsatisfactory professional conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature as to
justify the suspension or cancellation of Mr
Davis’s registration as a Registered Nurse and so professional misconduct.
Tribunal found that all the allegations in Particular 3(a), but not 3(b)
relating to Patient C proved. Nevertheless, it also found
that the conduct so
proved against Mr Davis was unsatisfactory professional conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature as to justify
the suspension or cancellation of Mr
Davis’s registration as a Registered Nurse and so professional misconduct.
Tribunal found that all the allegations in Particular 4 relating to Patient
D proved. It also found that the conduct so proved against Mr Davis
was unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature as to
justify the suspension or cancellation of Mr Davis’s registration as a
Registered Nurse and so professional misconduct.
Tribunal found that all the allegations in Particulars 5 and 6 relating to
Patients A, B, C and D proved. It also found that the
conduct so proved against
Mr Davis was, when linked with the conduct in relation to the other Particulars
set out in this Complaint,
unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently
serious nature as to justify the suspension or cancellation of Mr Davis’s
registration as a Registered Nurse and so professional misconduct.
Tribunal found that the allegations in Particular 7 relating to conduct of a
harassing, but not a sexual, nature in relation to
Patients A, B, C and D
proved. It also found that the conduct so proved against Mr Davis, under this
Particular was unsatisfactory
professional conduct, which when linked with the
conduct in relation to the other Particulars set out in this Complaint is of a
sufficiently
serious nature as to justify the suspension or cancellation of Mr
Davis’s registration as a Registered Nurse and so professional
misconduct.
Consequently,
the Tribunal found that both complaint one, unsatisfactory professional conduct
and complaint two, professional misconduct
were proved.
Tribunal made a non-publication order to the effect that the names of Patients
A, B, C and D are not to be published in any medium
other than in the Reasons
for Decision and attached material that is sent to the parties in this
the request of the parties the Tribunal conducted the proceedings in two parts.
The first to determine whether the subject-matter
of the complaints against Mr
Davis were proved and if so whether or not that conduct amounted to
unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct. The second part,
if required, would deal with the question of protective orders.
arrangements for the hearing of the second stage of this matter are set out at
the end of these reasons for decision.
5 September 2013, the Tribunal, in the exercise of its powers under s, 167E(2)
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
varied the conditions already existing on Mr Davis’s registration as a
nurse. That order is annexed to these reasons for
Background to this hearing
James Davis was born on 12 December 1960. He commenced his training as an
enrolled nurse in 1981. He became an enrolled nurse
in 1982 and worked as such
in hospitals in Sydney until 2001 when he completed his Bachelor of Nursing
degree. He was registered
as a Registered Nurse on 29 August 2001and continued
to work at a hospital in Sydney until 2009 when he began working at what is
known as the Bupa Bexley Aged Care Facility, Bexley (the Facility).
24 January 2011, as a result of reports of an incident involving Mr Davis and a
resident known as Patient A in these proceedings,
Mr Davis was suspended from
his employment while first a police investigation and then an internal
investigation conducted by Bupa
took place. As a result of the Bupa
investigations, Mr Davis was summarily dismissed from his employment on 18 March
28 June 2011, a senior officer of Bupa made a “notification” to the
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
(AHPRA) under the
Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW)
notification was investigated by the NSW Health Care Complaints Commission
a result of that investigation, in a Complaint dated 30 April 2011, the HCCC
alleged that Mr Davis engaged in unsatisfactory professional
conduct in relation
to four residents at the Facility and furthermore that that activity was of such
a serious nature that it amounted
to professional misconduct.
March 2011, Mr Davis has been employed as a registered nurse at Mareeba Aged
Care in Maclean.
The Complaint
18. The HCCC’s Complaint in this matter set out two complaints against Mr
Davis. Complaint one alleged that he was guilty of
unsatisfactory professional
conduct and complaint two alleged that he was guilty of professional
misconduct.
complaints alleged that he:
in conduct that demonstrated that judgment he possessed, or the care that he
exercised, in the practice of nursing, was significantly
below the standard
reasonably expected of a nurse of an equivalent level of training or experience;
in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice
of nursing.
particulars of both complaints were the same. They related to four residents,
all now deceased, of the Facility and are set out
below. At the commencement of
the hearing Mr McGee confirmed to the Tribunal that Mr Davis admitted a number
of the particulars and
other related matters. The matters that are admitted or
denied are marked below.
(a) At the relevant time, Patient A was a 64 year old man with a history of
alcohol related brain damage and a heavy dependence on
nicotine. Between 2010
and March 2011 during night shifts in the Dementia Unit at the Facility, Mr
three (3) or four (4) separate occasions, made Patient A beg on his hands and
knees for a cigarette, saying
“Can you beg
for a cigarette?”
“Can you sit on the floor?”
“Can you kiss the floor?”
laugh upon witnessing Patient A beg for cigarettes (
continued to laugh even when told by other nursing staff to stop
this conduct from Patient A for the purpose of ‘making fun of him’
(b) At the relevant time, Patient B was a 99 year old woman who suffered from
dementia, was immobile and dependent on staff for repositioning
and location
changes. Between February 2009 and March 2011 during night shifts in the
Dementia Unit at the Facility, Mr Davis:
several occasions, for a period of between two (2) and five (5) minutes, placed
his thumb inside the mouth of Patient B (denied);
laugh upon witnessing Patient B suck his thumb and continued to laugh even when
told by other nursing staff to stop (denied);
reason of the conduct referred to in (a) and (b), posed a serious infection risk
to Patient B (denied).
(c) At the relevant time, Patient C was an 82 year old man and suffered from
dementia and non insulin dependent diabetes. Between
December 2010 and January
2011 during a night shift in the Dementia Unit at the Facility, Mr
two (2) separate occasions whilst Patient C was watching television in the lunch
room, put his hand down Patient C’s pants
in the area of his genitals
Patient C’s belly (denied).
(d) At the relevant time, Patient D was an 84 year old man suffering from
dementia. Between 2010 and March 2011 during a nursing
shift in the Dementia
Unit at the BBACF, Mr Davis:
his face near Patient D, called him “Daddy”, tried to kiss him on
the forehead (
) and despite being physically pushed away (denied)
and told “I’m not your Daddy” (
don’t like you” (denied), continued this behaviour (denied);
distress to Patient D by unnecessarily involving himself in Patient D’s
care when not required contrary to the
Australian Nursing & Midwifery
Council (“ANMC”) ‘A nurse’s guide to professional
boundaries’
(e) In failing to have regard to the dignity and respect of Patients A, B, C and
D, breached the
ANMC National Competency Standards for the Registered Nurse
Code of Ethics for Nurses in Australia
Admits as to
Patients A and D as to matters set out in paragraphs 22, 24, 26 and 41 of his
statement dated 19 July 2013
; but denies as to Patients B and
(f) In failing to recognise the responsibility to prevent harm to Patients A, B,
C and D, breached the
National Competency Standards for the Registered
Admits as to Patients A and D as to matters set out
in paragraphs 22, 24, 26 and 41 of his statement dated 19 July 2013
denies as to Patients B and C.)
(g) By reason of the matters referred to in the particulars above (1) to (4) ,
individually or cumulatively, the practitioner engaged
in inappropriate and/or
unwelcome conduct of a sexual or harassing nature towards Patients A, B, C and
Admits as to conduct of a
nature as to Patients A and
; but denies as to Patients B and C.) (Denies as to conduct of a
nature as to Patients A, B, C and D.)
at the commencement of the hearing Mr McGee advised the Tribunal that Mr Davis
admitted that the conduct that was admitted to
was conduct of a serious nature,
but that there was no admission that the conduct was professional misconduct as
that was a matter
for the Tribunal to determine.
The onus and
standard of proof
as in this case, where the respondent, Mr Davis, has admitted to some matters,
the Tribunal must still be satisfied on the balance
of probabilities by the
evidence that the subject-matter of each of the complaints against him has been
proved. Only after the Tribunal
finds the subject-matter of a complaint has been
proved may it take action in relation to it. The responsibility for proving the
subject-matter of a complaint lies with the party alleging it – in this
case the HCCC. However where relevant facts and allegations
are admitted to, as
in this case, proof of those matters that are admitted to and an understanding
of their seriousness is more easily
The sources
of the evidence
two volumes of documentary material relied upon by the HCCC in this case were
tendered by Ms Mathur, without objection. This material
Complainant’s Exhibits 1- 45. Three other documents or bundles of
documents were tendered. These were marked CE
46-48.The documentary material
relied upon by Mr Davis in this case was tendered by Mr McGee without objection.
This material was
marked Respondent’s Exhibits 1 – 5. (However, for
the purposes of stage one of the hearing in this matter paragrapghs
62 to 75 of
Mr Davis’s statement (RE 1) were not read.) The tendered documents are
listed in Attachment A to these reasons
for decision. The following gave oral
evidence to the Tribunal in person in this matter: Ana Garay AIN, Ranju Pokharel
Kopitas AIN, Deborah Armitage, the peer reviewer and Mr Davis. On a
matter not involving the substance of the Complaint, Ms Gillian
Brown, Director
of Nursing, Mareeba Aged Care.
Patient A – Particular 1
the night of 23-24 January 2011, Ms Jessy Simon, a Registered Nurse, was on duty
on night shift responsible for three wards at
the Facility. Three Assistants in
Nursing (AINs) were also on duty under her supervision. Early on the morning of
Patient A walked into the nurses’ station of the
Dementia Ward and began begging for a cigarette. Ms Simon told him not to beg,
but Patient A told her that Mr Davis; “makes me go down on my hands and
knees and beg for a cigarette”. Two of the AIN’s
on duty with Ms
Simon, Ms Chakresh Khorba and Ms Helen Kopitas confirmed to her that they had
seen Mr Davis do this before. Ms Simon
and Ms Khorba have both returned to India
and were unavailable to the Tribunal to give evidence.
Simon made a “confidential log” reporting this matter. The General
Manager at the Facility, Mr Keith Crossland, received
the confidential log on 24
January 2011 and took action which resulted in an inquiry being undertaken by
Bupa. Ms Khorba and Ms Kopitas
were interviewed as part of the investigation as
was Mr Davis. Mr Davis was also interviewed by the police.
the interview conducted by Bupa on 8 March 2011, Mr Davis stated that Patient A
had memory loss, a history of alcohol abuse
and an addiction to cigarettes. He
then continued:
He sometimes asks for cigarettes every 15
minutes. Other residents have actually complained about him. I used to deny him
out of spite.
in the interview, Mr Davis stated that he did not smoke and continued; “I
suppose I was making fun of him”. He admitted,
when asked, that this was
not appropriate. He also admitted that he made Mr Davis get down on his hands
and knees and had done so;
“Many ... 3 or 4 times ... in the last year or
so.” He continued:
I just thought it was funny. I know it
was not appropriate. I am admitting this to you now. I am ashamed of my
the police interview on 16 February 2011Mr Davis was asked if he made Patient A
beg for cigarettes. His reply was; “Sometimes,
I might say – I
don’t want to incriminate myself, I might say to him stuff like,
‘How desperate are you for a cigarette’
but that is more having a
bit of fun, and really, it is not a nice thing to do, but yeah. I don’t
want to say anything more.”
already noted, as a result of Mr Davis’s admissions during its inquiry,
Bupa, having suspended him on 24 February 2011, summarily
terminated his
employment with effect from 18 March 2011. Also as already noted, after this
matter was notified to AHPRA, the HCCC
investigated this matter. However, as a
result of its investigation the HCCC drew up a Complaint alleging unsatisfactory
professional
conduct and professional misconduct against Mr Davis in relation
four of the residents of the Dementia Ward at the Facility.
the time that Mr Davis’s conduct in relation to Patient A came to light,
Patient A was 66 years of age. Bupa’s diagnosis
checklist in relation to
him records that he had alcohol related dementia, behaviour disorder, depression
and an unsteady gait due
to tardive dyskinesia among other problems.
already noted, Mr Davis admitted that on three or four separate occasions, he
made Patient A beg on his hands and knees for a cigarette,
saying “Can you
beg for a cigarette?”. However, he denied saying either “Can you sit
on the floor?”
or “Can you kiss the floor?”. He also
admitted that he would laugh when witnessing Patient A beg for cigarettes, but
in paragraph 24 of his statement dated 19 July 2013 that he could not
recall other nursing staff telling him to stop. He continued
by stating that to
the best of his recollection other nursing staff who observed Patient A’s
actions laughed as well. He further
stated that he denied continuing to laugh
even when told by other nursing staff to stop. However, he accepted that his
admitted conduct
was below the standard reasonably expected of a Registered
Nurse in his position.
admitted, in his statement, that he sought this conduct from Patient A for the
purpose of ‘making fun of him’. He went
on to state that his
intention was for Patient A and him “to have a bit of fun” because
he “got on well with Patient
A’. He continued:
was no malice in my intentions towards Patient A.
finalised his statement, in relation to Patient A, by saying that he understood
that; “this was not appropriate in the circumstances
given both his role
as a Registered Nurse on shift and Patient A’s condition”.
Ranju Pokharel, who is currently studying for a degree in nursing was an AIN at
the Facility when, either in December 2010 or January
2011, she was rostered on
a nightshift with Mr Davis and saw Patient A ask Mr Davis for a cigarette. She
saw Mr Davis taunting Patient
A by pulling faces and telling him he was
disgusting and that he had to beg for a cigarette. The Tribunal does not accept
evidence that he was telling Patient A that smoking was
disgusting. As will be seen below, the Tribunal did not consider Mr Davis
witness of the truth and preferred the evidence of Mr Pokharel and other
witnesses when their evidence was in conflict with
that of Mr Davis. She also
saw Mr Davis make Patient A go down on his knees and say “please,
please”. She also heard
Mr Davis say to Patient A something like;
“Put your nose on the floor” and “Kiss the floor”.
all happened on one night near the nurses’ station and it was the only
time she saw Mr Davis make Patient A beg for a cigarette
like that. She did not
say anything to Mr Davis about his behaviour because she was frightened of him.
Tribunal accepts Ms Pokharel’s evidence that Mr Davis said to Patient A,
in her presence, something like; “Put your
nose on the floor” and
“Kiss the floor”. Although her statement is dated 24 May 2012 and so
made long after the
events described in it, she was clear about what she said
she saw. She was also clear and convincing in her evidence before the Tribunal
and she was not shaken in cross-examination. When it was put to her that what
she said in her statement was just a general recollection
of what occurred and
not exactly what occurred, her reply was firm. She said:
it's not a general that I make, you know, story and tell. It was exactly that
what I saw. It was embarrassing and a bad movement
so it is stick in my mind.
I never can forget that incident.
part of the Bupa inquiry, Ms Khorba was interviewed on 14 March 2011. She stated
that one night she was sitting with Ms Pokharel
in the office when Mr Davis
joined them and Patient A kept coming and asking for cigarettes – a matter
that was regularly referred
to in his progress notes. Ms Khorba stated that Mr
Davis asked Patient A to beg for a cigarette and then said “Can you sit
the floor?”
and “Can you kiss the floor?”. Ms Khorba
stated that she saw Patient A both kiss the floor and sit on the floor. She also
stated that she then stood up from the table and asked Mr Davis to stop.
However, he just laughed.
already noted Ms Helen Kopitas was a witness to some of the incident that led Ms
Jessy Simon to make her confidential log on 24
January 2011. She had been
outside having a cigarette break and came back in when Ms Simon was asking
Patient A why he was begging
for a cigarette. She said that she heard Patient A
say something like; “That’s what [Mr Davis] makes me do. He’s
Tribunal is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that all the allegations
set out in the particulars in relation to Patient
A are proved. The eye
witnesses to some of the incidents alleged were reliable and credible. They did
not try to exaggerate their
evidence. They were clear about what they saw and
what they didn’t see.
Tribunal was prepared to give weight to Ms Khorba’s evidence even though
it could not be tested in cross-examination. It
was, as submitted by Ms Mathur,
both contemporaneous to the events alleged and corroborated by Ms Pokharel.
Tribunal did not consider Mr Davis to be a witness of the truth. His denials
inconsistent with the evidence
of others. His attempts blacken the reputation of others by suggesting that they
joined him in laughing
at his humiliation of Patient A failed as he had to
concede the truth during firm, patient and persistent cross-examination by Ms
Mathur. This part of his evidence, and many other parts of his evidence,
demonstrated that he was willing to make up explanations
on the spot to attempt
unsuccessfully to escape from having to admit the falsity of his denials of the
allegations made against him
that he had not admitted to.
assessing the seriousness of Mr Davis’s conduct towards Patient A, it is
appropriate to consider the reasons for his humiliation
of Patient A. As already
noted, he suggested in paragraph 27 of his sworn statement to the Tribunal that
he did it to have a bit
of fun with Patient A because he got on well with him
and further that there was no malice in his intentions towards Patient A. That
did not sit well with his wish to avoid saying anything that might incriminate
him at his police interview on 16 February 2011, but
still saying that was not a
nice thing to do. More significantly, it was totally inconsistent with his Bupa
interview on 8 March
2011 in which he stated that he denied Patient A cigarettes
out of spite.
the number of times he made Patient A beg for cigarettes is relevant. In his
Bupa interview, Mr Davis said that making Patient
A beg for cigarettes happened,
“Many ... 3 or 4 times ... in the last year or so.” During his
interview with the HCCC
on 4 May 2012, he admitted that it was more than four
occasions but less than 10.
too is the attitude of Mr Davis in giving evidence about the allegations against
him relating to Patient A. Two exchanges in the
evidence demonstrate this. The
first is as follows:
Q. Isn't it the case that your recollection isn't blurred? The fact is, no
nurses were ever present and laughed at witnessing a
patient beg for cigarettes?
Isn't that the truth of the matter?
A. Only [Patient A] and I were present in the room.
Q. No, that no nurse who was present laughed at witnessing the conduct of a
patient begging on his hands and knees for cigarettes?
Q. That's true to say no nurse laughed?
A. That's right.
Q. So in your interview with the Health Care Complaints Commission on
4 May 2012, you were untruthful when you alleged that other
staff were present and laughed at witnessing the begging, is that the case?
Q. It's also untruthful to say, is it not, that you were never told to stop?
The truth of the matter is, in fact, that you were told
to stop, were you
A. I don't know. I can't remember.
Q. Let's have a look at that. If the witness could be handed his statement
which appears in the respondent's bundle of documents
behind tab 1?
Mr Davis, can I take you to paragraph 24 of your statement? It's
correct to say, is it not, that you do not recall
other nurses telling you to
stop? That's what you state there, is that correct?
A. That's right.
Q. If you turn over, in the same breath, you say, "I deny continuing to
laugh even when I was told by other nursing staff to stop",
do you see that?
A. Yes I do.
Q. How is it that you can deny continuing to laugh when told to stop, when
you have no recollection of ever being told to stop?
A. I don't know.
Q. Isn't it the case that you, in fact, did continue to laugh after being
told to stop by another nurse, isn't that the truth of
the matter?
A. That might be the truth of the matter but I don't
second is as follows:
Q. So you understand and appreciate that
there are two nurse witnesses who say that they saw, firstly, the patient kiss
and, secondly, Ms Pokharel said that he did that upon your
instructions?
A. Yes. I do.
Q. Do you still deny that that occurred?
A. Yes. I do.
Q. But you agree, don't you, that this whole begging incident occurred for
your own enjoyment or gratification?
Q. Is it the case that you enjoyed the power you were exerting over this
particularly vulnerable patient?
Q. Isn't it the case that in that power trip, if I could use those words,
you wanted to see just precisely how far you could go,
which included asking the
patient to kiss the floor, did it not?
Q. If I can, Mr Davis, take you to your statement of 19 July, your
most recent account of what occurred. I think you've already
agreed, have you
not, that the conduct was engaged in because your intention was to "have a bit
of fun because I got on well with
Patient A and no malice was intended",
and I'm directing your attention there to paragraph 27 of your statement.
So paragraph 27
of your statement, do you see that there?
A. Yes. I do.
Q. You say no malice was intended; is that correct?
A. That's right.
Q. But we've established, haven't we, that earlier when you gave your record
of interview to the police weeks after the incident
you say the act was
committed "out of spite"; correct?
Q. So you would agree with me, wouldn't you, that there is a degree of
similarity between an act out of spite and an act out of malice?
Q. So are you being truthful with the Tribunal when you place in your
statement that there was no malice in your intentions?
A. I disagree.
Q. You disagree that there's any similarity between malice and spite or you
disagree that you've been untruthful with the Tribunal
at paragraph 27 of
your statement?
A. I have misled the Tribunal in regards to the word there was no "malice"
in my attention.
Q. You've misled them in what respect? What do you say is the truth of the
A. That it was more than fun.
Q. What was that something more?
A. It was to the detriment and dignity of the resident.
Q. Why is it that you only have that insight now, or do you have that
insight now?
A. Yes. I do.
Q. Why didn't you after the first or the second or the third or the fourth
occasion when it occurred in 2010 and/or 2011?
A. I don't know.
exchanges are not only examples of why the Tribunal did not accept his denials
of the some of the allegations against him, but
also they demonstrate that Mr
Davis continued to minimise the extent of his humiliation of Patient A and the
number of times that
he did it until it was apparent that there was no other way
to exit from the series of inconsistent and unbelievable statements that
been making about his conduct towards Patient A since it was brought to notice
in January 2011 than to make further admissions.
47. In her written report to the Tribunal, the peer reviewer, Ms Deborah
Armitage, noted that both the Australian Nursing and Midwifery
National Competency Standards for Registered Nurses (ANMC National Competency
Standards (RN)) and its Code of Ethics
for Nurses in Australia (ANMC Code of
Ethics) state clearly that nurses have a responsibility to actively preserve the
Dignity is integral in providing care and involves
not only treating people with courtesy but also not judging, making fun of them
or treating them in a manner that diminishes their self-esteem. Making [Patient
A] beg for cigarettes did not afford him this basic
dignity. For this reason I
find the actions of Mr Davis to be a significant departure from the standard
reasonably expected of a
registered nurse. Given that Mr Davis took this action
on several occasions I am strongly critical of his actions.
after she continued as follows:
Asking [Patient A] to put his
nose to the floor and kiss the floor is an extension of making him beg. Like
the issue discussed above,
this action by Mr Davis is an abuse of power and a
deprivation of dignity. For the reasons stated above I find the actions of Mr
Davis to be a significant departure from the standard reasonably expected of a
registered nurse and I am strongly critical of his
his cross-examination of her, Mr McGee asked Ms Armitage if the evidence was
that Patient A regularly asked for cigarettes
because of his nicotine addiction
and that as part of banter and having fun with him, Mr Davis would ask him to
beg in a friendly
joking manner, would that change her view as to the level of
departure from the standards of Mr Davis' conduct?
reply was; “No it wouldn't”. She continued that she didn’t
think that public humiliation of anybody was appropriate
and that if it was in
friendly banter then that was; “a fairly misguided professional
The Tribunal’s findings in relation to
Particular 1
Tribunal accepts Ms Armitage’s opinion evidence about the seriousness of
Mr Davis’s conduct even if the Tribunal were
to find that the conduct was
done “in friendly banter”, that it would have been a serious breach
of professional judgement.
However the conduct was not done in friendly banter.
The Tribunal is satisfied by the evidence that Mr Davis did make Patient A beg
for cigarettes on his knees on a number of occasions, more than four, and that
he did ask Patient A to sit on the floor and to kiss
the floor on at least one
of these occasions. Furthermore, that Mr Davis did laugh when witnessing
Patient A beg for cigarettes
as he admitted but that, on at least one occasion,
he continued to laugh even when told by at least one other of the nursing staff
told him to stop.
Tribunal is also satisfied by the evidence that Mr Davis sought this conduct
from Patient A for the purpose of “making fun
of him” and further
that the making fun of Patient A was also done out of spite and had an element
of malice in it.
Tribunal accepts Ms Armitage’s opinion evidence quoted above and Ms
Mathur’s submission that this conduct, alleged
in Particular 1, was, of
itself, of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation
of Mr Davis’s registration
as a nurse and consequently professional
misconduct.
conduct proven in relation to this particular demonstrated that the judgment Mr
Davis exercised when requiring Patient A to beg
for cigarettes when responsible
for his nursing care was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of
a nurse of an equivalent
level of training or experience. Similarly that
conduct was significantly below the standard of care reasonably expected of a
of an equivalent level of training or experience.
Furthermore,
the conduct proven against him also demonstrated that he had engaged in improper
and unethical conduct relating to the
practice of
The ANMC Code of Conduct
states in value statement 2.2 the nurses; “actively preserve the dignity
of people through practised
kindness and by recognising the vulnerability and
powerlessness of people in their care”. Mr Davis did the opposite. He
a man with significant cognitive deficits, albeit self-imposed, and
did so for his own amusement and out of spite.
– Particular 2
2 related to Patient B, a 99 year old woman who was in the end stages of
dementia. She was immobile and dependent on staff
for assistance with all
activities of daily living. Particular 2 alleged that between February 2009 and
March 2011 during night shifts
in the Dementia Unit at the Facility, Mr Davis on
several occasions, for a period of between two and five minutes, placed his
inside the mouth of Patient B and would laugh when witnessing Patient B
suck his thumb. He would continue to laugh even when told
by other nursing staff
to stop. The Particular also alleged that that conduct posed a serious
infection risk to Patient B. Mr Davis
denied all these allegations. His evidence
to the Tribunal was that the person who brought these incidents forward, an AIN
very regularly with him on night shifts at the Facility, Ms Garay,
had simply fabricated them – just made them up.
Garay alleged in the statement prepared for her by the HCCC, signed by her on 3
March 2012, that:
On several occasions during night shifts, when
Mr Davis was doing the rounds with me, I would see him put his thumb inside
B]’s mouth and then she would suck his thumb. Maybe [Patient B]
thought that Mr Davis’ thumb was food. Mr Davis would
laugh at [Patient
B] sucking his thumb. When I would say something to Mr Davis like
“Don’t do that”, he would
then laugh at me and carry on
letting [Patient B] suck his thumb. Mr Davis would leave this thumb in her
mouth for between two and
five minutes. This would make me very angry.
I commented to some of the other AINs about Mr Davis doing this to [Patient
B] and I also spoke to Sister Priya. The AINs I spoke
to about this were Helen
Kopitas and Chakresh Khoba, but she (Ms Khoba) has left Bupa Bexley. I also
spoke to Colin, who was also
an AIN. Colin does not work at Bupa Bexley
anymore. I remember that Chakresh was too scared to say anything about Mr
behaviour, even though she had also seen it, because she was new
to working at Bupa Bexley. When I told Sister Priya, she told me
Once I made a written report about Mr Davis doing this to [Patient B], but I
made the mistake of not keeping a copy.
Garay gave oral evidence to the Tribunal about this matter and pointed out that
she did most of her shifts with Mr Davis. She worked
night shifts and would do
rounds with Mr Davis. These included attending to Patient B. When it was put to
her that Mr Davis denied
putting his thumb into Patient B’s mouth, Ms
Garay said that she saw it happen and that she commented about it. She denied
inventing this matter. She was pressed on this issue during her oral evidence to
the Tribunal, but her evidence was to the same effect
as the statement she
signed on 3 March 2012.
Garay told the Tribunal in her evidence before it that she sent the letter to
the General Manager of the Facility, but did not
receive a reply. She also said
that she tried to raise the matter with the General Manager at a staff meeting.
She placed the time
of this meeting at just before Christmas 2010. She told the
Tribunal that she did not write a confidential log because they were
not to do that but rather to go and speak to the manager. They were welcome to
write about compliments but not to write
In her oral evidence to the Tribunal, Ms Kopitas stated that Ms Garay told her
the complaint about begging
for cigarettes came about. It was not a matter that Ms Garay raised with Ms
Kopitas at the time the alleged
conduct would have been occurring. Similarly in
her oral evidence, Ms Pokharel told the Tribunal that Ms Garay had told her that
Mr Davis used to put his thumb or finger in Patient B’s mouth and that
Patient B used to suck it. While Ms Pokharel did not
remember the time or date
that Ms Garay told her this, she said that it was after Mr Davis left the
Facility. He was not there after
he was suspended on 24 January 2011.
The evidence of Ms Khoba is in the form of a few questions and answers,
apparently verbatim, in an interview conducted on 14 March
2011 as part of the
Bupa inquiry. She is not asked a question about this matter.
McGee submitted that Mr Davis had denied this allegation from the time he first
became aware of it and had continued to do so at
the hearing. He submitted that,
because he had made other concessions against his own interests, including
conceding that some of
his evidence was either mistaken or not truthful, but had
maintained his denial about these matters occurring, that should be taken
account and the Tribunal should accept that his evidence relating to Particular
2 was truthful.
McGee continued that where issues or inconsistencies in his evidence have been
pointed out in relation to other particulars, Mr
Davis conceded those matters
when pressed in crossexamination. Mr McGee submitted that this was a matter
which should be looked at
in a positive light in that where appropriate Mr Davis
made concessions that comments made in his statements were not correct or
not fully correct but still he maintained his denial in relation to the conduct
in relation to Patient B. The Tribunal could
not accept this submission
because, as already noted, it had formed the view that Mr Davis had conceded the
truth , rather than making
‘concessions’ only when no other
sustainable alternative was apparent to him.
Tribunal did not consider that his evidence could be relied upon when
contradicted by evidence from others that was put to the
test. Ms Garay’s
evidence was put to the test in cross-examination by Mr McGee and she was not
shaken. Also as Ms Mathur submitted,
and it will be seen later in these reasons
for decision, Mr Davis changed his evidence during cross-examination in relation
to Particular
4 and Patient D. The result was that his evidence now corroborated
and confirmed what Ms Garay had always alleged in relation to
Davis’s conduct towards Patient D.
Tribunal accepts Ms Mathur’s submission that, as Ms Garay's
credibility has been upheld by virtue of the fact that the evidence
she gave in
relation to Patient D has been admitted in its entirety by Mr Davis, that
assists the Tribunal in deciding whether it
can accept her evidence in relation
to Patient B. The Tribunal also notes that MS Garay told both Ms Kopitas
and Ms Pokharel about
this matter probably after 24 January 2011. Given
these considerations, the Tribunal was satisfied that it could rely on Ms
evidence in order to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that the matters alleged in Particular 2(a) and (b) in this matter
were proved.
to Particular 2(c), during Ms Armitage’s oral evidence to the Tribunal she
was asked a question during examination in chief
and answered it as
Q. In relation to [Patient B], Mr Davis denies that he ever placed his
thumb in the patient's mouth. If he had placed his thumb
in the patient's mouth
and that was proven, can you see any clinical basis for a nurse placing their
thumb in a patient's mouth?
A. No. I think if this was a patient who was distressed in any way, then
that would not you know, that would not be acceptable
practice as a
means of relieving the distress of a patient and I couldn't see any clinical
reason why it would be an appropriate
her oral evidence to the Tribunal, Ms Garay was asked whether, when he placed
his thumb in Patient B’s mouth, did Mr
Davis have gloves on? Ms Garay
didn’t recall whether he had gloves on; but she did recall that he washed
his hands with liquid
sanitiser after each patient.
cross-examination Ms Armitage was asked to take this conduct in isolation from
other allegations and was then asked whether she
would agree that there was no
basis to see it as having some sexual innuendo. Her response
I don't I guess in isolation my question was
very much why on earth would you do this, so yes in the in light of
some of the other
allegations that was the only reason I could see for this
Armitage was then asked to take away the consideration it had some sexual
innuendo, and whether that would that change her view
as to the level of
departure from the expected standard in relation to the conduct. Her answer
I would see it as still significantly below standard
because of the potential risk of infection to a patient, particularly given that
these incidences are alleged to have occurred during care rounds which involved
personal care, changing of continence products, things
like that, so
you're you're putting a patient at significant risk.
it was put to her that Mr Davis used hand sanitiser, she said that that action
would reduce but not eliminate the infection risk.
She went on to say that the
level of departure from the expected standard would be below standard but not
“significantly”
Tribunal accepts Ms Armitage’s evidence that there was no clinical reason
why placing a thumb in a patient’s mouth
would be an appropriate practice.
It agrees that Mr Davis’s use of liquid hand sanitiser would not eliminate
the risk of infection
to Patient B, but it notes the risk of cross-infection
between Patient B and Mr Davis and the possibility that the risk of infection
could still be high in the context of attending to elderly patients in a
dementia ward. However, the Tribunal accepts Ms Armitage’s
evidence that
Mr Davis’s departure from the expected standard was below standard but not
“significantly” below.
Consequently in the light of this evidence,
the Tribunal could not be satisfied that Particular 2(c) was proved.
The Tribunal’s findings in relation to Particular
already noted, the Tribunal found the subject-matter of Particular 2(a) and (b)
in this matter proved; but not that of Particular
2(c). The Tribunal notes that
some of Ms Armitage’s comments on the allegations relating to Patient B
were affected by the
sexual innuendo issue raised in Particulars yet to be
considered in these reasons for decision. Her view about the seriousness of
conduct, expressed during her evidence to the Tribunal, was made in the context
of the impact of the infection control undertaken
by Mr Davis. However, the
Tribunal notes Ms Armitage’s comment in her report that the ANMC National
Competency Standards (RN)
require a registered nurse to act as a role model to
other members of the health care team and that he did not model good practice
dignified care.
Tribunal also notes Ms Mathur’s submission that takes up the issue of the
lack of dignified care in relation to patients.
She submitted that there was a
striking similarity between the conduct as alleged against Mr Davis in relation
to Patient B, namely
placing his thumb in the mouth of an elderly patient
and laughing when she sucked it, and his admitted conduct in relation to
A and D. As already noted, he admitted that he conducted himself
towards Patient A for fun. As will be seen, he conducted himself
Patient D because he was being playful, but said more when
Tribunal considered the conduct displayed by Mr Davis towards Patient B
demonstrated that both the judgment and the care that
he exercised in relation
to Patient B were significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
nurse of an equivalent level
of training or experience. Putting his thumb in
the mouth of a very old woman seriously affected by dementia and then laughing
she sucked it, showed that he considered her a figure of fun to be played
with for his amusement, rather than a person entitled to
respect even when her
capacities as a human being had largely been stripped away by the course of her
dementia – a terminal
Tribunal considered that this conduct of itself or occurring during the same
general time period as the other conduct alleged
against him was of such a
serious nature as to amount to professional misconduct.
Patient C - Particular 3
C was an 82 year old man who suffered from dementia and non-insulin dependent
diabetes who lived in the Dementia Unit at the
Facility. Particular 3 alleged
that between December 2010 and January 2011 during a night shift, Mr Davis on
two separate occasions
while Patient C was watching television in the lunch
room, put his hand down Patient C’s pants in the area of his genitals
also, during this time, rubbed Patient C’s belly. Mr Davis denied these
allegations.
the statement prepared for her by the HCCC and signed by her on 27 November
2012, Ms Pokharel stated that one night shift between
December 2010 and January
2011she filled in for Ms Garay. During that shift she came up to the lunch room
on the first floor of the
Dementia Ward of the Facility in order to tell Mr
Davis that she was going on her break. As she stepped into the room to do this,
she saw Mr Davis sitting next to Patient C. They were sitting side by side with
Patient C to the left of Mr Davis. Ms Pokharel said
she saw Mr Davis’s
left hand down Patient C’s pant in the area of his genitals. She could not
see Mr Davis’s hand
moving, but she could where it was placed down Patient
C’s pants. The television was on, so was the exit light, but the main
lights in the room were off. The hallway outside the room had night lighting
on. Ms Pokharel said that she could see, “fairly
clearly with the light
from the television”. She stated that Mr Davis did not see her at first,
and when she said, “Andrew”,
he replied, “What” and Ms
Pokharel saw him remove his hand from Patient A’s trousers. She then told
him that she
was going down to make her tea.
evidence to the Tribunal was that the second time that she saw Mr Davis with his
hands down Patient C’s pants was on the
same shift when she came to tell
Mr Davis that she had returned from her break, 15 to 20 minutes later. On this
occasion Mr Davis
and Patient A had moved to different chairs in a different
part of the room. This time Mr Davis saw her come in and removed his hand
Patient C’s pants. Ms Pokharel told the Tribunal in her oral evidence to
it that she and Mr Davis did not speak this time
but she could see the elastic
in Patient C’s pants as Mr Davis removed his hand.
Pokharel was certain about what she saw on both occasions that night. Her
evidence was tested in relation to the light quality,
her ability to see what
she alleged from where she entered the room and where Mr Davis was positioned,
the possibility that she saw
Patient C’s hands not Mr Davis’s and
other matters. Consistent with Ms Mathur’s submission on this issue,
seen and heard Ms Pokharel give evidence, the Tribunal considered her a
credible and reliable witness. She was not prone to exaggeration
of what she
saw. The Tribunal accepted that she could see where Mr Davis’s hand was on
both occasions she said she saw it down
Patient C’s pants. Mr Davis and
Patient D were sitting down on both occasions that she walked into the room.
There was sufficient
light for her to see what she said she saw.
Pokharel had an explanation for why she did not report these incidents to
management when they occurred. She told the Tribunal
that she did tell Ms Khoba
evidence. She said that Ms
Khoba had told her that she had seen this many times
but that she couldn’t do anything. Ms Pokharel said that Ms Khoba advised
that: “if you love your job you just keep quiet and do your work and go
Tribunal accepts this explanation and considers that the lack of contemporaneous
reporting does not affect the credibility of
Ms Pokharel’s
Tribunal also notes that Ms Khoba reported in her interview during the Bupa
inquiry that she saw “discreetly” Mr Davis
touch Patient C and
Patient C scream and hit Mr Davis who just laughed. However, the Tribunal based
its findings as to Particular
3(a) on the evidence of Ms
Davis’s position was that what was alleged by Ms Pokharel did not happen
and further that he would have been foolish to be
doing the same thing 15
minutes later if he had been seen doing it the first time. However, he did
acknowledge in cross-examination
that he sometimes sat in the room where the
television was with Patient C during night shift.
already noted, in relation to Patient A, the Tribunal found Mr Poharel’s
evidence to be also clear and convincing and that
she was not shaken in
cross-examination. The same could not be said of Mr Davis. He changed his
evidence about a number of things
during the hearing and the Tribunal did not
find his denials believable in relation to Patient B and did not find them
reliable in
relation to Patient C either.
Tribunal was satisfied that Particular 3(a) was proved.
to Particular 3(b), there was little difference between the oral evidence given
to the Tribunal by Ms Kopitas and Mr Davis on
the matter. Ms Kopitas’s
evidence came down to that she once saw Mr Davis touch Patient C’s belly
and say “big
belly, big belly” and Patient C laughed. She told the
Tribunal that she didn’t say that Mr Davis was playing around with
C’s belly. Mr Davis’s evidence was that he said “big belly,
big belly” to Patient C and he laughed.
In her answers to questions during
an interview on 14 March 201, which was part of the Bupa inquiry, Ms Kopitas
stated that Mr Davis
would touch residents bellies in the Dementia Unit of the
Facility and that he would rub Patient C’s belly.
Tribunal notes that the evidence shows that Patient C did have a big belly.
However, it also shows that this matter was not pursued
by the HCCC in the sense
that Ms Kopitas was not pressed as to her original statement. The Tribunal was
not satisfied by the evidence
before it that Particular 3(b) was
Nevertheless,
it was of the opinion that what was proved in relation to Particular 3(a) was
serious. Ms Armitage noted that Ms Pokharel’s
statement does not indicate
that Patient C was distressed by what was occurring. However she pointed out
that it was the responsibility
of the nurse to maintain a professional boundary,
even if the person in their care consents or initiates the sexual conduct. This
is articulated in the ANMC’s “A nurse’s guide to professional
boundaries”. Ms Armitage stated that; “Mr
Davis’s actions
clearly overstep those boundaries” and continued:
I find Mr Davis’s actions in this issue to be a significant departure
from reasonably expected standards and am strongly critical
The Tribunal’s findings in relation to Particular
already noted, the Tribunal found the subject-matter of Particular 3(a) proved,
but not that of Particular 3(b). Because Mr Davis’s
actions involved an
invasion of the physical privacy of an elderly man whose capacity to understand
what was happening to him must
have been in doubt because of his advanced
dementia that required him to be in the dementia ward of an aged care facility,
the Tribunal
considered that that conduct, of itself, was of a sufficiently
serious nature as to justify suspension or cancellation of his registration
nurse and thus professional misconduct.
Patient D -
Particular 4
2010 and March 2011, when Patient D an 84 year old man who had dementia and
behavioural problems, including outbursts of aggressive
behaviour, arising from
his dementia, but was immobile, was a resident of the Dementia Unit at the
Facility and during a nursing
shift, Mr Davis put his face near Patient D,
called him “Daddy”, tried to kiss him on the forehead. Mr Davis
this in his statement dated 19 July 2013. In his statement Mr Davis
denied that he actually kissed Patient D and that he was physically
pushed away
by Patient D. He admitted that Patient D told him; “I’m not your
Daddy” but denied that Patient D said
to him; “I don’t like
you” and that he continued this behaviour. These admissions and denials
relate to Particular
to Particular 4(b), Mr Davis denied that he caused distress to Patient D by
unnecessarily involving himself in Patient D’s
care when not required
contrary to the ANMC’s “A nurse’s guide to professional
boundaries”.
McGee confirmed all these admissions and denials at the commencement of the
hearing. However, during the course of being cross-examined
by Ms Mathur, Mr
Davis made admissions to all the elements of Particular 4(a) that he had
previously denied. A relevant part of the
cross-examination is as
Q. Mr Davis, when [Patient D] said to you, "I'm
not your daddy", his tone wasn't jovial, was it, it was aggressive, do you agree
A. Sometimes it was, sometimes it wasn't.
Q. But after the occasions when it was aggressive, you would continue to
call him "Daddy"?
A. On the same occasion and separately?
Q. On a subsequent? On the same or subsequent knowing that he had said to
you in an aggressive tone, "I'm not your daddy"?
Q. When you say in your statement at paragraph 43 that you called him
"Daddy" in a playful manner, his aggression or the aggressive
tone of his voice
when he indicated to you that, "I am not your daddy", made clearly to you did it
not that there was nothing playful
in your actions in calling him "Daddy" or
attempting to kiss him, do you agree with that?
A. On the occasions that he'd become upset and aggressive, but other times
it didn't worry him.
Q. Yes, but on the occasions when he became upset and aggressive, you
continued, didn't you, with calling him "Daddy" and attempting
to kiss him on
the forehead?
A. On the same occurrence?
Q. On the same occasion?
Q. On a subsequent occasion?
Q. Knowing it had upset him on a previous occasion, correct?
Q. Why? Why, knowing full well it had upset him last
A. Because at the time I lacked insight into my behaviour.
Q. Why? You'd been a nurse for over ten years, you are dealing with
the sick and the elderly, [Patient D] was 84 years of age.
How? Why did
you lack insight? Ana Garay said she told you to stop. Did that not give you a
wakeup call into did that not give
you some insight that your conduct
then and there was inappropriate?
Q. Right, well why didn't you stop? She told you to stop, why not stop? I
want to suggest to you, Mr Davis, that you didn't stop
because you had
insight but complete disregard to the inappropriateness of your actions and you
enjoyed it? You got enjoyment out
of making fun of vulnerable patients, did you
Q. You have made admissions in your statement that you now accept that
your conduct in relation to [Patient A and Patient D] showed
a lack of regard
and dignity, that's correct?
Q. But do you say that you didn't recognise that disregard for dignity at
the time, is that your evidence?
Q. In your evidence you could see it was undignified for the patient but you
chose to ignore it?
A. At the time, yes.
Q. Which one?
A. The second statement she made.
Q. You could see it was undignified but you chose to ignore that fact, is
that your evidence?
Q. Because you were enjoying the power imbalance in effect between you and
the patient?
A. At the time, yes.
Q. This behaviour continued over months, didn't
it? It wasn't isolated to a single occasion, was it?
Q. The behaviour in relation to both [Patient A] and the behaviour in
relation to [Patient D] extended over months?
Q. Do you agree?
Q. And extended over months in circumstances where other nurses had
indicated to you to stop that behaviour, correct?
her statement signed on 2 March 2011, Ms Garay stated that Patient D did not
like Mr Davis coming anywhere near him because Mr
Davis would call him
“Daddy”, put his face close to Patient D’s face and try to
kiss him. Patient D would say to
Mr Davis something like; “I’m not
your Daddy” and push Mr Davis away. She also stated that Patient D would
be fighting
Mr Davis to keep him away. Nevertheless, Mr Davis would carry on
touching Patient D by pulling his arm while she was trying to change
D’s clothes. Ms Garay stated that she would try to change Patient D by
herself, but would often find that Mr Davis
had followed her into Patient
D’s room and would try to help her change Patient D even though Patient D
did not like Mr Davis
Garay also stated that she would comment to other AINs and registered nurses
oral evidence to the
Tribunal confirmed what she said in her statement. During it she gave a sense of
Patient D’s aggressive
behaviour. She said that the immobile Patient D
pushed Mr Davis away and hit out at him most of the times Mr Davis came in
with him. She also said that Mr Davis’s response to Patient
D’s pushing him away and hitting and punching was to laugh.
Davis’s tone when he called Patient D “Daddy”, Ms Garay
rejected the suggestions that it was “playful”
“friendly” and described it as “teasing and
provocative”.
what also became clear during Ms Garay’s oral evidence to the Tribunal was
that Mr Davis would call Patient D “Daddy”
every time she would go
with Mr Davies to change him and that Patient D’s pushing of Mr Davis was
in reaction to what Mr Davis
Tribunal accepted the evidence of Ms Garay into Mr Davis’s interactions
with Patient D. It also noted that Mr Davis admitted
that his conduct towards
Patient D showed that he enjoyed making fun out of vulnerable patients and that
he had disregard for their
dignity. He also admitted that he enjoyed the power
imbalance between himself and the patients and that his conduct in relation to
both Patient A and Patient D extended over months and in circumstances where
others had indicated to him to stop that conduct.
Ms Mathur submitted that Ms Garay’s evidence was that Mr Davis involved
himself unnecessarily in Patient D’s care. However,
Mr McGee submitted
that in the circumstances of the case the Tribunal could not be satisfied that
Mr Davis had unnecessarily involved
himself in Patient D's care. This was
because there was evidence that it was part of the responsibilities of
registered nurses,
and part of their practice, to assist AINs in attending to
tasks such as turning patients and checking residents for continence.
submitted that the evidence showed that it was Mr Davis's usual practice to
assist in nursing during routine care rounds during
the night shift. Further
that the nursing notes showed that Patient D required two staff on most
occasions when attending to his
personal hygiene due to his physical
restiveness. Mr McGee noted also that Mr Davis stated that his conduct in
assisting the AIN
was not conduct that was done for the purpose of causing
distress or for the purpose of unnecessarily involving himself in Patient
care, but that he did accept that his conduct then, while assisting in that
caring, of saying the word "Daddy" and air kissing
around Patient D’s head
and the other conduct that he admitted was, of itself, inappropriate.
Mathur went on to submit that whether or not Particular 4(b) was made out
Particular 4(a), if made out, demonstrated conduct that
fell significantly below
the standard and was of a very serious nature.
Tribunal did not accept Mr McGee’s submission that the Tribunal cannot be
satisfied that Particular 4(b) is proved by the
evidence. The evidence before
the Tribunal is that the conduct alleged in Particular 4(a) occurred when Mr
Davis involved himself
in Patient D’s care on a very regular basis. As Ms
Armitage pointed out in her report, Patient D’s pushing away of Mr
when he attempted to kiss or even come near him and the fact that Mr Davis
ignored these protests demonstrates Mr Davis’s
disregard for Patient D. It
is also contrary to the advice offered in the ANMC’s
Guide to Professional Boundaries
, which states that nurses should be aware
of the discomfort for the person receiving care when the care involves personal
or invasion of personal space and that they should respond appropriately
to the person’s
discomfort.
views led Ms Armitage to go on to say:
By continuing to touch
and kiss [Patient D] and call him “daddy”, Mr Davis
knowingly and
deliberately
caused distress to this resident and it is for this reason that
I believe his actions are significantly below expected standard and
strongly critical of those actions.
is the view of the Tribunal that Particular 4 with its paragraphs (a) and (b)
should be read as covering interrelated events. As
a consequence, all of what is
set out in the Particular is not only proved by the evidence but also shown by
the evidence to be of
a very serious nature.
Tribunal’s findings in relation to Particular 4
Tribunal considered that the subject –matter of Particular 4(a) and (b)
was proved by the evidence. Furthermore, it found
that the conduct proved was of
a sufficiently serious nature as to justify suspension or cancellation of his
registration as a nurse
and thus professional
misconduct.
Particulars 5, 6 and 7
Particulars
5, 6 and 7 respectively were as follows:
In failing to have regard to the dignity and respect of Patients A, B, C and
D, breached the
ANMC National Competency Standards for the Registered Nurse
Code of Ethics for Nurses in Australia
In failing to recognise the responsibility to prevent harm to Patients A, B,
C and D, breached the
National Competency Standards for the Registered
By reason of the matters referred to in the particulars above (1) to (4) ,
individually or cumulatively, the practitioner engaged
in inappropriate and/or
unwelcome conduct of a sexual or harassing nature towards Patients A, B, C and
his submissions to the Tribunal Mr McGee conceded that if the Tribunal found
that Particulars 2 and 3 were made out then that would
be a matter that the
Tribunal could have regard to in terms of making out all of the Particulars of
5, 6 and 7. While he maintained
his client’s denial as to conduct of a
sexual nature, he conceded that conduct of a harassing nature could be made out
in relation
to Patients A, B, C and D if Particulars 2 and 3 were proved. Ms
Mathur submitted that if Particulars 2 and 3 in relation to Patients
B and C are
proved then they would also amount to conduct that was harassing and, in
relation, to Patient C would amount to conduct
of a sexual nature also.
the admissions made, the findings of the Tribunal set out above, the amplitude
of the evidence and the lack of any contest between
the parties, other than the
denial about conduct of a sexual nature, the Tribunal did not consider that it
was required, in the circumstances
of this case, to set out an analysis of the
evidence before finding that the subject-matter of the three Particulars was
but with one exception. The Tribunal did not make any finding that Mr
Davis’s intrusion into Patient C’s physical privacy
was of a sexual
nature or make any inference to that effect. Consequently, it did not make any
finding of conduct of a sexual nature
in relation to Particular 7.
the Tribunal also notes, and adopts, the following comment made by Ms Armitage
in her report to the Tribunal:
The World Health Organisation defines elder abuse as a single or repeated
act, or lack of appropriate action, occurring within any
relationship where
there is an expectation of trust and which causes harm or distress to an older
person. Mr Davis’ treatment
of Patients A, B, C and D clearly falls
within this definition. The number of residents involved in these issues and
the repetitive
nature of his actions towards each of these residents cannot be
attributed to a lack of clinical knowledge as even the most inexperienced
would understand that these actions were, at best, inappropriate. Rather than a
knowledge deficit, Mr Davis’ actions
demonstrate an attitude of disrespect
and disregard for older people, their welfare and the duty of care he had to
The Tribunal’s formal findings
Tribunal found that all the allegations in Particular 1 relating to Patient A
proved. It also found that the conduct so proved
against Mr Davis was
unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature as to
justify the suspension or cancellation
of Mr Davis’s registration as a
Registered Nurse and so professional misconduct.
Tribunal found that all the allegations in Particular 2(a) and (b) relating to
Patient B proved, but not Particular 2(c). It also
found that the conduct so
proved against Mr Davis was unsatisfactory professional conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature as to
justify the suspension or cancellation of Mr
Davis’s registration as a Registered Nurse and so professional misconduct.
Tribunal found that all the allegations in Particular 3(a), but not 3(b)
relating to Patient C proved. Nevertheless, it also found
that the conduct so
proved against Mr Davis was unsatisfactory professional conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature as to justify
the suspension or cancellation of Mr
Davis’s registration as a Registered Nurse and so professional misconduct.
Tribunal found that all the allegations in Particular 4 relating to Patient
D proved. It also found that the conduct so proved against Mr Davis
was unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature as to
justify the suspension or cancellation of Mr Davis’s registration as a
Registered Nurse and so professional misconduct.
Tribunal found that all the allegations in Particulars 5 and 6 relating to
Patients A, B, C and D proved. It also found that the
conduct so proved against
Mr Davis was, when linked with the conduct in relation to the other Particulars
set out in this Complaint,
unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently
serious nature as to justify the suspension or cancellation of Mr Davis’s
registration as a Registered Nurse and so professional misconduct.
Tribunal found that the allegations in Particular 7 relating to conduct of a
harassing, but not a sexual, nature in relation to
Patients A, B, C and D
proved. It also found that the conduct so proved against Mr Davis, under this
Particular was unsatisfactory
professional conduct, which when linked with the
conduct in relation to the other Particulars set out in this Complaint is of a
sufficiently
serious nature as to justify the suspension or cancellation of Mr
Davis’s registration as a Registered Nurse and so professional
misconduct.
Consequently,
the Tribunal found that both complaint one, unsatisfactory professional conduct
and complaint two, professional misconduct
were proved.
Arrangements for stage 2 of the hearing
a consequence of these findings, the hearing will have to proceed to second
stage to deal with the questions of protective orders,
if any, costs, and any
other matter. In anticipation of this being the case, the Tribunal and the
lawyers for the parties have agreed
- A Directions Hearing to sort out any questions relating to the admissibility
of documentary material and any other necessary matters
will be held at
- HPCA offices, Level 6, 477 Pitt St, Sydney,
Monday, 11 November
2013, at 10am to 12 noon.
hearing of the second stage will commence at 1pm on Monday, 2 December 2013, at
a tribunal hearing room at Level 6, 477 Pitt St,
Sydney. The hearing is also set
down for Tuesday, 3 December 2013.
Order under s. 167E(2) of
hearing of the first stage of this matter was completed on 5 September 2013, but
because of issues of availability of counsel
and Tribunal members, it was
neither procedurally fair nor possible to have the second stage of the hearing
of this matter to commence
until 2 December 2013.
of issues raised by the evidence in this matter, after discussion with the
parties, and taking evidence from a senior representative
of Mr Davis’s
current employer, in the exercise if it powers under s. 167E(2) of the
and taking into account its obligation under s. 3A of the
that, in the exercise of its functions, it is to give paramount consideration to
the safety of the public, the Tribunal varied the
conditions already imposed on
Mr Davis’s registration as a nurse, to provide that he not work in a
residential aged care facility,
a geriatric ward in a hospital, a mental health
facility, or with children. Some other procedural conditions were also added.
relevant order is attached to these reasons for decision.
Tribunal made its orders accordingly.
September 2013
_____________________
Nick O’Neill
Chairperson
_____________________
Kathleen Dixon - Nurse Member
_____________________
Mark Constable - Nurse Member
_____________________
Sandra Everett - Lay Member
For complaint one this conduct
was alleged to be contrary to s.139B of the
and for complaint two
contrary to s. 139E of the
ANMC National Competency
Standards (RN), Standard 2.3 and ANMC Code of Ethics, Value Statement 2.2.
Section 139E of the
Section 139B(1)(a)
and (l) of the
Standard 4.3.
“Therapeutic & Care Relationships”, paragraph 15.
Matter No: 028/2013
INQUIRY INTO A COMPLAINT AGAINST A
Complainant:
Health Care Complaints Commission
Respondent:
Andrew James DAVIS
Nick O’Neill (Deputy Chairperson)
Kathleen Dixon (Nurse
Mark Constable (Nurse Member)
Sandra Everett (Lay
Date of Order:
5 September 2013
ORDER VARYING CONDITIONS ON REGISTRATION
In the exercise of its powers under s.167E (2) of the
Practitioner
Regulation National Law (NSW
Tribunal orders that the conditions imposed on the registration of Andrew James
Davis on the national register for nurses and
midwives be varied to read as
registrant may only practise as a registered nurse under the supervision (either
indirect or direct) of another registered nurse
(Division 1) who does not have
conditions on his/her practice. The supervisor must be (a) On site and working
in close proximity
within a ward or unit with the registrant; and (b) Able to
oversee the registrant’s practice.
registrant must provide a report from a nurse manager responsible for
supervising practice every three (3) months.
registrant must not work in the following places:
a residential
aged care facility
a geriatric ward
in a hospital
a mental health
facility, or
registrant must not engage with an agency for the purpose of
registrant must not work on night duty.
registrant must not be in charge, have supervisory or delegation
responsibilities, or work as sole practitioner on any shift,
registrant must nominate a nurse manager (or equivalent) who has agreed to
provide a report for approval by the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW. The
registrant must: (a) Provide the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW with the
name, contact details and resume
of the nominated nurse manager; (b) Authorise
the nurse manager to (i) Notify the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW of any
of the conditions or unsafe practice; and (ii) Exchange information with
the Council related to compliance with the conditions; (c)
Authorise the nurse
manager to provide a written report regarding compliance with
conditions.
registrant must advise the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW, in writing, of
all employment as a nurse, providing contact details
registrant must advise the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW, in writing, of
any change in employment as a nurse, providing
registrant must advise all current nursing employers and future employers of the
conditions of registration and, within 1 week,
provide the Nursing and Midwifery
Council of NSW with a copy of the conditions signed by the employer as
acknowledgment of this notification.
registrant must authorise each nursing employer to notify the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of NSW of any breach of these conditions
and, within 1 week,
provide written acknowledgement of this signed by the
registrant must provide all current nursing employers and future employers with
a copy of the Tribunal’s written Reasons
for Decision setting out the
Tribunal’s findings with respect to the Complaint and, within 1 week,
provide the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of NSW with a copy of the conditions
signed by the employer as acknowledgment of this
notification.
registrant must authorise each nursing employer to provide the nominated nursing
manager and all supervisors with a copy of the
Tribunal’s written Reasons
for Decision setting out the Tribunal’s findings with respect to the
7 Division 11 Subdivision 2 of the
is to apply, if the registrant
changes his or her principal place of residence or predominant place of practice
from NSW to another
State or Territory the Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Australia may review the conditions.
These amended conditions are to take effect on and from 5 September
Dated 5 September 2013
Nick O’Neill
Deputy Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (417 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter