URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDDT/2024/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:55:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Black v Luke and Singer Pty Ltd [2024] NSWDDT 16 (29 November 2024)
Dust Diseases Tribunal
New South Wales
Black v Luke and Singer Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2024] NSWDDT 16
Hearing Date(s):
25 November 2024
Date of Orders:
29 November 2024
Decision Date:
29 November 2024
Russell SC DCJ
(1) Grant leave to the plaintiff pursuant to
Liability (Third Party Claims Against Insurers) Act 2017
(NSW) to bring
proceedings against QBE Insurance (Australia) Ltd.
(2) Order that QBE
Insurance (Australia) Ltd be substituted for the first defendant in these
proceedings.
(3) Grant leave to the plaintiff to file a Further Amended
Statement of Claim in the form of Exhibit PX 4.
(4) Order that the plaintiff
pay the costs of QBE Insurance (Australia) Ltd of and incidental to the Notice
of Motion filed on 19
September 2024.
Catchwords:
DUST DISEASES – insurance – application for leave to proceed
against an insurer – whether insurance policy covered
the last date of
employment – different last employment date and last exposure date –
insurer on risk on date of last
exposure – leave granted
DUST DISEASES – costs – plaintiff to pay
insurer’s costs despite succeeding on the Motion – plaintiff sought
leave to amend Statement of Claim by oral application at the hearing of the
Motion – three forms of the plaintiff’s pleading
implied a last date
of exposure after QBE was no longer on risk – pleading handed up in court
finally accorded with plaintiff’s
instructions and his Statement of
Particulars
Legislation Cited:
Civil Liability (Third Party Claims Against Insurers) Act 2017
(NSW) ss, 4,
Workers Compensation Act 1987
Cases Cited:
Avant Insurance Ltd v Burnie
[2021] NSWCA 272
CGU Insurance Limited v
AAI Insurance Limited
[2016] NSWCA 335
Mrdajl v Southern Cross Constructions
(NSW) Pty Ltd (In Liq)
[2018] NSWSC 161
Procedural rulings
David Brian Black (Plaintiff)
Luke and Singer Pty Ltd (First
Amaca Pty Ltd (Second Defendant)
QBE Insurance (Australia) Ltd
(Respondent)
Representation:
S Tzouganatos (Plaintiff)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Slater & Gordon (Plaintiff)
Oakley Lawyers (Second Defendant)
Moray & Agnew Lawyers
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
DDT 2024/272317
Publication Restriction:
Introduction
plaintiff Mr David Black suffers from mesothelioma. By a Statement of Claim
filed on 24 July 2024 Mr Black sued a former employer
Luke and Singer Pty Ltd
(Luke and Singer) as first defendant and Amaca Pty Ltd as second defendant. Luke
and Singer is a deregistered
a Notice of Motion filed on 19 September 2024 Mr Black seeks leave to sue QBE
Insurance (Australia) Ltd (QBE) as the insurer of
the liabilities of Luke and
Singer. That claim is brought pursuant to
Civil Liability
(Third Party Claims Against Insurers) Act 2017
(NSW) (the Third Party Claims
The Third Party Claims Act
4 of the Third Party Claims Act provides as
Claimant may recover
from insurer in certain circumstances
(1) If an insured person has an insured liability to a person
), the claimant may, subject to this Act,
recover the amount of the insured liability from the insurer in proceedings
before a court.
(2) The amount of the insured liability is the amount of indemnity (if
any) payable pursuant to the terms of the contract of insurance
in respect of
the insured person’s liability to the claimant.
(3) In proceedings brought by a claimant against an insurer under this
section, the insurer stands in the place of the insured person
proceedings were proceedings to recover damages, compensation or costs from the
insured person. Accordingly (but subject
to this Act), the parties have the same
rights and liabilities, and the court has the same powers, as if the proceedings
were proceedings
brought against the insured person.
(4) This section does not entitle a claimant to recover any amount from
a re-insurer under a contract or arrangement for re-insurance.”
Mrdajl v Southern Cross Constructions (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWSC 161
, Walton J identified four elements in s 4 as
(1) There is an insurer in existence.
(2) The insurer has issued a policy to the relevant defendant.
(3) The policy covers the risk.
(4) The policy was in place at the time of the risk.
1 and 2 are not presently in dispute. Elements 3 and 4 are in dispute.
5 of the Third Party Claims Act provides as
5 Leave to proceed
(1) Proceedings may not be brought, or continued, against an insurer
under section 4 except by leave of the court in which the proceedings
or have been, commenced.
(2) An application for leave may be made before or after proceedings
under section 4 have been commenced.
(3) Subject to subsection (4), the court may grant or refuse the
claimant’s application for leave.
(4) Leave must be refused if the insurer can establish that it is
entitled to disclaim liability under the contract of insurance
or under any Act
Avant Insurance Ltd v Burnie
[2021] NSWCA 272
the Court of Appeal
held that an applicant for leave under s 5 of the Third Party Claims Act is
required to establish the following
three elements:
(1) That there is an arguable case against the holder of the insurance
(2) That there is a reasonable possibility that the holder of the insurance
policy will be unable to satisfy any judgment.
(3) That there is an arguable case that the holder of the insurance policy
would, if found liable to the plaintiff, be entitled to
indemnity under the
policy - to put it another way, that any liability of the holder of the
insurance policy to the plaintiff is,
in the language of s 4 of the Third Party
Claims Act, an “insured liability”.
1 and 2 are not in dispute. Element 3 is in dispute.
Pleadings and the Particulars
original Statement of Claim was filed on 24 July 2024. In relation to the claim
against Luke and Singer, the allegation was that
Mr Black had been employed by
Luke and Singer from 1962 to 1980. The pleading alleged that Mr Black wore
asbestos gloves and mitts
on a daily basis and was required to handle,
manipulate, cut, install and remove asbestos containing insulation. It also
that Mr Black was exposed by being in areas where other workers were
working with asbestos. The impression gained from the original
Statement of
Claim is that the exposure to asbestos covered the entire period of employment
from 1962 to 1980.
Amended Statement of Claim was filed on 5 September 2024. The allegations
against Luke and Singer remained the same, including
an implication that the
exposure to asbestos occurred between 1962 and 1980.
plaintiff’s Statement of Particulars was filed on 17 September 2024. It
stated that the only employer who exposed Mr Black
to asbestos was Luke and
par 4.1 of the Statement of Particulars Mr Black set out the facts regarding his
exposure to asbestos during employment by Luke
and Singer. He gave details about
the asbestos gloves which he used during hot metal processes involved in his
work. As part of this
material, Mr Black said the
“k. Myself and the other die setters used the
asbestos gloves until about 1969. At that time we then switched to using leather
gloves that had a backing on them.
l. In the last ten years of my employment with Luke and Singer I was employed
as a foreman and I was no longer required to work on
the hot processes, however,
I worked in the factory supervising other workers.
m. I do not recall any exposure to asbestos once the leather gloves started
being used.”
it is plain that the Statement of Particulars, which Mr Black verified by
Statutory Declaration on 12 September 2024, said that
his exposure to asbestos
was between 1962 and 1969. The date range of 1962 to 1980 in the pleading
related to the start and end dates
of his employment, but were not accurate
statements of the years in which Mr Black was exposed to asbestos while working
and Singer.
Affidavit Evidence
plaintiff relied upon the affidavit of his solicitor Ms Valenti dated 19
September 2024 (PX 1). Ms Valenti recited her instructions
that the plaintiff
was exposed to asbestos dust from about 1962 to about 1969, while working for
Luke and Singer. The balance of
the affidavit concerned the deregistration of
Luke and Singer on 13 May 2003 and material received from QBE showing that it
insurer responsible for workers compensation policies issued by
Mercantile Mutual Insurance (MMI) “for the relevant period”.
phrase Ms Valenti must have meant the period between 1962 and 1969, rather than
the period between 1962 and 1980 pleaded
in the Statement of Claim and the
Amended Statement of Claim.
Valenti annexed to that affidavit a proposed Further Amended Statement of Claim.
Unfortunately, this document perpetuated the impression
that it was during the
entire employment of the plaintiff by Luke and Singer, from 1962 to 1980, that
there was asbestos exposure.
Valenti sought to correct the mistaken impression given by the proposed pleading
annexed to her first affidavit, by sending an
email dated 1 November 2024 (PX
3). That email attached a different version of the Further Amended Statement of
new version of the pleading became Exhibit PX 4 on the hearing of the Motion.
Paragraph 7 of the proposed pleading states that
during the course of the Luke
and Singer employment the plaintiff wore asbestos gloves and mitts on a daily
basis “from about
1962 to about 1969”. Paragraph 8 of the proposed
pleading says that in the course of the Luke and Singer employment the plaintiff
worked in areas in which other workers wore asbestos gloves and mitts
“from about 1962 to about 1969”.
it was not until this fourth iteration of the pleading that the information
contained in the proposed pleading became congruent
with the statement about the
years of exposure contained in the Statement of Particulars.
Valenti swore a second affidavit dated 22 November 2024 (PX 2), which set out
her instructions from Mr Black. Mr Black maintained
that the contents of the
Statement of Particulars was correct and that his exposure to asbestos while
employed by Luke and Singer
ran from 1962 to 1969. The instructions of Mr Black
reiterated that he only ever used asbestos gloves until 1969 and that after that
year he did not work in an environment where asbestos was present.
relied upon an affidavit by its solicitor Mr Taylor-Jones dated 8 November 2024
(DX 1). Mr Taylor-Jones said that QBE is the successor
to the liabilities of MMI
and that QBE had located records of MMI showing that it had underwritten workers
compensation policies
covering Luke and Singer between 19 November 1958 and 30
June 1978. QBE was not the insurer of Luke and Singer after
Last Date of Employment
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(NSW) provides that
liability for certain occupational diseases is taken to have arisen when the
worker was last employed by the employer
in employment to the nature of which
the disease was due. Mesothelioma is one such “occupational
Section 151AB
requires the Court to make a finding as to the
date of last employment of the worker, which exposed the worker to the risk of
of asbestos particles:
CGU Insurance Limited v AAI Insurance
[2016] NSWCA 335
Consideration
Amendment of the Pleading
find that I should grant leave to the plaintiff to amend his pleading in
accordance with the latest version of the proposed Amended
Statement of Claim
(PX 4). The plaintiff said in his Statement of Particulars that his exposure to
asbestos with Luke and Singer
was restricted to the years 1962 to 1969. He
verified this by Statutory Declaration. For whatever reason, the pleading,
not by Mr Black but by his solicitors, was capable of giving the
impression that the period of exposure was between 1962 and 1980.
indeed that was the case, then leave would not be granted to sue QBE, as it was
not the insurer for Luke and Singer on the last
date relevant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
(NSW). However, as pointed out by counsel
for the plaintiff, Luke and Singer had insurance for the entire period, and
there was a
different insurer after QBE ceased to provide cover in 1978.
Further, Mr Black himself has always said that his exposure was caused
using asbestos gloves and mitts and that this ceased in 1969. This is not a case
where a plaintiff is tailoring his evidence
to suit the insurance position.
Black’s instructions concerning the years of exposure have been consistent
throughout. The existing versions of the Statement
of Claim did not explicitly
state that there was exposure up until 1980, but are certainly capable of being
read to give that impression.
It is appropriate to grant leave to amend, to
clarify the pleadings so that it accords with what Mr Black has been saying all
Leave will be granted to amend the Statement of Claim in the terms set
out in Exhibit PX 4.
Grant of Leave to Sue the Insurer
Mr Black has always said that his exposure ended in 1969, and because leave has
now been granted to clarify that issue on
the pleadings, it is appropriate to
grant leave for Mr Black to sue QBE as the insurer on risk for Luke and Singer
in 1969. It was
not in dispute that QBE is the appropriate insurer, being the
successor in title to MMI, which was the workers compensation insurer
and Singer in 1969.
make the following findings:
(1) QBE, the successor of MMI, was in existence at the time the liability
(2) MMI had issued a policy to Luke and Singer.
(3) The policy covered the risk.
(4) The policy was in place at the time of the risk.
(5) There is an arguable case against Luke and Singer being the holder of the
insurance policy.
(6) There is a reasonable possibility, indeed a certainty, that Luke and Singer
will be unable to satisfy any judgment.
(7) There is an arguable case that Luke and Singer would, if found liable to Mr
Black, be entitled to indemnity under the policy
for which QBE is presently
responsible.
light of those findings it is appropriate to grant leave to sue QBE, as sought
by the plaintiff.
plaintiff has come to court to seek an indulgence, not just in relation to
obtaining leave to sue an insurer, but also by seeking
leave to amend the
Statement of Claim so that the allegations about the years of exposure are
correctly set out in the pleading.
As previously recited, the three forms of the
pleading prior to PX 4 all give the impression that exposure occurred right up
those circumstances QBE was entirely justified in opposing the grant of leave.
It appears that the latest version of the Statement
of Claim, while sent by Ms
Valenti on 1 November 2024, did not come to the attention of the solicitor for
QBE. Certainly the written
submissions made by counsel for QBE (MFI 1) proceed
on the basis that the proposed amended pleading is that annexed to PX 1. The
application for leave to amend the Statement of Claim in the form of PX 4 was
only made by an oral application at the hearing of
the Notice of Motion.
those circumstances the appropriate order for costs is that the plaintiff should
pay the costs of QBE of and incidental to the
Notice of Motion. If the pleading
had correctly reflected Mr Black’s instructions from the beginning, there
would most likely
have been no contest about the granting of leave to sue QBE.
orders of the Tribunal are:
(1) Grant leave to the plaintiff pursuant to
Liability (Third Party Claims Against Insurers) Act 2017
(NSW) to bring
proceedings against QBE Insurance (Australia) Ltd.
(2) Order that QBE Insurance (Australia) Ltd be substituted for the first
defendant in these proceedings.
(3) Grant leave to the plaintiff to file a Further Amended Statement of Claim in
the form of Exhibit PX 4.
(4) Order that the plaintiff pay the costs of QBE Insurance (Australia) Ltd of
and incidental to the Notice of Motion filed on 19
September 2024.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (250 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter