URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/445.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Frederick Schaaf [2025] NSWDC 445 (30 October 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
R v Frederick Schaaf
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 445
Hearing Date(s):
17 October 2025
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Decision Date:
30 October 2025
Mahony SC DCJ
Intensive Correction Order and Community Correction Order imposed. For
orders see [65]
Catchwords:
SENTENCE – Stalk/intimidate intend fear physical etc harm –
Assault occasioning actual bodily harm in company of others
– Intensive
Correction Order
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Domestic and Personal) Violence Act 2007
Cases Cited:
Bugmy v The Queen (2013) 249 CLR 571; [2013] HCA 37
[2022] NSWCCA
[2012] NSWCCA 32
Mandranis v R
[2021] NSWCCA 97
(1982) 2 NSWLR 517
[2012] NSWCCA 214
[2025] NSWCCA
[2025] NSWCCA 165
Frederick Schaaf (the offender)
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
(the Crown)
Representation:
Mr A Terracini (the offender)
Ms E Blizard; Mr A Isaacs (the
Solicitors:
Ms J Nguyen (the offender)
Ms D Horsley (the
File Number(s):
2021/00125074
Publication Restriction:
Nil. There is however a non-publication order regarding the name of the
co-accused who is referred to as MS
REMARKS ON SENTENCE
offender who was born in 1993 is to be sentenced in respect of the following two
offences for which he has pleaded guilty:-
Count 1 – Offence
pursuant to
Crimes (Domestic and Personal) Violence Act 2007
(“the CDPVA”) of stalk/intimidate intend fear physical etc harm. The
maximum penalty for this offence is 5 years
imprisonment and/or $5,500 fine and
there is no standard non-parole period prescribed.
Count 2 – Offence pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
(“the CA”) of assault occasioning actual bodily harm in company of
others. The maximum penalty prescribed for this
offence is 7 years imprisonment
and there is no standard non-parole period prescribed.
his arrest on 5 May 2021 the offender spent 1 year, 4 months and 2 days in
custody (490 days).
The sentence hearing
sentence hearing took place on 17 October 2025. The Crown Sentence Summary
became Exhibit A and included a Statement of Agreed
Facts which may be
summarised as follows.
or about 14 April 2021, a co-accused MS organised for a supply of 2 kilograms of
cocaine to another drug dealer referred to as
“Person A”. Person A
took the 2 kilograms of cocaine and handed over a block of paper of $50 notes on
one end and otherwise
contained blank paper instead of $660,000. MS held Stuart
MacGill (“the victim”) responsible for Person A’s theft
drugs because he had introduced MS to Person A. On 14 April 2021, MS met with
the victim telling him that the victim needed
to pay money to cover the theft or
provide information as to the whereabouts of Person A. The victim denied
responsibility for the
debt left by Person A’s theft.
conduct constituting the two offences commenced at 5:50 p.m. on 14 April 2021
when the co-offender was tasked to drive from his
Cremorne with the intention of intimidating the victim into providing money or
information about the
whereabouts of Person A. The offender searched for the
victim’s address in his phone, and afterwards he and the co-offender
Richard Schaaf left Caringbah arriving at Cremorne just before 7 p.m.
purchased a pair of long handled garden shears, three
sets of gloves, cable ties
and rope. The garden shears were later found in the offender’s car. Feilo
then travelled from Rouse
Hill to Bringelly arriving there at 7:20 p.m.
the afternoon and after the second meeting with the victim, MS waited outside
the victim’s apartment building in
Cremorne in his car. At about 7:00 p.m.
the victim escaped his apartment in the boot of another resident’s car,
met with friends
and went to a friend’s house nearby. The victim was then
lured back to his apartment by MS just before 8:00 p.m. under the
looking at photographs to identify Person A. The victim met MS on a street close
by his home and MS took his phone and said,
“The big guys are here to see
you”. The victim kept walking towards his home and came across the
co-offender Richard
Schaaf who was standing in the street outside a car. The
co-offender said to the victim, “I don’t want to hurt you, we
you have nothing to do with it, we just want to talk to you, get in the
car”. The victim resisted and the co-offender
said, “Don’t
make it difficult” and placed his hand on his own waist.
is an agreed fact that the victim got in the car because he thought that gesture
meant that the co-offender had a firearm. The
victim did not see a firearm, nor
did he communicate his belief to either the offender or co-offender and the
Crown does not contend
that the offender intended to imply possession of a
firearm. Nor does the Crown contend that either offender or co-offender had a
firearm. Nor does the Crown contend that either offender or co-offender actually
knew or were reckless to the victim’s lack
of consent to enter the car.
victim got in the car and the co-offender sat next to him. The co-offender said,
“We’ve got a problem because they
(a reference to the drugs) were
mine”. However it is not contended that the co-offender was actually
involved in the failed
cocaine deal or that the drugs in fact belonged to the
co-offender.
victim said that the drug deal had nothing to do with him. The co-offender asked
the victim about the whereabouts of Person A
and the victim told him that he had
been trying to contact Person A all day without success.
offender drove the car from Cremorne to Bringelly arriving at about 9:00 p.m.
The car pulled over and the co-offender Feilo got
in the car with a bag
containing the garden shears. Feilo was wearing a balaclava and sat in the front
passenger seat. It is an agreed
fact that the intimidation commenced at the time
that Feilo entered the car.
car was driven to premises at Bringelly, being an unoccupied house with a
driveway which led to a shed. When they arrived the
offender and co-offenders
got out of the car leaving the victim in the car for about 10 minutes. The
victim was then told to go to
the shed, photos of which are contained in Exhibit
A. The co-offenders demanded proof that the victim was not wearing “a
and searched the victim which caused him to be intimidated. The
garden shears were placed on the floor near the victim, and the co-offender,
Richard Schaaf slapped the victim across the face causing him to fall down.
Richard Schaaf asked the victim again about the whereabouts
of Person A and was
told that he didn’t know where he was. Richard Schaaf then said,
“They want me to take your fingers”
and said they needed $150,000
and asked where he would get it from and how long it would take. The co-offender
then asked for the
victim’s phone which was provided.
co-offenders Richard Schaaf and Feilo punched the victim multiple times in the
head. In this assault the victim suffered a cut
lip. The co-offender Richard
Schaaf then said it was enough, and the offender then asked the victim,
“Are you ok?”, and
handed the victim his glasses which he had
co-offenders and victim then returned to the car, and the offender drove to
Belmore arriving at 10:30 p.m. The co-offender Richard
Schaaf then had a
conversation with the victim by the side of the road telling him that someone
would provide a phone to him the
following morning and that he should not leave
what had happened. The matter was reported by way of formal report to
police on 20 April 2021.
A also included the NSW Police Force report of convictions relating to the
offender which commenced in 2012 with a number
of traffic convictions for which
he was fined, and in the same year offences of receive/dispose stolen property
for which he was
given a suspended prison sentence for 6 months and an offence
of make/furnish a statement which is false/misleading for which he
was fined. In
2013 there were further traffic offences for which a community service order was
imposed together with a fine, and
in 2014 an offence of assault occasioning
actual bodily harm for which he was sentenced to imprisonment for 12 months with
a non-parole
period of 7 months and an offence of steal from the person, for
which a prison sentence of 4 months to be served concurrently, was
2015 the offender was convicted of a common assault offence for which he was
sentenced on appeal to imprisonment for 9 months with
a non-parole period of 4
months. In 2017 the offender was convicted of a supply prohibited drug offence
for which he was placed on
bond to be of good behaviour for 12 months and
in 2022 he was convicted of an offence of assault for which he was sentenced by
of an Intensive Correction Order (“ICO”) for a period of 10
A also included his custody records and a bail chronology.
offender’s evidence
offender tendered a bundle of documents which became Exhibit 1.1 to 1.4. Exhibit
1.1 is an affidavit sworn by Ms B Fifita on 17
October 2025 who is the mother of
the offender and co-offender Richard Schaaf. She deposed to the family history
in which the offender,
as the middle of 5 children was exposed to domestic
violence perpetrated by her husband towards the deponent and the offender which
was alcohol fuelled and regular. She deposed that their homelife was difficult
and both the offender and his brother were exposed
to and experimented with
drugs from an early age and exposed to alcohol abuse at home and violence in
the community.
deponent developed a number of health issues including severe chronic diabetes
which requires regular monitoring and has suffered
a heart attack and a kidney
infection. She deposed that the offender has assisted her with transportation to
her medical appointments
and she remains in daily contact with him.
2009 the offender witnessed an attack on his brother and co-offender, Richard
Schaaf when he was attacked by a group of 7 boys
and stabbed four times in the
stomach. Richard had told the offender to run home and get help, which he did,
but which led to admonishment
by his father for leaving his brother “to
die”, for which he felt guilt. This affected him both mentally and
and he became depressed. He completed year 12 at school.
his release to bail Ms Fifita had observed positive changes, in what she
described as a “great transformation of the offender.
He has become a
father, and is more focused, responsible and determined to be a better
deposed that she has encouraged and provided support for her two sons to ensure
that they do not offend again.
1.2 is an affidavit affirmed by the offender’s partner setting out their
relationship history. They had been together
since November 2020 and have a
daughter born in February 2024. Ms Masih deposed to dental issues the offender
experienced whilst
on remand in custody as well as the onerous conditions
imposed as a result of the COVID-19 restrictions. That included long periods
lockdowns and no physical visits. Following his release on bail on 6 September
2022, the offender was able to obtain the necessary
dental treatment. The
deponent confirmed the family history deposed to by the offender’s mother
and his exposure to family
violence, alcohol and drug abuse. She also deposed to
his strict bail conditions, the constant media publicity and prolonged delay
these criminal proceedings which have impacted upon the offender and herself
immensely. The offender has been working in the family
concreting business since
being on bail and has expressed his regret for his offending and is doing his
best to stay out of trouble.
She expressed her ongoing support to the offender
to ensure that he stays out of trouble with the law.
1.4 is a letter from the offender dated 15 October 2025 expressing his apology
to the victim for any pain and suffering that
he caused him and to say sorry to
the Court, the community and everyone affected by his actions, which he
described as “very
offender, since becoming a father to his 18 month old daughter, is conscious
ensure that he never goes
his hardest to abide by
the law. He expressed a desire to be “a good
citizen, a good father and a good partner”.
submissions
Crown relied on a written and detailed outline of submissions setting out the
procedural history and noting that the offender
is entitled to a 25% discount in
respect of Count 1 and a 5% discount in relation to Count 2 for his pleas of
Crown noted that the offender had spent 490 days in pre-sentence custody which
was entirely referable to the index offending.
The start date for any sentence
of imprisonment therefore would be 14 June 2024.
Crown submitted that in assessing the objective seriousness of the offending
where there is a joint-criminal enterprise the Court
must assess the degree of
participation of the offender. The Crown referred to Somba v R
[2012] NSWCCA 214
where Hall J held that it was necessary to refer to and take into account the
particular conduct of each participant in a joint-criminal
enterprise with a
view to determine the level of culpability to which each must be sentenced. The
Crown referred to the judgment
of Latham J in KR v R
[2012] NSWCCA 32
respect to the distinction between the offender's responsibility for criminal
conduct and his moral culpability for the offending.
Crown submitted the following features were relevant to the assessment of
objective seriousness of the offences:-
(a) The offences were not spontaneous and involved a significant degree of
planning and organisation, as evidenced by:
(i) The surveillance of the victim by co-accused MS and attendance at his
personal residence by the offender and Richard Schaaf.
(ii) The use of a ruse to lure the victim back to his home where Richard Schaaf
and the offender were waiting.
(iii) The purchase by Feilo of items for use or possible use in the offending,
namely a pair of long handled garden shears, three
sets of gloves, cable ties
(iv) The victim’s phone was taken by MS from him to isolate him and
prevent him from calling for help.
(v) Prior arrangements had been made for the offender and Richard Schaaf to pick
up Feilo in Bringelly, and on the way to Robinson
Road, Bringelly.
(vi) Feilo was wearing a balaclava when he entered the car.
(vii) The victim was transported to an isolated and semi-rural property,
approximately 70kms from his home.
(b) Regarding the intimidation:
(i) The victim was in the presence of three unknown males, without means of
escape or contacting police or other parties for assistance.
(ii) The victim was taken to an unoccupied property and directed to go with the
offenders to a dilapidated shed type structure.
(iii) On entering the shed, the offenders demanded proof the victim was not
wearing a wire and searched him. This caused him to be
intimidated.
(iv) Feilo put the garden shears on the floor near the victim.
(c) Regarding the AOABH:
(i) Extent and nature of the injuries:
The victim suffered a cut lip as a result of the assault.
(ii) Degree of violence:
Richard Schaaf commenced the conduct comprising the assault by slapping the
victim across the face and causing him to fall down.
Richard Schaaf and Feilo punched the victim multiple times to the head. The
assault ended when Richard Schaaf said words to the effect
“That’s enough”.
(iii) Intention of the offenders:
The offenders intentionally caused harm to the victim. The offenders were
motivated by obtaining information as to the location of
Person A, or $150,000
from the victim.
Crown submitted the following matters should be taken into account in assessing
the role of Frederick Schaaf in the offending:-
(a) The offender was the driver: He drove himself and Richard Schaaf to Cremorne
to collect the victim, and then to Bringelly where
the offending occurred. The
offender also drove the offenders and the victim to Belmore where the victim was
dropped off.
(b) The offender’s involvement in the Intimidation of the victim by was by
virtue of his presence.
(c) The offender did not assault the victim.
(d) At the end of the assault, the offender asked the victim: “Are you
okay” and handed the victim his glasses.
Crown submitted that it was an aggravating factor pursuant to s21A(2)(c) of the
CSPA that the offence involved the threatened
use of a weapon, namely the garden
Crown submitted that the offender's criminal history disentitled him to
Crown submitted that general deterrence was applicable in sentencing to deter
the general public from committing such offences
and to recognise the harm done
to the victim. Specific deterrence was also applicable to ensure that the
offender was adequately
punished for the offence and to hold him accountable for
his actions. The Crown accepted, however, that the threshold in s5 of the
had been crossed and that any sentence may be served in the community, by the
imposition of an ICO.
his oral submissions, and responding to the written submissions of the offender,
the Crown submitted that there was some planning
involved in the offending
conduct, and further that the offending did not occur at a suburban street but
rather in a semi-rural location.
Crown accepted the offender had a background of childhood disadvantage but, like
its submissions regarding Richard Schaaf, submitted
that he had developed an
understanding of responsibilities in his life, relying on TH v R
[2025] NSWCCA
relation to the question of delay in sentencing, the Crown referred to the
prosecution of the victim which had emerged during the
investigations that
followed this offence. The victim had first stood trial on 18 November 2024,
however the jury in that trial were
discharged on 24 November 2024. His second
trial concluded on 11 March 2025. The Crown submitted that the offender had
provided consent
for the victim’s trial to proceed and that it was a
function of the criminal justice system.
respect to extra-curial punishment by way of media coverage, the Crown referred
to a 12 minute podcast in which at no time was
the offender named. It was
submitted the evidence concerning media coverage here did not reach the
threshold but rather principles
of open justice were met subject to any
non-publication order made.
respect to the assessment of objective seriousness of the offending, the Crown
conceded that the role of this offender was less
culpable than that of his
co-offenders.
The offender’s submissions
for the offender relied on a thorough and detailed written outline of
submissions noting that the offender is entitled to
a 25% discount for Count 1
and a 5% discount for Count 2. Further, counsel submitted the entering of the
plea assisted the proper
administration of justice, saved valuable court time
and allowed the victim to have certainty over these proceedings.
relation to the assessment of objective seriousness of the offending, it was not
conceded that the offending involved a significant
degree of planning and
organisation. The Crown was unable to prove to any standard that this offender
had any contact with MS in
any way nor was he involved in any ruse to lure the
victim back to his home. The Crown was unable to prove that MS unlawfully took
the victim’s phone to prevent him from calling for help nor was the victim
“isolated” in a property rather, statements
relied on by the Crown
suggested neighbours had heard commotion at the relevant time. It was submitted
to be a property on “a
suburban street surrounded by other homes”.
submitted that the Court should not accept the Crown’s submission that the
victim did not have any means of contacting
police or other parties for
assistance. However the offender’s role in the JCE was only that of driver
and it was noted that
the Crown accepted that the intimidation of the victim
only commenced when Feilo entered the car in a balaclava. This offender did
assault the victim, however he was “in company” of those that did.
At the conclusion of what counsel characterised
as a minor assault, this
offender asked the victim, “Are you ok?” whilst handing him back his
submitted that the principles in Bugmy v The Queen (2013) 249 CLR 571; [2013]
HCA 37 were enlivened due to the offender’s
childhood exposure to domestic
violence, abandonment, lack of stability and education, cultural dispossession
and social exclusion.
Further, such disadvantage should be given full weight in
determining the sentence. Counsel referred to DR v R
[2022] NSWCCA 151
where the Court summarised the two central ways that the principles apply,
“i. the existence of a causal link between an offender’s
disadvantaged background and the offending will inevitably support
that such offender’s moral culpability is reduced; and
ii. even where there is no such causal link, an offender’s disadvantaged
background remains a factor which must be given full
weight in the determination
of an appropriate sentence.”
referred to the well known principles regarding delay in sentencing enunciated
by Street CJ in R v Todd
(1982) 2 NSWLR 517
at 519. Counsel submitted that the
delay here fell squarely on the NSW Police. Counsel submitted that the Crown had
not fairly provided
an accurate history of delay but rather that the charging of
the victim with serious drug related offences arose from the investigation
these matters. The delay was therefore due to circumstances outside the
offender’s control. Further, although the trial
was due to commence on 11
August 2025 several weeks were taken up with pre-trial rulings sought by the
Crown due to the late service
of evidentiary material. This offender did not
participate in those arguments.
referred to the progress the offender has made in his rehabilitation and to the
genuine remorse outlined in his letter of
apology. He had also for a period of 3
years or more been subject to onerous bail conditions which had caused
restrictions on his
liberty. Those conditions were imposed for a charge which
was subsequently withdrawn.
respect to the media coverage of the arrest and charging of the offenders,
counsel noted that this offender and others had been
routinely described as
“kidnappers”. It was submitted that the adverse media coverage
ranged across thousands of internet
articles as well as mainstream media, naming
and depicting the offender in sensationalised television pieces and lengthy
interviews.
submitted that the s5 threshold in the CSPA had not been crossed and that a
community based order would be appropriate considering
his role, the delay, his
lengthy period on bail and the offender’s demonstrated rehabilitation as
well as adverse media reporting.
his oral submissions, learned counsel rehearsed his written submissions noting
that the saving in court time caused by the offender’s
pleas amounted to
assistance recognised by s22A of the CSPA.
rehearsed his submissions regarding the assessment of objective seriousness,
submitting that the offences did not involve
any significant planning. The
inference advocated by the Crown was not the only inference available in the
offending which involved
the intimidation and assault of a drug dealer. This
offender has used his own phone and vehicle and did not disguise himself at all.
He was not involved in the personal attack on the victim, but he was present
during what was characterised as a minor assault. This
took place over a short
period of time.
rehearsed his submissions regarding the offender’s background of
deprivation and the delay in sentencing. He conceded
that the offender was not
being sentenced for a stale crime and had not been in a state of uncertainty so
as to engage the principle
in Todd v R.
rehearsed his submissions regarding the offender’s time in custody and the
fact that he had not committed further offences
which would warrant a community
based sentence. Whilst serious, these offences could have been dealt with in the
Local Court in 2021.
Whilst the media coverage was not so significant as to
warrant mitigation it could also be factored into account. That media coverage
was identified as including three items principally focused on the victim, being
a Channel 9 program broadcast on 21 June 2021, a
Channel 7 program broadcast on
19 June 2022 and a podcast released on 15 July 2025.
Determination
3A of the CSPA
sets out the purposes of sentencing as follows:
“3A The purposes for which a Court may impose a sentence on an offender
are as follows:
(a) To ensure that the offender is adequately punished for the offence,
(b) To prevent crime by deterring the offender and other persons from committing
similar offences,
(c) To protect the community from the offender,
(d) To promote the rehabilitation of the offender,
(e) To make the offender accountable for his or her actions,
(f) To denounce the conduct of the offender,
(g) To recognise the harm done to the victim of the crime and the
community.”
assessing the objective seriousness of the offending in Count 1, I have had
regard to the circumstances in which the offending
arose, which involved a drug
rip off in which MS sought to obtain information as to the location of Person A
or demand money from
him. Whilst there was clearly planning involved in what
occurred, a clear inference arises that the planning was not carried out
offender who was the driver of the vehicle. He drove his brother Richard Schaaf
to Cremorne to collect the victim and then
drove to Bringelly with Richard
Schaff and the victim in the backseat of the vehicle. There they collected the
co-offender Feilo,
who was wearing a balaclava and at that time the intimidation
commenced. The offender’s role in the intimidation is therefore
driver and his presence both in the vehicle and at Bringelly, and also in
driving the victim to Belmore. I therefore find
that the objective seriousness
of his offending in Count 1 was below the mid-range for an offence pursuant to
s7(1) of the CDPVA.
objective seriousness of the offending in Count 2 must be assessed with
reference only to the presence of the offender at the
time when the assault took
place. His conduct was somewhat ameliorated by asking the victim after the
assault, “Are you ok?”
and handing him back his glasses which had
fallen to the ground. This offending fell in the low range for an offence
pursuant to
s59(2) of the CA.
was an aggravating factor to the offence in Count 2 that the offence involved
the threatened use of a weapon, namely the garden
shears, pursuant to s21A(2)(c)
of the CSPA.
offender has a poor criminal history which disentitles him to any leniency in
sentencing.
have had regard to the maximum penalties prescribed of 5 years imprisonment for
the offence pursuant so 13(1) of the CDPVA and 7
years imprisonment for the
offence pursuant to s59(2) of the CA. The maximum penalties reflect the
seriousness with which Parliament
regards such criminal conduct and provides a
guidepost in the sentencing process for each offence.
deterrence is also important in sentencing for such offences. A clear message
must be sent to like-minded members of the community
that Parliament has
prescribed lengthy maximum prison sentences and that the Courts will impose
condign punishment in appropriate
cases. Specific deterrence is also important
given the offender’s criminal history of convictions. He must understand
if he were to commit further offences, he would be subject to increasingly
severe penalties.
have taken into account the offender’s pleas of guilty which entitled him
to a 25% utilitarian discount on sentence in respect
of Count 1 and a 5%
discount in respect of Count 2. The pleas also demonstrate some remorse, and I
accept the evidence of his mother
and from his own letter of apology that the
offender has expressed genuine remorse for his offending conduct.
there was some delay in the investigation of what was a complex matter and which
necessitated the trial and subsequent sentencing
of the victim for drug related
offending, I do not find that the delay caused in sentencing this offender is to
be taken into account
as a mitigating factor. His counsel conceded that he was
not being sentenced for a stale crime and had not been in a state of uncertainty
so as to engage the relevant principles. Nor do I find that he has suffered
extra-curial punishment by reference to media reporting
of these proceedings.
Such reporting focused on the identity of the victim rather than the offender
and co-offenders and are a necessary
adjunct of our system of open justice.
accept that the offender suffered a childhood and adolescence of disadvantage so
as to engage the principles Bugmy v The Queen (2013)
249 CLR 571; [2013] HCA 37.
In that case, the High Court of Australia held as follows:-
1. The circumstances that an offender has been raised in a community surrounded
by alcohol abuse and violence may mitigate the sentence
because his/her moral
culpability is likely to be less than the culpability of an offender whose
formative years have not been marred
in that way [40].
2. The effects of profound deprivation do not diminish over time and repeated
offending and should be given full weight in determining
the sentence in every
case [42-44].
3. A background of that kind may leave a mark on a person throughout life and
compromise a person’s capacity to mature and
learn from experience [43].
The application of these principles, and their impact in diminishing the
offender’s moral culpability for the offending and
how that further
impacts the purposes of sentencing set out in s3A of the CSPA was recently
explained by Weinstein J (with whom Wright
and Sweeney JJ agreed) in YZ v R
[2025] NSWCCA 165
to [68]. The reduction in this offender’s moral
culpability must therefore be given “full weight” in the sentencing
synthesis (per Bugmy at [44]).
Notwithstanding
that the offender had some short periods of stability in his life that is not
reflected in his history of criminal
convictions and thus the Bugmy principles
must be given full effect so as to reduce significantly the offender’s
moral culpability
for his offending. This inevitably leads to a diminished
impact of general deterrence, specific deterrence and denunciation in any
sentence to be imposed.
offender spent 490 days in pre-sentence custody before being released to bail
having been charged with a much more serious offence
carrying a maximum penalty
of 25 years imprisonment. When released he was subject to onerous bail
conditions with which he has complied
for a period of over 3 years. Further, he
has not offended during that period and has progressed his rehabilitation by
taking responsibility
for his own conduct. These are significant matters to take
into account on sentence.
respect to Count 1 on the Indictment, I find that the threshold in s5 of the
CSPA has been crossed and that no sentence other
than imprisonment is warranted
given the objective seriousness of the offending notwithstanding that this
offender’s role was
the least serious of the three co-offenders being
sentenced. However, having regard to the 490 days already spent in custody that
period would adequately cover any non-parole period imposed. In accordance with
the Court of Criminal Appeal’s decision in
Mandranis v R
[2021] NSWCCA 97
and having regard to the 25% utilitarian discount on sentence, I intend to
impose an ICO for a period of 9 months for this offence.
In so finding, I have
taken into account community safety as a paramount consideration pursuant to s66
of the CSPA and, together
with the other purposes of sentencing in s3A as set
out above, I find this sentence will best address this offender’s risk
reoffending.
respect of the offence in Count 2, I find that the threshold in s5 of the CSPA
has not been crossed. I intend to convict the offender
of this offence and
impose a Community Correction Order pursuant to s8(1) of the CSPA for a period
of 11 months from today.
hereby make the following orders:-
(1) You are convicted of Count 1, an offence pursuant to
(Domestic and Personal) Violence Act 2007
(NSW) of stalk/intimidate intend fear
physical etc harm. For that offence I impose, pursuant to
of the CSPA, an
Intensive Correction Order for a period of 9 months commencing today.
(2) You must report to the Community Corrections Office at Miranda as soon as
practicable but no later than 7 days from today.
(3) The standard conditions of the order apply:-
(a) You must not commit any offence; and
(b) You must submit to supervision by a Community Corrections officer.
(4) The following additional conditions apply:-
(a) That you perform community service work for 100 hours.
(5) I am satisfied pursuant to 17D(1)(a) of the CSPA that I have sufficient
information before me to justify the making of the above
Intensive Correction
Order without obtaining an assessment report.
(6) If you fail to comply with the conditions of this order sanctions may be
imposed by the Commissioner of Corrective Services or
State Parole Authority.
Those sanctions may include a formal warning, imposing more stringent conditions
or it may include revocation
of this order.
(7) If the order is revoked, you may be required to a serve all or some of the
period of your sentence in full-time custody.
(8) In respect of Count 2, you are convicted. Pursuant to s8(1) of the CSPA,
instead of imposing a sentence of imprisonment, you
are ordered to comply with a
Community Correction Order for a period of 11 months commencing today.
(9) The standard conditions of the order apply:-
(a) You must not commit any offence; and
(b) You must submit to supervision by a Community Corrections officer.
(10) If you fail to comply with the conditions of this order, further action may
be taken against you. This may require you to return
to court to be
re-sentenced.
(11) Finally, you are now directed to attend the court registry where a copy of
this order will be explained and given to you.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (289 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter