URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCA/2025/235.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ceerose Pty Ltd v The Owners �e" Strata Plan No 89074 [2025] NSWCA 235 (27 October 2025)
Court of Appeal
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Ceerose Pty Ltd v The Owners – Strata Plan No 89074
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCA 235
Hearing Date(s):
1 July 2025
Date of Orders:
27 October 2025
Decision Date:
27 October 2025
Leeming JA at [1];
Kirk JA at [2];
Ball JA at [81]
(2) Appellants to pay the
respondent’s costs.
Catchwords:
CONTRACTS — remedies — damages — mitigation of loss
— whether conduct was unreasonable in the circumstances
such that some or
all of the claimed loss should be disregarded — legal and evidentiary onus
on the party asserting a failure
to mitigate — no “positive
obligation” to provide builder an opportunity to rectify damage —
invocation of
a “shifting” or “tactical onus”
misconceived and should be avoided
CIVIL PROCEDURE —
alternative dispute resolution — court referral to referee — claimed
denial of procedural fairness
— no procedural unfairness established
Legislation Cited:
Uniform Civil Procedure
(NSW), r 20.24
Cases Cited:
Arsalan v Rixon
(2021) 274 CLR 606
[2021] HCA 40
Bagnall v National
Tobacco Corporation of Australia Ltd
[1934] NSWStRp 30
(1934) 34 SR (NSW) 421
Cessnock City
Council v 123 259 932 Pty Ltd
[2024] HCA 17
(2024) 98 ALJR 719
CJD Equipment
Pty Ltd v A&C Constructions Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 188
Jones v Dunkel
101 CLR 298
[1959] HCA 8
Karacominakis v Big Country Developments
[2000] NSWCA 313
(2000) 10 BPR 18,235
Lodge Holes Colliery Company
Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation
[1908] UKLawRpAC 40
[1908] AC 323
Munce v Vinidex Tube Makers Pty
[1974] 2 NSWLR 235
Owners SP 76674 v Di Blasio Constructions Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC 1067
XJS World Pty Ltd v Central West Civil Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWCA
Texts Cited:
Julian Bailey, Construction Law: Volume II (1st ed, 2011,
Principal judgment
Ceerose Pty Ltd (First appellant)
Prisand Investments Pty Ltd (Second
The Owners – Strata Plan No 89074 (Respondent)
Representation:
M Ashhurst SC / MT Keene (Appellants)
F Hicks SC / W
Marshall (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Salim Rutherford Lawyers
(Appellants)
Hamilton Locke Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/475105
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Supreme Court
Equity – Commercial List
The Owners – Strata Plan No 89074 v Ceerose Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC
Date of Decision:
26 November 2024
File Number(s):
2017/262472
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(Rule 36.11)
that unless the Court otherwise orders, a judgment or order is taken to be
entered when it is recorded in the Court's computerised
court record system.
Setting aside and variation of judgments or orders is dealt with by
Rules 36.15
. Parties should in particular note the time limit of
fourteen days in
Rule 36.16.]
[This headnote is not to be read as part of the judgment]
Pty Ltd (the first appellant) and Prisand Investments Pty Ltd
(the second appellant) were the builder and developer, respectively,
apartment building in the centre of Sydney known as “The Eliza”. The
building was completed in 2014, and in light
of defects which emerged, the
owners corporation (the respondent) commenced proceedings. The respondent
alleged that the building
work did not comply with the requirements of the
(NSW), identifying a range of defects. The
appellants implicitly admitted the existence of some of these, claiming that
they had always
been ready, willing and able to rectify the defects but that the
respondent would not let them do so, which was said to constitute
a failure by
the respondent to mitigate damage. On a number of occasions in 2018-2019 the
respondent’s solicitors had informed
the appellants’ solicitors that
the respondent was losing or had lost confidence in Ceerose and that it was
unwilling to allow
Ceerose any further opportunities to repair the defects.
The matter was referred to a referee who produced a report on liability
issues and then a report on quantum for the rectification
works. On the
mitigation issue the referee concluded that the appellants bore the onus to
prove facts establishing that the decision
to deny access to rectify was
unreasonable. He concluded that the respondent did not act unreasonably in
losing confidence in the
appellants and in refusing to allow them access to
carry out further rectification works.
The respondent sought that both reports be adopted by the Supreme Court and
that judgment be entered for an identified sum. The respondents
countervailing motion seeking the rejection of certain aspects of the reports
and a declaration that the respondent had failed
to mitigate its loss such that
any avoidable loss could not be recovered. The primary judge rejected almost all
of the challenges
to the reports, substantially adopted them, and gave judgment
for the respondent in the amount of some $1.95 million excluding GST.
On appeal the appellants challenged the adoption decision, raising the
following issues:
(1) whether the primary judge erred in failing to find that the referee had
denied the appellants procedural fairness by relying on
evidence contrary to an
earlier ruling;
(2) whether the primary judge erred by failing to find that the referee had
misapplied the legal principles relating to mitigation,
in particular by not
accepting that the respondent had a “positive obligation” to afford
the builder a reasonable opportunity
to rectify alleged defects;
(3) whether the primary judge erred in failing to find that the referee
applied a superseded version of an Australian Standard to
be applied to a
bathroom drainage issue; and
(4) whether the primary judge erred by not rejecting that part of the
referee’s reports which took account of certain invoices.
The Court held
(Kirk JA, Leeming and Ball JJA agreeing), dismissing
the appeal:
Failure to mitigate
1. It was convenient to address this issue first, as doing so served to put
the procedural fairness argument in context. It has long
been established that
even though a plaintiff bears the duty of establishing a loss, the onus is on
the defendant to prove facts
going to a claim of failing to mitigate a loss,
including where the plaintiff incurs costs while attempting to ameliorate its
or whether it is claimed that the plaintiff should have taken steps to
reduce its loss. Establishing a failure to mitigate depends
on the defendant
establishing that the plaintiff has acted unreasonably in some respect: [
]. In relation to
building contracts, there is no invariable requirement that the owner provide
the builder with an opportunity to
rectify defects: [
]. The issue is whether
the plaintiff’s conduct was unreasonable in the circumstances such that
some or all of the claimed loss
should be disregarded. The defendant bears both
the legal and evidential onus in that regard. The respondent had no
obligation” to provide the appellants an opportunity to
rectify the defects: [
Arsalan v Rixon
(2021) 274 CLR 606
[2021] HCA 40
Cessnock City
Council v 123 259 932 Pty Ltd
[2024] HCA 17
(2024) 98 ALJR 719
v National Tobacco Corporation of Australia Ltd
[1934] NSWStRp 30
(1934) 34 SR (NSW) 421
Munce v Vinidex Tube Makers Pty Ltd
[1974] 2 NSWLR 235
Karacominakis
v Big Country Developments Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWCA 313
(2000) 10 BPR 18,235
Owners SP 76674 v Di Blasio Constructions Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC 1067
Lodge Holes Colliery Company Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation
[1908] UKLawRpAC 40
[1908] AC 323
referred to.
2. The appellants’ assertion that “the evidentiary onus
shifted” if the defendant established that the plaintiff
had not provided
it with an opportunity to rectify the defects, thereby invoking what has been
called a “tactical” onus,
is misconceived. The appellants bore the
onus of proof and persuasion from beginning to end with respect to their claim
respondent acted unreasonably. The respondent did not have “to
positively establish grounds upon which a reasonable person
in its position
would reject the builder’s offer...”. The appellants’
speculation as to another purpose for failing
to provide the builder another
opportunity did little if anything towards discharging their onus: [
XJS World Pty Ltd v Central West Civil Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWCA 133
CJD Equipment Pty Ltd v A&C Constructions Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 188
considered.
Procedural fairness
3. The appellants accused the referee of a “procedural ambush” by
relying on what was said in letters sent by the respondent’s
and willingness to rectify defects where
it was said the referee had ruled they
would not be so used: [
]. The appellants’ case before the referee, in
the court below and in this Court was based on the misunderstanding that the
respondent bore the onus because it had “shifted”. Their complaint
relates to letters that they themselves tendered,
where they sought no
restriction on the use of the letters when this occurred. The retrospective
ruling of the referee was not as
unequivocal as they claim. And even if the
ruling was understood so as not to allow the letters to be relied upon as going
state of mind of the respondent, there is no unfairness because the
referee’s conclusion that they did in fact manifest the
view of the
respondent was based upon other evidence. No procedural unfairness has been
established: [
Application of incorrect Australian Standard
4. The appellants argued that the referee should have had regard to the
standards in force at the time the rectification is carried
out. It is not
necessary to determine that point. The referee did indicate that he considered
the later standard was not applicable.
However, his decision did not depend on a
conclusion that the later version was legally irrelevant. Further, there is no
the analysis by the primary judge to the effect that the appellants had
ample time to explore the matter but had not done so by the
time the referee
heard evidence on the issue: [
Failure to reject certain invoices
5. The appellants argued that certain invoices should have been rejected
because: they were rendered after the commencement of litigation;
they did not
form part of a particular schedule; and details were lacking as to the works the
subject of the invoices. No error has
been established in the primary
judge’s conclusion in relation to each of those claims: [
I agree with Kirk JA.
This appeal stems from a building dispute concerning an apartment
building known as “The Eliza” on Elizabeth Street in
the centre of
Sydney. The first appellant,
Pty Ltd, is the builder. The second
Investments Pty Ltd, is the developer. The respondent
is the owners corporation. The proceedings were commenced by the respondent
against the appellants in 2016 in the Civil and Administrative Tribunal and
transferred to the Equity Division of the Supreme Court
in 2017. After a
prolonged delay caused by settlement discussions, followed by the service of
pleadings and evidence, orders were
made for the matter to be referred to a
referee, Mr Steven Goldstein, for inquiry and report under
Div 3 of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005
referee is both an engineer and a barrister.
referee produced a report on liability and the rectification scope of works in
March 2023 (the
Liability Report
). In June 2024 he produced a report on
quantum for the rectification works. The respondent then sought that the two
reports be adopted
by the Supreme Court and, on that basis, sought judgment for
an identified sum. The appellants filed a countervailing motion seeking
certain parts of the reports be rejected, and also sought a declaration that the
respondent had “failed to mitigate its
loss, reasonably or otherwise, such
that any avoidable loss cannot be recovered”. The primary judge,
Rees J, rejected nearly
all of the respondents’ challenges to the
reports (other than with respect to some minor arithmetic errors), substantially
adopted the reports, and gave judgment for the respondent in the amount of some
$1.95 million exclusive of GST:
The Owners – Strata Plan No 89074 v
Ceerose Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 1494
appellants have challenged the adoption decision, advancing 10 grounds of
appeal. The decision whether or not to adopt a referee’s
discretionary: UCPR, r 20.24. The appellants are thus required to establish
an error of
House v The King
kind. The respondent raised eight points in
a notice of contention which, in the event, it is unnecessary to address. The
errors asserted
by the appellants are not established. The appeal should be
dismissed with costs.
issues raised by the appellants are as follows:
(1) Their “primary issue” was whether the court below erred in
failing to find that the referee had denied the appellants
procedural fairness
(grounds 1-4). The claimed denial was “determining several issues of fact
... by reliance on hearsay evidence
contrary to the earlier rulings on evidence
previously made by the Referee”. That evidence went to a central matter in
being the appellants’ claim that the respondent had failed to
mitigate its loss.
(2) The appellants said that the primary judge erred in failing to find that the
referee had misapplied the legal principles relating
to mitigation, in
particular by not accepting that the respondent had a “positive
obligation” to afford the builder a
reasonable opportunity to rectify
alleged defects, which opportunity had not been provided (grounds 5-7).
(3) They asserted that the primary judge erred in failing to find the referee
had applied an incorrect, superseded version of an
Australian Standard to be
applied with respect to a bathroom drainage issue (grounds 8-9).
(4) They claimed that the primary judge erred in not rejecting that part of the
referee’s reports which took account of certain
invoices (ground 10).
8-10 were the subject of only brief written submissions by the appellants and
were not mentioned in oral address.
what follows I first briefly set out the background to the matter, then
summarise the appellants’ overlapping arguments as
to procedural fairness
and mitigation. Although ordinarily the procedural fairness complaint should be
addressed first, here it is
convenient to consider it after addressing the
appellants’ arguments as to principles of mitigation, as doing so serves
put the procedural fairness argument in context. I address grounds 8-9 and 10
at the end of these reasons.
appellants entered into building contracts to construct a 16 level apartment
building consisting of 19 residential lots, one commercial
lot and a basement
car park. Construction was completed in 2014. Disputes arose about defects in
the building, leading to the proceedings
being commenced. On the first 17
occasions the proceedings were listed before the Court (after being transferred
from the Tribunal)
they were stood over at the parties’ request to enable
settlement discussions to progress. In October 2018 the parties informed
Court that the parties had reached an “in principle” settlement and
were in the process of finalising a deed of settlement
which would provide for
the appellants to undertake a list of rectification work. However, the parties
could not reach final agreement
on the terms of the settlement. The
appellants’ senior counsel accepted in this Court that such agreement as
had been reached
was “probably not capable of being specifically
enforced” because it was always to be subject to finalisation in a
extraordinary general meeting of the respondent was held on 29 April 2019 at
which it was resolved to impose a special levy to
raise $820,000 for purposes
which included legal pursuit of the claim against the appellants. The meeting
also resolved to authorise
the executive committee to “use its discretion
and make decisions about the Defects claim, subject to taking into account legal
advice from DEA Lawyers, which includes (but is not limited to), negotiating
with Ceerose and Prisand and resolving the Defects Claim”.
DEA Lawyers
were the respondent’s then solicitors with respect to the claim.
a number of occasions in 2018-2019 the respondent’s solicitors informed
the appellants’ solicitors that their client
was losing or had lost
confidence in the builder and was unwilling to allow the builder any further
opportunity to repair the defects.
Ultimately, the following was said in a
letter dated 8 November 2019:
It is also important to repeat that my client has lost confidence that your
client has the ability or desire to perform the rectification
works properly and
in a timely manner and, as such, it is unwilling to allow your client any
further opportunity to repair the defects.
its technology and construction list statement the respondent alleged that the
building work by Ceerose did not conform to the
requirements of the statutory
warranties set out in
range of defects were identified in a schedule. In their list response the
appellants implicitly admitted the existence
of some defects. However, they said
(amongst other things) that they had always been ready, willing and able to
rectify any defective
works but the respondent had not permitted them to do so.
That was said to constitute a failure by the respondent to mitigate its
Annexure A to the list response was a table setting out 95 defects which
the appellants said they had offered to undertake
to rectify on a without
admissions basis, which offer had been refused. The annexure was based upon a
schedule attached to an iteration
of the draft deed of settlement. Both sides
indicated in their respective list documents that all issues were appropriate
for referral
to a referee.
key dispute between the parties in relation to the mitigation issue related to
the issue of onus of proof. In the Liability Report
the referee summarised the
parties’ positions as follows (footnotes omitted):
75. The Owners submitted that in respect of the Defendants’ ‘failure
to mitigate defence’, the Defendants bore
the legal and evidentiary onus
with respect to this defence. It was not for the Owners to prove that it acted
reasonably.
76. The Defendants submitted that once a builder had established that the
principal had refused it access to rectify the defects,
then the builder had
discharged its onus of proving failure to mitigate. It was then incumbent on the
principal to prove that it
was reasonable in all circumstances for it not to
have done so. Whilst the defendant carries the ultimate legal onus and the
evidentiary onus of proving a failure to mitigate this does not prevent
the evidentiary onus shifting to the plaintiff during the
77. In the present case, the Defendants submitted that as they could demonstrate
that on 8 November 2019, the Owners refused the
Builder access to rectify the
defects, the evidentiary onus was on the Owners to establish that it was
reasonable for it to have
acted in this way.
referee did not accept the respondents’ argument, saying that “the
onus of proof rests with the Defendants to prove
the facts which establish that
the decision to deny access on 8 November 2019, or at any other time, was
unreasonable”.
referee addressed the mitigation issue in detail at paras 54-244 of the
Liability Report. He summarised his conclusions as follows:
a. The Defendants were given a reasonable opportunity to undertake defect
rectification to the urgent fire safety works: ... [then
giving details]
b. The Defendants failed to keep the Owners properly informed about the progress
of the rectification works in that: ... [then giving
c. The Owners did not act unreasonably in losing confidence in the Defendants in
relation to all of the urgent works described above;
d. The Owners did not act unreasonably on 8 November 2019 when they refused to
allow the Defendants access to carry out any further
rectification work; and
e. The Owners did not act unreasonably in losing confidence in the
Defendants’ willingness and ability to carry out the other
defect rectification work.
primary judge held that the appellants had not established that the referee
erred with respect to mitigation, such as to preclude
adoption of his reports,
in finding the respondent’s actions to be reasonable. Her Honour agreed
with the referee that “the
fact that the owner refused access does not, of
itself, shift the onus of proof from the builder to the owner to prove the
reasonableness
of that decision” (J [73]). As to the
appellants’ criticism of the referee’s reliance on what was said in
correspondence
sent by the respondent’s solicitors, her Honour said that
“the referee was not bound by the rules of evidence”
(J [73], [77],
[87]). Further, the referee had regard to evidence from Mr Patrick Machado
– the person who ran the respondent’s
defects sub-committee –
that indicated from where the instructions to the lawyers had emanated
(J [78]-[79], [87]).
The appellants’ arguments
relating to mitigation and procedural fairness
appeal, the appellants’ contentions with respect to mitigation and
procedural fairness were linked. They asserted:
Once Ceerose established that it was willing and able to undertake
rectification, that the parties had agreed on the terms of that
rectification
and was denied the opportunity, the evidentiary onus shifted decisively to the
Respondent to prove that its refusal
was reasonable in all the circumstances.
The Respondent had to positively establish grounds upon which a reasonable
person in its
position would reject the builder's offer to rectify at
potentially lower cost. The primary judge did not engage with whether the
Referee correctly applied this onus. [footnote omitted]
particular focus of the appellants’ complaint about onus was whether or
not the respondent had established that it “ever
confidence in Ceerose’s ability and willingness to rectify the
defects”. They suggested that the respondent “may
have manufactured
an excuse”. In oral submissions, this supposed alternative purpose was
explained this way:
What was possibly being considered here was instead of proceeding with the
entitlement to have the defects all repaired, the alternative
is to get a cash
settlement and then that money may or may not get allocated to carrying out the
repairs, and it may be that there
would be a windfall to the owners corporation
because they have a judgment against the builder, and with no necessity to
carry out those repairs, and they could bank the moneys that were not
required to carry out the repairs.
appellants pointed to no material evidence in support of this claim, other than
the fact that the parties had come close to agreeing
on settlement of their
dispute involving Ceerose undertaking rectification of defects (as noted above,
the appellants did not assert
that a contractual agreement on rectification had
been reached). Senior counsel for the appellants said of this alternative
“[i]t’s possible, and we put it no higher than this”.
He later described the possibility by saying that “there
alternative available inference”.
appellants argued that once the claimed “evidentiary onus” had
shifted to the respondent then it was for the respondent
to prove that it had
refused to let Ceerose rectify the defects because of a loss of confidence. More
broadly, it “had to positively
establish grounds upon which a reasonable
person in its position would reject the builder’s offer”. In
substance, the
appellants argued that a refusal by an owner to allow the builder
to undertake rectification work – at least in circumstances
where there
had been some advanced negotiations to that end – created a rebuttable
presumption that the owner had acted unreasonably
and failed to mitigate its
appellants said that the referee erred in relying upon what was said in letters
sent by the solicitors asserting the respondent’s
loss of confidence in
Ceerose, including the clear statement in the letter of 8 November 2019 (quoted
asserted that in the course of the liability hearing the referee
“unequivocally made the Ruling that correspondence
between the parties
be admitted to prove the truth of the statements made
therein” (the nature of this ruling is discussed below). The
departure from this “clear and unmistakable” ruling
constituted a “procedural ambush”, in breach of the requirements
procedural fairness. The requirements of procedural fairness applied regardless
of whether or not the rules of evidence were applicable.
This “fundamental
procedural breach ... manifested primarily in the Referee’s impermissible
reliance on hearsay evidence
– specifically, assertions within solicitor
correspondence”.
was also asserted that there was an “unexplained failure” by the
respondent to call “direct evidence” from
members of its strata
executive committee as to whether or not the committee had lost confidence in
Ceerose. The appellants said
that this “compels the application of the
principle in
Jones v Dunkel
101 CLR 298
[1959] HCA 8]
and that this gap in the evidence “strongly suggests” that
“their evidence would have been damaging to
the Respondent’s
assertion of a reasonable loss of confidence”. The appellants noted
(correctly) that the minutes of
the strata committee did not record in terms the
claimed lack of confidence. The respondent did call evidence from Mr Patrick
who was part of the executive committee from about 2016 to 2020 and who
(to quote J [58]) “ran the owner’s defects
sub-committee”.
The appellants said that evidence rose no higher than Mr
Machado’s own views.
the primary judge explained (J [7]-[8] and [20]), the usual order for
reference was made by the Supreme Court, pursuant to which
“the referee is
not bound by the rules of evidence but may inform himself or herself in relation
to any matter in such manner
as the referee thinks fit”. The
appellants’ arguments as to hearsay and
Jones v Dunkel
not independent complaints but were founded on their procedural fairness
was said that the referee’s finding that the respondent had lost
confidence in the builder was “fatally undermined
by profound procedural
unfairness”. In particular:
The consequence of this procedural dereliction was not trivial; it inflicted
substantial and irremediable prejudice upon Ceerose.
Having conducted its case
in legitimate reliance upon the Referee’s express “Ruling”
– foregoing lines of
cross-examination directed at the truth of the
correspondence and potentially necessary rebuttal evidence – Ceerose was
utterly unable to counter the Referee’s retrospective reliance on
that very material. This denial of a fair opportunity to
be heard on evidence
ultimately used against it renders the affected parts of the Report unsafe,
unjust, and liable to rejection
by this Court. [footnotes omitted]
appellants noted that they had not challenged Mr Machado in cross-examination on
the respondent’s reasons for declining
to allow Ceerose to rectify the
defects, and they had not cross-examined the strata manager, Mr Van Oort,
at all (he had provided
two affidavits).
appellants’ conclusion, asserted in ground 7 of the notice of appeal,
The primary judge should have held that as a consequence of the ruling there was
not evidence enough, or at all, for the Respondent
to displace its evidentiary
onus of establishing that a reasonable person in the Respondent’s position
would have in all the
circumstances refused the Appellant access on 8 November
2019, to rectify the defects.
The claimed failure to mitigate
Breach of a statutory warranty implied in a contract constitutes a breach of the
contract and accordingly—
(a) a party to the contract who suffers loss arising from the breach has a duty
to mitigate their loss, and
(b) the onus of establishing a failure to mitigate loss is on the party alleging
the failure.
all levels the parties have proceeded on the assumption that common law
principles relating to mitigation apply, unaffected by
the Act, including with
respect to onus. In the absence of argument to the contrary, I shall do the
has long been established that even though a plaintiff bears the duty of
establishing loss, the onus is on the defendant to prove
facts going to a claim
that the plaintiff failed to mitigate the loss: see, eg,
Bagnall v National
Tobacco Corporation of Australia Ltd
[1934] NSWStRp 30
(1934) 34 SR (NSW) 421
(Jordan CJ). The High Court said this in
Arsalan v Rixon
[2021] HCA 40:
[32] Where a plaintiff acts in an attempt to reduce a loss, the onus shifts to
the defendant to show that the acts actually taken
by the plaintiff were
unreasonable acts of mitigation. Unless the plaintiff’s actions are shown
to be unreasonable, costs that
are incurred in an attempt to mitigate loss
caused by wrongdoing become, themselves, a head of damage that can be recovered.
if the costs incurred by the plaintiff are greater than the loss that was
attempted to be mitigated, those costs will be recoverable
other than to the
extent that they are shown to be unreasonable. [footnotes omitted]
High Court was addressing circumstances where the plaintiff incurs costs in
attempting to ameliorate the loss or its effects.
The principle as to onus is
the same where the defendant claims the plaintiff should have taken steps to
reduce loss. That type of
issue is addressed as a matter of mitigation even
though, as Ball J has pointed out, “the [plaintiff] is not mitigating
loss, but rather the [defendant’s] damages”:
Owners SP 76674
Constructions Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC 1067
or not a failure to mitigate is established depends upon the defendant
establishing that the plaintiff has acted unreasonably
in some respect. That
might be so by acts (incurring unnecessary or unreasonable expenses) or
omissions (failing to take steps that
reasonably should have been taken to
reduce the loss). Loss “which is due to unreasonable or improvident
actions of the plaintiff
is generally disregarded by application of the rules of
mitigation of loss”:
Cessnock City Council v 123 259 932 Pty Ltd
[2024] HCA 17
(2024) 98 ALJR 719
(Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and
Beech-Jones JJ).
excessive diligence nor perfection is required of a plaintiff in this regard. As
Lord Loreburn LC said in
Lodge Holes Colliery Company Ltd v Wednesbury
Corporation
[1908] UKLawRpAC 40
[1908] AC 323
Now I think a Court of justice ought to be very slow in countenancing any
attempt by a wrong-doer to make captious objections to
the methods by which
those whom he has injured have sought to repair the injury. ... Errors of
judgment may be committed in this
as in other affairs of life. It would be
intolerable if persons so situated could be called to account by the wrong-doer
in a minute
scrutiny of the expense, as though they were his agents, for any
mistake or miscalculation, provided they act honestly and reasonably.
position was well summarised by Giles JA in
Karacominakis v Big Country
Developments Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWCA 313
(2000) 10 BPR 18,235
[187] A plaintiff who acts unreasonably in failing to minimise his loss from the
defendant’s breach of contract will have his
damages reduced to the extent
to which, had he acted reasonably, his loss would have been less. This is often
misleadingly referred
to as a duty to mitigate, although the plaintiff is not
under a positive duty. The plaintiff does not have to show that he has fulfilled
his so-called duty, and the onus is on the defendant to show that he has not and
the extent to which he has not. Since the defendant
is a wrongdoer, in
determining whether the plaintiff has acted unreasonably a high standard of
conduct will not be required, and
the plaintiff will not be held to have acted
unreasonably simply because the defendant can suggest other and more beneficial
if it was reasonable for the plaintiff to do what he did. [citations
is no special common law rule applicable to building contracts in this regard.
The appellants placed some reliance on the statement
by Ball J in
, at [44], that “[i]n the case of building contracts, it is also
generally accepted that the owner must give the builder a reasonable
opportunity
to rectify any defects”. His Honour was not suggesting there is some
automatic requirement to that effect. As the
primary judge here noted
(J [42]), one of the sources his Honour invoked was Julian Bailey,
Construction Law: Volume II
(1st ed, 2011, Routledge) at [14.109],
where the following was said:
Even where a contract does not require the owner, or the contract administrator,
to give the contractor the opportunity of correcting
a defect for which it is
responsible,
it may, in the circumstances, be a reasonable step
owner, in attempting to mitigate its loss, to give the contractor such an
opportunity. This is especially so where the alternative
is for the owner to
engage a new contractor to perform the remedial work, where the new contractor
may – rightly – only
wish to undertake the remedial work on the
basis that it be performed from scratch (and for a substantial cost), rather
than attempting
to fix up the suspect or shoddy work of the first contractor;
whereas if the first contractor were given the opportunity to correct
the cost would be relatively small. [citations omitted, emphasis added]
this explanation indicates, there is no invariable requirement that the owner
provide the builder with an opportunity to rectify
defects. The issue is whether
the conduct of the plaintiff – including the failure to provide an
opportunity to rectify –
was unreasonable in all the circumstances, such
that some or all of the claimed loss resulting from the breach of contract
be disregarded. The onus of proof and persuasion in that regard is on the
defendant. That onus is a legal one. It is for the defendant
to establish the
relevant facts on the balance of probabilities and to persuade the
decision-maker of the conclusion. The defendant
also bears the evidential onus
on the point, that is, it is for the defendant to identify evidence sufficient
to raise the issue:
Munce v Vinidex Tube Makers Pty Ltd
[1974] 2 NSWLR
respondent did not have a “positive obligation” to provide the
appellants an opportunity to rectify the claimed defects
(to quote grounds 5 and
6 of the notice of appeal). The refusal of such an opportunity by the respondent
was a relevant fact which
the appellants could invoke in arguing that the
respondent’s damages claim should not be upheld in whole or part. But it
the start of the argument, not the end of it. The appellants needed to
persuade the referee that in all the circumstances of the
respondent’s refusal was unreasonable, and they needed to establish the
facts which supported that argument.
appellants asserted that “the evidentiary onus shifted” if the
defendant established that the plaintiff had not provided
it with an opportunity
to rectify defects. They accused the respondent of “conflat[ing] the
stable legal onus with the shifting
evidentiary onus”. The appellants
seemed thereby to invoke the notion of what has been called a
“tactical” onus
given that, as discussed, both the legal and
evidential onuses were on the appellants. Their argument illustrates (again) the
commonly created by that notion, and why its invocation is best
avoided. Given the centrality of this point to the appellants case,
it is worth
repeating what this Court said recently in
XJS World Pty Ltd v Central West
Civil Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWCA 133:
[45] Both parties referred to the notion of a “shifting” onus. That
language can be apt to deceive: note
Brady (Inspector of Taxes) v Group Lotus
Car Cos plc
[1987] 2 All ER 674
at 686-687. What is generally meant by that
language ... is to refer to what has been called the “tactical”
being simply “a tactical evaluation of who is winning at a
particular point in time”: CR Williams, “Burdens and
Standards in
Civil Litigation”
[2003] SydLawRw 9
(2003) 25 Sydney Law Review 165
at 168. The
“tactical” understanding of onus is liable to be confused with
instances where there is an evidentiary onus
requiring that the side bearing
that onus points to sufficient evidence for an issue to be raised (after which
the legal onus may
be on the other side). It can also be distinguished from the
principle of judicial reasoning that all evidence is to be weighed according
the proof which it is in the power of one side to have produced and the power of
the other to have contradicted:
Blatch v Archer
(1774) 1 Cowper 63 at 65;
[1774] EngR 2
Vetter v Lake Macquarie City Council
(2001) 202 CLR
[2001] HCA 12
[46] This Court has warned of the dangers of confusion when invoking the notion
of a “shifting” or “tactical”
onus. Macfarlan JA
explained the point as follows in
Commissioner of Police (New South Wales
Police Force) v Zisopoulos
[2020] NSWCA 236
(2020) 299 IR 314
Bell P at [61]-[62] and [88] and Wright J at [170] and [215]):
[97] As stated in JD Heydon,
Cross on Evidence
(online ed, March 2020,
LexisNexis Australia) at [7210] this type of [tactical] burden is “devoid
of legal significance because
there is no means of telling when it has been
brought into existence or when it has been discharged”. This is because
conducting a case will not know whilst the case is in progress what the
judicial officer is thinking about who will win if no further
evidence is
adduced. There is good reason therefore to avoid reference to the concept during
a hearing. If reference is to be made
to it in a judgment describing, in
retrospect, the course that the hearing took, a name, such as “tactical
onus”, should
be used to preclude ambiguity.
[98] It can be confusing to describe the concept as the “evidential
onus” as that term refers instead to the distinct
concept of an onus of
introducing evidence. That onus arises when a case will be decided without
consideration of a particular issue
unless the party upon whom the evidential
onus rests adduces some evidence to require the party bearing the legal burden
to address it (see for example
Purkess v Crittenden
[1965] HCA 34
[1965] HCA 34
Strong v Woolworths Ltd
(2012) 246 CLR
[2012] HCA 5
[47] The notion of a “tactical” or “shifting” onus is
also of doubtful utility at the end of a hearing (or
in an appeal) when the
course of adducing evidence has come to an end. The question at that point with
respect to a factual matter
properly raised is whether the party bearing the
legal burden of proof has discharged it. The risk of non-persuasion lies on the
person bearing the legal burden.
tactical notion of onus is employed as though litigation were a sporting
contest, addressing which side is leading at a particular
point in the game. But
in sporting contests the winner is the person or team ahead when the game ends.
In litigation, disputes are
resolved when receipt of the evidence has concluded
and the evidence is assessed. In the case of a draw – where the court is
not persuaded either way – the party bearing the legal onus loses.
appellants referred to a statement by Handley AJA that “[t]he fact
that the defendant carries the ultimate legal onus and
the initial evidentiary
onus of proving a failure to mitigate does not prevent the evidentiary onus
shifting to the plaintiff during
the trial”:
CJD Equipment Pty Ltd v
A&C Constructions Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 188
. That statement
invokes a tactical onus, as illustrated by the reference to what occurs
the trial. It is not relevant to the assessment at the end of the
trial. It can also be noted that the other two members of this
Court did not
adopt his Honour’s analysis on mitigation.
appellants’ arguments about onus are thus misconceived. It is wrong to say
that “the evidentiary onus shifted decisively
to the Respondent to prove
that its refusal was reasonable in all the circumstances” once it was
established that Ceerose was
ready and willing to undertake rectification works.
The appellants bore the onus of proof and persuasion from beginning to end with
respect to their claim that the respondent had acted unreasonably. The
respondent did not have “to positively establish grounds
upon which a
reasonable person in its position would reject the builder’s offer to
rectify at potentially lower cost”.
appellants’ case theory was, in effect, that it was for the respondent to
prove that its decision not to allow Ceerose to
undertake rectification works
was because it had lost confidence in Ceerose’s ability and willingness to
undertake the works
rather than for some other reason. Yet the respondent bore
no onus. The appellants’ forensic choice not to cross-examine Mr
and Mr Van Oort on the issue simply means that they did not explore an issue on
which they bore the onus; it does nothing
to assist them to discharge that onus.
Their speculation as to another purpose – which they conceded was a mere
possibility
– did little if anything towards discharging their onus.
primary judge thus did not err in failing to hold that there “was not
evidence enough, or at all, for the Respondent to
displace its evidentiary
onus”. Grounds 5-7 must be rejected.
The claimed denial of
procedural fairness
appellants accused the referee of a “procedural ambush” – a
term suggestive of bad faith – saying that
his finding that the respondent
had lost confidence in the builder was “fatally undermined by profound
procedural unfairness”.
The supposed ambush was the referee’s
reliance on what was said in letters sent by the respondent’s solicitors
the respondent losing or having lost confidence in Ceerose’s ability
and willingness to rectify defects, where it was said
the referee had ruled that
the letters would not be so used. There was no such ambush. There was no
procedural unfairness, let alone
of a profound kind.
premise of the complaint is that the respondent bore a positive onus on the
mitigation issue and was required to put forward evidence
which would
demonstrate that it had not acted unreasonably. The impermissible reliance on
the letters as evidence would thus undermine
the basis upon which the referee
could make such a determination. As just explained, the respondent did not bear
any such onus. The
respondent did not need to prove that it had not acted
unreasonably. Rather, the appellants had to prove that the respondent had
unreasonably. That the appellants chose not to cross-examine on the issue or to
call further evidence, in claimed reliance
on the ruling, was a forensic choice
made based upon their own legal misunderstanding. Those choices were made at the
appellants’
procedural fairness has been established by the appellants. To begin with, it is
necessary to address what the referee’s
ruling was and how it came about.
The oddity, if not absurdity, of the appellants’ position is that they
complain of the referee
relying on what was said in letters sent by the
respondent’s solicitors, yet it was the appellants themselves who tendered
those letters, and at the time they did so they did not seek any restriction on
the use to which they could be put.
liability hearing before the referee commenced on 19 April 2022. At the
beginning of the hearing the respondent’s counsel
complained that
affidavits had been served late by the appellants. One of those affidavits was
by a director of both appellants,
Mr Edward Doueihi, which exhibited the
correspondence between the parties as to the defendant’s offers to rectify
the defects.
As to that affidavit, the respondent’s counsel (Mr Hand)
complained about the lateness of the material being served and the
non-compliance with the court-imposed timetable; about prejudice in having to
gather material in response; and about the fact that
some of the correspondence
was “without prejudice”. As to the claimed prejudice, senior counsel
for the appellants (Mr
Ashhurst) said this:
He says they need to speak to witnesses. Why? This is correspondence passing
between the parties. There’s no alleged conversations
that are relevant.
It’s correspondence passing between the parties. He doesn’t explain
why he needs to speak to any of
these witnesses.
referee asked why evidence was necessary when the appellants had pleaded an
agreement as to rectification. Senior counsel responded:
Firstly, there has to be some evidence of where that document comes from
that’s attached to the pleading. Otherwise we don’t
know the basis
referee ended up saying that “I’m inclined to allow it subject to
the concerns about it being a document evidencing
the without prejudice
discussions, and to give [the respondent] the opportunity to put on whatever
documents are missing”.
The appellants’ senior counsel responded
that “that’s sensible because we could simply just tender the
anyway and they couldn’t possibly complain”. The
referee’s ruling then was as follows:
I’m prepared to allow the affidavit, but it’s subject to objections
to any – what ..... subject to any without
prejudice discussions involving
settlement, and I will give the plaintiff the opportunity to put on an affidavit
and any attachments
in reply ...
side sought any limitation be placed on the use to which the correspondence
attached to the affidavit could be put (leaving
aside the issue of whether any
significance should be attached to the “without prejudice” nature of
the correspondence,
which was left for later debate). No such limitation was
imposed. Indeed, the appellants’ senior counsel had rejected any
that witness evidence was needed to explain the contents of the
correspondence which, he suggested, spoke for itself.
respondent later served an affidavit of Mr Machado dealing with the issue. The
appellants had a number of objections to that affidavit.
The appellants’
position with respect to the use that could be made of correspondence now
reversed, their senior counsel saying
I’m assuming that the exhibit of the correspondence between the parties is
not tendered to prove the truth of the statements
made in the annexures; only
that the communications were made.
for the respondent indicated that they were so tendered. The referee then
pointed out that this material was simply responsive
to the late affidavit
provided by the appellants. Senior counsel for the appellants then sought
retrospectively to limit his earlier
tender, saying this:
However, we agree what’s sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander, and
we do not tender any of that material as evidence
of anything other than the
correspondence: “These are the communications.” And that’s why
I think we said earlier
we could have tendered all of that evidence simply as,
“Here’s the communications.”
was then the following exchange:
MR HAND: I understood that they were relying on the correspondence attached to
Mr Doueihi’s affidavit for purposes
other than proof of the fact of the
communication
MR GOLDSTEIN: Mr Ashhurst has said no.
MR ASHHURST: It’s not.
MR GOLDSTEIN: And if that’s the case, then I would have thought, again,
what’s good for the goose is good for the gander.
MR HAND: Yes. Yes. Yes.
MR GOLDSTEIN: That,
if both of those affidavits and the supporting
correspondence are received on that basis, then that ought to remove that
MR HAND: Yes. And I make one further point, which is that you as referee are not
bound by the rules of evidence.
MR GOLDSTEIN: I know that. Yes. But it still doesn’t mean that I should
allow without prejudice communications in on a willy-nilly
basis. I think I have
still got to be fairly responsible in the approach. [emphasis added]
is the italicised statement by the referee which is said to be the unequivocal
ruling. In the Liability Report, the referee himself
cited the same statement in
saying the following:
In the Defendants’ mitigation submissions, the defendants submitted that
when considering the chronology, it was important
for me to note that an
assertion in correspondence between solicitors was not proof of the existence of
the fact so asserted. In
this regard, it was pointed out (correctly) that I had
already made a general ruling to that effect during the hearing.
thus appears that in the end there was some ruling made which retrospectively
limited the use that either side might make of the
correspondence relating to
Ceerose rectifying defects. But the appellants’ stridently expressed
complaints ring rather hollow
in the context outlined.
the ruling cannot be said to be “unequivocal”. The basis on which it
was received was as “proof of the
fact of the communication” (to
quote what Mr Hand said at the start of the exchange just set out). It did not
address issues
of state of mind and, in particular, whose mind was relevant. The
appellants did not dispute that the correspondence could be used
as evidence of
the state of mind of the sender, but said that the sender (relevantly) was the
respondent’s solicitors, and
their state of mind was not to the point.
That issue was not addressed directly in the ruling.
is also notable that despite the appellants’ complaints of a
“procedural ambush”, in fact the referee drew upon
submissions made
by the respondent which invoked the correspondence and argued why it could be
relied upon, to which the appellants
had the chance to respond, which
opportunity they took. As the respondent correctly said in its submissions to
this Court:
No submissions were made to the Referee that the correspondence could not be
used to establish the loss of confidence of the Respondent
because of any
forensic decision or particular prejudice to the Appellants. Further, the
Appellants could have sought to withdraw
their tender of the correspondence or
communications, sought leave to further cross-examine witnesses, or sought leave
to call rebuttal evidence. They did none of these things.
if the ruling is understood to mean that the letters of the respondent’s
solicitors could not be relied upon per se to
prove the truth of the fact that
the respondent was losing or had lost confidence in Ceerose undertaking
rectification work, no material
prejudice or unfairness has been identified by
the appellants.
the Liability Report the referee addressed the issue by determining whether the
claims made in the relevant correspondence was
supported by other evidence or
inferences. Four letters relevantly were referred to by the referee in relation
to the alleged loss
of confidence. In a letter dated 6 December 2018, the
respondent’s solicitors said this:
The unexplained delay to the commencement of the urgent works and the failure to
keep the Owners informed as to a programme for the
urgent works is causing my
client to lose faith in the capacity of Ceerose to carry out the rectification
of the defects promptly
and in a good and tradesman like manner.
the referee (twice) noted in the Liability Report, that statement appeared to
reflect the minutes of a strata executive committee
of 26 November 2018, shortly
beforehand, in which this was said:
The collective view of the Strata Committee is that as Ceerose continues to
stall with undertaking the urgent building defects, they
continue to lose faith
in Ceerose being engaged to undertake the remaining defect works.
the referee noted, those minutes also recorded that Mr Machado was to attend an
onsite meeting on 28 November 2018 with a lawyer
from DEA Lawyers to discuss the
defects claim; that he would speak with her “noting the Committee’s
above concerns”.
The minutes also note that Mr Machado would seek advice
on whether it was in the respondent’s “best interest” to
and have Ceerose attend the site or proceed with the repairs at their own cost.
There is nothing remarkable in this minute,
nor anything supportive of the
appellants’ speculative theory about some other motivation of the
respondent. The respondent
was entitled to take account of its own interests.
is true that the referee ended his analysis with respect to the 6 December 2018
in these terms:
Accordingly, I accept that the letter from the Owners’ solicitor, DEA
lawyers dated 6 December 2018 is a statement of the state
of mind of the Owners
at that time, and therefore is admissible as evidence on that basis.
as the word “accordingly” indicates, this was a statement of the
based upon the other evidence to which he
referred; he concluded that the letter did in fact manifest the view of the
respondent.
He was not treating the letter per se as evidence of the state of
mind of the respondent. The referee’s approach was much the
respect to the other letters.
a letter dated 4 April 2019, the respondent’s solicitors said:
In circumstances where Ceerose and Prisand have failed to complete the urgent
AFSS fire safety rectification works in breach of its
agreement with the Owners,
I am instructed that the Owners have no confidence that your clients are willing
or able to carry out
the works in accordance with the time frame for submission
of the SFSS or at all.
referee noted that this statement was consistent with the evidence of Mr
Machado, who testified that:
Due to the Defendants’ conduct in failing to fully respond to the fire
safety defect over an extended, I, as a member of the
executive committee of the
Owners Corporation, lost confidence in the Defendants’ ability to be
ready, willing and able to
attend to the remainder of the fire safety defects
and other defects identified in the Building.
that evidence goes only to Mr Machado’s view, he was a key figure both as
a member of the executive committee and as
the person who ran the
respondent’s defects sub-committee. It is some evidence – even if
not conclusive – going
towards a conclusion that the executive
committee’s decision not to allow Ceerose to rectify the defects was taken
of the concern he expressed.
referee also noted that the solicitors were “always careful to state that
they were acting under instructions” and
there “was no evidence
which suggested that DEA Lawyers had misunderstood its instructions”. The
referee cannot be criticised
for drawing the obvious inference, in the absence
of evidence to the contrary, that the state of mind of solicitors about their
position was based upon instructions.
a letter dated 1 October 2019, the respondent’s solicitors said the
following (and this paragraph was actually quoted in
Mr Doueihi’s
affidavit):
Most importantly, my client has lost confidence that your client has the ability
or desire to perform the rectification works properly
and in a timely manner
and, as such, is unwilling to allow your client any further opportunity to
repair the defects. That loss of
confidence arises from several factors in the
history of my client’s dealings with your client, including ...
letter sent by the respondent’s solicitor on 8 November 2019 has already
been quoted (above at [
primary judge correctly summarised the approach of the referee in this
[77] ... the referee had regard to the correspondence in combination with other
contemporaneous documents which together painted
a cohesive picture of the owner
having lost confidence in the builder to attend to the rectification of defects
in a timely manner
or at all or in a manner which the owner regarded as
acceptable.
as her Honour observed (J [67]), the fact that a year had passed since an
“in principle” agreement had been
reached, without final resolution,
of itself “speaks volumes” about the parties’ inability to
agree on rectification.
is an air of unreality about the appellants’ complaints. The following
exchange in this Court illustrates the point:
BALL JA: But weren’t [the letters] also relevant to demonstrating the
relationship between the parties? Irrespective of what
particular assertions
were made in the letters, they illustrate the relationship between the parties,
and might it not be inferred
from the nature of that relationship that it had
broken down? Isn’t that really what the referee did?
ASHHURST: There’s a number of problems with that. The primary one is the
one I started with, which is was this an engineered
breakdown of the
relationship?
explained, it was not incumbent on the respondent to prove why it decided not to
allow Ceerose to rectify the defects; it was for
the appellants to prove that
that decision was unreasonable. The letters themselves are some evidence of the
breakdown in the relationship,
and there was other evidence going to the
respondent having lost confidence in Ceerose. The suggestion that this breakdown
was “engineered”
was speculative. The appellants made no real
attempt to prove that claim. They chose not to put their claim to Mr Machado in
cross-examination.
appellants’ case before the referee, in the court below and in this Court
was based on the misunderstanding that the respondent
bore the onus because it
had “shifted”. Their complaint relates to letters that they
themselves tendered, where they
sought no restriction on the use of the letters
when this occurred. The retrospective ruling of the referee was not as
unequivocal
as they claim. And even if the ruling was understood so as not to
allow the letters to be relied upon as going to the state of mind
respondent, there is no unfairness because the referee’s conclusion that
they did in fact manifest the view of the respondent
was based upon other
evidence. No procedural unfairness has been established.
claimed error as to which version of the Australian Standard to apply
appellants argued that the primary judge erred by rejecting their contention
that the referee had determined the respondent’s
claims relating to
claimed defects in the falls of bathroom floors by reference to a superseded
standard. Each side had called a
building expert who addressed the issue. In the
liability hearing the appellants put to the referee that “[n]either expert
carried out proper testing to determine whether ponding [of water] was in fact
subsisting to such a degree (or at all), that it was
causing damage”
(quoting the Liability Report). There was no definition of ponding in the
version of the relevant Australian
Standard that applied when the building was
constructed, being AS3740-2004. However, the current version of that standard,
AS3740-2021,
outlines a process for determining ponding, which potentially
involves observing whether water evaporates within 5 hours in certain
atmospheric conditions. That type of testing had not been done by either expert.
The appellants submitted that “further tests
should be conducted to
ascertain whether the floors as they currently exist” complied with the
later standard. The referee
rejected the contention that the experts had failed
to carry out proper testing, implicitly rejecting the appellants’ argument
that his determination should await further testing.
appellants argued both in the court below and in this Court that a proper
assessment of the reasonable cost of rectification must
have regard to the
standards in force at the time it is carried out, and that the referee erred in
concluding to the contrary. It
is not necessary to determine that point. The
referee did indicate in the Liability Report that he considered the later
was not applicable. However, he also based his decision upon a
conclusion that the method of determining ponding in the later version
standard “imposes a number of conditions which would be difficult, if not
impossible, to achieve in practice”.
And he noted that the preface to the
later standard made it clear that the appendix which included the ponding test
was provided
only for information and guidance and was not an integral part of
the standard. Thus the referee’s decision did not depend
upon a conclusion
that the later version of the standard was legally irrelevant.
there is no error in the following analysis by the primary judge:
[102] The referee had before him two building experts, who agreed that there
were inadequate falls in
of the bathrooms. The only point of
controversy was the method of rectification. The possibility that the bathrooms,
or some of them,
might not have ‘ponding’ according to the method
described in the 2021 standard was just that: a possibility. Some six
passed between the commencement of these proceedings in NCAT and the expert
conclave on this issue in September 2022. The
defendants had ample time to
explore this matter, but had not done so by the time the referee heard the
evidence on this issue. Where
the experts, including the defendants’
expert, agreed that there was a defect, it is difficult to see why the referee
in proceeding as he did.
8-9 of the notice of appeal are not established.
The claimed
erred as to the Yedalian and Van Oort invoices
appellants contended that the primary judge erred in not rejecting that part of
the referee’s report which allowed costs
the subject of two categories of
invoices: first, those issued by Mr Gary Yedalian, mechanical services
engineer, for his works in
the building; and second, those for other
rectification works in the building attached to an affidavit of Mr Van
Oort, the strata
manager. The appellants argued below and on appeal that the
claims for these invoices should have been rejected for three reasons:
(1) they were rendered after the commencement of litigation and so were to be
characterised as costs of litigation, not damages;
(2) they did not form part of the Scott Schedule before the referee listing the
defects in question and associated costs; and
(3) details were lacking as to the works the subject of the invoices.
to the first point, the fact that the invoices were rendered after the
litigation commenced does not necessarily mean that they
cannot be claimed as
damages. Whether the invoices were claimable was addressed by the referee. No
error has been established in
the conclusion of the primary judge that
“[i]t is clear from the referee’s report that he closely examined
each and every
invoice and formed a view”, and “[w]hether that view
was right or wrong, it was clearly available to the referee and
is no basis to
reject the report” (J [124]). The same answer applies to the third
point, which the appellants supported with
a half-hearted argument that the
invoices were “potentially lacking sufficient detail and
verification” and “may
not have constituted adequate proof of the
loss claimed”.
to the second point, the primary judge concluded that whether or not the
invoices were included in the Scott Schedule, the respondents’
them had been made clear well in advance, and there had been no denial of
natural justice relating to the claim for these
amounts (J [122]-[123]). No
error has been shown in that conclusion. Procedural fairness is a matter of
substance not form.
10 is not made out.
orders of the Court should be as follows:
(1) Appeal dismissed.
(2) Appellants to pay the respondent’s costs.
I agree with Kirk JA.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (366 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter