URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSIRADRS/2020/255.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ARC v GIO (Merit Review) [2020] NSWSIRADRS 255 (4 December 2020)
ARC v GIO (Merit Review)
NSWSIRADRS 255
NSW DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE (NSWDRS)
Merit Review
Merit Review – recovery of legal costs – medical assessment
findings commensurate with Insurer’s internal review
costs awarded
Legislation Cited
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
, Schedule 2 Clause
Motor Accident Regulations – Schedule 1 Part 1(2)(1)
Cases Cited
ARC – Claimant
GIO – Insurer
This decision has been edited to remove all Unique Personal
Identification including the name of the Claimant
Merit Review
Date of Accident:
28 March 2019
AAI Limited trading GIO
Insurer Claim Number:
DRS Reference:
APP-10253773
Date of reviewable decision:
22 September 2020
Nature of reviewable decision:
Recovery of legal costs
Merit Reviewer:
Tajan Baba (DRS)
Date of certificate:
4 December 2020
Certificate
Issued under
section 7.13(4)
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Insurer’s reviewable decision of 22 July 2020 is set aside and the
following decision is made in substitution of the reviewable
The Insurer is to pay ARC’s legal costs in the amount of $1,027.22
(inclusive of GST) relating to the medical assessment of
the treatment dispute
(determined in certificate dated 24 March 2020).
date: This determination takes effect on 4 December 2020.
reasons for this decision are attached to this
certificate.
Merit Reviewer and Claims Assessor
Resolution Service
REASONS FOR DECISION – MERIT REVIEW
Issued in accordance with Schedule 2 of the
Accident Injuries Act
was injured in a motor vehicle accident on 28 March 2019.
Limited trading as GIO (“the Insurer”) accepted ARC’s claim
Motor Accidents Injuries Act
2017 (“the Act”).
submitted a treatment request to the Insurer, seeking approval for the costs of
an MRI and chiropractic treatment. On 27 June
2019, the Insurer declined to
provide approval for the treatments requested.
sought an internal review of the Insurer’s decision. On internal review
dated 6 September 2019, the Insurer maintained its
decision to decline the costs
of the treatment requested.
disputed the Insurer’s decision and her legal representatives, Marsdens
Law Group, lodged an application for medical assessment
with the Dispute
Resolution Service (“DRS”) dated 15 October 2019.
referred ARC for a medical assessment with Assessor Nel Wijetunga. In a
certificate dated 24 March 2020, Assessor Wijetunga determined
treatment requested was not reasonable and necessary in the circumstances.
legal representatives subsequently issued a tax invoice to the Insurer dated 22
July 2020 for recovery of legal costs
in the amount of $1,760.00 (inclusive of
Insurer did not make payments of the legal costs. This is the ‘reviewable
decision’ for the purposes of the Act. The
issue in dispute is whether ARC
is entitled to recover from the Insurer the legal costs incurred pursuant to
section 8.10 of the
legal representatives referred the dispute in relation to legal costs to DRS on
15 April 2020. The application was accepted
and falls within the jurisdiction of
the DRS as a merit review matter under Schedule 2(1)(aa) of the Act.
DOCUMENTS CONSIDERED
have considered the documents provided in the application and the reply and any
further information and submissions provided by
the parties.
LEGISLATION
conducting my review, I have considered the following legislation and
guidelines:
Accident Injuries Act
(NSW) (“the Act”)
Motor Accident
Guidelines 2017 (as amended on 20 December 2019) (“the
Guidelines”)
Accident Injuries Amendment Regulation
(NSW) (“the
Regulations”).
Submissions
the correspondence referring the costs dispute, ARC’s legal
representatives submit that the costs should be assessed in accordance
Schedule 1 of the Regulations. They attach a copy of the letter and tax invoice
in the amount of $1,760.00 (inclusive of GST)
issued to the Insurer, dated 22
reply, the Insurer makes, in summary, the following submissions:
legal representatives did not provide any supporting documents and failed to
provide any submissions in the application
for medical assessment. It does not
appear ARC’s legal representatives considered and/or referred to any
medical evidence.
the Medical Assessment Certificate issued by Assessor Nel Wijetunga, dated 24
March 2020, the request for an MRI and Chiropractic
treatment was unsurprisingly
determined to be not reasonable and necessary. The Insurer submits this was
commensurate with the Insurer’s
internal review decision, comprehensively
set out and provided to ARC.
injured persons have a right to have medical disputes determined by a medical
assessor, there is no automatic entitlement to
recover legal costs, particularly
the maximum amount of legal costs in matters such as this.
Consideration
ought to be given to the amount of work completed and effort exerted by
ARC’s legal representatives. The Insurer
respectfully submits there is
little evidence available to demonstrate that the ARC’s legal
representatives demonstrated any
legal expertise beyond that of completing the
DRS Application form.
8.10(4)(b) of the Act provides that DRS can permit legal costs if there are
exceptional circumstances
to justify payment of legal costs. The Insurer
submits that the Claimant was not under a legal disability and no exceptional
circumstances
exist in this matter that would justify payment of legal costs
incurred by the Claimant.
Notwithstanding
the above, ARC’s legal representatives did not provide a schedule
itemising the tasks for which the costs were
incurred with respect to the
application for medical assessment. There are also no submissions pertaining to
the tasks in which the
costs claimed in the invoice relate.
Insurer submits it is not in line with the objects of the Act
award the maximum amount of costs in a medical dispute, or any costs at all, in
the absence of evidence of exceptional circumstances,
application of legal
expertise, or considerable work undertaken.
Insurer is of the view that maximum costs may be awarded in circumstances where
the legal representative has put significant and
justified time and effort into
the application. In this instance, there has been minimal effort exerted with
respect to providing
medical evidence and/or formulating arguments in support of
their position.
the Insurer submits that the ARC’s application for legal costs ought to be
the alternative, only a minimal allowance for costs should be awarded.
Commensurate with a multitude of prior DRS decisions in
this regard, the Insurer
submits that in the absence of any submissions whatsoever which refer to medical
evidence and lack of overall
consideration put into the application, it would
not be appropriate to award the maximum costs claimed. It is submitted that
approximately
three (3) units of costs for the time it took to complete the DRS
Application form may be appropriate.
issue in dispute between the parties is ARC’s entitlement to legal costs
relating to the medical assessment of the treatment
dispute, determined by
Assessor Wijetunga in medical assessment certificate dated 24 March 2020.
8.3 of the Act provides for the fixing of maximum costs recoverable by
Australian legal practitioners. Section 8.10(1) provides
that a claimant for
statutory benefits is (subject to that section) entitled to recover from the
insurer ‘reasonable and necessary’
costs and expenses incurred in
connection with the claim. This is qualified by subsections (3) and (4) which
provide that the recovery
of costs is allowed if payment is permitted by the
Regulations or the DRS.
Is there an entitlement to recover costs
in connection with medical assessments?
Insurer has declined to make payment of the legal costs sought by ARC on the
basis that there is no automatic entitlement to recover
legal costs under the
legislative framework and that exceptional circumstances do not exist in
ARC’s circumstances to justify
payment of legal costs.
do not agree with either of these submissions of the Insurer. I note that
subsection (2) of section 8.10 of the Act provides:
regulations may make provision for or with respect to fixing the maximum costs
and expenses recoverable by a claimant under
this section (including any matters
for which no costs and expenses are recoverable from the insurer).
1, Part 1(2)(1) of the Regulations states:
The maximum costs for
legal services provided to a claimant or an insurer in connection with a medical
assessment under Division 7.5
of the Act, as allowed by the claims assessor or
court, are 16 monetary units (to a maximum of 60 monetary units per claim).
my view, the extracts above provide an express provision through the Regulations
stipulating that costs and expenses are recoverable
by claimants in connection
with medical assessments.
agree with the Insurer that the above does not provide an entitlement to recover
the maximum costs in all cases. The Insurer is
however able to pay costs it
agrees is reasonable and necessary, in light of the provisions above.
provisions above also provide that ARC does not have to establish that
exceptional circumstances exist for costs to be paid, the
other submission made
by the Insurer. Section 8.10(4) of the Act, which provides for costs in
exceptional circumstances is not relevant
in cases such as these where the
Regulations specifically permit the recovery of reasonable and necessary costs
for medical assessment
DRS has jurisdiction to determine disputes arising in relation to costs as merit
review matters under Schedule 2 of the Act, where
agreement between the parties
in relation to costs cannot be reached. The dispute is outlined at clause 1(aa)
whether for the purposes of section 8.10 (Recovery of
costs and expenses in relation to claims for statutory benefits) the costs and
expenses incurred by ARC are reasonable and necessary.
is no provision in the Act or the Regulations which states that reasonable and
necessary costs cannot be agreed to or paid by
an insurer in cases where
exceptional circumstances do not exist.
refusing to consider payment of legal costs at all, resulting in further
disputation, falls contrary to the objects of the
Act particularly that at
section 1.3(2)(g): “to encourage the early resolution of motor accident
claims and the quick, cost
effective and just resolution of disputes”.
8.3(3) provides that costs are recoverable if permitted by the Regulations
the DRS. I am satisfied on the reasons outlined above, that the
Regulations permit costs in medical assessment matters. ARC is therefore
required to establish to DRS that exceptional circumstances exist under section
8.10(4) of the Act.
What is the reasonable and necessary
costs incurred in connection with the Medical Assessment?
outlined above, Schedule 1, clause 2(1) of the Regulations limits costs in
connection with medical assessments to 16 monetary units
(currently equalling
$1,660.16).
am required pursuant to the jurisdiction conferred by Schedule 2, clause 1(aa)
of the Act (outlined above), to determine the quantum
of the maximum costs I
consider appropriate. It is open to me to permit any amount up to the maximum
legal representatives submitted a tax invoice to the Insurer, dated 22 July
2020, for recovery of legal costs in the amount
of $1,760.00 (inclusive of GST).
legal representatives therefore sought the maximum of 16 monetary units for
their professional costs of the medical assessment.
The Insurer submits that the
maximum is not demonstrated by ARC’s legal representatives to be
appropriate in the circumstances
and that if I were to allow costs, an award for
approximately 3 monetary units should be made (currently equalling $311.28). A
of submissions are made about the brevity of the submissions prepared for
the application for medical assessment, the lack of “legal
expertise” demonstrated and a failure to refer to any medical
review of the application for medical assessment, I note that the submissions
are two lines in length and lists the two treatments
declined by the Insurer.
As submitted by the Insurer, the submissions do not refer to the medical
evidence attached to the application.
The application included 13 attachments
made up of medical information and documents relevant to the dispute.
submissions prepared by ARC’s legal representatives identify that the
Insurer’s decision in dispute is in relation
to a treatment dispute
however do not contain any further submissions to indicate that ARC’s
legal representatives had consideration
to the relevant test and provisions
under the Act. While this is a factor for consideration when determining what
costs are reasonable
and necessary for the work undertaken by ARC’s legal
representatives, it is also important to note that the information before
indicates that ARC suffered from pre-existing injuries to the same areas injured
in the motor accident.
note the Insurer’s submission with respect to the medical assessment
findings being commensurate with the Insurer’s
internal review decision. I
acknowledge the comprehensive internal review and reasons provided by the
Insurer including detailed
references to the medical information available.
While I acknowledge this, given the existence of the pre-existing injuries to
same areas, I consider the reasonable prospects of success of the
application may not have been so clear to ARC’s legal representatives
do not have the medical training to differentiate between the injury and
symptoms following the accident and the pre-existing
issues with certainty, as
the medical assessor was able to. I consider it reasonable that ARC may have
wished to have the Insurer’s
decision reviewed.
Accordingly,
when considering the appropriate costs, I have had regard to the outcome of the
medical assessment, where ARC’s
application was ultimately not successful
and considered the Insurer’s submissions. However, for the reasons
outlined above,
I do not consider the reasonable prospects of success of the
application was very clear to ARC’s legal representatives given
of ARC’s injuries, even with the detailed internal review decision
prepared by the Insurer.
maximum of 16 monetary units is provided in the Regulations despite the outcome
of the assessment. In light of this, while I consider
the prospects of success
of the application is a relevant consideration when determining the reasonable
and necessary costs and the
quantum of the maximum costs that should be allowed,
I do not consider that nil costs should automatically be awarded in matters
where the applications are not successful.
Insurer also makes submissions in relation to ARC’s legal representatives
not providing a schedule itemising the costs incurred
and that they have not
made submissions pertaining to the tasks in which the costs claimed in the
invoice relate. I note that there
is no legislative or other requirement to
provide a schedule itemising costs.
regard to the brief and general nature of the submissions made, as well as the
ultimate outcome of ARC’s application,
I do not consider the recovery of
maximum costs of $1,660.16 is reasonable and necessary in this matter. I do
consider some costs
are reasonably incurred however for the time and effort
expended in consulting with ARC, reviewing the available information and
preparing the application and submissions including attachments. I consider the
Insurer’s proposal of 3 monetary units is too
low for the work undertaken
in completing these tasks.
my discretion and experience, I consider legal costs of $933.84 (9 monetary
units) to be an appropriate amount for costs
in this matter.
allow costs in the amount of $1,027.22 (inclusive of GST) in respect to the
medical assessment of the treatment dispute, determined
in the medical
assessment certificate dated 24 March 2020.
DETERMINATION
Insurer’s reviewable decision of 22 July 2020 is set aside and the
following decision is made in substitution of the reviewable
The Insurer is to pay ARC’s legal costs in the amount of $1,027.22
(inclusive of GST) relating to the medical assessment of
the treatment dispute
(determined in certificate dated 24 March 2020).
date: This determination takes effect on 4 December 2020.
Merit Reviewer and Claims Assessor
Resolution Service
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (839 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter