URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMHRT/2017/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:02:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Collie [2017] NSWMHRT 1; (7 February 2017)
THIS IS AN OFFICIAL REPORT OF THE MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW TRIBUNAL
PROCEEDINGS IN RELATION TO COLLIE AUTHORISED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
TRIBUNAL ON
19 APRIL 2017
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision. The
forensic patient has been allocated a pseudonym for the purposes of
Official Report
FORENSIC REVIEW:
[2017] NSWMHRT 1
s 46(1) Review of forensic patient
Mental Health (Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
Judge Richard Cogswell SC
Dr Janelle Miller
Psychiatrist
Dr Sally McSwiggan
Other Member
DATE OF HEARING:
3 February 2017
Conference Room, MHRT
APPLICATION:
That the former Minister’s undated request made in early November
2016 not be taken into account in determining whether or not
to grant escorted
day leave to My Collie to the Local Government Area.
1. The Tribunal determined that it was appropriate to grant the application
made on behalf of Mr Collie that the medical superintendent
may not have regard
to the former Minister’s letter in exercising his decision to allow Mr
Collie the extended leave granted
by the Tribunal.
2. In addition, the medical superintendent must have regard to the fact that
the Tribunal has already determined that the extended
leave will have
therapeutic value for Mr Collie.
Judge Richard Cogswell SC
Dated 7 February
1. This is the 15
review of Desmond Collie who is currently
detained in Hospital with access to escorted day leave restricted to the Local
Area. At this review, Mr Collie, through his lawyer, is seeking an
order that the former Minister's undated request not be taken
into account in
determining whether or not to grant escorted day leave to Mr Collie to the Local
Government Area.
3. Mr Collie was found not guilty by reason of mental illness
TRIBUNAL REQUIREMENTS
4. This is a review pursuant to
section 46(1)
Mental Health
(Forensic Provisions) Act 1990
(“the Act”). Under
Tribunal is required to review the case of each forensic patient every six
months. On such a review the Tribunal may make orders
as to the patient’s
continued detention, care or treatment or the patient’s release.
5. The Act has special evidentiary requirements in relation to leave or
release which must be satisfied before the Tribunal can grant
leave or release.
In view of this, the Tribunal requires notice of applications for leave or
release to ensure that the necessary
evidence is available.
6. This process also enables the Tribunal to provide notice of such
applications to the Minister for Health, the Attorney General,
registered victims who are entitled to make submissions concerning any proposed
leave or release. A notice was provided to
the Tribunal prior to this review
advising the Minister of Mental Health and the Attorney General that the review
would be limited
to seeking orders that the former Minister's undated request
not be taken into account in determining whether or not to grant Mr
escorted day leave to the Local Government Area.
7. Without limiting any other matters the Tribunal may consider, the Tribunal
must consider the principles set out in section 40 of
the Act and
Mental Health Act 2007
as well as the following matters under
when determining what order to make:
(a) whether the person is suffering from a mental illness or other mental
(b) whether there are reasonable grounds for believing that care,
treatment or control of the person is necessary for the person’s
protection from serious harm or the protection of others from serious harm,
(c) the continuing condition of the person, including any likely
deterioration in the person’s condition, and the likely effects
such deterioration,
(d) .........
(e) ..........
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
8. The Tribunal considered documentary material and reports, an exhibit list
of which is held on the Tribunal’s files
9. Desmond Collie attended the hearing by videolink and was represented by
his lawyer of the Mental Health Advocacy Service. Also
in attendance were:
Psychiatrist (by
Superintendent (by videolink)
Area Clinical
Director (by telephone)
Clinical Nurse
Consultant (by videolink)
Registered Nurse
(by videolink)
PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES
Mr Collie’s application
10. In his helpful written submissions the Solicitor for Mr Collie, sought on
behalf of his client “orders or directions that
the Minister’s
undated request and letter may not be taken into account by the Medical
Superintendent or his delegate in determining
whether or not to granted escorted
day leave to the Local Government Area”.
11. There was a report from the treating psychiatrist who is also the
Clinical Director of the Forensic Unit at the Hospital. He reported
“Mr Collie’s condition remains very stable”. He recorded that
it was the opinion of the treating team (as
well as an independent psychiatrist
– see at [13] below) “that it is safe for Mr Collie to exercise
escorted day leave
in the LGA”. He said that there are “no clinical
grounds for continuing to withhold escorted day leave”. Indeed,
“continuing to withhold this leave is prejudicing Mr Collie by delaying
his recovery and limiting his capacity to fully engage
in his recovery
program”. The treating team will re-instate the escorted day leave
“as soon as it is authorised to do
so by the medical
superintendent”.
12. In a nursing report the RN noted that “Mr Collie’s overall
clinical risk is currently considered low as he is currently
in remission in a
controlled environment”. He is fully compliant with medication and has
insight into his illness and need
for abstinence. He is participating in
programs and courses. On behalf of the nursing staff, it was the recommendation
Collie’s current leave provisions are re-instated back to
escorted leave to the CBD for the purposes of shopping, recreational
and leisure
activities based on his continued ongoing assessment of low risk by the Treating
13. Included amongst the papers was the report provided by a psychiatrist. He
was the psychiatrist engaged on behalf of the then Minister
for Mental Health
late last year to provide an independent opinion. The psychiatrist provided a
report assessing the concerns “that
leave and transfer may have been
progressed too early in this case”. He expressed the opinion that there is
significant evidence
that the time required to address the relevant risk factors
in this case has been achieved”. Any faster progress in Mr Collie’s
case “is due to the individual risk factors in this case responding to
interventions, rather than undue haste”. He thought
that appropriate
monitoring is in place “and leave can be halted or slowed if
required”. He thought “Mr Collie
would fall into a group of persons
with a risk of offending while on escorted day leave that is low due to
sustained effective treatment
and monitoring of his major mental
Correspondence
14. The letter referred to in Mr Collie’s application was from the then
Minister for Mental Health (the Hon Pru Goward MP) to
the Registrar of the
Mental Health Review Tribunal. The letter is undated but was apparently sent in
early November. She expressed
“ongoing concerns regarding Desmond
Collie’s risk to the safety of the public” and advised the Registrar
was seeking “an independent clinical review of Mr Collie’s
care”. (The report of the psychiatrist referred to at
[13] above comprised
that review.) The Minister went on to advise that once she had the report she
would “consider whether
further action is required including whether to
seek a further review of Mr Collie”. She asked the Registrar that
to these concerns, the Medical Superintendent ceases leave to the
Local Government Area until the review is complete”.
15. The Registrar of the Tribunal responded by letter that it will be
“a matter for the Medical Superintendent at the Hospital
to determine if
access to this leave should cease pending the independent clinical review you
have requested”.
A change in Ministers
16. Following the resignation of the NSW Premier, a new Premier was sworn in.
All Cabinet positions were then vacated. Premier Berejiklian
appointed the Hon
Tanya Davies as the new Minister for Mental Health.
The listing of this hearing
17. This hearing was listed at short notice at the request of Mr
Collie’s solicitor. Efforts were made to obtain an appearance
on behalf of
the new Minister for Mental Health. Regrettably, but understandably, this was
not possible because the new Minister
had just been sworn in and was not yet in
a position to provide instructions.
18. The Tribunal determined to proceed in any event. This was because of the
risk that further uncertainty about Mr Collie’s
leave could compromise its
therapeutic value. It also put at risk Mr Collie’s opportunity to advance
his case at future reviews
by pointing to the exercise of his extended leave.
The Hearing
19. The Medical Superintendent at the Hospital acknowledged that he had
directed that the extended leave not be given to Mr Collie
because of the
Minister’s letter. There had been no other request apart from that letter.
He was aware that the treating team
thought that the leave should be given.
Asked by Mr Collie’s solicitor what he would do if the Tribunal directed
take into account the former Minister’s letter in exercising
his discretion on leave, he responded that he would seek a legal
opinion from
the Ministry of Health. Cross examined about the reasons for needing such
advice, he said that he has to take notice
of the Minister. He is not a lawyer
and queried whether he is allowed to ignore the Minister’s wishes. He
appreciated that
the new Minister had not had an opportunity to consider this
case. He agreed that clinical considerations concerning leave were a
the treating team. Asked by me where he regarded the Tribunal in the hierarchy,
he acknowledged that that was a difficult
question. He confirmed his respect for
the Tribunal but acknowledged his view that there is a need for checks and
balances. He felt
a little like the “meat in the sandwich” with the
Tribunal on one side and the Minister on the other. He would prefer
the side of caution and seek advice. If the advice was that he could grant leave
with such a restriction then he would
proceed. Asked about the alternative
application made on behalf of Mr Collie that the discretion be transferred to
the treating team,
he said that he would not be offended. However, he would like
to be reassured that such a transfer of the discretion would be
He acknowledged in response to a question from Tribunal
member Dr Miller that as medical superintendent he was also responsible for
hospital as a whole as well as the decisions of the treating team.
20. The treating psychiatrist was asked his attitude to discretion being
transferred to the treating team for leave for Mr Collie.
He said that he would
be comfortable with that provided the Medical Superintendent agreed and provided
the Area Clinical Director
21. The Tribunal President telephoned the Area Clinical Director who informed
him that he could not provide that agreement on the
spot during that phone call
but would need to consider the position.
22. At that stage we adjourned the proceedings so that the Area Clinical
Director could complete his appointments. (The phone call
to him was made
without notice.)
23. After resuming, the treating psychiatrist recounted that he had spoken to
the Area Clinical Director during the adjournment. The
Area Clinical
Director’s position was that he was not comfortable with the discretion
being transferred to the treating team
this afternoon but would need time to
consider its implications and also to seek legal advice. He was not willing to
endorse the
plan this afternoon. The treating psychiatrist confirmed that he
himself was not willing to proceed as the holder of the discretion
without the
agreement of the Area Clinical Director.
Victim’s question
24. There were three victims present during the morning’s proceedings.
They asked not to be identified publicly. One of the
victims who returned for
the afternoon proceedings acknowledged that it was good to have checks and
balances and that the boxes should
be ticked before leave extended. That victim
acknowledged feeling safer having another check and balance such as the Minister
that the medical superintendent should be following the law. That victim was
concerned that the Minister may lose her power.
25. On behalf of the Tribunal the President assured that victim that any
order made by the Tribunal today could be reviewed in the
future by the new
Minister by an application on her part. The President acknowledged the
reasonable expression of concerns on behalf
of that victim.
A way ahead
26. The Tribunal formed that view that they would be in favour of Mr
Collie’s primary application to direct the medical superintendent
take into account the former Minister’s letter. Mr Collie’s
solicitor said that he would have nothing to say against
that position. The
Tribunal proceeded to make an order to that effect.
27. The Tribunal then asked the medical superintendent to obtain from the
Ministry of Health that afternoon the advice that he said
he would need before
feeling ready to comply with such an order. The Tribunal provided the name of a
lawyer in the Ministry of Health
and that lawyer’s telephone number. The
Medical Superintendent said that he would make the telephone call.
28. The Tribunal resumed and the medical superintendent said that he had
spoken to another lawyer in the Ministry of Health (the first
lawyer was not
available). He received advice from that lawyer that because the Minister had
changed, the former Minister’s
letter could be disregarded. He told the
Tribunal that he was advised that he could go ahead with the Tribunal decision.
the Tribunal the advice was that if the new Minister wanted a fresh
review then she can seek one. The medical superintendent said
that he was happy
to approve the extended leave ordered last year by the Tribunal, given the
advice that he had received.
29. The treating psychiatrist checked whether the medical superintendent
might want the order made by the Tribunal this afternoon
in writing. The medical
superintendent asked the Tribunal whether he could act on the order given
verbally this afternoon by the
Tribunal. The Tribunal said that he was able to
act on that order and he agreed that he would not take into account the former
letter in considering any application made by the treating
Consideration
30. In the Tribunal’s opinion, it was no longer relevant for the
medical superintendent to take into account the former Minister’s
Even in its own terms, the former Minister’s request was that the extended
leave be ceased “until the review
is complete”. The review of the
(independent) psychiatrist was complete and that psychiatrist confirmed that the
extended leave
was appropriate.
31. In addition, the Tribunal respectfully differs from the medical
superintendent’s view that he should consider the authority
Minister as a relevant consideration to granting extended leave. In saying that,
the Tribunal can understand where the medical
superintendent is coming from; but
it is the Tribunal that has made the final determination and that determination
is legally binding
on him. It was made after hearing from the Minister. Not only
that, the Minister has not yet exercised her right to appeal from the
Tribunal’s decision of last year.
Some general observations
32. This case provides an opportunity for the Tribunal to make some
observations about the apparent dilemma the medical superintendent
found himself
in. From the Tribunal’s point of view, there was no dilemma. There was an
order of the Tribunal and discretion
vested in medical superintendent. The
former Minister’s letter was not a relevant consideration for him in
exercising that
discretion.
33. Again, the Tribunal expresses this opinion respectfully. The medical
superintendent is an experienced psychiatrist, not a practising
lawyer. What is
clear to a lawyer may not be so clear to a non-lawyer, especially in a
hierarchical context where powers are vested
in various office-holders and
institutions. The Minister for Mental Health and the Mental Health Review
Tribunal are two examples.
The medical superintendent’s decision to err on
the side of caution is understandable in the circumstances.
34. This is not the only case where orders of the Tribunal have been delayed
in their implementation or temporarily discontinued because
of uncertainty about
the law on the part of those charged with implementing the orders. This too is
understandable. Some of the cases
dealt with by the Tribunal are particularly
difficult and the Tribunal’s decisions are potentially controversial.
35. However, the orders made by the Tribunal should be put into effect
according to their terms as soon as practicable. The Tribunal
relies on that
occurring unless it is told otherwise.
36. Sometimes, of course, the Minister may exercise the right of appeal from
the Tribunal's orders. It is important to appreciate
that those orders remain
valid and enforceable in such circumstances, unless the Minister obtains from
the Tribunal or the Court
a suspension of the Tribunal's orders pending the
outcome of the appeal. The Tribunal understands that the Minister needs to take
advice and is allowed by law a period within which to lodge an appeal.
Nevertheless it expects the orders to be implemented in the
meantime by those
responsible for doing so. If there is a concern about implementing the orders
pending the appeal, then the appropriate
course is a suspension application by
the Minister
37. Other delays may be unconnected with any appeal process by the Minister.
For example, there will be some cases where there are
practical or logistical
problems. If such problems delay the implementation of the Tribunal's orders,
the Tribunal should be notified
immediately. There may be other cases - again,
unconnected with any appeal by the Minister - where the person responsible for
implementing
the Tribunal's orders wishes to seek their own advice about the
validity or terms of the orders. This is understandable; but there
minimal delay in seeking that advice. It needs to be obtained within hours or a
day or two of the issue arising, not weeks.
If the delay will be greater than
one or two days, then the Tribunal should be told. It needs to know about the
fact that there is
a delay and how long it is expected to be. This enables the
Tribunal to allow for the delay or to fix another review urgently to
the parties.
38. For these reasons the Tribunal determined that it was appropriate to
grant the application made on behalf of Mr Collie that the
superintendent may not have regard to the Minister’s letter in exercising
his discretion to allow Mr Collie the extended
leave granted by the Tribunal. In
addition, he must have regard to the fact that the Tribunal has already
determined that the extended
leave will have therapeutic value for Mr
His Honour Judge Richard Cogswell SC
Dated 7 February 2017
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (318 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (63.5 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter