URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWDC/2025/459.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:54:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Conroy [2025] NSWDC 459 (7 November 2025)
District Court
New South Wales
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWDC 459
Hearing Date(s):
25 September 2025
Date of Orders:
7 November 2025
Decision Date:
7 November 2025
Montgomery DCJ
2 years and 10 months’ imprisonment with a non-parole period of 1
year and 8 months & disqualification of driver’s
licence for 2
Catchwords:
CRIME – sentencing – robbery armed with offensive weapon
– police pursuit – not stop – drive dangerously
& drive conveyance without consent of owner – where Offender's
motivation for offending was to be returned
to prison – where Offender has
been institutionalised since a young age – reduced moral culpability
– special circumstances
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Cases Cited:
Bugmy v The Queen [2013] HCA 37
DS v R; DM v R
[2022] NSWCCA
Faleafga v R [2016] NSWCC 178
[2023] NSWCCA
Markarian v The Queen (2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25
Paterson v R
[2021] NSWCCA 273
Postiglione v The Queen
189 CLR 295
[1997] HCA 26
R v Freeman
[1999] NSWCCA 394
R v Henry (1999)
46 NSWLR 346
R v MAK & MSK
[2006] NSWCCA 381
R v McNaughton
R v Simon [1999] NSWCCA 224
[1999] NSWCCA 160
[1999] NSWCCA 275
Veen v The Queen (No 2) (1988) 164 CLR 465
Texts Cited:
Rex (Crown)
Jayden Conroy (Offender)
Representation:
Ms. Patterson (Offender)
Solicitors:
Ms. Tsang (Legal Aid)
File Number(s):
2024/341525 & 2024/353582
Publication Restriction:
Offender is a 24-year-old indigenous Australian who committed these offences
with the singular motivation of wanting to be arrested
and returned to prison
because he felt unable to cope with his life in the world while receiving NDIS
funded support for only 11
of the 24 hours of the day.
expert psychological and psychiatric evidence confirms his motivation to have
been based in mental disorders and psychological
dysfunction, the first in time
of which being Foetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder incurred in utero due to his
mother's alcohol abuse.
Offender is to be sentenced for the following offences:
(1) Sequence H81542827 – 4: Robbery armed with offensive weapon against
Crimes Act 1900
maximum penalty of 20 years’ imprisonment.
(2) Sequence H81542827 – 1: Police pursuit – not stop – drive
dangerously against
– maximum penalty of 3
years’ imprisonment; automatic disqualification of licence 5 years
(minimum 2 years).
(3) Sequence H81542827 – 3: Take & drive conveyance without consent of
owner against
s 154A(1)(a)
– maximum penalty 5
years’ imprisonment.
(4) H82152357 – 1: Robbery armed with offensive weapon against
– maximum penalty of 20 years’ imprisonment.
the fortnight prior to these events, the Offender told his support worker, who
was also his assistant NDIS coordinator, that he
was not coping in his life. He
was told that his funding only permitted 11 hours of support per day.
was not referred to a Local Mental Health Unit, or otherwise to professional
medical assistance. The evidence is that he had previously
voluntarily submitted
to admission into a voluntary Mental Health Unit.
was not receiving support in the evening and overnight. It is common ground that
the offending occurred during the hours he was
not funded for and therefore not
receiving supervising support.
is agreed that when arrested by police, the Offender immediately said that he
committed the offences with the intention of going
to prison. When he was not
arrested following the offences of assaulting the taxi driver with a knife and
causing a police pursuit
with dangerous driving, he committed the third offence
involving robbery with the screwdriver weapon at the service station to achieve
his aim of being arrested and sent to prison.
these unusual circumstances, the Crown does not submit that the offending was a
planned criminal course, but does submit that the
Offender did actually intend
to commit the offences. That appropriate submission engages with the Agreed
Facts that the taxi was
recovered undamaged and there was no significant
robbery; the taxi driver’s wallet was recovered in the vehicle and the
thieved from the service station was minimal.
are no Victim Impact Statements. Neither the taxi driver, nor the service
station attendant, suffered physical harm. The Crown
properly submits, and I
accept, that each of those victims was vulnerable in that they were alone and
were physically forced into
close contact with a weapon which would have
communicated to them a potentially lethal consequence, and it is therefore
likely that
psychological harm was caused.
said, the Crown accepts that its onus is to prove that psychological harm
occurred beyond reasonable doubt and there is no direct
evidence of the extent
of it beyond that ordinarily to be accepted beyond reasonable doubt as a
consequence for a victim being exposed
to threat of potentially lethal
AGREED FACTS
Sequence ending 827-4 - Armed robbery in taxi
shows this horrifying incident which occurred in the early hours of 15 September
2024. The Offender entered the taxi of the Victim,
Mr Kassim, via the front
passenger seat. He produced a large kitchen knife, which he held to the side of
the neck of the Victim who,
on the Offender’s demand, handed over his
wallet while under threat of serious harm. The wallet contained $125 in cash. On
the Offender’s demand to do so, the Victim exited the taxi and the
Offender moved to the driver's seat and drove away.
ending 827-1: Police pursuit - drive dangerously
he was detected driving the stolen taxi by Police, he accelerated despite being
directed to stop and initiated a dangerous pursuit
along Military Road,
Marylands. The Offender drove at speeds of up to 120 km/h in a 60 km/h zone. In
the course of the pursuit, he
crossed to the incorrect side of the road and
narrowly avoided collisions with oncoming vehicles. Police terminated the
pursuit due
to safety concerns.
Sequence ending 827-3: Take and
drive conveyance without consent of owner
Offender’s theft of Mr Kassim’s taxi forms the basis of this
offence. When the taxi was recovered by police, inside
were the knife and the
Victim's belongings including his mobile phone, house keys, $40 in cash and
driver’s licence.
Sequence ending 357-1: Armed robbery with
offensive weapon
the afternoon of the same day as the other offences, the Offender entered Metro
Petroleum Station at Lansdowne where Mr Varada,
the Victim, was working alone in
the store. CCTV shows the Victim sweeping or mopping when the Offender walked in
and jumped on him
from behind, taking him to the floor. The Offender then stood
in a threatening, prone position with hands raised, as is colloquially
as "shaped up”, when the Victim stood.
the course of those acts, the Offender physically restrained the victim before
seizing a screwdriver (not shown on the CCTV) from
a product stand and
brandished it as a weapon. The Offender threatened the Victim and directed him
to go into the cashier vestibule
and, as the Offender stood by, to open the
till. The Offender stole $382 cash and several packets of
cigarettes.
the police having recovered the taxi and the taxi driver’s belongings, the
Police attended, on that day, a residential
address where the Offender had
voluntarily organised to hand himself in. The Offender readily made the
admissions to which I have
referred and explained his motivation as I have
described, being his desire to return to prison. He remarked to police that
is easier inside." He immediately admitted each of the offences, his
abandoning of the taxi and that he used stolen money to purchase
adult services
and gamble. Following arrest, he declined a record of interview.
24 September 2024, Police attended Silverwater Correctional Centre and placed
the Offender under arrest for the robbery in relation
to Metro Petroleum. In
relation to that offence, the Offender made admissions and participated in a
recorded interview.
OBJECTIVE SERIOUSNESS
my opinion, that the Offender’s motivation when committing each offence
was to be arrested and returned to prison does not
reduce the objective
seriousness of the offending. While that was his reason for offending, it was
not a state of mind causing or
materially contributing to the offending. It was
the reason behind his conscious choice to offend. That reason does not reduce
objective assessment of seriousness of the offending. It was not causative
in the way that provocation or non-exculpatory duress
might be in another case.
It was a factor personal to the Offender, which is relevant to moral
blameworthiness for the offending
in the wider consideration of subjective
matters, including his mental state:
Paterson v R
[2021] NSWCCA 273.
is convenient to deal with the two counts of robbery armed with offensive
weapon, an offence against
disagree with the Crown's submission that this offending falls in the upper
range of seriousness for offences of this type. In my
assessment, this offending
is objectively a moderately serious example of this inherently very serious type
of offending.
the assistance of
(1999) 46 NSWLR 346 ("
"), my assessment is based on appreciation that the large knife
held to the side of the throat of the vulnerable taxi driver was very
there was no
actual physical injury, as the knife edge was held but not pressed to cut the
the Offender
acted alone;
the Offender was
not motivated by monetary gain or cruelty or some other serious malevolent
there is no
evidence of any injuries suffered by the taxi driver Victim save as is accepted
as the terror and psychological injury
or insult inherent to this type of
as the Crown
properly concedes, there is no direct evidence of planning, albeit the Offender
did not act wholly impulsively;
properly does not rely on premeditation as an aggravating factor, but rather
views the offending as reflective of the Offender's
mental state at the
the offending
conduct was brief;
monetary theft was minimal; and
the offending
was not part of organised criminal activity.
disagree with the Crown’s submission that this offending falls into the
upper range of seriousness for offending of this type.
my view, although the CCTV is not as dramatic as it is in the Sequence 827-4
event, this is principally because it was recorded
from a greater distance and
because the screwdriver is difficult to see. I make no differentiation of
seriousness with the knife
used in the offending ending in the sequence numbers
827-4 event because the screwdriver was a potentially lethal weapon which must
have instilled fear in the victim. I do not assume the service station
attendant’s fear to be less than was the fear of the
taxi driver in that
other offence.
as guidance, I consider the use of the screwdriver to
threaten the vulnerable victim was very serious. In addition, I take into
consideration
the Victim was
taken to the ground and then further threatened and intimidated by the Offender
standing over him in a "shape up”
stance, and the threat and intimidation
continued as the Victim removed the money from the till;
the Offender
acted alone;
the amount taken
there was no
physical injury suffered by the Victim;
the offending
must have caused mental shock and horror at a level which is characteristic of
this serious kind of offending;
appropriately concedes that there is no direct evidence of planning, but the
Offender's conduct was not wholly impulsive;
appropriately does not rely on planning or motivation as aggravating factors,
but rather submits that the offending was
reflective of the Offender’s
mental state at the time.
the offending
was not part of an organised criminal activity;
while relatively
short lived, the offending was of longer duration than the offending ending in
the sequence numbers 827-4 event and
involved the greater extent of actual
violent physical engagement in the form of taking the Victim to the ground, a
position of helplessness
against an offender armed with a screwdriver; and
there is no
evidence of actual contact or pressure of the screwdriver against the Victim.
for the Offender submits that the offending is a moderately serious example of
offending of this type. While I agree, it is
my assessment that the objective
seriousness is slightly higher than for the offending ending in the sequence
numbers 827-4, which
involved the use of the knife against the victim taxi
Sequence 827-1:
danger of driving at twice the speed limit in a suburban area, and of crossing
to the other side of the road, and generally that
the danger was assessed by
police as requiring the pursuit to be terminated, means that this offending was
serious. I agree with
the submission separately made by the parties that it
falls below but toward the mid-range for offending of this type. I take into
account that the Offender was not intoxicated, the conditions were fine and
there were no collisions in the course.
Sequence 827-3
taxi was not driven for a long period or distance and was abandoned undamaged.
In my opinion, this offending falls into the lower
range for offending of this
SUBJECTIVE CONSIDERATIONS
seriousness of the subject offending, his significant antecedent criminal
history and the unusual circumstances of the offending,
being his want to return
to prison in circumstances where his NDIS support was unavailable to him, are
unique to this case.
Offender was not motivated to harm victims or to financially gain in the
instance of each offence but, rather, intended to be
returned to
institutionalised life so as to escape the outside world after he had asked for
In my opinion, this significantly
reduces his moral culpability in relation to each offence. Independent expert
medical opinion evidence
supports that the Offender needed the help that he
asked for and that the offending may not have occurred at all had he received
that support. I must ultimately take into account these unusual factors
surrounding the offending amongst all other considerations
and arrive at a
single result in relation to each offence and the total sentence and, by that
instinctive synthesis, determine my
value judgment:
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357; [2005] HCA 25 at [44].
attention is required to the future opportunity for rehabilitation and risk to
the community.
Offender’s antecedent criminal history is significant, including prior
police pursuit, destroying or damaging property,
stalking and intimidating,
custody of a knife, common assault and one offence of reckless wounding. The
deprivations of the Offender’s
early life, his complex mental health
impairments, the opportunity and prospects of his rehabilitation and the future
risk to the
community are to be weighed with his present significant
institutionalisation. By the time of offending, the Offender
approximately 2 years and 10 months in prison of his adult life of only 4 years
and 9 months. Prior to that he was in Departmental
care from age 13 years. In
relation to the antecedent reckless wounding offence, the Offender told Mr
Andrew Wong, clinical and forensic
psychologist, that he stabbed a paedophile
who tried to touch a girl.
expert opinion evidence provided by Mr Wong, clinical and forensic psychologist,
report dated 8 September 2025, Dr Dayalan, forensic
psychiatrist, report dated
28 July 2025 and Dr White, forensic and clinical neuropsychologist, report dated
30 May 2023, consistently
observes that the offending occurred in the
circumstances of the Offender being provided inadequate support in the community
his complex mental health conditions and circumstances of deprivation from
infancy and until adult life.
report of Mr Shaik, occupational therapist, dated 8 June 2024, explains and
identifies the Offender’s practical needs for
assistance in everyday
living which, if provided, will enhance the opportunity for him to benefit from
mental health treatment and
therefore improve his prospects of rehabilitation.
White observes that the offender attempts "to express his need for recognition
of his complex internal struggles and desire to
ascertain assistance with same."
He is a person of below average intellectual and cognitive capacity which
circumscribes his ability
to live with his complex mental health conditions.
is no suggestion in the expert opinion evidence that the Offender lacks
prospects of rehabilitation.
Dayalan opined that, while the Offender presently poses a high risk of
recidivism, he could be assisted in lowering his reoffending
risk with treatment
of his mental health conditions and engagement in rehabilitation and
psychological support through NDIS.
Wong reported with the benefit of having considered the reports of Dr Dayalan
and Dr White, but also with the added information
not available to either of
them of a 30 minute telephone conversation with the Offender’s estranged
mother to obtain the history
of his mother’s pregnancy of him and early
childhood history.
Wong described the Offender’s current presentation as
“infantile” and vulnerable to social influences.
experts unanimously observe that the Offender demonstrates a level of insight
and awareness of his behaviour cycle, with reduced
insight into other areas such
as cognitive distortions, and that his ability to regulate and control his
thought distortions, in
the moment, is significantly impaired. It is also
unanimously observed that his self-control is diminished by his use of drugs and
alcohol. He uses these substances as a maladaptive coping mechanism, in the way
commonly observed in patients suffering complex post-traumatic
stress disorder
White assessed there to be a significant discrepancy between his intellectual
functioning and adaptive skills, whereby his daily
functioning is well below his
measured cognitive abilities. Dr White observed that this is not uncommon in
individuals with autism
spectrum disorder (“
diagnosis is observed in each of the reports of Dr Daylan, Dr White and
confirmed in the report of Mr Wong.
understand, from the expert reports that, with sufficient support when living in
the outside community, supervision and treatment,
the prospects for reduction of
his present recidivism risk as explained by Dr Dayalan, and his opportunity to
integrate into and
remain law-abiding within the community, would be
Offender’s moral culpability is significantly reduced by the deprivations
and hardships of his early life, to which I now
refer in point form:
Indigenous;
he was born
prematurely, having been exposed in utero to his mother's use of alcohol;
he was delayed
in his early developmental milestones;
until 11 years
of age, he was severely physically abused by both parents, including his mother
beating him with a wooden spoon, a
metal spatula, a jug cord and a belt;
at 11 years of
age, his parents separated after which he suffered neglect from his mother,
including being left to go hungry;
at 12 years of
age, he experienced physical abuse by his father, witnessed physical abuse to
his sister and witnessed his sister’s
attempt to hang herself in
consequence;
at 12 years of
age, he was belittled by his father, including by being called
"worthless”;
from 13 years of
age to adulthood, his care was relinquished by his mother to the Department of
Community Services from which he felt
abandoned, given she retained the care of
his siblings;
from 13 years of
age he was institutionalised in the care of the Department including being
placed in high needs residential 2:1 placement
until aged 14, whereafter he was
housed in a disability placement with two other children;
at 14 years of
age he was introduced to antisocial lifestyles including drug and alcohol abuse
and criminal behaviour by the other
children in the placement;
at 15 years of
age, he was physically abused by a carer who jammed him between a door and a
wall, punched him in the face, threw him
into the kitchen bench and fridge and
placed a knee on his neck whilst continuing to punch him until he was saved by a
second carer;
between release
from the Department’s youth care placements at around age 18, he was
he was educated
until partial completion of year 11, but was regularly suspended for truanting
and other behavioural issues, including
at 10 years of
age, he was introduced to alcohol on special occasions by his mother and
stepfather;
while in care
from 14 years of age, he drank alcohol regularly, seeking intoxication to escape
reality, make himself happier and repress
memories and emotions;
at 10 years of
age, his mother introduced him to cannabis consumption and by age 13 he smoked
cannabis daily, which increased by such
an amount that by 17 years of age he
smoked 28 g per week and has continued to abuse cannabis when not in jail;
at 14 years of
age, while in the Department's care, he commenced smoking methamphetamine daily
and his drug use increased such that
at age 16 he was using methamphetamine
intravenously and recently in 2023 he was injecting methamphetamine at an amount
each day; and
from 14 years of
age to 18 years of age, he also used ecstasy pills and LSD.
Offender informed Mr Wong that after leaving school in year 11 he had lived a
life of crime, albeit at age 16 he had worked three
months in McDonald's and
more recently had worked in a motor vehicle fit-out business for a few months,
an air filtration business
for a couple of days, bricklaying for a few weeks and
with shipping containers for a couple of months. His longest term of employment
was with a commercial landscaping business for 6 months during his most recent
period in the community.
his anxiety, vulnerability and disability, he enjoys prosocial influences in an
individual referred to as Uncle Ben who works
in aged care and is to the
Offender a parental figure. Uncle Ben is a person the Offender met in jail at
age 18 who is described
as a good influence against offending. Uncle Ben
regularly deposits money in the Offender’s prison account.
in jail, the Offender is addicted to the prescribed opioid Buprenorphine
my opinion, some measure of context of the Offender’s coping with life in
the community on the day of his instant offending
is given by his statement that
he wanted to return to prison, even though he was stabbed 11 times while
incarcerated in January 2023,
suffering a collapsed lung, a broken nose and
black eyes. I think that shows the extent to which he felt unable to cope with
life in the community when provided with only 11 hours of NDIS support. As
explained by Mr Wong, the Offender felt that jail was
more like the residential
care experienced by him through his childhood from about age 13 years. Further
measure of this observation
is provided by his requesting and being placed in
non-association jail confinement. He finds people confusing in every aspect of
life and told Dr Wong that he needs someone "telling me 24/7 how to live life."
Dr Dayalan reported that the Offender requested non-association
incarceration
because he is anxious and paranoid when housed with other prisoners and that
while incarcerated, he does not have the
opportunity of work.
to the offending, the Offender was voluntarily admitted to a psychiatric
inpatient unit where he was retained for three weeks
because he felt emotionally
dysregulated and angry and was concerned that he would hurt himself or others. I
think it lessens future
risk to the community that he voluntarily requests care
when needed.
the limited NDIS hours of support the Offender was provided, he was smoking
cannabis daily and had occasionally snorted cocaine
and would binge drink
alcohol on weekends. He struggled with the responsibilities of managing his
household and finances. He worried
custody on assault charges. He was feeling highly anxious and irritable, and
felt that the
world was too much for him. Despite smoking cannabis to assist
with his mood and sleep, he continued to suffer from insomnia and
anxiety, and
experienced dissociative flashbacks during the day.
understand that, prior to the current offending, the Offender informed his NDIS
support worker, who is also his support coordinator,
that he was not coping
without more support. No action was taken to assist him, such as admission to a
Mental Health Unit. He was
told that there was not funding for more than the
limited 11 hours of support that he was receiving.
Offender is diagnosed to suffer the following mental health conditions:
Foetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder;
Autism Spectrum
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder;
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder;
Personality Disorder with borderline traits; and
Stimulant Use
Disorder (methamphetamine), severe, in early remission in controlled environment
Offender’s early life deprivations and adversities and his social and
economic disadvantages have contributed to his impaired
regulation of emotions
and behaviour which is relevant to his offending history. Accordingly, I think
he is entitled to some degree
of mitigation of sentence:
Bugmy v The
[2013] HCA 37.
Dayalan opined at [57]:
"The psychiatric conditions and associated functional impairment increased the
risk of institutionalisation. Whilst in a correctional
Centre, Mr Conroy
preferred to be placed in isolation in view of heightened anxiety, stemming from
complex PTSD and past traumatic
experiences. Placement in isolation further
fosters institutionalisation and impairs social skills. He has limited personal
in the community given strained relationships with close family members.
Having spent a significant amount of time in the correctional
environment, he
has not acquired the requisite skills to function in the community.... [which
has] played a key role in the offending
behaviour. He had also been abusing
substances and suffering from symptoms of complex PTSD that would have
contributed to impairment
of his judgement."
my assessment, the expert opinion evidence clearly shows that the Offender
suffers more onerous conditions while incarcerated than
other prisoners. He is
entitled to some reduction in sentence on account of that hardship.
Offender’s reduced moral culpability for offending, explained in the
expert opinion evidence, requires design of a sentence
satisfying the
requirements of
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
”) while providing punishment, denunciation of his
crimes and a sentence that, at the same time, is designed to meet his personal
rehabilitation needs.
my opinion, because of his hardships in life, particularly his complex mental
health conditions, the Offender is both a vulnerable
person and a person who
represents a risk when in the community, which risk is likely to be reduced if
he is provided with adequate
treatment and support.
parties’ submissions did not engage substantially, or indeed at all, with
the issue of remorse. In the circumstances of
the Offender’s limited
insight into his offending, and his motivation being to escape the world by
being incarcerated, that
approach is understandable. As Dr Dayalan reported (at
[26]), the Offender does regret his Offending behaviour, but feels it helped
denunciation of the crimes are obviously relevant
considerations.
is put by each of the parties and, on the basis of the expert medical opinion, I
agree, that the subject offending was not the
product of premeditated criminal
planning, but rather was reflective of the Offender’s mental state at the
time. This is an
appropriate starting point in the design of sentence.
offending was not impulsive. The Offender knew that he was breaking the law.
That appreciation was integral to his purpose of
being imprisoned. The offences
ending in the sequence numbers 827-4 and 357-1 are very serious types of
offending, and so is the
offence ending in the sequence numbers 827-1.
respect of the offending ending in the sequence number 827-3, in the
circumstances of recovery of the property and in the absence
of an intention to
steal, damage or harm property (except for a small amount of cash taken
opportunistically), it is a less serious
example of offending.
armed robbery offences imposed horror on vulnerable victims. The police pursuit
– drive dangerously offence risked serious
collision, injury or even death
with road users. That the Offender’s moral culpability was substantially
mitigated by the unusual
circumstance that his course of offending was driven by
his mental-illness-founded desire to return to prison, rather than to harm
person or property, does not expunge the horror those victims personally
experienced, nor the risk to the public by the dangerous
driving during the
have found that his moral culpability was further reduced because his motivation
to offend, being to achieve an institutional environment
because he could not
cope with life in the community while receiving the limited NDIS support, was a
motivation to garner help arising
after he had notified his support worker and
NDIS coordinator that he was not coping and yet he was not referred to a local
Health Unit or otherwise to professional medical assistance, and was left
untreated and unsupported for those hours of the day during
Offender is not only to be observed as institutionalised by the worryingly large
portion of his adult life during which he has
been incarcerated, but he also is
assessed by the expert opinion evidence to have been institutionalised from his
placements when
in the care of the Department from age 13, such that he has not
acquired the requisite skills to function in the community. His mental
impairments also cause him to require assistance with how to live when in the
community. These are special circumstances weighing
in the consideration of the
period for which he might be incarcerated. It is in this context that the
overall sentence and non-parole
period must meet the obligation that the
seriousness of the offending is satisfied for the purposes of
is inherent in the observations of the expert medical witnesses that the
Offender has demonstrated a level of insight and awareness
of his behaviour
cycle, though with a reduced insight into other areas such as cognitive
distortions and his ability to regulate
and control his thought distortions. If,
in the moment, the Offender had the support recommended by the expert medical
opinion, then
it can be assumed that he would not likely have been consuming the
drugs and alcohol around the period of the offending, as he was
doing in his
maladaptive attempt to cope.
Dayalan observed that the Offender demonstrates some understanding of his mental
health challenges and is willing to engage in
treatment and rehabilitation.
think that this just stated observation finds easy acceptance with the
appreciation of the Offender’s history of institutionalisation.
my earlier observation that his commitment to achieving placement in prison by
the offending because of his anxiety and
paranoia while living in the community
without adequate support, and without the treatment medical experts recommended,
was so strong
that he pursued that motivation even though he had been savagely
assaulted and stabbed 11 times during his preceding incarceration.
is no evidence before me that the Offender has failed to take advantage of
previously provided opportunities for rehabilitation
in his adult life. He had
previously voluntarily been admitted to a psychiatric inpatient unit because he
felt emotionally dysregulated
and angry and was concerned that he would hurt
himself or others. In fact, only two weeks prior to the instant offending, the
asked his NDIS support worker to have him admitted to hospital because
he was not coping, but he was encouraged to utilise his NDIS-funded
support (Dr
Dayalan’s report at [25]) On all of the evidence, the spree of offending
on 15 September 2024 occurred in circumstances
of the Offender having sought
medical help, from which he was discouraged.
Offender’s antecedent criminal history does not entitle him to leniency,
but it provides, in the context of the expert opinion
evidence, what I would
understand to be a historical picture of how his cognitive impairment, mental
health and institutionalised
upbringing left him inadequately equipped to engage
with life in the community in a law-abiding way compared to another person. For
that reason, his antecedent history does not amount to an aggravating
expert opinion evidence supports the approach that, with the appropriate
treatment and support, the chance of that antecedent
criminality continuing
should be reduced. As a result, his criminal history is not illuminating or an
evidentiary basis for finding
a measure of his moral culpability in the instant
offending before me, nor should it be found that the offending was a
manifestation
of a continuing disobedience of the law warranting the imposition
of condign punishment to shift him and other offenders from committing
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
(1988) 164 CLR 465 at 477-478;
[2006] NSWCCA 242.
do find that incarceration is objectively more onerous for the Offender than for
another person because, while he is less anxious
when in the structured
environment of prison, and his anxiety and paranoia of engaging with strangers
is reduced by his non-association
conditions as requested by him, the expert
medical opinion is that those conditions re-enforce his institutionalisation.
a negative consequence for him. He is, for instance, unable to work
while in non-associate custody. I understand the expert medical
opinion to mean
that those conditions hamper, rather than enhance, his prospects of
rehabilitation and reintegration into the community.
It is an important
consideration in the design of an appropriate sentence that the risk of further
institutionalisation weigh heavily.
principle of proportionality requires that the sentence should not exceed what
is appropriate to the gravity of the crime, having
regard to the objective
circumstances. Proportionality is to be applied so that a sentence should not be
less than the objective
gravity the offence requires:
my opinion, and in relation to each of the offences committed in the course of
the spree of offending, the moral culpability or,
as most recently termed by
Justice Yehia as "moral blameworthiness” (
[2025] NSWCCA 73)
was substantially reduced by the set of clear factors identified in the expert
medical evidence. The Offender’s reasoned motivation
to offend, being an
unusual purpose of achieving imprisonment, was a course of thinking attributable
to his below average intellectual
capacity and diagnosed mental illnesses,
combined with his life of deprivation and institutionalisation, such that Mr
Wong's expert
assessment of his presentation was that he was "infantile" and
"vulnerable." The overall expert assessment is that he had reduced
cognitive distortions and was significantly impaired, in the moment, in his
ability to regulate and control his thought
distortions.
factors, in my assessment, clearly reduce the objective gravity of each of the
offences for the purposes of application of “
principles:
[2022] NSWCCA 159
, per Yehia J at [101] (Ball JA and Fagan J agreeing).
evidence shows that the trajectory of the deprivations suffered by the Offender
throughout his life were not treated or mitigated.
They continued to his present
state of disadvantaged opportunity to live within the community. He requires a
level of treatment and
supervision to integrate into the community which has not
previously been made available to him. On that background, his capacity
mature and to learn from experience was compromised and it remains a feature of
his makeup relevant to the determination of the
appropriate sentence,
notwithstanding his history of offending:
recognising that the deprivations of his background do not have the same
mitigatory relevance for all purposes of punishment,
his early life exposure to
violence and substance abuse have left him, particularly as a person of low
intelligence and compromised
cognition, at the time of the offending,
inadequately equipped to deal with and control his impulse to escape the world
by re-entering
expert medical opinion is that adequate supervision and treatment through an
extended parole be recommended. It would give the
Offender the best chance of
reintegration into the community as a law-abiding citizen, and at the same time
benefit the community
by reducing the risk of his reoffending. An important
consideration is that he is of the relatively young age of 24 years, and
that opportunity should be taken as soon as the demands of
proportional sentencing allow.
Specifically,
the Offender’s impaired mental health and diagnosed mental illnesses at
the time of the offending moderate the
significance of the considerations of
general deterrence and of retribution:
per Yehia J at [105].
Separately, those factors also moderate the need for specific deterrence.
my view, adjustment of the
ratio of parole to non-parole period is required
given the special circumstances that, with adequate treatment and support, he
reasonable prospects of rehabilitation.
have considered, for comity of sentence,
[1999] NSWCCA 160
[1999] NSWCCA 224,
R v Freeman
[1999] NSWCCA 394
[1999] NSWCCA 275
[2023] NSWCCA 142
[2016] NSWCC 178 in relation to the Sequence 827-4 and 357-1 offences.
In in each of those cases, the offenders presented with what
might be called a
strong subjective case.
the most recent of those cases,
, the offender grabbed the
victim from behind around the neck when the offender was wearing a balaclava and
holding a box cutter with
a 10 cm blade in front of the victim's stomach. The
offender’s motivation was theft and the victim's wallet; $415 and a credit
card was stolen. The offender later attempted to use the credit card. The
offender had suffered deprivations as a child and have
been placed in the care
of the Department of Community Services, was sexually abused, experienced
disrupted schooling and witnessed,
at a young age, the trauma of the younger boy
being run over and killed. From a young age, the offender abused substances. The
found that the offender had good prospects of rehabilitation and had
demonstrated remorse. The indicative sentence was 3 years and
imprisonment.
my view, the case before me is distinguished from
Offender’s motivation here having nothing to do with theft for monetary
gain but rather a seriously misguided and mental-illness-driven
want to be in
prison, because of his inability to cope with the real world. The
Offender’s subjective case here is, in my opinion,
stronger than for the
offender in
my opinion, an appropriate sentence in this case will take into account the
reduced moral culpability and special circumstances
which I have identified
while still denouncing the conduct of the Offender, recognising the harm done to
the Victims and the community
and providing adequate punishment for the
common position is that the
threshold has been crossed and there is no
alternative other than full-time imprisonment.
bear in mind the statutory yardstick of maximum punishment for each offence. The
Sequence 827-4 and 357-1 offences are of a type
for which the legislature
provides very serious maximum penalties representing their seriousness.
note that the Offender is entitled to a 25% discount for his early pleas of
of the CSP.
is appropriate to proceed by aggregate sentencing.
deem the appropriate indicative sentences to be:
for Sequence
827-4, 2 years and 6 months' imprisonment (after application of the 25% discount
for early guilty plea);
for Sequence
357-1, 2 years and 7 months' imprisonment (after application of the 25% discount
for early guilty plea);
for Sequence
827-1, 5 months' imprisonment (after application of the 25% discount for early
guilty plea); and
for Sequence
827-3, 2 months' imprisonment (after application of the 25% discount for early
guilty plea).
my assessment, each of the offences strongly comprehends the common criminality
of the Offender's purpose, that being not to hurt,
steal or damage but to be
apprehended and to return to prison. All the offending was conducted in the
course of a single spree of
offending. The offences involve factually different
criminal activities and different victims, and it remains necessary to ensure
that the aggregation of all of the sentences is a just and appropriate measure
of the total criminality involved:
Postiglione v The Queen
(1997) 189 CLR
[1997] HCA 26.
mindful that I must maintain an appropriate relationship between the totality of
the criminality involved in the series of offences,
and the totality of the
sentence to be imposed for those sentences, the measure of severity of a
sentence is not simply the product
of a linear relationship. Without double
counting mitigation on account of institutionalisation and of special hardship
prison, those factors bring to the forefront of mind the relationship
of severity and length of term of imprisonment.
understand the expert opinion evidence to describe the Offender as a person
already possessed of feelings of hopelessness in relation
to his ability to live
lawfully while coping with the lack of structure of community life, and bear in
mind that prolonged incarceration,
including non-association conditions, serves
his present feeling of hopelessness concerning living lawfully within the
and delays the opportunity of equipping him with the skills, and
providing him with the support, that expert opinion evidence says
he needs to
achieve his rehabilitation:
[2006] NSWCCA 381.
For those reasons, substantial concurrence is warranted.
appropriate aggregate sentence is 2 years and 10 months’ imprisonment with
a significant adjustment of the parole to non-parole
period pursuant to
the CSP to accommodate the best opportunity for the Offender’s
rehabilitation, which also gives the best chance of reducing
the risk of
reoffending, a matter highly in the interests of the community. I determine a
single non-parole period for the offending
of 1 year and 8 months.
is appropriate that I backdate the Offender’s sentence to begin from when
he entered custody on 15 September 2024, as he
has remained incarcerated since.
relation to the offending ending in the sequence number 827-4, the Offender is
relation to the offending ending in the sequence number ending 357-1, the
Offender is convicted.
relation to the offending ending in the sequence number ending 827-1, the
Offender is convicted.
relation to the offending ending in the sequence number ending 827-3, the
Offender is convicted.
Offender is sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 2 years and 10 months
commencing 15 September 2024 and expiring 14 July 2027.
Offender must serve a non-parole period of 1 year and 8 months, and will be
eligible for release to parole on 14 May 2026.
Offender is disqualified from driving for a period of 2 years, commencing 14 May
also recommend that:
the reports of
Mr Andrew Wong, forensic psychologist, dated 8 September 2025, Dr Sathish
Dayalan, forensic psychiatrist, dated 28
July 2025, Dr Amanda White, forensic
psychologist and clinical neuropsychologist, dated 30 May 2023, and Mr Adam
Shaik, occupational
therapist, dated 8 June 2024, as well as the Comprehensive
Behaviour Support Plan dated 9 October 2024, be provided to Corrective
the Offender be
trialled on non-stimulant medication for ADHD, such as Atomoxetine;
the Offender be
trialled on antidepressant medication as indicated for treatment of his complex
the Offender be
referred to a Local Medical Officer for development of and maintenance of a
Mental Health Care Plan;
the Offender
regularly attend appointments with a psychiatrist to monitor his mental state
and response to treatment;
the Offender be
provided with psychological treatment incorporating teaching distress tolerance
skills, and then proceeding to address
the symptoms of complex PTSD through
treatment such as trauma-focused Cognitive Behavioural Therapy;
the Offender be
provided with motivational interviewing with a drug counsellor;
the Offender be
assessed for 24/7 support through NDIS including, as required, 2:1 support with
restraint-trained support workers;
the Offender
remain abstinent of illicit substance use;
the Offender
comply with the provisions of any Mental Health Care Plan provided by a
Registered Medical Practitioner; and
the Offender
comply with all reasonable directions and supervision of Community Corrections,
including in regard to each of the above
recommendations.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (322 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter