URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/40.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:46:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AAD v NSW Trustee and Guardian [2013] NSWADTAP 40 (21 August 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
AAD v NSW Trustee and Guardian
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 40
Hearing Date(s):
22 July 2013
Decision Date:
21 August 2013
Magistrate N Hennessy, Deputy President
Mr P Molony, Judicial Member
Ms A Wunsch, Non-Judicial Member
The appeal is dismissed.
Catchwords:
APPEAL - appeal against decision of Guardianship Tribunal confirming the
appointment of the NSW Trustee as AAE's financial manager
- whether Guardianship
Tribunal should have reviewed financial manager order as well as appointment;
whether Guardianship Tribunal
breached rules of procedural fairness by not
allowing a non-party to speak at the hearing - whether appeal should be extended
grounds other than a question of law
Legislation Cited:
Guardianship Act 1987
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Cases Cited:
Italiano v Carbone v Ors
[2005] NSWCA 177
Re Refugee Tribunal; ex parte
[2000] HCA 57
(2000) 75 ALJR 52
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
[2000] NSWSC 1052
[2001] NSWSC 146
[2000] NSWSC 886
(17 August 2000)
Holt v Protective
Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227.
Principal judgment
NSW Trustee and Guardian
Guardianship
Representation
- Solicitors:
APY (agent for AAD)
Ms J McIlwraith (Guardian ad litem for AAE)
(3rd respondent in person)
NSW Trustee and Guardian (no appearance)
Guardianship Tribunal (no appearance)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
- Citation:
2012/15252012/3754
- Court File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Section 126
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
REASONS FOR
Introduction
is a 73 year old woman who lives in a nursing home. She has Alzheimer's dementia
as well as depression and anxiety. Her daughters,
AAD and AAF are estranged. On
13 October 2011, following an application from AAD, the Guardianship Tribunal
made a financial management
order in relation to AAE and appointed the NSW
Trustee as the manager of her estate. In May 2012 AAD applied for a review of
decision to appoint the NSW Trustee as the manager of her mother's estate.
AAD wanted the Guardianship Tribunal to appoint her as
financial manager. AAE's
other daughter, AAF, wanted the NSW Trustee and Guardian to remain as the
financial manager. The Guardianship
Tribunal confirmed the appointment. AAD has
appealed against that decision.
Administrative Decisions Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear this external appeal:
Guardianship Act
s 67A(1)(h)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
), s 118A. An appeal may be made as of right on a
question of law and, with leave, on any other ground:
, s 118B(1).
appellant, AAD, was represented by her husband APY, as agent:
71(1)(b1). The subject person, AAE, was represented by Ms McIlwraith, a guardian
ad litem appointed by the Tribunal:
, s 71(4). The subject
person's other daughter, AAF, chose to appear by phone. The Guardianship
Tribunal elected to be a party:
, s 67(2B). The Guardianship
Tribunal advised that a representative would be available by phone if necessary.
We did not need to contact
the Guardianship Tribunal's representative.
Guardianship Tribunal's power
Guardianship Tribunal was exercising power under
Guardianship
. That provision gives the Tribunal a discretion to revoke or confirm the
appointment of a particular financial manager. In this case,
the only basis for
revocation was if "the Tribunal is satisfied that it is in the best interests of
the protected person that the
appointment be revoked".
Section 25U
(1) On reviewing its appointment of the manager of a protected
person's estate, the Tribunal may:
(a) revoke the appointment, or
(b) confirm the appointment.
(2) The Tribunal may also review the financial management order under which
the manager was appointed, and may take any action in
respect of that order that
it may take on a review of such an order under Division 2.
(3) If the relevant financial management order is not revoked under
subsection (2), the Tribunal is to appoint another person as manager
estate subject to the order in substitution for a person whose appointment as
manager has been revoked under this section.
(4) The Tribunal may revoke the appointment under review only if:
(a) the person appointed seeks the revocation, or
(b) the Tribunal is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the
protected person that the appointment be revoked, or
(c) the financial management order in respect of the estate concerned is
Guardianship Tribunal's decision
Guardianship Tribunal understood AAD's motivation for applying for a review as
being because "the current arrangements are expensive
and do not provide
flexibility for her mother."
Carter, a representative from the NSW Trustee and Guardian, gave evidence to the
Guardianship Tribunal. She outlined the nature
and extent of AAE's estate. She
said it includes a superannuation fund with assets of $1,900,000 and a family
There is also cash in bank accounts, a unit trust and
two privately owned companies valued at $538,948. Legal proceedings are pending
in relation to a private company of which AAE is the sole director. The Tribunal
did not provide any further details of those proceedings.
owes the nursing home a bond of $360,000 but the NSW Trustee has not been able
to pay that amount. Ms Carter gave evidence that
a decision about the sale of
the family home was imminent. The sale was considered necessary because of the
difficulty accessing
other assets in circumstances where AAE lacks capacity.
Apparently there was no provision for the incapacity of a director of the
superannuation fund or of the unit trust.
reviewing the evidence and the submissions of the parties, the Guardianship
Tribunal concluded that:
. . . at this stage of [AAE]'s life, it would not be in her best
interests to allow the management of her financial affairs to continue
such a source of conflict among those who are closest to her. At this stage of
her life, it is in [AAE]'s interests to have
a united family.
Grounds of Appeal
the day of the hearing APY sought to file a "revised" Notice of Appeal. That
Notice had not been served but both the other parties,
AAF and Ms McIlwraith,
agreed that APY could rely on the amended Notice as long as they had the
opportunity to provide written submissions
in reply. Both provided those
submissions by the due date.
were fifteen grounds of appeal. Only two identify questions of law. The first is
that the Guardianship Tribunal failed to exercise
a power it was bound to
exercise, that is reviewing the
of the financial management order.
The second question of law is that the Guardianship Tribunal breached the rules
of procedural
fairness by refusing to allow AAD's partner, APY, to give oral
evidence or make submissions at the hearing.
will address these two grounds of appeal and then go on to consider the grounds
of appeal on questions other than questions of
Failing to exercise a power
submitted that the Guardianship Tribunal should have exercised its power under
to review the financial management order. Instead, it merely reviewed the
appointment of the financial manager.
gives the Tribunal power to review the financial management order when
reviewing the appointment of the financial manager. If it
reviews the financial
management order it may revoke that order. It is apparent from the application
form completed by AAD that she
did not apply to the Guardianship Tribunal for a
review of the financial management order. The application AAD lodged with the
was entitled "Application to review a Financial Management Order".
Under the heading, "Are applying to . . ", AAD ticked the box
headed "Review the
financial management order so as to replace the current financial manager with a
new financial manager". She did
not tick any of the other three boxes relating
to the review of the financial management order itself.
submitted that the Guardianship Tribunal should have reviewed and revoked the
financial management order itself. In legal terms,
APY's submission appears to
be that the Guardianship Tribunal made an error of law by failing, on its own
motion, to exercise a power
that was available to it. That submission was made
on the basis that the Guardianship Tribunal:
previously accepted substantial evidence concerning the improper circumstances
that surrounded the appointment of an accountant
as AAE's enduring power of
attorney; and
evidence from AAF that she had arranged to become a signatory to her mother's
business accounts in 2010 after her mother
had been diagnosed with dementia;
contradictory evidence from AAF as to her involvement with her mother's
financial affairs.
are some circumstances where a decision maker will make an error of law by
failing to do something of its own motion. For example,
it is a breach of
procedural fairness to fail to offer an adjournment to a self-represented party,
if that party would otherwise
be prevented from having a reasonable opportunity
to present his or her case:
Italiano v Carbone v Ors
[2005] NSWCA 177.
But, ordinarily, procedural fairness does not require a decision maker to make
an application of its own motion.
only two bases on which the Guardianship Tribunal may revoke a financial
management order are if the protected person is now capable
of managing his or
her affairs or if it is in the best interests of the protected person for the
order to be revoked: s 25P. The
evidence that AYP referred to does not relate to
AAE's capacity, nor is it clear how it relates to her best interests. As we
AYP's reasoning, it was his view that if the financial management
order were revoked, his wife (AAD) would act as power of attorney
without the
need for a financial management order. That is a significant change from the
existing arrangement. If that is the outcome
AAD was seeking, she should have
applied to the Guardianship Tribunal for a revocation of the financial
management order. The Guardianship
Tribunal did not make an error of law by
failing to initiate an own motion review of the making of that order.
Breaching procedural fairness
who is AAD's husband, submitted that the Guardianship Tribunal breached the
rules of procedural fairness by refusing to allow
him to give oral evidence or
make submissions at the hearing.
'hearing rule' of procedural fairness requires that a decision maker hear a
person before making a decision affecting their interests.
McHugh J spoke
generally of this concept in
Re Refugee Tribunal; ex parte Aala
(2000) 75 ALJR 52
One of the fundamental rules of the fair hearing doctrine is that a
decision-maker should not make an adverse finding relevant to
a person's rights,
interests or legitimate expectations unless the decision-maker has warned that
person of the risk of that finding
being made or unless the risk necessarily
inheres in the issues to be decided. It is a corollary of the warning rule that
who might be affected by the finding should also be given the
opportunity to adduce evidence or make submissions rebutting the potential
adverse finding.
applied to be a party to the proceedings before the Guardianship Tribunal but
that application was refused. In its interlocutory
reasons for decision dated 4
August 2012, the Tribunal wrote, "APY did not demonstrate how his own interests
might be affected by
the proceedings concerning [AAE], nor how joining him as a
party might help to promote AAE's best interests." The Tribunal added
"[APY] does, of course, remain free to attend the substantive hearing when it
resumes, and to give evidence as a witness if
he so wishes."
the Guardianship Tribunal's assurance that APY could attend the hearing and give
evidence as a witness, he says he was not
permitted to give such evidence. He
concedes that he was able, through his wife, to correct at least one assumption
that the Guardianship
Tribunal had made relating to AAE's income. APY provided
excerpts from an unofficial transcript of proceedings before the Guardianship
Tribunal. Those excerpts record that APY asked the presiding member on two
occasions whether he would have a chance to make a comment.
APY's version of the
transcript records the presiding member as saying, "You are not a party to the
proceedings." We do not have
the full transcript and have not listened to the
entire tape recording of the proceedings.
the basis of APY's unofficial transcript and the evidence he gave, we are
satisfied that APY asked to speak during the hearing
but was refused that
opportunity. He did convey certain information to the Tribunal through his wife.
It follows that despite the
Guardianship Tribunal advising APY that he could
give evidence as a witness if he wished, he was not permitted to do so.
Guardianship Tribunal may "inform itself on any matter in such manner as it
thinks fit":
Guardianship Act
In this case it decided not to
hear from APY presumably because his interests were not affected by his wife's
application. In those
circumstances there was no breach of procedural fairness.
Leave to appeal on 'other grounds'?
may appeal as of right on any question of law but leave is required before an
appeal can go ahead on any other ground. The "other
grounds" on which AAD
appealed related to the Guardianship Tribunal:
incorrect findings of fact;
(2) not making
relevant findings of fact; and
(3) ignoring or
failing to explore evidence.
does not contain any guidance on the relevant matters to be taken
into account in determining whether leave should be granted. The
Supreme Court
has provided some guidance on this question in the cases of
[2001] NSWSC 146
[2000] NSWSC 886
August 2000). Those cases interpret
Guardianship Act
the equivalent provision in relation to appeals from Tribunal decisions to the
Supreme Court. In
, Young J observed at [10] that `it has never been
clearly decided what the circumstances are that should lead the Court to grant
leave to appeal under
, but went on to make a number of observations on
this point: see para [10]-[15]. After considering the relationship between the
and the Tribunal, Young J observed at [15]:
It would seem to me that
Guardianship Act
operates so
that broad questions of administration and policy and the applicability of
policy to individual cases, even if they are
not questions of law, may well be
subjects on which the Court will grant leave to appeal. On the other hand, it is
very unlikely
that the Court will grant leave to appeal when there is a problem
with a fact finding exercise unless there are clear indications
Tribunal has gone about that fact finding process in such an unorthodox manner
or in a way which is likely to produce an
unfair result so that it would be in
the interests of justice for it to be reviewed.
Failing to make relevant findings of fact about NSW Trustees' fees
of APY's grounds of appeal relate to a failure by the Guardianship Tribunal to
make a factual finding about the amount the
NSW Trustee would charge the estate
for administration and external advice. APY submitted that the Guardianship
Tribunal should have
made a finding that those charges were onerous and that it
would be in AAE's best interests for her estate to be managed privately.
Guardianship Tribunal summarised the evidence before it on the issue of the
amount of fees the NSW Trustee had charged to date:
[AAD] claimed
that the NSW Trustee charges [AAE]'s estate fees of between $30,000 and $40,000.
[AAD] submitted that this money could
be applied instead to [AAE]'s care. Ms
Diane Carter (officer of the NSW Trustee and Guardian) then gave evidence that
the NSW Trustee
has, to date, charged [AAE]'s estate fees amounting to $8,861.48
the end of its reasons, the Guardianship Tribunal made the following
In reaching its decision, the Tribunal took account of the practice
of the NSW Trustee to charge fees for the administration of an
estate under
management. Notwithstanding those fees, the Tribunal was satisfied that it is in
[AAE]'s best interests for her to have
an independent financial manager.
fees charged by the NSW Trustee are a relevant matter to be taken into account
when determining whom to appoint as financial manager.
Holt v Protective
Commissioner
(1993) 31 NSWLR 227
at 242 Kirby P stated that ". . . in a
smaller estate it may often be appropriate to appoint a family member who will
be entirely
familiar with the assets and liabilities and readily able to manage
them with greater economy and possibly free of cost to the protected
person." In
that context, Kirby P added that, "The Protective Commissioner (now the NSW
Trustee) is entitled to and ordinarily does
recover fees under the Act "
Guardianship Tribunal took into account the fact that the NSW Trustee charges
fees for its services including any services provided
by external lawyers or
financial advisers. The Guardianship Tribunal did not attempt to estimate the
amount of the NSW Trustee's
fees and charges in the future. There is nothing
unfair or unorthodox about failing to make such a factual finding.
Incorrect finding about basis for charging fees
finding of fact with which AAD disagreed was the following statement in the
reasons for decision:
The NSW Trustee charges fees calculated only on the value of
[AAE]'s St Hubert's Island property, and the funds in her trust account,
her account with the National Australia Bank.
to APY, this statement is incorrect because the NSW Trustee charges fees on all
AAE's corporate assets and cash assets including
superannuation and does not
charge fees on the family home. He says that that "error" makes the final
decision "unjust".
we have said, the Guardianship Tribunal is not obliged to make a factual finding
as to the precise extent of the NSW Trustee's
fees and charges when deciding
whether to confirm or revoke the appointment of a particular financial manager.
If the Guardianship
Tribunal was mistaken in relation to the assets on which
fees are charged, that mistake did not lead it to make a decision that it
not otherwise have made. The Guardianship Tribunal's main concern was the
'significant conflict' between the siblings, AAD
and AAF and the effect of that
conflict on AAE's interests.
Incorrectly finding that the appointment of the NSW Trustee
would reduce conflict
says that the Guardianship Tribunal incorrectly found that, "The appointment of
the NSW Trustee may also assist by reducing the
incidence of family conflict.
The Tribunal recognised the importance of preserving [AAE]'s existing family
relationships." According
to APY, appointing the NSW Trustee as financial
manager will not reduce family conflict.
the reasons for decision, the Guardianship Tribunal stated that:
[AAD] . . .had submitted that it would not harm [AAE]'s family
relationship if she were to be appointed as her private financial manager.
emphasised that there is no animosity or conflict between AAE and herself.
However, it was apparent to the Tribunal that there
is significant conflict
between AAD and AAF particularly on guardianship issues.
submitted that the Guardianship Tribunal failed to consider evidence that AAF
was the principal cause of family disunity. He indicated
that the Guardianship
Tribunal should have taken account of AAF's conduct, contrasted that with AAD's
behaviour, and appointed AAD
as the financial manager.
make no finding as to whether evidence before the Guardianship Tribunal would
have justified a finding that AAF or anyone else
did not act in AAE's best
interests. Even if there was evidence supporting such a finding, that evidence
was not relevant to any
issue the Guardianship Tribunal had to resolve. The
question before the Guardianship Tribunal was not whether AAE or AAF would make
the better or more deserving financial manager. AAF was not nominating herself
as a suitable financial manager. The question was
whether it is in AAE's best
interests for the appointment of the NSW Trustee to be revoked and for another
person to be appointed.
Incorrect finding that private manager would have same
difficulties as NSW Trustee
factual error was said to be that the Guardianship Tribunal accepted the
statement from Ms Carter, a representative from the
NSW Trustee, that ". . .any
financial manager would have the same difficulties as those faced by the NSW
Trustee, given the structure
of [AAE's] finances." According to APY that is not
true because if his wife were to have a power of attorney for her mother, there
would be virtually no difficulties. According to advice APY says he obtained
from the Australian Taxation Office, AAD would be able
to manage her mother's
superannuation fund and her business interests. APY conceded that there was no
evidence to that effect before
the Guardianship Tribunal but offered to provide
such evidence by 5 August 2013. He did not do so.
any case, APY has incorrectly assumed that the reference to "financial manager"
in the passage quoted above includes a person appointed
as power of attorney. We
do not understand the statement to include such a person. Rather, we understand
the reference to be to a
private financial manager. If that is the case, the
statement quoted by APY is correct.
Failure to examine decision to sell family home
submitted that the Guardianship Tribunal failed to properly explore and question
the NSW Trustee and Guardian's decision to sell
the family home. The following
passage from the Tribunal's decision addresses that issue:
Ms Carter gave evidence that it has not been possible for the NSW
Trustee to pay AAE's accommodation bond, pending a decision as to
the sale or
rental of her residential property . . Ms Carter confirmed that a decision about
the payment of the bond is imminent.
She added that the NSW Trustee would liaise
with both AAD and AAF concerning any decision about the sale.
P made the point in
that, "Where it is shown that a person appointed
as manager is incompetent or has acted in a relevant way improperly or
unlawfully,
the court may terminate the appointment and appoint another
manager." As at the date of the hearing, the NSW Trustee had not made
decision to sell the family home in order to pay the bond. APY's objection
appears to be that if his wife had a power of
attorney she would be in a
position to obtain the money from other sources and avoid the sale of the family
the issue before the Guardianship Tribunal was whether
the appointment of the NSW Trustee should be revoked, not whether the financial
management order itself should be revoked. There was no need for the
Guardianship Tribunal to 'explore' or 'question' the NSW Trustee's
decision to sell the family home because there was no suggestion that that
decision involved any incompetence or impropriety.
1. Leave to appeal on grounds other than a question of law is refused.
2. The appeal is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (175 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter