URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWMT/2012/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:03:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Ristevski [2012] NSWMT 23 (14 December 2012)
Medical Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Ristevski
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2012] NSWMT 23
Hearing Date(s):
10/12/2012 - 11/12/2012
Decision Date:
14 December 2012
Elkaim SC DCJ
Dr M Higgins
See paragraph 41
Catchwords:
Transgression of doctor patient boundaries, record keeping failure.
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW) No 86A
Cases Cited:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
HCCC v Howe [2010] NSWMT
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 253
Lee v Health
Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 80
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Complainant)
Dr Kiro Ristevski
(Respondent)
Representation
L Fernandez (Complainant)
M J Windsor SC (Respondent)
- Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission (Complainant)
Fraser MacLennan-Pike
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
The proceedings
the commencement of the hearing the Health Care Complaints Commission (the
"HCCC") sought leave to rely on a Further Amended Notice
of Complaint. The new
document added a series of particulars of a failure on behalf of the doctor to
record proper clinical records
of consultations and referrals with Patient A.
The doctor's conduct in respect of this patient is the subject of the HCCC's
generally. Although the Amended Complaint did not allege any failures
in record keeping, with one exception, Dr Ristevski was able
to deal with the
new particulars. The exception was particular numbered '2' to Complaint One.
This was not pressed. The Tribunal
accordingly proceeded on the basis of the
Further Amended Notice of Complaint, but without the withdrawn
particular.
Some background
Ristevski was born in 1952 in Macedonia. He obtained a medical degree from the
University of Cyril and Methodius in, as it was
then known, Yugoslavia. He came
to Australia in 1982 and over a period of 10 years studied for the Australian
Medical Council examinations.
He was conditionally registered as a medical
practitioner in 1992. In 1994 the registration became unconditional. In the same
Dr Ristevski commenced general practice at the "Bellevue Medical Centre" in
Hurstville. This is also his home and with the exception
of some visiting health
practitioners it is essentially a sole practice.
10 June 2003 Patient A, a married woman almost aged 27, commenced working for Dr
Ristevski as a receptionist. A few days later
she consulted him as a patient.
She continued to consult him from time to time including during October 2003. At
the end of October
2003 Dr Ristevski commenced a sexual relationship with
Patient A. This relationship continued until 3 July 2009 when Dr Ristevski
assaulted Patient A. During the course of the relationship Dr Ristevski
continued to see Patient A as a patient. However, following
the consultation on
28 July 2006 Dr Ristevski no longer recorded the consultations with Patient A,
making no note of her histories
or of the various referrals that he gave her.
the assault in 2009 the police took action against Dr Ristevski. On 21 June 2010
he was convicted in the Sutherland Local
Court on the charge of assault
occasioning actual bodily harm. He was dealt with under
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
and placed on a good behaviour
bond for 12 months. An apprehended violence order was made for two years.
Ristevski immediately appealed against both his conviction and sentence. This
appeal was dealt with in the District Court on 16
February 2011. The appeal
against the finding of guilt was dismissed. The sentence imposed by the
magistrate was quashed and the
doctor was dealt with pursuant to
the above Act. In effect this meant that the facts of the allegation were found
to have occurred but a conviction was not recorded.
He was placed on a good
behaviour bond for a period of two years. The apprehended violence order
continued in the Local Court.
The Complaints
convenience a copy of the Further Amended Complaint is annexed to these
attitude of the HCCC as stated at the commencement of the hearing was that Dr
Ristevski should have his registration cancelled.
Dr Ristevski's response was
that cancellation was not appropriate. Rather he should be allowed to continue
to practise subject to
a reprimand and the imposition of various conditions.
senior counsel for Dr Ristevski indicated at the outset of the hearing that his
client did not challenge any of the matters
of fact alleged in the Complaint.
Further, he indicated that Dr Ristevski accepted that his conduct was
unsatisfactory professional
conduct within the meaning of Section 139B of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (NSW) No 86A.
However, Mr
Windsor SC said that notwithstanding this concession it was not conceded that
the doctor's unsatisfactory professional
conduct was
"of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration ..."
within Section 139E. This, he said, was a decision the
Tribunal needed to make.
Ristevski did not elect to have a separate hearing in respect of consequential
orders on a finding relating to his conduct (as
envisaged in
King v Health
Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 253).
The evidence and discussion
Ristevski's case was put through Exhibit 1. In addition, he gave oral evidence,
as did Dr Adams-Dzierzba and Dr Wright.
examination in chief of Dr Ristevski, appropriately, was designed to elicit his
remorse for his conduct and for Patient A and
to satisfy the Tribunal that he
was unlikely to engage in similar behaviour in the future.
Ristevski certainly expressed considerable remorse, apologising repeatedly both
for the anguish and hurt caused to Patient A and
for the insult to the long
established principles of patient care upheld by the medical profession. In
addition, Dr Ristevski
"guaranteed
" that he would never again engage in
similar conduct. He said that the trauma that had been caused to Patient A, to
his own family
and to himself had brought home to him the extent of his
wrongdoing. In addition he said Dr Wright had given greater clarity to him
series of consultations that continued to date and would do so into the future.
the Tribunal accepts that Dr Ristevski genuinely regrets what has occurred there
were nevertheless a number of concerns that
arose from his evidence. These
included the following:
(a) Dr Ristevski said that once the relationship had commenced it was based on
genuine love between him and Patient A to the extent
that they both intended
that Patient A should separate from her husband and enter a permanent
relationship with Dr Ristevski including
the possibility of
(b) Notwithstanding this, and somewhat inconsistently, Dr Ristevski said that
that it was inappropriate
and he attempted to persuade Patient A that the relationship should end.
Importantly, the relationship
he was referring to was not that of Patient A
continuing to be his patient but rather that, despite the love and affection of
he attested, that the relationship itself should end.
(c) Despite concluding that the relationship was inappropriate Dr Ristevski
continued in the relationship for a number of years until
(d) The Tribunal had the overwhelming impression that but for the events giving
rise to the assault the relationship might not necessarily
have ceased.
(e) Dr Ristevski's appreciation of the inappropriateness of the relationship was
given practical effect when he ceased recording
his consultations with Patient A
after July 2006.
(f) Dr Ristevski initially said that he only continued to see Patient A because
she insisted. She sometimes saw him without an appointment
and he felt compelled
to treat her because of the nature of her complaints. Despite this he conceded
that such records as do exist
do not indicate any need for emergency
consultation.
Notwithstanding
the often repeated expressions of remorse another thread that consistently
appeared in Dr Ristevski's evidence was
his assertion that Patient A intimidated
him. There was, in the view of the Tribunal, an attempt by Dr Ristevski to shift
for his actions on to Patient A. He said, in effect, that she did not
want to give up the relationship with him, that she insisted
on coming back and
she insisted on continuing to see him socially. He said it became a relationship
in which he did not receive and
he did not give. He said he had become impotent.
Despite this, he was involved in a second sexual relationship with Ms X which
in 2004 and carried on for four or five years. Dr Ristevski's evidence
before the magistrate suggested an air of almost normality
in which he conducted
these affairs concurrently.
in the Local Court and in the Tribunal he spoke of the three parties getting
together to try and sort out who should, in effect,
have the benefit of his
companionship. He gave this evidence in the Local Court:
"WITNESS: And both of them knew, it was not a hidden thing. We sat down
with them and spoke couple of times and both of them knew
exactly what was
happening, there were no secrets there. Both of them were treated as goddesses,
as nicely as I could treat them
in the best possible way. They had the option to
leave and to go whenever they wanted to."
(Exhibit A, Tab 26, page 102).
Ristevski's assertions of trying to get out of the relationship with Patient A,
but being prevented from doing so by her intimidatory
actions, of still loving
her, of concurrently having an intimate relationship with Ms X all created an
almost surreal picture entirely
inconsistent with the doctor's evidence of
appreciating that he was doing the wrong thing.
Ristevski said, as already noted, that from about a year after commencing the
relationship with Patient A he appreciated it was
wrong. He said that a little
later in time he concluded that he might end up before the medical authorities
(like the Tribunal) if
he carried on. Despite this, because of Patient A's
actions he did not end the relationship. His explanations bordered on the
unbelievable.
Ristevski said that around the end of 2005 it was a good time to end the
relationship but he struggled with feelings of passion
and the need to see
Patient A. This seems at odds with his alleged impotency and general acceptance
of an intimate relationship until
2009. He said that Patient A was persuading
him that their relationship was not wrong, that it was based on true love and
their children
would be happy.
examples of the doctor attempting to shift the blame from himself can be found
in the letter at Tab 38 of Exhibit A. On page
3 Dr Ristevski attributes an
apparent revenge motive to his victim. He states that he has denied her
allegations to the police. It
is to be recalled that these allegations were
found proved both in the Local Court and in the District Court. A similar
can be found in the electronic interview with the police at Tab 20, for
example in Question 112. In his evidence before the Magistrate
Dr Ristevski
suggests an almost planned act of revenge on the part of the victim (Exhibit A,
Tab 26, page 92, lines 9 to 20).
Ristevski said on a number of occasions that the court proceedings in 2009 had
been very traumatic and embarrassing for him. This
is no doubt the case but the
Tribunal was left with the impression that but for the court proceedings Dr
Ristevski may not have appreciated
the error of his ways. This was to some
degree apparent in the evidence of Dr Adams-Dzierzba who became Dr Ristevski's
general practitioner
Tribunal is concerned that Dr Adams-Dzierzba did not have a complete history and
found his opinion difficult to accept. Dr Adams-Dzierzba
said that Dr Ristevski
had told him that he had been treating the relationship seriously and hoping it
would continue on a long-term
basis. This is despite Dr Ristevski's evidence
that after about a year he changed his expectations of the relationship and in
event had already begun the separate relationship with Ms X. It is also
noteworthy that Dr Adams-Dzierzba said that initially he
had the impression that
Dr Ristevski had come to see him to discuss the assault. This confirmed the
Tribunal's impression that the
events that were most acutely embarrassing and
traumatic to Dr Ristevski were his involvement in the assault proceedings.
Wright, in his oral evidence suggested a number of conditions that might be
imposed on Dr Ristevski. These included working in
a group practice, reducing
his hours of work, not working on weekends, not providing his mobile phone
number and having a mentor.
He also suggested that Dr Ristevski continue to
consult a psychiatrist, perhaps for a further 18 months.
Wright said that since his consultations with Dr Ristevski had begun that he
felt the doctor had gained a fuller insight into his
wrongdoing. While the
Tribunal has great respect for the views of Dr Wright it is also observed that
Dr Ristevski knew that what
he was doing was wrong, certainly from about a year
after the relationship started and perhaps even, based on his evidence, before
it started at all.
Wright was asked about Dr Ristevski's manner of giving evidence, in particular
his somewhat expansive answers. He said that Dr
Ristevski was
and that he wanted to please those persons with whom he dealt. The
Tribunal had a strong feeling that Dr Ristevski's evidence to
a large measure
contained his perception of what he thought the Tribunal wanted to hear. This
was evident, for example, in the number
of times he said he was sorry for his
relation to record keeping, Dr Wright had not dealt with the matter in his
report because he had not seen the Further Amended Complaint.
particulars described to him he said that he was critical of the absence of
record-keeping. Adopting Dr Ristevski's words
that records are kept
clinical care"
the failure to keep records for Patient A is seen by the
Tribunal as a significant transgression of his methods of
relation to the criminal charges, notwithstanding Dr Ristevski repeatedly saying
that he accepted the findings of the District
Court in relation to his appeal he
nevertheless asserted that a number of the allegations made by Patient A were
not correct. The
Tribunal takes the view that it is bound to accept the events
as found both in the Local Court and in the District Court.
the Tribunal simply does not accept Dr Ristevski's statements of remorse about
the relationship with Patient A other than
to the extent that it has caused him
considerable cost and embarrassment, particularly as a result of the criminal
proceedings. The
Tribunal does appreciate that the civil proceedings brought by
Patient A were settled promptly but absent further information the
Tribunal is
not in a position to say that this was not done on advice and perhaps was an
endeavour to compromise what was potentially
a larger claim. The Tribunal does
not accept that Dr Ristevski has appropriate insight into his wrongdoing and is
certainly not confident
that he is capable of avoiding a similar circumstance
should it present in the future.
Resolution of the complaints
summary of basic principles in
HCCC v Howe
[2010] NSWMT 12 is a useful
introduction:
"59 This jurisdiction is exercised for the protection of the public and
the medical profession. It is protective rather than punitive,
deregistration is not an automatic outcome of a finding of professional
misconduct, even where that conduct is sufficiently serious
to justify it:
Health Care Complaints Commission v Karalasingham
[2007] NSWCA 267
is clear that deregistration may be required in serious cases of professional
misconduct in order to adequately achieve the objectives
of minimising the risk
of recurrence and of deterring other practitioners from engaging in such conduct
and thereby maintaining public
confidence in the profession: Health Care
Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
; Re Dr Parajuli [2010]
NSWMT 3 at [32]; Saville v Health Care Complaints Commission & Anor
; Prakash v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
Santow JA at [64] and Basten JA at [101]; Childs v Walton
[1990] NSWCA
Tribunal is acutely aware of the seriousness of the allegations put by the HCCC
and the severity of the sanctions open to it.
Accordingly it has approached the
evidence on the basis of the standard of proof described in
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
already stated, the factual allegations in the Further Amended Complaint are
accepted. It is also accepted that Dr Ristevski has
been guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct as described in Section 139B of the
National Law
Tribunal is of the view that the unsatisfactory professional conduct displayed
by Dr Ristevski is of such a nature as to fall
within the definition of
professional misconduct in Section 139E. This is for the following
(a) The maintenance of boundaries between patient and doctor is a long and well
established principle of medical practice.
(b) The breach of trust involved means that a breach of the boundaries must be
viewed as a particularly serious activity.
(c) Patient A was a young married woman with young children. She was also an
employee of the doctor. Her circumstances made her particularly
vulnerable.
(d) Having commenced a so-called
"loving relationship"
with Patient A, as
a result of which she left her husband, Dr Ristevski continued the relationship
concurrently with a relationship
(e) The concurrent relationship was such that Dr Ristevski found it appropriate
for the two women to meet and resolve their preferences.
This attitude added to
the vulnerability of the young mother, namely Patient A.
(f) The failure to record the consultations deprived Patient A of a record of
her medical history, which may have been of significance
to treatment of her by
Dr Ristovski or any subsequent practitioner.
Tribunal is satisfied that Complaint 1 including all particulars besides number
two have been established to the necessary standard
of proof. There was in fact
no dispute about this finding.
Tribunal is satisfied, as already stated, that the unsatisfactory professional
conduct is such that Complaint 2 has been established
both in relation to Parts
I and II of the Complaint.
respect of Complaint 3, like Complaint 1, there was no dispute that the
complaint has been established at least to the extent that
the District Court
confirmed a finding of guilt in respect of one offence of assault occasioning
actual bodily harm, although no
conviction was entered.
HCCC submitted that establishment of Complaint 3 brought the matter squarely
within the bounds of Section 149C(1)(c) therefore
justifying the cancellation of
Dr Ristevski's registration. The Tribunal does not agree that cancellation
should follow. It is necessary
to take Complaint 3 on its own. Like Judge
Murrell in the District Court the Tribunal thinks it appropriate to take into
the same considerations in coming to the conclusion that she could apply
Section 10 and not proceed to a conviction. The Tribunal
is also not satisfied
that it would be in the public interest to cancel the doctor's registration only
on the basis of the criminal
Tribunal's view is different in relation to Complaint 2. The Tribunal's
assessment of the seriousness of the professional misconduct
displayed by Dr
Ristevski, its rejection of the level of insight asserted by the doctor and its
concern of future similar misconduct
on the doctor's part all combine to make
cancellation of his registration an inevitable result.
respondent cited a number of authorities in which cancellation did not follow
upon inappropriate sexual misconduct but also acknowledged
that each case must
be viewed on its own facts. The considerations involved in making comparative
judgments were well set out by
the NSW Court of Appeal in
Lee v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 80
in particular from paragraph 23.
respondent submitted that there were a number of reasons why cancellation was
not appropriate. These included the nature of the
respondent's practice and in
particular his service to the Macedonian community. This is an important point
but one that does not
surmount the necessary protection to the community that
must be imposed following the doctor's conduct and the doubts of the Tribunal
that he will not re-offend.
conduct in this case was serious, prolonged, in the face of knowledge that it
was wrong and concerned the welfare of a young woman
with a young family. The
Tribunal does not see any appropriate alternative to cancellation. In reaching
this conclusion the Tribunal
has taken into account the various 'references'
submitted by Dr Ristevski and included in Exhibit 1.
Tribunal does however recognise that the respondent has operated as the only
doctor in his practice and that arrangements will
need to be made for the
benefit of his patients. The orders will therefore allow for the cancellation to
be delayed for a period
of about 6 weeks.
Accordingly
the Tribunal makes the following orders:
(a) That the respondent is reprimanded.
(b) The respondent's registration is cancelled with effect from 5pm on 31
January 2013.
(c) The respondent is to pay the applicant's costs of the
proceedings.
Tribunal appreciates that the return to the register will require the approval
of a differently constituted Tribunal. Any such
application should not be made
for a period 12 months.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (10.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter