URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWPICMR/2025/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:08:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mazry v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance [2025] NSWPICMR 28; (24 September 2025)
CERTIFICATE OF DETERMINATION
OF MERIT REVIEWER
Mazry v Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance
[2025] NSWPICMR
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA
MERIT REVIEWER:
DATE OF DECISION:
24 September 2025
CATCHWORDS:
MOTOR ACCIDENTS -
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
; no dispute
claimant is an earner and was injured in the motor accident; whether claimant
entitled to weekly payments of statutory
benefits; calculation of pre-accident
weekly earnings (PAWE); whether claimant received director fees from the
company; absence of
personal income tax return; company tax documents do not
include director fees;
–not satisfied the claimant was paid
director fees; PAWE calculated as nil; insurer’s reviewable decision
DETERMINATIONS MADE:
CERTIFICATE
The reviewable decision is about the calculation of the claimant’s
pre-accident weekly earnings (PAWE) which concerns the amount
of weekly payments
of statutory benefits that are payable under Division 3.3 of the
Accident Injuries Act 2017
(the MAI Act), and is therefore a merit review
matter under Schedule 2(1)(a) of the MAI Act.
I make the following determinations:
reviewable decision of the insurer is affirmed.
statement setting out my reasons for the decision is set out below.
STATEMENT OF REASONS
Sam Mazry (the claimant) was involved in a motor accident on 22 August 2024.
claimant says he sustained injuries to his neck, right shoulder, back, right
knee, right ankle as well as shock and anxiety as
a result of the motor
claimant made a claim for statutory benefits with Insurance Australia Limited
t/as NRMA (the insurer), the third-party insurer
of the vehicle that he says
caused the accident.
the time of the motor accident, the claimant was sole director and shareholder
of the company Justmed Medical Fitouts Pty Ltd (the
insurer was satisfied that the claimant was an
and in a decision dated
11 September 2024, made interim weekly payments of compensation in the
amount of $572.88 per week. This was done while the insurer
gathered information
regarding the claimant’s pre-accident weekly earnings (PAWE).
27 November 2024, the insurer made a decision calculating the claimant’s
PAWE in the amount of $nil. Following a request
from the claimant, the insurer
conducted an internal review and, in a decision dated 17 December 2024, affirmed
its decision that
the claimant’s PAWE is $nil. These decisions of the
insurer comprise of the “reviewable decision”.
claimant subsequently lodged an application for merit review of the
insurer’s reviewable decision at the Personal Injury
(Commission). I have been asked to deal with the application as the Merit
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
mentioned above, the decision under review is the insurer’s reviewable
decision which calculated the claimant’s PAWE
insurer noted that the claimant provided his company’s tax return for the
year ended 30 June 2024, profit and loss statement
for the year ended 30 June
2024 and business activity statements for July 2023 to June 2024.
claimant noted that the company’s business activity statement for the
periods September 2023 and October 2023 indicate total
salary and wages of
$3,000 have been paid per period.
insurer stated that it had requested the claimant’s individual tax return
for the year ended June 2024, payslips for the
months September 2023 and October
2023 or any bank statements during these periods to verify that he was in
receipt of this salary
insurer noted that to date, the claimant had not provided the above
information.
insurer referred to the merit review decision in
Patton v Allianz v Australia
Insurance Limited (No 1)
) where it concluded that:
(a) even where a claimant is the sole director and owner of a company through
which they exercise their earning capacity, at law
it is the company that
carries on the relevant business (as a company is a separate legal entity), not
the claimant, and
(b) therefore, when calculating a claimant’s PAWE in those circumstances,
the claimant’s “earnings” are the
amounts received as
remuneration by the claimant from the company (e.g. wages / director’s
fees etc.), rather than the proceeds
(i.e. the profits) of the relevant
insurer concluded that in accordance with the decision in
found the claimant’s PAWE to be $nil.
claimant stated that the company provides design, build and fit out services to
general practitioners (GP), specialists, pharmacies
and other health care
was a total of three employees in the company.
claimant’s role was to manage projects, conduct site inspections, organise
tradies, order building material and other business
management duties.
said that upon completion of a job, an invoice would be issued and payment was
made by the customer either directly into the bank
account of the business via
bank transfer or via EFTPOS payment.
Claimant’s earnings
claimant says his company made a total gross profit of $1,639,039.76 as
evidenced by the business’ Profit and Loss Statement
for the year ending
30 June 2024.
those profits, the claimant was paid a director’s fee of $188,650. The
claimant therefore submits his earnings were $3,627.88
for the 52-week period
before the motor accident ($188,650 / 52).
Statement of claimant
dated 21 March 2025
claimant says he paid himself a wage from the business profits into three bank
accounts, comprising of two personal accounts and
one joint account with his
wife. The bank transfer description was “Project Management” which
reflects one of the functions
of his role as director. There were also transfers
made from the company’s bank account number ending 261 into his personal
22 August 2023 to 21 August 2024, the claimant says he was paid $52,451.82
(personal account No1), $354,736.80 (personal account
No2) and $116,027.70
(joint account). This totalled $523,214 which was $10,061.80 per week (before
tax) for the 52 weeks before the
claimant also stated that he has not lodged personal tax returns for the
relevant period.
Supplementary statement of claimant dated 26 May
the supplementary statement, the claimant confirms that he made $188,650 (or
$3,627.88 per week) from his personal exertion as
director of the company for
the year ending 30 June 2024.
claimant says there are two copies of the 2024 Profit and Loss Statement with
the correct one being that which contains the director
fees. He says the
previous one was “amended due to accounting
Profit and Loss Statements
are two company Profit and Loss Statements for the year ended 30 June 2024.
These indicate a total trading income of just over
$3m with cost of goods sold
totalling approximately $1.38m. The operating expenses are itemised and total
$1.58m for the first statement
and $1.39m for the second statement.
only difference between the two statements is the inclusion of “director
fees” for the amount $188,650 for one of
the statements.
account for the “director fees”, the net profit of the company was
therefore reduced accordingly from one statement
to the other –
$246,732.73 to $58,082.73.
St George bank – company bank
account statements
shows all transactions in the relevant period with yellow highlighted
transactions of deposits made out of the company account
and Osko Deposits with
the description “Project Management”. There were also two
highlighted transactions with the description
INSURER’S POSITION
insurer says the claimant is an earner and is therefore entitled to statutory
weekly benefits. The calculation of the claimant’s
PAWE is the 12 months
immediately before the day of the motor accident and confirmed that the period
for the calculation is from
22 August 2023 to 21 August 2024 (the relevant
insurer relies on two reports prepared by forensic accountant Mr Lance Kahler,
CPA, from Vincents:
report with
attachments dated 5 December 2024, and
supplementary
report with attachments dated 5 August 2025.
insurer notes that the total wages reported in the Company’s Business
Account Statements for September 2023 and October
2023 was $6,000 (comprising of
$3,000 each month). The insurer submits that while it is possible the wages
reported in the company’s
BAS were payments of wages and/or director fees
to the claimant, the claimant has not provided his individual tax return for the
year ended 30 June 2024 or any payslips or bank statements to verify the receipt
of those payments.
insurer noted that the following documents were requested but not provided:
if the company
maintains digital accounting records (e.g. Xero, MYOB etc), a profit and loss
report for the period from 22 August
21 August 2024;
individual tax returns for the years ended 30 June 2023 and 2024, and
if the company
paid Mr Mazry salary and wages, copies of Mr Mazry’s payslips from 1 July
2023 to 21 August 2024 and his personal
bank account statements to which wages
were paid for that period.
insurer further noted that of the bank statements provided in the merit review
application, there are no identifying features
– such as account
holder’s name, address, or account number – that would confirm they
belong to Mr Mazry. As such
the insurer submits that it is unable to rely on
these documents in order to verify whether Mr Mazry received any wages or
fees from the company.
insurer maintains that the claimant’s PAWE should be calculated at $nil.
RELEVANT LEGISLATION
3.3 of the MAI Act deals with an injured persons entitlement to weekly payments
of statutory benefits.
3.6 and 3.7 sets out an entitlement to weekly payments calculated with reference
to the “pre-accident weekly earnings.”
1 of the MAI Act sets out the definitions relating to “earner” and
“pre-accident weekly earnings”
for the purposes of statutory weekly
payments under Division 3.3.
to Schedule 1, cl 4 of the MAI Act, PAWE means:
‘Pre-accident weekly earnings’
, in relation to an earner who
is injured as a result of a motor accident, means the weekly average of the
gross earnings received
by the earner as an earner during the 12 months
immediately before the day on which the motor accident occurred...”
DISPUTE RESOLUTION
Preliminary
conferences were held with the parties on 23 June 2025 and
18 August 2025.
following matters were agreed:
(a) the claimant was a self-employed sole director and shareholder of the
(b) the claimant was an “earner” for the purposes of the definition
in schedule 1 of the MAI Act, and
(c) the calculation of the claimant’s PAWE falls under Schedule 1, cl 4(1)
of the MAI Act (reproduced above in paragraph 39).
indicated that it was unclear from the provided bank account statements what
amounts the claimant actually received as wages or
director fees. I also noted
that the BAS only states that wages were paid in the amount of $6,000 for the
months of September and
October 2023.
claimant subsequently clarified in a statement dated 16 July 2025 that the
$6,000 recorded in the BAS referred to wages paid to
a worker whom the claimant
had for a short period of time as a subcontractor. He says his own earnings were
not recorded in the BAS
and that his accountant has properly reflected his
director fees as per the Profit and Loss Statement.
claimant also provided complete bank statements for his two joint accounts with
his wife for the relevant period.
claimant further submitted that “the structure of his business was quite
informal and his bookkeeping was not kept in the
order of a traditional
claimant confirmed that he has not lodged a 2024 tax return to date.
claimant submits that the lack of reference made in the claimant’s bank
statement description to “director fees”
should not be a basis to
calculate the claimant’s PAWE at $0. The claimant says he is entitled to
manage his funds according
to his personal preferences.
determining the merit review, the Merit Reviewer is to decide what the correct
and preferable decision is having regard to the
material before the Merit
Reviewer including any relevant factual material and the applicable written or
unwritten law.
Merit Reviewer may exercise all the functions under the MAI Act on the
determining a merit review application, the Merit Reviewer may decide:
(a) to affirm the reviewable decision; or
(b) to vary the reviewable decision; or
(c) to set aside the reviewable decision and make a decision in substitution for
the reviewable decision the merit reviewer set aside,
(d) to set aside the reviewable decision and remit the matter for
reconsideration by the insurer in accordance with any directions
of the merit
Merit Reviewer is to issue the parties with a certificate as to the
determination and is to attach a brief statement to the certificate
setting out
the reviewer’s reasons for the
determination.
CONSIDERATION
OF THE ISSUES
note that there is no dispute that the claimant is an earner and was injured as
a result of the motor accident. He is therefore
entitled to statutory benefits.
issue to be decided is whether the claimant received earnings in the form of
director fees and if so, how much, in order to calculate
his PAWE in accordance
with Schedule 1, cl 4 of the MAI Act for the relevant period.
stated earlier, the claimant is the sole director and shareholder of the
I am not bound by the decisions of previous Merit Reviewers or Merit Review
Panels, I see no reason to depart from the findings
that it is the company that carries on the relevant business as a separate legal
entity. The claimant’s earnings are
the amounts received as renumeration
from the company as director fees and not the profits of the business.
note that the claimant’s submissions do not appear to cavil with the
application of
, as the claimant acknowledges the original sum of
$523,214 cannot be claimed as his own gross earnings received from personal
“but includes other profits made by the business received
outside of his personal contributions to the
claimant maintains that he was in receipt of $188,650 for his personal exertion
for the 52 weeks before the motor accident and
relies on the company’s
amended Profit and Loss Statement.
relevant bank account statements that are before me are:
Justmed Medical
Fit outs St George account ending in 261, single page, covering the period 8
February 2025 to 7 March 2025, and
Constructions Pty Ltd St George account ending in 417, covering the period from
3 June 2023 to 2 September 2024.
personal joint accounts:
St George joint
account held by Mr Mazry and Mrs A El Masri ending in 562, covering the period
from 4 May 2023 to 3 November 2024,
St George joint
account held by Mr Mazry and Mrs A El Masri ending in 478, also covering the
period from 4 May 2023 to
3 November 2024.
The payments made
into account ending 562
the claimant’s joint account ending in 562, I note that there are regular
deposits ranging from $800 to $1,500 made throughout
the 12 months before the
accident. These deposits are highlighted yellow by the claimant in the bank
statements provided for the
relevant period. The description is “Internet
Deposit” and are all from the Justmed Medical Fit outs account ending
accept the insurer’s submission that the payments made do not specifically
state that the payments are for “director
fees”. The claimant says
this, however, should not be a basis to calculate the claimant’s PAWE at
$nil. The claimant
argues that he is entitled to manage his funds according to
his personal preference(s) and should not reflect his PAWE.
accept that there are deposits made from the company account ending 261 to the
claimant’s joint account ending 562. The payments
received in the relevant
period total $50,200.
note that the regularity of the payments and the consistency of the amounts paid
supports the claimant’s contention that the
deposits could be earnings
there is documented evidence to argue against the claimant’s position that
the amounts paid are in fact earnings received
by the claimant as an
the claimant is the company’s sole director and shareholder and received
director fees as payment for his personal exertion.
To date, there is no company
constitution or any other document that sets out how or when the claimant was to
be renumerated.
if the deposits made from the company into the claimant’s joint account
are in fact payments of director fees, this
should be appropriately stated in
the description. As noted above, the transaction description only says
“Internet Deposit”
which could comprise of any type of payment made
into the claimant’s joint account.
the claimant has not provided the company’s bank statement for the account
ending 261 to verify the transactions made
out of the account and into either of
the claimant’s joint accounts. Only the first page is provided and this
refers to a 2025
statement that is outside of the relevant period.
the claimant has not provided any official personal tax documents (such as an
income tax return for any year) to show amounts
were paid to him as director
fees by the company.
there is a notable absence of director fees in the original company Profit and
Loss Statement. It is unconceivable that an
amount of this magnitude ($188,650)
could be simply left out of the original ledger due to “accounting
and perhaps the most fatal to the claimant’s position, is the absence of
any director fees (or any salaries/wages paid)
in the official company tax
documentation, namely the 2024 company tax return and in the monthly activity
statements. As held in
, as company director, the claimant’s
earnings are the amounts received as renumeration from the company as director
the company did not pay director fees, the claimant’s position
cannot be maintained or justified.
therefore cannot be satisfied, on balance, that the amounts made into the
claimant’s joint bank account ending 562 constituted
earnings received by
the claimant as an earner for the relevant period.
The payments
made into account ending 478
is also a joint account held in the name of the claimant and his wife. The
claimant claims amounts paid as cheque deposits ($49,507),
Grays ($41,082) and
James Talari Pty Ltd ($20,000) as income from his personal exertion.
note that these payments are irregular, do not contain any reference to director
fees and there is no supporting documentation to
indicate that they are earnings
received by the claimant as an earner.
the same above reasons for the account ending 562, I am not satisfied the
amounts constitute earnings received by the claimant
as an earner for the
relevant period.
The payments made into account ending
payments made into this account were either internet or Osko deposits with the
description “Project Management”. While
the claimant describes his
duties as including project management, the account ending 417 is a company
account and are not therefore
amounts received by the claimant as renumeration
from the company as director fees.
CALCULATION OF PAWE
the information before me, the correct and preferable decision is that the
claimant’s PAWE is $nil.
insurer’s reviewable decision is therefore affirmed.
the claimant have additional information to substantiate the amounts claimed as
his earnings, he can provide this documentation
to the insurer who can make a
new decision on his statutory entitlements.
Only a person who was an earner
when injured is entitled to statutory benefits under Division 3.3 of the MAI
[2022] NSWPICMR 45.
Section 7.13(1) of the MAI
Section 7.13(2) of the MAI
Section 7.13(3) of the MAI
Section 7.13(4) of the MAI
At paragraphs 6 and 7 of the
additional submissions dated 18 August 2025.
With the exception of payment
dated 30 March 2024 which was from Justmed Constructions Pty Ltd account ending
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (442 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter