URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADTAP/2013/43.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lotz v Coco Chocolates Pty Ltd (RLD) [2013] NSWADTAP 43 (25 September 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
Lotz v Coco Chocolates Pty Ltd (RLD)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADTAP 43
Hearing Date(s):
29 July 2013
Decision Date:
25 September 2013
Retail Leases Division
M Chesterman, Deputy President
K Rickards, Judicial Member
Non-judicial Member
1. The appeal is dismissed.
2. Any application by the Respondents for the costs of these appeal
proceedings must be filed and served within 28 days, along with
submissions and any additional submissions they may wish to make as to the costs
of the proceedings at first instance.
Any submissions in reply by the Appellant
must be filed and served within a further 28 days. These matters of costs will
determined 'on the papers', pursuant to
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
, unless the Appeal Panel decides that a hearing is
Catchwords:
Retail lease - whether lease repudiated by lessee - whether essential terms
breached - operation of
Conveyancing Act 1919
section 129
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Conveyancing Act 1919
Environment Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Environment Planning and
Assessment Regulation 2000
Retail Leases Act 1994
Cases Cited:
Associated Newspapers Ltd v Bancks
[1951] HCA 24
(1951) 83 CLR 322
Coco Chocolates
Pty Ltd v Lotz
[2013] NSWADT 83
Macquarie International Health Clinic Pty
Ltd v Sydney South West Area Health Service
[2010] NSWCA 268
Builders Licensing Board
[1982] HCA 47
(1982) 149 CLR 620
Suisse Atlantique Societe
d'Armement Maritime SA v NV Rotterdamsche Kolen Centrale
[1967] 1 AC 361
Principal judgment
Debrah Ann Lotz (Appellant)
Coco Chocolates Pty Ltd (First Respondent)
Rebecca Kerswell (Second Respondent)
Representation
P Glissan (Appellant)
- Solicitors:
N J Papallo & Co (Appellant)
Brown & Partners
(Respondents)
File Number(s):
Decision Under Appeal
Retail Leases Division
- Date of Decision:
19 April 2013
- Citation:
Coco Chocolates Pty Ltd v Lotz
[2013] NSWADT 83
- Court File Number(s):
125042, 125074
REASONS FOR
Introduction
is an appeal against a decision of the Retail Leases Division (
Chocolates Pty Ltd v Lotz
[2013] NSWADT 83)
dismissing two applications for
relief under the
Retail Leases Act
'). The first of these
applications (file 125042) was brought by the Respondents to the appeal, Coco
Chocolates Pty Ltd ('Coco') and
Rebecca Kerswell, against the Appellant, Debrah
Lotz. The second (file 125074) was a cross application filed by Ms Lotz against
and Ms Kerswell.
Tribunal heard the matter on 13 August 2012. Mr Glissan of counsel appeared for
Ms Lotz and Mr Brown, of Brown & Partners,
appeared for Coco and Ms
Kerswell. Pursuant to directions given by the Tribunal, the parties then filed
supplementary submissions,
on 29 October and 13 November 2012 respectively.
Tribunal delivered its decision on 19 April 2013. On 17 May 2013, Ms Lotz
appealed against the dismissal of her cross application.
hearing of the appeal took place before us on 29 July 2013. Mr Glissan of
counsel again appeared for Ms Lotz. Mr Noonan, of Brown
& Partners, appeared
for Coco and Ms Kerswell.
this hearing, we rejected an application by Mr Glissan for leave to adduce
further evidence. We acceded, however, to an application
by him for leave to
extend the appeal to a review of the merits of the Tribunal's decision, pursuant
section 113(2)(b)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
'). In consequence, we are required by
section 115(1)
to 'decide what the correct and preferable decision is', having regard to the
material now before us. The reasons underlying our
decisions on each of these
applications are outlined below.
the hearing, we also indicated that, in our decision on the appeal, we would
give directions as to the filing of submissions regarding
the costs of the
hearings at first instance and on appeal.
The nature and course of the dispute between the parties
Kerswell is the sole director and secretary of Coco. Coco and Ms Kerswell are
the lessee and guarantor, respectively, under a lease
dated 28 May 2010 ('the
Lease') from Ms Lotz of a retail shop at the rear of the ground floor of 565
Military Road, Mosman ('the
Premises'). A second shop exists at the front of the
ground floor.
Lease is governed by the
. It has a term of ten years, commencing on 1 June
2010, and contains an option to renew for a further five years. The initial
rent was $2,651.52 plus GST. The permitted use is defined as 'chocolate
April 2010, during negotiations for the Lease, Ms Kerswell indicated that she
required an internal wall of the Premises to be removed,
in order to make her
business more viable. The Lease accordingly contained an Additional Condition
('AC 25') dealing with this matter.
AC 25.01 permitted Coco to 'remove the
interior walls within the Premises' and to carry out other works by way of
fit-out, so long
as a number of stipulations listed in AC 25.02 were observed.
The terms of AC 25, along with a number of other relevant provisions
Lease, are reproduced below.
events of significance that then occurred were described as follows in
paragraphs [15] to [18] and [42] of the Tribunal's
15 Kerswell states in paragraphs 10-15 of [her statutory
declaration] that she undertook the following actions in relation to obtaining
the approval of the proposed works and the construction of those works:
Approval of Proposed Works
10 I spoke to Mr Joe Vertel, a strategic planner working for Mosman Council,
who advised me that I should contact a private certifier
to sign off on the
building works proposal as he did not think I needed to obtain a Development
Application. He advised that he thought
a Complying Development Certificate
("CDC") would suffice.
11 I engaged a structural engineer, Mr John Bagnall of John Bagnall &
Associates Pty Ltd, who provided me with a report dated
1 April 2010 concerning
the proposed works
12 I subsequently engaged Fitzgerald Building Certifiers ("Fitzgeralds") as a
Principal Certifying Authority ("PCA") able to issue
13 On or about 4 June 2010, Paul Lotz (as agent for the Owner) signed the
Owners Declaration section of the CDC application form that
had been provided to
me by Fitzgeralds.
14 The CDC Application makes mention of the 'wall removal' and the plan
submitted shows which wall is to be removed.
15 The Plan was lodged with Mosman Council, subsequently Mosman Council
confirms having it on file.
16 Although Jeffrey Sharp, the proposed builder, was not a licensed builder,
Mr Paul Lotz agreed to Mr Sharp completing the proposed
works and subsequently
asked Jeffrey Sharp to perform works for Lotz in the upstairs flat above the
Premises concurrently with my
renovation work. Fitzgerald certifiers were also
fully aware of Jeffery Sharp's status as an Industrial Engineer, not a licensed
builder. This was also addressed on the CDC application signed by Paul Lotz.
17 On 17 January 2011 Fitzgeralds issued a Final Occupation Certificate.
16 The Final Occupation Certificate contained a statement as follows:
"I, Paul Fitzgerald as the certifying authority am satisfied that the
building will not constitute a hazard to the health or safety
of the occupants
of the building".
17 Subsequently, after the fit out works were completed Lotz became concerned
of the internal wall.
She says in her statutory declaration at paragraph 11... '[While] I have been
requesting final structural engineer
sign off since August 2010, by October 2011
there were multiple issues outstanding including disputes regarding money owed
as the structural issues".
18 Lotz sought from Coco a sign off from a structural engineer and on 11
January 2012 she wrote to the Certifier, Fitzgeralds for
a final confirmation
whether or not the CDC included removal of the wall or not. Fitzgeralds
responded that no reference was made
in the CDC to a wall removal. This then
raised doubt in the mind of Lotz as to whether the Occupation Certificate upon
relied, based on the CDC was in fact comprehensive enough to cover
the full extent of the works undertaken by Coco in accordance
with additional
condition 25.02 of the Lease.
42 Lotz stated... that on 23 January 2012, Mosman Council confirmed that no
private certifier plans were on record. However, in a
separate email from Mr
Vertel of Mosman Council on 4 April 2012... to Kerswell, Mr Vertel advised "Yes
as previously advised to all
parties, a plan has been lodged as part of the CDC
application. This plan could best be described as a site plan"...
is useful to add here that the Final Occupation Certificate issued by
Fiztgeralds on 17 January 2011 also stated that the 'building'
was 'suitable for
its use under the Building Code of Australia'.
a letter sent on 17 February 2012 to Ms Kerswell, Ms Lotz's solicitors (N J
Papallo & Co) alleged that Coco had breached a
number of provisions of the
Lease, some of which were 'essential terms'. Many of these alleged breaches were
of provisions within
AC 25.02. On account of one of them, involving an alleged
failure by Coco's certifier to provide 'the correct certification on the
scope of the works' carried out in the Premises, the letter claimed that Ms Lotz
had been 'obliged to carry out a building code
assessment report to identify any
further issues of non-compliance'.
letter then set out a number of 'demands' by Ms Lotz for rectification of these
breaches within the 'reasonable time period' of
forty days. It stated in
conclusion that if Coco failed to meet these demands and to 'make good' on all
its obligations under the
Lease, Ms Lotz reserved the right to enter and take
possession of the Premises, to terminate the Lease without further notice and
claim damages.
this letter made no mention of
section 129
Conveyancing Act
it was treated by the Tribunal, without any opposition from the parties, as
constituting a notice under subsection (1) of that provision.
We will refer to
it, as did the Tribunal, as 'the
section 129
'building code assessment report' referred to in the
section 129
(hereafter 'the BCA Report') was described on the front cover as a 'BCA Audit
and Upgrading Report'. It was prepared by a
firm of building regulation and fire
safety engineering consultants called BCA Logic Pty Ltd. It was dated 5 February
2012 and was
addressed to Mr Paul Lotz, the husband of Ms Lotz.
23 March 2012, Coco and Ms Kerswell filed their Application for Original
Decision in the Tribunal. They also filed an Application
for Urgent Interim
Order, seeking an interlocutory order against Ms Lotz under the
27 March 2012, the Tribunal ordered that until further order Ms Lotz should not
interfere with Coco's occupation of the Premises.
orders sought in Coco's and Ms Kerswell's Application for Original Decision were
to the effect that they should be permitted to
'trade in peace', that there
should be an 'end to any building dispute', that if no resolution was possible
the Lease should be terminated
and that they should receive compensation for
loss of trade and for legal expenses.
23 May 2012, Lotz filed her Application for Original Decision in the Tribunal.
She sought an order that Coco should vacate the
premises on the date four weeks
after Ms Lotz had signed a lease with a new tenant, an order that the Lease 'be
terminated' on that
date, an award of damages for the alleged breaches of the
Lease and a costs order.
grounds on which Ms Lotz maintained that she was entitled to possession of the
Premises included an assertion that Coco by its
conduct had repudiated the
Lease. The damages that she claimed included compensation for partial loss of
rent relating to a residential
unit on the upper level of the building in which
the Premises were located.
the hearing before the Tribunal, Mr Glissan applied for leave to amend Ms Lotz's
application so as to claim an order that Coco
surrender possession of the
premises to her four weeks after the date of the order. This amendment was not
was also granted to Coco and Ms Kerswell to amend their Application so as to
include a claim for relief against forfeiture of
the Lease. This amendment was
also not opposed.
of the evidence adduced at the hearing was in documentary form. It comprised two
statutory declarations signed by Ms Lotz and
one signed by Ms Kerswell. Annexed
to each of these declarations were copies of a number of documents.
the conclusion of the hearing, the Tribunal granted leave to Ms Lotz to carry
out further inspections of the Premises for the purpose
of determining whether
further rectification works were required. On 29 October 2012, after inspections
had taken place, her solicitors
filed supplementary submissions, in which they
argued that a number of reports prepared following the inspections gave
support to her claim of breaches of the Lease by Coco. Annexed to
these submissions were copies of the reports.
and Ms Kerswell did not seek leave to file any additional evidence in reply,
even though the directions given by the Tribunal
included liberty to any party
to restore the matter to the list on reasonable notice. On or about 13 November
2012, they did, however,
file supplementary submissions in reply.
Relevant provisions of the Lease
following provisions of the Lease, most of which were reproduced in the
Tribunal's decision, are relevant in this appeal:-
CLAUSE 6 USE
How must the property be used?
6.1 The tenant must -
6.1.4 comply with all laws... regulating how the property is used, obtain any
consents or licences needed, comply with any conditions
of consent...
6.3 The tenant must not -
6.3.1 do anything that might invalidate any insurance policy covering the
property... or
6.3.2 use the property... for any activity that is dangerous... illegal... or
that is or may become a nuisance or annoyance to the
landlord...
CLAUSE 7 CONDITION AND REPAIRS
Who is to repair the property?
7.1 The landlord must -
7.1.1 maintain in a state of good condition and serviceable repair the roof,
the ceiling... and must fix structural defects;
7.1.2 maintain the property in a structurally sound condition; and
7.1.3 maintain essential services.
7.2 The tenant must otherwise maintain the property in its condition at the
commencement date and promptly do repairs needed to keep
condition...
7.4 If an authority requires work to be done on the property and it is
structural work or work needed to make the property safe to
use then the
landlord must do the work unless it is required only because of the way the
tenant uses the property. But if it is any
other work or is required only
because of the way the tenant uses the property then the tenant must do the
CLAUSE 12 FORFEITURE AND END OF LEASE
When does this lease end?
12.1 This lease ends...
12.1.3 if the landlord lawfully demands possession of the property.
12.2 The landlord can enter and take possession of the property or demand
possession of the property if:
12.2.1 the tenant has repudiated this lease; or
12.2.2 rent or other money due under this lease is 14 days overdue for
payment; or
12.2.3 the tenant has failed to comply with a landlord's notice under
Conveyancing Act 1919
12.2.4 the tenant has not complied with any term of this lease where a
landlord's notice under
section 129
Conveyancing Act 1919
landlord has given at least 14 days written notice of the landlord's intention
to end this lease.
12.5 Essential terms of this Lease include...
12.5.3 the obligations of the tenant in clause 6.1 (dealing with use);
12.5.4 the obligations of the tenant in clause 7 (dealing with
repairs)...
12.6 If there is a breach of an essential term the landlord can recover
damages for losses over the entire period of this lease...
Additional Condition 23 - Additional Tenant Covenants
23.01 The Tenant covenants with the Landlord that the Tenant must...
(b) comply with all statutes, regulations, by-laws or ordinances affecting
the Premises or any fixtures or fittings installed by the
tenant therein...
(d) at the Tenant's expense repair and maintain the essential fire services
for the Premises including fire safety equipment, emergency
lighting, smoke
detectors, exit signs and fire extinguishers.
Additional Condition 25 - Additional Tenant's Fitout
25.01 Provided the Tenant complies with Additional Condition 25.02, the
Tenant may carry out the following works:
(a) remove the interior walls within the Premises, some of which are
load-bearing walls; and
(b) other works to fit out the Premises.
25.02 The works referred to in Additional Condition 25.01 must be:
(a) undertaken in a proper and workmanlike manner and commenced only after
the Tenant, at its own cost, has consulted a structural
consulting engineer for
advice concerning the removal of the interior walls within the Premises;
(b) carried out in a workmanlike manner by a contractor under the supervision
of persons both approved by the Landlord and in accordance
with the advice given
by the structural consulting engineer referred to in Additional Condition
(c) in accordance with all statutes, rules, regulations, proclamations,
ordinances, or by-laws present or future and includes applicable
Standards and Codes of Practice, requirements, notices, orders, or directions
received from or given by any Authorities;
(d) in accordance with and only after plans and specifications have been
approved by the Landlord;
(e) in accordance with and only after obtaining the approvals of all relevant
Authorities;
(f) only after providing copies to the Landlord of all approvals from
relevant Authorities, including without limitation an Occupation
Certificate,
Construction Certificate and/or such other certificate as may be required
pursuant to Additional Condition 25.02(e)
hereof in relation to the works prior
to carrying out the works;
(g) the Tenant must only engage a reputable and financially responsible
contractor...
The Tribunal's decision
substantial proportion of the Tribunal's decision was devoted to an
investigation and determination of Ms Lotz's claim that Coco,
in the course of
carrying out the fit-out permitted by AC 25.01, had breached a number of the
essential terms of the Lease.
Tribunal's conclusion, based on a number of factual findings that it made, was
that no such breaches had taken place.
the course of this investigation, the Tribunal made determinations as to which
provisions of the Lease were 'essential terms'.
It held (at [45]) that clauses 6
and 7 fell within this category, on account of the express words of clauses
12.5.3 and 12.5.4.
[46], it held that AC 25 was also an express term, even though it was not
expressly stated to be one. In so deciding, it applied
a criterion formulated by
Gibbs CJ in
Shevill v Builders Licensing Board
[1982] HCA 47
(1982) 149 CLR 620.
relevant passage (at 626 - 627), the Chief Justice identified (a) conduct
amounting to repudiation and (b) fundamental breach
as grounds on which the
innocent party to a contract could rescind the contract and claim damages for
the failure to perform the
obligations imposed by the contract. He then
A third situation in which a right to rescission arises is where
there has been a breach of a fundamental or essential term of a contract.
Suisse Atlantique Societe d'Armement Maritime SA v NV Rotterdamsche Kolen
[1967] 1 AC 361
at 422, Lord Upjohn said:
"A fundamental term of a contract is a stipulation which the parties have
agreed either expressly or by necessary implication or which
the general law
regards as a condition which goes to the root of the contract so that any breach
of that term may at once and without
further reference to the facts and
circumstances be regarded as a fundamental breach..."
The test accepted in
Associated Newspapers Ltd v Bancks
[1951] HCA 24
(1951) 83 CLR
at 337 is whether the term "is of such importance to the promisee that he
would not have entered into the contract unless he had
been assured of a strict
or a substantial performance of the promise, as the case may be, and that this
ought to have been apparent
to the promisor."
this test (which it quoted at [34]), the Tribunal came to the opposite
conclusion regarding paragraphs (b) and (d) of AC
23.01. It held at [46] that
these were 'no more than general compliance obligations of the lessee with
respect to maintaining the
premises' and were 'not in the same category as
additional provision 25 which viewed objectively is essential'.
[26 - 28], the Tribunal considered whether any action taken by Ms Lotz amounted
to a demand for forfeiture of the Lease. It pointed
out that she never made a
'formal demand' for possession of the Premises. But it accepted Mr Glissan's
submission that by seeking
an order for possession in her Application for
Original Decision and filing and serving this Application she had made a
demand for forfeiture.
further determination by the Tribunal, based principally on its conclusion that
no breaches of the Lease by Coco had been established,
was that Coco had not
engaged in conduct constituting repudiation of the Lease. It set out its
reasoning on this question at [67
Shevill v Builders Licensing Board
[1982] HCA 47
(1982) 149 CLR 620
at 625-626, Gibbs CJ held that, to establish repudiation, it must be shown that
the tenant "evinced an intention no longer to be
bound by the contract; or to
fulfil it only in a manner substantially inconsistent with his obligations"...
The test to be applied
is whether the conduct of one party is such as to convey
to a reasonable person in the situation of the other party renunciation
of the contract as a whole or of a fundamental obligation under it.
68 The Tribunal has already determined that Coco was not in breach of
essential terms of the Lease or any other breaches as alleged
notice or other building breaches alleged in the later submissions. As the
Tribunal has found there were no breaches of the Lease
as alleged in the
notice and the conduct of Coco in not acting upon the notice therefore
cannot be viewed as repudiatory conduct by Coco.
69 If in any event a breach was established, Mr Brown on behalf of Coco
submitted such breach was not of a nature that shows "an intention
no longer to
be bound by the contract or to fulfil it only in a manner substantially
inconsistent with his obligations". On the contrary,
it is submitted that Coco's
evidence shows that Coco went to great lengths both to ascertain the correct
procedure to follow in relation
to the proposed fit out works and to obtain
Lotz's consent to the works being performed. The Tribunal accepts this
submission. The
Tribunal is not to judge a party's conduct in undertaking
performance of essential terms of the Lease on the basis of an efficiency
Consequently, the Tribunal finds no evidence of any conduct by Coco in
performing its obligations under the Lease that could
on the test to be applied
be viewed as Coco repudiating its obligations under the Lease entitling Lotz to
accept such conduct and
forfeit the Lease...
Tribunal then stated succinctly (at [69]) why on account of its findings and
determinations it was bound to dismiss both of the
Applications for Original
Decision that were before it:-
69... As there was no breach of Lease nor any repudiatory conduct
by Coco the Lease cannot be forfeited by Lotz and the question of
that Coco might have for relief against forfeiture does not arise to be
considered by the Tribunal.
The questions to be resolved in the appeal
of the grounds of appeal urged on us by Mr Glissan involved challenges to the
Tribunal's rejection of Ms Lotz's claim that Coco
had breached a number of
provisions of the Lease. He argued also that the Tribunal had erred in rejecting
his submission that paragraphs
(b) and (d) of AC 23.01 were essential terms of
the Lease, and in concluding that Coco's conduct had not been such as to amount
repudiation of the Lease.
small number of allegations of breach of the Lease on which Ms Lotz based her
case before the Tribunal were not pressed in her appeal.
We therefore do not
need to deal with them.
discussing the grounds of appeal, it is convenient to deal individually with the
allegations of breach that are still pressed.
With respect to each of them, we
will set out the following: the content of the allegation; the provision(s) of
the Lease claimed
to have been breached; relevant parts of the evidence; the
Tribunal's ruling, together with the reasons given by it; the submissions
advanced in the appeal; and our conclusions.
will then deal with the parties' arguments relating to the characterisation of
AC 23.01(b) and (d) and to the claim that Coco repudiated
summary, the allegations of breach of the Lease that are still pressed by Ms
Lotz involved the following conduct by Coco in the
course of carrying out its
fit-out operations: (a) failing to obtain valid approvals and to lodge plans
relating to removal of the
internal wall; (b) failing to submit the plans for
the works to Ms Lotz for her approval; (c) failing to ensure that they were
out under the supervision of one or more persons approved by her; (d)
employing an unlicensed builder; (e) failing to obtain certification
in relation
to certain plumbing operations and permitting the installation of non-compliant
plumbing; (f) creating and failing to
remedy defects in the ceiling of the
Premises, thereby giving rise to a fire hazard; and (g) failing to lower the
height of a step
at the rear of the Premises in order to comply with applicable
building regulations.
Failure to obtain valid approvals and to lodge plans relating to
removal of the internal wall
parties' contentions and the Tribunal's rulings.
The allegation of prime
importance made by Ms Lotz in this context was that the CDC that Coco obtained
did not authorise the removal
of an internal wall. It followed, she claimed,
that the CDC and the Final Occupation Certificate were 'illusory'. She alleged
that Coco breached a statutory obligation to lodge relevant plans with
Mosman Council ('the Council') within two days after the CDC
was granted.
these reasons, she maintained, Coco had contravened the following obligations
imposed by AC 23.01(b) and AC 25.02(c), (e) and
(f): to have the fit-out
operations carried out in accordance with all relevant laws etc, to obtain the
requisite approvals and to
provide copies of all these approvals to her. The
section 129
Notice contained allegations to this effect.
further consequence described by Ms Lotz was that she became concerned about the
structural integrity of the building. She expressed
her concerns to her
insurers, who declined on this account to renew her insurance policy. This was a
further item of complaint in
section 129
Notice. But the insurers
subsequently renewed the policy, in response to a further communication from her
and her husband advising
that a structural engineer engaged by them had
confirmed the soundness of the building.
five paragraphs ([15 -18] and [42]) of the Tribunal's decision that we
reproduced above at [10] show that the evidence on these
matters contained a
number of contradictions.
a letter written to Mr Lotz on 16 January 2012 and mentioned by the Tribunal at
[18], Mr Fitzgerald stated that the CDC was 'issued
for "Shop Fitout" only with
no reference to the internal wall'. An enclosed copy of the CDC also did not
refer to removal of a wall.
In a letter to Ms Lotz dated 23 January 2012, the
Council stated that no private certifier plans had been lodged (see [42]).
she later obtained a copy (which was annexed to her first statutory
declaration) of a plan of the Premises that the Council claimed
to have received
at some stage. This plan did not indicate that a wall was to be removed.
Kerswell's evidence on these matters was quite different. She maintained (see
again the Tribunal's decision at [42], and paragraphs
14 and 15 of her statutory
declaration, quoted at [15]) that the CDC application mentioned the wall
removal, that the plan lodged
with the Council showed which wall was to be
removed and that the Council confirmed having received such a plan.
is not surprising that at [44] the Tribunal made the following observation: 'The
resolution of the dispute between the parties
has not been assisted by the
inconsistent advice received by the parties from Mosman Council...' It could be
added that the advice
conveyed by Fitzgeralds was similarly unhelpful.
[48] and [49], the Tribunal determined in the following manner Ms Lotz's claims
that Coco had breached paragraphs (c), (e) and,
by implication, (f) of AC
48... After many emails and discussion between the parties, Mosman
Council and the certifier eventually agreed that a CDC had been
Accordingly, additional condition 25.02(c) has been complied with.
49... A CDC application was made and approval granted by Mosman Council and
therefore additional condition 25.02(e) has been complied
with. Lotz now has the
relevant approval, together with confirmation from the structural engineer, Mr
Bagnall, that the wall removed
was not load bearing...
the appeal, Mr Glissan repeated these allegations of breach of the Lease by
Coco. He applied also for leave to adduce further evidence
relating to them.
main component of this evidence was a copy of an adverse disciplinary
determination made by the Building Professionals Board on
15 March 2013 against
Mr Fitzgerald. The complaints with which it dealt included a complaint by Ms
Lotz. All of the six allegations
in this complaint related to Mr Fitzgerald's
discharge of his duties as an accredited certifier for Coco's fit-out
operations.
indicated earlier in this decision, we rejected Mr Glissan's application for
leave to adduce this evidence. We did so on the ground
that, although the
Board's determination was based in part on its view of Mr Fitzgerald's
professional conduct with regard to Coco's
fit-out operations, the questions
that it addressed differed materially from those which arise in this appeal.
remaining item of evidence that Mr Glissan sought to tender by leave was a copy
of a letter dated 13 June 2013 from the Council
to Ms Lotz. This letter outlined
the steps that needed to be taken if work on a property had been carried out
without development
consent. We did not consider this evidence to be of
sufficient weight to warrant being admitted in appeal proceedings.
his submissions, Mr Noonan drew our attention to Ms Kerswell's statements in her
statutory declaration (see [10] above) that on
or about 4 June 2010 Mr Lotz
signed the application for a CDC on behalf of the owners of the Premises and
that this application expressly
indicated that an internal wall was to be
removed. He argued that since the application was signed on behalf of Mr and Ms
was wrong to characterise Fitzgeralds, the certifier, as an agent of
Coco. Ensuring the validity of the CDC and the Final Occupation
Certificate was,
he said, a matter for Fitzgeralds and/or the Council, not a responsibility borne
relation to the lodgement of appropriate plans with the Council following the
issue of the CDC, Mr Noonan relied on the Council's
statement to Ms Kerswell
that this had been attended to. He pointed out also that the duty of lodgement
was imposed by relevant legislation
on Fitzgeralds, the certifier, not on Coco
or on the owners of the building.
conclusions.
In our judgment, three aspects of the evidence and the
governing law on these matters are crucial to the determination of these claims
by Ms Lotz that Coco breached the Lease.
Mr Lotz, in signing the application for a CDC, participated in the appointment
of Fitzgeralds as the certifier. Because he
signed on behalf of his wife as well
as himself, she must also be taken to have participated in this appointment.
copy of two pages of the form that he signed was annexed to Ms Kerswell's
statutory declaration. Relevantly, the first page, headed
, indicated
that the form was an application for a CDC, that the applicant 'must be the
owner', that the owner was Ms Lotz and, as
already mentioned, that the proposed
development would include 'wall removal'. The second page was headed 'Owners
Declaration'. This
declaration contained a clause indemnifying Fitzgeralds
against 'any damages, losses or suffering as a result of incorrect information'
provided in
Its concluding clause, appearing immediately above Mr
Lotz's signature, was in these terms: 'As owners of the above mentioned property
I/we wish to appoint Paul Fitzgerald as PCA.' ('PCA' evidently means 'principal
certifying authority'.) Mr Lotz's signature appeared
alongside the words 'Owners
Signature'. On the line immediately below, the handwritten phrase 'Paul and Deb
Lotz' appeared beside
the word 'Name/s'. The date of signature was stated to be
2 June 2010.
the function which Fitzgeralds, an accredited certifier, was thereby authorised
to perform was that of a certifier appointed
under section 85A of the
Environment Planning and Assessment Act
1979 ('the EPA Act'). Its duty
was to act as an independent body in issuing a CDC. It was similarly obliged to
act as an independent
body when issuing the Final Occupation Certificate under
section 109D of this Act. Within limits imposed by the Act, its tasks were
same as those regularly performed by local authorities.
as Mr Noonan pointed out, the duty to lodge relevant plans with the Council
within two days after issuing the CDC was a duty
imposed by the
Environment
Planning and Assessment Regulation
2000 on Fitzgeralds, the certifier. The
provision imposing this duty is clause 130(4).
these three considerations are taken into account, we conclude that Ms Lotz's
claims of breaches by Coco of AC 25.02(c), (e)
and (f) are not made out. Our
reasons are as follows.
Fitzgeralds,
in its role as an accredited certifier, was an independent authority exercising
functions conferred upon it by the EPA
Act. Accordingly, it could not be
regarded merely as an agent of either or both of the parties. The fact that Mr
Lotz signed the
'Owners Declaration' section of the application for a CDC on
behalf of Ms Lotz (as well as on his own behalf) constitutes a further
for rejecting her claim that Fitzgeralds was an agent of Coco. In its role as an
accredited certifier, Fitzgeralds - not,
as both the Tribunal (at [49]) and some
of Ms Lotz's submissions appeared to assume, the Council - issued the CDC. The
application
for the CDC referred expressly to removal of the internal wall. We
cannot understand why Mr Fitzgerald should have stated the opposite
letter dated 16 January 2012 to Mr Lotz. We can only assume that he failed to
check the contents of the application before
writing this letter.
these circumstances, it cannot be maintained - or at least, cannot be maintained
against Coco - that the CDC was invalid or 'illusory'
on the ground that it did
not cover this aspect of the fit-out operations. On the face of it, Ms Lotz, as
owner, and Coco, as potential
tenant, applied for and were granted a CDC which
authorised, among other things, the removal of the internal wall.
evidence suggests that in issuing the CDC and/or the Final Occupation
Certificate Fitzgeralds may well have contravened provisions
of the EPA Act
and/or the regulations made under that Act. It appears likely, in particular,
that the plans which it lodged with
the Council following issue of the CDC did
not indicate that an internal wall was to be removed. But because Fitzgeralds
was an independent
authority appointed by Mr and Ms Lotz as well as by Coco,
these contraventions are not contraventions for which Coco could be held
responsible under AC 25.02(c) or AC 23.01(b).
Furthermore,
no argument was put to us to establish that any such contraventions committed by
Fitzgeralds would invalidate either
the CDC or the Final Occupation Certificate
that it issued. We do not see why this result would necessarily follow.
Accordingly,
these two certificates must be regarded as valid 'approvals' by a
'relevant Authority' that Coco was required by AC 25.02(e) to obtain
fact obtain.
we understand Ms Lotz's argument relating to AC 25.02(f), it was based on the
proposition that the 'approvals' of which she received
copies from Coco were
invalid or 'illusory'. Since we have held this not to be the case, her argument
the foregoing reasons, Ms Lotz claims of breach of AC 23.01(b) and AC 25.02(c),
(e) and (f), stemming from various aspects of
the evidence regarding the conduct
of Fitzgeralds, must be rejected.
Failure to submit plans to Ms Lotz for her approval
parties' contentions and the Tribunal's rulings.
The relevant allegation by
Ms Lotz was that Coco breached AC 25.02(d) by not submitting the plans and
specifications relating to its
fit-out operations to her for her approval before
these operations commenced.
the Tribunal stated at [49], there was 'no direct evidence to say that Coco
provided the plan and [Ms] Lotz approved it'. Coco
and Ms Kerswell maintained
before the Tribunal, however, that there were two reasons why Ms Lotz could not
complain about any failure
on its part to comply with AC 25.02(d).
have already mentioned the first of these reasons. It was that on 2 June 2010 Mr
Lotz, purportedly on behalf of the owners of the
Premises (whom he indicated to
be himself and Ms Lotz) signed the application for a CDC and that in this
application the most important
feature of the fit-out operations - namely, that
an internal wall was to be removed - was expressly mentioned. Coco and Ms
did not allege, however, that Mr Lotz viewed any plans accompanying the
application, even though it was their case that an appropriate
plan was lodged
with the Council as part of the application.
second reason was that Ms Lotz should be held to have waived the requirements of
AC 25.02(d). The grounds for this contention
were that neither she nor her
husband had asked at the time to see any plans for the fit-out and that in an
email sent to Ms Kerswell
on 10 January 2011, when the fit-out was substantially
complete, they said that subject to a couple of minor considerations
'everything'
was 'fine' in relation to the fit-out.
response to these contentions (and also in the context of Ms Lotz's allegation
that Coco breached its obligation in AC 25.02(b)
to ensure that the fit-out
operations were supervised by a person or persons approved by her), Mr Glissan
argued that there was no
evidentiary basis for a finding that Mr Lotz had acted
as an agent for Ms Lotz. He argued also that there were no grounds for a ruling
that she had waived compliance with the obligation to submit plans to her.
[49], the Tribunal dealt as follows with this matter:-
49 The question whether Lotz [i.e., Ms Lotz] approved the plan is
vexed. There is no direct evidence to say that Coco provided the
plan and Lotz
approved it. The plan annexed to the application for a CDC held at Mosman
Council was a copy of the plan out of the
Lease. Nevertheless Lotz signed the
application for a CDC and also Lotz had the work supervised by her agent Mr Paul
Lotz. No complaint
was made at the time of lodging the CDC application nor at
the time of the work being undertaken that a plan had not been provided
and had not been approved. In these circumstances whatever breach had been made
by Coco in not supplying a plan had been
subsequently waived by Lotz by the
conduct of her agent in the supervision of the work...
his written submissions in the appeal, Mr Glissan argued again that there was
'no evidence before the Tribunal' to support its
finding that Mr Lotz had
supervised the fit-out operations as the agent of Ms Lotz and that since he was
not her agent, he had no
authority to waive on her behalf Coco's failure, in
contravention of AC 25.02(d), to supply the plans for these operations to her
for her approval.
his oral submissions, Mr Glissan acknowledged that Mr Lotz had acted as agent
for his wife in signing the CDC application. But
he still maintained that no
authority, actual or ostensible, had been conferred on Mr Lotz to act as her
agent in any other context.
the question of agency, Mr Noonan submitted that there was ample evidence to
show that Mr Lotz purported to act as agent for his
wife in a number of relevant
contexts. In addition to his signing the CDC application, this included
unchallenged testimony by Ms
Kerswell to the following effect: (a) during
negotiations for the Lease, she asked him whether she might be permitted to
internal wall of the Premises, and he was 'generally agreeable' to
this proposition; (b) he agreed to the engagement of Mr Sharp
to complete the
fit-out; (c) he was present at the fit-out operations 'almost every day'
(including particularly when doors to the
Premises were replaced and the rear
step was widened); and (d) the email message of 10 January 2011 expressing
approval of the fit-out
came jointly from him and Ms Lotz.
conclusions.
An important premise underlying the Tribunal's determination of
this question in favour of Coco and Ms Kerswell was, as we have indicated,
finding that to the relevant extent Mr Lotz was an agent of Ms Lotz.
agree with this proposition, though in our judgment the Tribunal erred through
not giving adequate reasons for adopting it. The
Tribunal merely stated it at
various points (specifically in [41], [47], [48] and twice in [49]) without
referring to any evidence
in support. By virtue of the evidence on which Mr
Noonan relied, we are satisfied that Ms Kerswell was entitled to treat Mr Lotz
as his wife's agent in all dealings relating to the Lease. There is no evidence
that Ms Lotz conferred actual authority on him, but
he did have ostensible
the footing that Mr Lotz was his wife's agent, we agree with the Tribunal that
his conduct, along with her co-operation with him
in sending the email of 10
January 2011, could legitimately be construed by Ms Kerswell as waiving the
requirement in AC 25.02(d)
for the fit-out plans to be submitted to her for her
approval. It follows that Ms Lotz's claim of contravention of this requirement
must be rejected.
Failing to ensure supervision by one or more approved
parties' contentions and the Tribunal's rulings.
The relevant allegation by
Ms Lotz was that Coco breached AC 25.02(b) by not ensuring that the fit-out
operations were carried out
under the supervision of a person or persons
approved by her.
Tribunal's brief ruling on this matter, at [48], was as follows:-
48... Mr Sharp undertook the work and Mr Paul Lotz, as agent for
Lotz supervised the work and the builder. Thus additional condition
25.02(b) has
been complied with.
his written submissions in the appeal, Mr Glissan argued that, in addition to
there being no relationship of principal and agent
between Ms and Mr Lotz, Mr
Lotz was 'not qualified to carry out or supervise building work' and was 'a mere
observer'. He did not
elaborate on this contention in his oral submissions.
acknowledging that Mr Lotz did not supervise this work in any technical
capacity, Mr Noonan submitted that his conduct in observing
what was done
operated in 'substitution' for Ms Lotz's supervision for the purpose of ensuring
that all visible aspects of the fit-out
was sufficiently to her liking.
conclusions.
Being satisfied, for reasons already explained, that Mr Lotz
had ostensible authority to represent his wife, we are satisfied also
continuing observation of the fit-out operations (as described by Ms Kerswell)
either constituted 'supervision' of them
in accordance with AC 25.02(b) or gave
legitimate grounds for Ms Kerswell to believe that Ms Lotz did not insist on any
more 'technical' supervision taking place on her behalf.
these grounds, we agree with the Tribunal that this complaint of contravention
of AC 25.02(b) is not made out.
Employment of an unlicensed builder
parties' contentions and the Tribunal's ruling.
Ms Lotz maintained that
Coco, through employing a contractor (Mr Sharp) who was not a licensed builder,
contravened its obligation
under AC 25.02(a) (see also AC 25.02(b)) to ensure
that the fit-out works permitted by AC 25.01 were 'undertaken in a proper and
workmanlike manner'. Although at the Tribunal hearing it was claimed that the
employment of Mr Sharp also contravened clauses 6.3.2
and 7.4, this claim was
not repeated in the appeal.
was not disputed that Mr Sharp was not a licensed builder. As the Tribunal
pointed out at [40], however, Ms Kerswell testified
that Mr Lotz agreed to his
being employed and indeed engaged him subsequently to carry out work in the
residential unit above the
Premises. Ms Kerswell also stated that Mr Sharp was a
licensed engineer.
[47], the Tribunal ruled as follows on this matter:-
47... There appears to have been no complaint from Lotz about the
nature of the work undertaken by the builder, Mr Sharp. Only now
asserting that Mr Sharp was not a licensed builder and that this constitutes a
default by Coco. Further, there was no evidence
presented to the Tribunal that a
builder of commercial premises is required to be licensed. The Tribunal is asked
to make an assumption
that because Mr Sharp was not licensed, then the work
carried out by him may not have been in a proper and workmanlike manner. There
was no evidence to support that assumption...
his submissions in the appeal, Mr Glissan argued that the statement made in the
first sentence of this passage constituted an error
of law. Referring to the
alleged defects in the plumbing and the ceiling caused by the fit-out works and
to the failure to lower
the height of the rear step so as to comply with
building regulations, he contended that in fact there was indisputable evidence
of 'complaint from Lotz about the nature of the work undertaken by the builder,
responding on this specific point, Mr Noonan relied on an email message dated 10
January 2011 to which we have already referred
(at [69]). In reply to a message
from Ms Kerswell describing the completion of certain aspects of the fit-out and
asking them to
'confirm agreement all finalised', Mr and Ms Lotz said that
'everything' was 'fine', except for three matters which had no bearing
quality of Mr Sharp's workmanship. Mr Noonan pointed out that this
correspondence took place after Mr Sharp had finished working
in the Premises.
reference to the above-quoted extract from paragraph [47] of the Tribunal's
decision, Mr Glissan further argued that since some
of the defects in
workmanship had been identified in an expert report on the state of the Premises
- i.e. the BCA Report - the Tribunal
erred in stating that there was 'no
evidence' to support 'an assumption that because Mr Sharp was not licensed, then
the work carried
out by him may not have been in a proper and workmanlike
Noonan's response was that on the specific question posed by the Tribunal -
whether or not it should be assumed that because Mr
Sharp was not licensed, the
work carried out by him might not have been completed in a proper and
workmanlike manner - there was
indeed no evidence before the Tribunal. The
expert evidence to which Mr Glissan adverted did not address this question.
conclusions.
We agree with Mr Glissan that it was incorrect to say that
there appeared to have been no complaint by Ms Lotz regarding Mr Sharp's
the Premises. As at the date of the email correspondence on which Mr Noonan
relied, she did appear to be satisfied with what
he had done. But she
subsequently conveyed to Coco a number of complaints on the matters identified
by Mr Glissan. The Tribunal's
misdescription of the evidence on this point was,
in our opinion, an error of law.
Noonan's submission on the question whether there was evidence supporting any
'assumption' flowing from Mr Sharp's not being licensed
is correct as far as it
goes. But the Tribunal's ruling on this question did not address the primary
matter that required determination
in this context: namely, whether or not the
fit-out work for which he was responsible had indeed been carried out 'in a
workmanlike manner'.
would appear that the Tribunal, having mistakenly said that Ms Lotz had made no
complaint about the quality of this work, overlooked
the necessity to record its
own finding on this matter. It is in fact a matter whose resolution calls for an
assessment of the merits
of the next three allegations of breach of the Lease
set out in the above list, relating respectively to plumbing operations, fire
safety and the height of the rear step.
errors by the Tribunal, along with two further errors identified below,
constituted the grounds on which we ruled during the
hearing that the appeal
should be extended to a review of the merits under
section 113(2)(b)
. None of them was an error of major import. But when considered in
conjunction, they constitute sufficient grounds for revisiting
the evidence on
significant matters of dispute in these proceedings.
ultimate conclusion on Ms Lotz's claim that the fit-out operations were not
carried out in a 'proper and workmanlike manner' is
that, subject to one
exception relating to fire safety, it was not established by the evidence. This
follows from our rulings, on
grounds that we will now explain, relating to her
allegations of non-compliance with requirements relating to the plumbing, the
and the rear step.
Defective plumbing
parties' contentions and the Tribunal's rulings.
Ms Lotz put forward two
allegations in relation to the plumbing works carried out by Coco in the
first allegation was that Coco, in breach of AC 25.02(c), failed to obtain
proper certification with regard to plumbing operations
carried out during the
fit-out of the Premises. These related to the installation of a new sink and the
modification of an existing
washbasin and toilet.
claim was advanced in the
section 129
Notice, but no particulars were given as
to the nature of the certification required. On this matter, the Notice simply
a result of the BCA, the Lessor demands that you... provide
certification in relation to plumbing such that the required building
Lotz's second allegation was that the inspection of the Premises carried out
after the Tribunal hearing had finished revealed a
number of defects in the
plumbing. It followed, she maintained, that Coco had breached its obligation
under AC 25.02(a) and (b) to
ensure that the fit-out operations were carried out
in a 'proper and workmanlike manner'.
evidence that Ms Lotz adduced in support of this allegation was a report
prepared by Longlife Plumbing Pty Ltd ('Longlife'). This
company described
itself on its letterhead as 'plumbers, drainers, gasfitters'. Its report, which
was dated 2 September 2012, included
the following findings:-
On a plumbing inspection of the property the following non
compliant plumbing works were found.
Water pipes
- The water pipe work was under sized...
- No isolating tap under the kitchen sink for the sink mixer...
- Junction under vanity in toilet was upside down.
- The pipe work to kitchen sink and basin are connected as a stack. It is not
and Ms Kerswell did not adduce any evidence in response to this report.
Tribunal held at [62] that the report by Longlife was 'inconclusive and too
vague to constitute evidence regarding any breaches'.
It agreed with the
arguments put in their supplementary submissions by Coco and Ms Kerswell, which
it summarised briefly at [59].
They included the observation that the report
contained 'no reference to the Building Code of Australia or other standard to
the alleged breaches against'.
the appeal hearing, Mr Glissan mentioned, but did not press strongly, the claim
in the section 129 Notice that 'certification'
as to the plumbing should have
been furnished. His arguments with regard to the alleged defects in the plumbing
were as follows:
(i) they were clearly established, since no evidence had been
adduced to rebut the conclusions reached by Longlife; (ii) they were
in themselves to demonstrate that the fit-out works had not been carried out in
a 'proper and workmanlike manner' as required
by AC 25.01(a) and (b), or in
accordance with all applicable standards as required by AC 25.01(c); and (iii)
at the time of the Tribunal
hearing, they had not been rectified.
Noonan did not address these questions arising from the plumbing operations,
except to point out that the plumbing had been done
by a licensed plumber
engaged by Mr Sharp, not by Mr Sharp himself.
conclusions.
In our opinion, the 'demand' for certification made by Ms Lotz
in the section 129 Notice was inadequate for the purposes of a notice
nature, for two reasons. First, it did not stipulate what form of
'certification' was required. Secondly, in referring to
the BCA Report, it
conveyed the misleading impression that this Report contained some form of
critical comment on the absence of
certification. In fact, the only statement
relating to plumbing made in the Report was as follows: 'This report does not
or imply compliance with: (a) the National Construction Code - Plumbing
Code of Australia Volume 3...'
order to explain this ruling, we will reproduce the relevant provisions
(subsections (1) and (8)) of
section 129
Conveyancing Act
then quote a short passage from a leading authority on the operation of
subsection (1).
two subsections state as follows:-
129 Restrictions on and relief against forfeiture of
(1) A right of re-entry or forfeiture under any proviso or stipulation in a
lease, for a breach of any covenant, condition, or agreement
(express or
implied) in the lease, shall not be enforceable by action or otherwise unless
and until the lessor serves on the lessee
(a) specifying the particular breach complained of, and
(b) if the breach is capable of remedy, requiring the lessee to remedy the
breach, and
(c) in case the lessor claims compensation in money for the breach, requiring
the lessee to pay the same,
and the lessee fails within a reasonable time thereafter to remedy the
breach, if it is capable of remedy, and where compensation
in money is required
to pay reasonable compensation to the satisfaction of the lessor for the
(8) This section shall not affect the law relating to re-entry or forfeiture
or relief in case of non-payment of rent.
passage in the case law on which we rely comes at the end of a lengthy
discussion of
section 129(1)
in the judgment of Hodgson JA in
International Health Clinic Pty Ltd v Sydney South West Area Health Service
[2010] NSWCA 268
- 324]. At [323 - 324], having reviewed relevant
authorities, his Honour said:-
323 In my opinion, the above authorities clearly indicate that a
notice under
must not only allege breach, but must also describe the
particular acts or omissions constituting the alleged breach; and the notice
must indicate the acts of the tenant which the landlord would consider
sufficient for the lease to continue, and upon completion
of which the landlord
would abandon its claim to forfeit. The standard of particulars or degree of
specificity depends upon the circumstances,
including the nature of the covenant
alleged to be breached, the tenant's actual or constructive knowledge, and
whether the landlord
claims reasonable compensation. To use the example of Lord
Buckmaster LC, where there are several options open to a tenant to waterproof
leaking ceiling, then that choice is at the tenant's discretion. Thus
in my opinion, directed at allowing the tenant to bring about (within a
reasonable time) a state of affairs under which the landlord
would not pursue
forfeiture.
324 In particular, the lessee should not be left to speculate as to whether,
if it took whatever action it could to remedy the specified
breaches, the lessor
might nevertheless proceed to terminate the lease on the basis that the breaches
were not capable of remedy
or that, because what the lessee did was insufficient
to eliminate loss caused to the lessor by the late performance of the lessee's
obligations, the lessee was still in breach.
clearly cannot be said that the 'demand' in the Notice to 'provide certification
in relation to plumbing such that the required
building standards are met'
satisfies the criteria laid down by Hodgson JA, This is particularly the case
because the BCA Report,
on which this demand was explicitly based, stated at the
outset that it did not deal at all with the question of plumbing.
is relevant also to recall that the Final Occupation Certificate issued by
Fitzgeralds on 17 January 2011 included a statement
that the 'building' was
'suitable for its use under the Building Code of Australia'.
follows that any claim by Ms Lotz to terminate the Lease by virtue of these
alleged defects must be rejected. The defects were
not properly identified in
the section 129 Notice or in any later notice served under this section.
to the significance of the defects in the plumbing outlined in Longlife's
report, we agree with the position taken by the Tribunal.
In reaching this
conclusion, we derive assistance from aspects of Coco's and Ms Kerswell's
supplementary submissions that the Tribunal
did not mention. In addition to
relying on the Final Occupation Certificate as evidence that applicable
standards had been complied
with, these submissions made the following specific
points with regard to Longlife's report: (a) it did not indicate the actual size
or the 'alleged necessary size' of the water pipe claimed to have been 'under
sized'; (b) it did not state 'in what respect' the
absence of an isolating tap
under the kitchen sink was non-compliant; (c) it did not indicate whether an
upside down joint was non-compliant
or merely reflected a 'non-critical error'
on the part of the plumber; and (d) it did not set out in sufficient detail why
the connection
of the 'pipe work to kitchen sink and basin' was
non-compliant.
Lotz's claim for damages on the ground of defects in the plumbing depends on
whether it can be held that the plumbing operations
were not carried out in a
'proper and workmanlike manner' and/or that applicable standards were not met.
On these questions, the
onus of proof lay on her.
our opinion, more precise and compelling evidence of the nature of the claimed
defects was required than the distinctly brief report
prepared by Longlife. In
these circumstances, the contravention of a clause requiring adherence to a
'workmanlike' standard is not
proved merely by showing that the work performed
was not entirely perfect. Furthermore, the specific standards claimed to have
contravened were not identified.
these reasons, we reject Ms Lotz's claim for damages in so far as it was based
on alleged defects in the plumbing works carried
out in the Premises by
Creating and failing to remedy a fire hazard in the ceiling
parties' contentions and the Tribunal's rulings.
In the section 129 Notice,
one of the 'demands' made by Ms Lotz 'as a result of' the BCA report was that
Coco 'correct the ceiling
of the Property to meet the fire regulation
standards'. She indicated in the notice that she was willing to allow Coco to
BCA Report to assist in identification of the works that were 'in
breach of the building standard's codes for fire and safety'.
the appeal hearing, Mr Glissan indicated that his client still pressed her
allegation of the defects described in the following
passage in this Report. It
appeared under the heading 'Fire Resistance':-
Any penetration through [the] ceiling [of the Premises] will need
to be treated in a manner that maintains the fire protective covering.
disruption and cost associated with this work it is recommended that Council
apply its discretion and consider the alternative
of providing a system of mains
powered fire alarms suitably interconnected to an alarm within the residential
unit. Activation of
one of these alarms on the ground floor would suitably
notify those occupants on the top floor providing them sufficient notification
to safely evacuate.
A number of door and window openings exist within the external walls of the
building and are located within 3m of the property boundaries.
These openings
are not treated or protected in a way which would maintain the fire resistance
of the walls as would be required by
C3.2 and C3.4 of BCA 2011.
addition, a section of the Report headed 'Deemed to Satisfy Clause Assessment
Summary' contained the following entry:-
C3.12: Openings in Floors and Ceilings for Services - Any openings
or service penetrations penetrating the fire protective covering
must be done
and protected so that the fire performance of the covering is maintained - CRA
accompanying note gave the following explanation for the letters 'CRA':-
'COMPLIANCE READILY ACHIEVABLE'. It is considered that there was
not enough information included in the documentation to accurately
strict compliance with the individual clause requirements. However, subject to
noting the requirements of each clause,
compliance can be readily achieved.
Lotz relied also on a 'budget estimate' (hereafter 'the consultant's report')
that a firm called 'i.d. Projects' sent to Mr Lotz
on 30 August 2012. This was
one of the documents annexed to her supplementary submissions to the Tribunal
filed on 29 October 2012.
It commenced as follows:-
From our brief visual inspection we would concur with the report
you've received from BCA access (
) and do not believe that an adequate
fire separation has been achieve (
) between the caf and the
residence above.
Due to the limited time we were able to spend on site and our inability to
any physical
inspections, we have provided quotations based on two scenarios.
two quotations then provided related respectively to the relining and the
'reusing' of the existing ceiling. Each of them included
the supply and
installation of '8 off new fire protection downlight covers'.
attached to these supplementary submissions were photographs demonstrating that
the fit-out works conducted by Coco included
the demolition of the existing
ceiling and the installation of a new ceiling and cornice.
his arguments to the Tribunal, Mr Glissan maintained that the continuing failure
by Coco to address these concerns properly amounted
to contravention of clause
7.4, AC 23.01(d) and AC 25.02(b)-(g) of the Lease.
Glissan argued also that on account of this failure Ms Lotz had been unable to
place a tenant in the residential unit above the
Premises. This followed from
the fact that she was under a duty to 'ensure that all OH&S matters are
compliant' and that 'failure
to do so could result in criminal liability'.
Ms Lotz's Application for Original Decision, her claim for damages, based on
this argument, included a component described as 'a
partial amount of lost rent
in relation to the upper level of the Property'. The amount that she claimed
under this head was $9,750,
representing a weekly rent of $750 for the period of
thirteen weeks after 21 March 2012 (this being the date of expiration of 40
from the date of the section 129 Notice). In her supplementary submissions, this
claim was enlarged to an amount of $24,000
and described as 'ongoing'.
its decision at [53 - 54], following a summary of the statements about fire
safety contained in the BCA Report, the Tribunal both
outlined the submissions
advanced by Mr Brown and set out some conclusions:-
53 Mr Brown submitted that the evidence adduced by Lotz in support
of her claim that Coco's fit out works do not conform with fire
regulations is insufficient. The BCA report simply raised concerns but did not
state either that there is a problem or that
Coco's fit out works have caused a
problem. The Final Occupation Certificate notes the fire safety measures as
attachments and makes
the declaration as to safety as noted in paragraph 16 of
these Reasons.
54 In relation to the alleged piercing of the ceiling as a major fire safety
concern and a breach of the Lease the Tribunal finds
that the evidence from the
BCA Report is inclusive (
) and uncertain. Interestingly, in Part 1 of
the BCA Report under Audit Objectives, the following statement is found "This
is to accompany a development application for the proposed strata
subdivision of the property". Further, the Tribunal notes that
condition 31 of the Lease states that Lotz "may lodge a strata plan" and Coco is
not to object. As Mr Brown submits the
BCA report is a report on what has to be
done by the owner Lotz to prepare the building to be separated into two separate
pursuant to a strata plan. The Tribunal agrees with the submission by
Mr Brown that the BCA Report should not be relied upon in assessing
whether the
fit out works by Coco created fire safety issues and instead rely on the Final
Occupation Certificate which is conclusive
on this matter, given the statement
by the certifier that there are no hazards to health and safety...
[56 - 57], the Tribunal summarised the evidence on fire safety matters that
accompanied Ms Lotz's supplementary submissions and
outlined her claim that on
account of uncertainty about fire safety and concern for occupational health and
safety issues she had
not been able to place a tenant in the residential unit.
[58] and [60], the Tribunal outlined the response on these matters that Coco and
Ms Kerswell conveyed in their supplementary submissions:-
58 Mr Brown in his submissions in reply on behalf of Coco pointed
out that the consultant report on fire safety matters noted that
no specialist
contractors were able to undertake any physical inspection and stated "from
brief visual inspection we would concur
with the (BCA Report) you have received
and do not believe that an adequate fire separation has been achieved between
and the residence above". Mr Brown submits that this
consultant's report is inadequate in dealing with any alleged breach of fire
safety to the premises in the building by Coco as it merely reinforces the
original comments made in the BCA Report regarding separation
of premises for
strata plan purposes.
60... Mr Brown points out in the evidence from Coco... is an email from Mr
Rod Marr, real estate agent dated 12 April 2012 confirming
that in August 2011,
he submitted to Lotz a tenancy proposal for the upstairs apartment and "the
owner declined this proposal and
advised us that he did not wish to let the
[61 - 62], the Tribunal set out its conclusions on these matters:-
61 The Tribunal finds that the BCA Report and the consultants'
report focus on the necessary requirements to separate the premises
upstairs flat for the purposes of lodging a strata plan for the building. The
only feature of the fit out by Coco that appears
to be non-compliant is new
light covers - called fire protection down light covers. The Tribunal is of the
opinion that it is not
an obligation on a lessee of one part of premises in a
building to ensure that the separation of it from other premises in the building
is fire safety complaint. This is the responsibility of the Lessor. However, in
relation to the premises the Tribunal notes the concession
by Mr Brown on behalf
of Coco that Coco would comply with any necessary fire safety recommendations
and consequently the Tribunal
notes that fire protection down light covers
should be installed at the cost of Coco.
62... With respect to the claim for lost rent the Tribunal takes note of the
underlying reason for Lotz obtaining the BCA report in
the first place, for the
purposes of lodging a strata plan, as mentioned in the Lease and from the
evidence from Coco that Lotz rejected
the offer of a tenant and finds that
vacancy in the upstairs flat is as a result of the commercial decisions made by
Lotz and has
nothing to do with any concern by Lotz regarding fire safety and
compliance with Occupational Health & Safety issues.
his submissions to us, Mr Glissan focused particularly on the requirement to
install fire protection downlight covers and fire
alarms described in the BCA
Report and the consultant's report. He pointed out that at the Tribunal hearing
Mr Brown conceded that
covers should be installed. He also argued that, on
grounds outlined above, the Final Occupation Certificate could not be treated
conclusive on fire safety issues.
submissions by Mr Noonan were along the same lines as those put before the
Tribunal by Mr Brown. They included a statement, to
which Mr Glissan raised no
objection, that downlight covers had in fact been installed.
conclusions.
As we understood Mr Glissan's submissions, Ms Lotz still
pressed her claim for damages on the ground that Coco's fit-out works created
fire safety hazards for the reasons stated in each of the two paragraphs in the
BCA Report that we quoted above at [117].
do not see how the contents of the second paragraph could be relevant. They
relate to 'door and window openings within the external
walls of the building',
not to any part of the building for which Coco, as lessee, might be responsible.
matters raised in the first paragraph do, however, require careful
consideration. Although the Final Occupation Certificate stated
that there was
no fire hazard in the Premises, and although the BCA Report was concerned with
Ms Lotz's plans for strata subdivision
rather than the fit-out works conducted
by Coco, this paragraph did sufficiently indicate that remedial work of some
sort was required
in the interests of fire safety. Since there was unchallenged
evidence that Coco had installed a new ceiling as opposed to repairing
modifying an existing one, this was in our judgment a matter on which it bore
responsibility. The concession by Mr Brown (in his
supplementary submissions
filed on 13 November 2012) that Coco should undertake at its own cost the
specific remedial measures recommended
in the consultant's report, involving the
installation of fire protection downlight covers, is in line with this
this specific point, we respectfully disagree with the conclusion stated in
paragraph [61] of the Tribunal's decision. The Tribunal,
in our opinion, erred
in law through not taking due account of the unchallenged evidence that Coco
installed a new ceiling, as opposed
to modifying an existing one.
cannot, however, be held answerable for failure to undertake immediate remedial
action in response to the section 129 Notice
and the relevant passages in the
BCA Report. Our reasons for taking this view are as follows.
the passage quoted above at [117], the Report set out two alternative ways of
dealing with the problem that it had identified.
One involved treatment of any
'service penetration... in a manner that maintains the fire protective
covering'. The other was the
installation of a 'system of mains powered fire
alarms suitably connected to an alarm within the residential unit'. The Report
that the question whether this latter approach was permissible was a
matter within the discretion of the Council. Since, as noted
near the beginning
of this decision, both the Premises (at the rear) and a second shop (at the
front) constituted the ground floor
of the building, Coco could reasonably have
assumed that any such system would include one or more fire alarms within the
the front, as well as the alarm in the residential unit upstairs.
Patently, this solution was not a measure that Coco could adopt
on its own. The
choice between the two alternatives was one to be made by Ms Lotz, as owner of
the building, not by Coco.
grounds for so concluding are strengthened by the fact that, as the Tribunal
noted, the Report was prepared in the context of
plans for a future project
(strata subdivision) being contemplated by Ms Lotz.
the section 129 Notice, Ms Lotz gave no indication to Coco as to how she
expected this matter to be approached. She simply required
that the ceiling be
'corrected' to 'meet the fire regulation standards'. In our judgment, this
broadly formulated 'demand' did not
satisfy the criteria relating to such
notices that we have quoted from the judgment of Hodgson JA in
International Health Clinic Pty Ltd v Sydney South West Area Health Service
[2010] NSWCA 268
- 324] (see [108] above). It was accordingly not
open to Ms Lotz to claim that in consequence of non-compliance with her
she was entitled to terminate the Lease.
we do not think that Ms Lotz, having made no attempt to clarify for Coco what
she wished to be done, could not rely on Coco's
inaction at that stage as a
ground for claiming damages.
situation changed, however, when the consultant's report was sent to Coco on or
remedial measure was
identified. Any failure to implement it would amount to a breach of AC 25.02(b).
A contractor operating in a
'workmanlike' manner would respond to the report by
adopting the measure recommended in it: namely, installing downlight protection
covers. If Mr Brown had not conceded that this was a task that Coco should
attend to at its own cost, we would have been inclined
to uphold Ms Lotz's claim
for damages to the extent of ordering Coco and Ms Kerswell to pay her any amount
outlaid by her in having
the task carried out.
do not think, however, that any breach of AC 23.01(d) would be involved. Our
reason is that this provision refers to the repair
and maintenance of 'essential
fire services', not to their installation. Equally, we do not see how the other
provisions of the Lease
that Mr Glissan claimed to have been breached - i.e.,
clause 7.4 and AC 25.02(c)-(g) of the Lease - could be said to be applicable.
already indicated, a head of damages included in Ms Lotz's Application for
Original Decision was one of 'lost rent'. Both in her
Application for Original
Decision (filed on 23 May 2012) and in the earlier of her statutory declarations
(signed on 6 June 2012),
she alleged that on account of breaches of the Lease by
Coco she could not seek a tenant for the residential unit above the Premises.
the declaration, she expressly attributed this to 'fire safety issues with the
ceiling between the shop and the flat', adding
that she would be 'an
irresponsible landlord to rent out a property' if she 'did not have certainty'
that it complied with fire safety
the Tribunal noted at [60], the principal evidence adduced in response by Coco
and Ms Kerswell was that during August 2011 Ms Lotz
rejected a tenancy proposal
for the unit, saying that she 'did not wish to let the premises'.
further significant aspect of the evidence is that it contains nothing to
suggest that Ms Lotz, having received advice in the BCA
Report that the ceiling
required rectification, notified Coco forthwith that one of the reasons why this
needed immediate attention
was her desire to find a tenant. According to Ms
Lotz's supplementary submissions to the Tribunal, the section 129 Notice
an allegation that fire safety concerns prohibited her from letting the
unit. But this is incorrect. No such allegation is to be
found in the Notice.
Ms Lotz filed her Application for Original Decision, about three months after
she received the BCA Report, she communicated to
Coco her desire to find a
tenant for the unit above the Premises. It may be that she made this known to
Coco at some earlier point
of time within this period. But the evidence on this
matter is not decisive.
she did make it known, Coco was not on notice of any such desire on her part.
Indeed, the reference in the BCA Report to strata
subdivision gave it positive
grounds for believing that Ms Lotz remained reluctant to let the unit, as she
had been during August
the foregoing reasons, our conclusions in relation to Ms Lotz's claim for
damages for lost rent on account of the defects in the
ceiling are as follows:
(a) because she failed to specify in the section 129 Notice what should be done
in consequence of the findings
in the BCA Report, Coco cannot be liable for
damages during the period between its becoming aware of those findings and its
a copy of the consultant's report on or about 29 October 2012; (b)
until some uncertain date following the section 129 Notice and
possibility as
late as the date of filing of Ms Lotz's Application, Coco was not only unaware
of any desire by Ms Lotz to let the
unit, but could in fact believe, on
reasonable grounds, that she was opposed to letting it; and (c) Coco's offer,
made shortly after
it received a copy of the consultant's report, to install
downlight protection covers at its own cost, provided to Ms Lotz the opportunity
to have this operation completed and to proceed, if she so wished, to find a
tenant for the unit.
these grounds, we reject Ms Lotz's claims for entitlement to terminate the Lease
and for damages, based on a fire safety risk identified
in the ceiling that Coco
installed in the course of its fit-out operations.
Failure to lower the height of the rear step
parties' contentions and the Tribunal's rulings.
The section 129 Notice
dealt with this matter in the following terms:-
As a result of the BCA the lessor demands that you... (b) correct
the entrance step such that it meets the required safety standards.
the BCA Report, the relevant passage stated:-
The rear retail discharges direct to open space however the
difference to ground level is greater than 190mm at the door threshold.
permitted to have a step in the vicinity of the threshold on the external side
only if the difference between levels does not
exceed 190mm. To ensure occupants
can safely enter and exit this part of the building it is recommended that this
entry level be
reconfigured to comply with the requirements of Clause D2.15 of
BCA2011 and reduce the step to less than 190mm.
to Ms Lotz's supplementary submissions to the Tribunal was a quotation for
rebuilding the step for a total cost of $1,100,
including GST.
following extracts from the Tribunal's decision contain a summary of the
principal argument put in response by Coco and Ms Kerswell
and of the Tribunal's
own conclusion on the matter:-
55 In the section 129 notice Lotz asserted that in breach of
building regulations the rear step height exceeded 190mm. Lotz asserted
Coco was in breach of clauses 6.3.2, 7.4 additional condition 23.01(d) and
25.02(b)-(g) of the Lease. Mr Brown submitted that
insufficient evidence has
been adduced by Lotz concerning the dimensions of the step and the relevant
regulatory requirements to
support her claim. Mr Brown also submitted that the
height of the step was unchanged by Coco... and that any problem with the height
was not caused by Coco but existed prior to the Lease being entered into. As
there was no evidence presented to the Tribunal to show
the height of the step
prior to Coco's fit out works the Tribunal agrees with the submissions by Mr
Brown that there was no breach
of Lease by Coco.
60 In relation to the front step Mr Brown submitted that the dimensions were
unchanged from the original dimensions and there is no
evidence to suggest that
Coco altered the dimensions during its fit out works...
62... there is no evidence that if the front step does not comply with such
non-compliance is as a result of the activities of Coco...
these extracts illustrate, the step was variously described during the
proceedings as 'the rear step' and 'the front step'. We
are satisfied that only
one step was involved. It was the step at the entrance (and in this sense a
'front step') to the Premises,
which were at the rear of the building.
Mr Glissan and Mr Noonan drew our attention to two photographs annexed to Ms
Kerswell's declaration. By depicting the step before
and after Coco's fit-out
operations, these photographs showed that it was widened but seemingly not
increased in height. Accompanying
testimony by Ms Kerswell was to the effect
that its height was not 'materially' changed during the fit-out. She stated also
Mr Lotz was present while Mr Sharp worked on the step. These statements
were not challenged in Ms Lotz's evidence.
Glissan argued that Coco was at fault for not bringing the height of the step
into conformity with the standard quoted in the BCA
Report. Mr Noonan argued
that Coco should not be held responsible for any pre-existing
non-compliance.
conclusions.
We agree with the Tribunal that Coco cannot be held liable for
this failure to comply with the relevant standard. Our grounds differ,
from those of the Tribunal.
our opinion, the photographs and accompanying testimony sufficiently establish
the following: (a) the height of the step contravened
the standard before the
fit-out operations commenced; and (b) Mr Lotz knew that the height would remain
the same after these operations
were completed. In these circumstances, Ms Lotz
cannot be permitted to claim forfeiture of the Lease, or an award of damages,
on the ground of the continuation by Coco of her own pre-existing breach
of the building standard. Coco was entitled to assume, at
the time of the
fit-out, that this was not a matter of concern to her.
Remaining matters
have concluded that Ms Lotz has failed to establish any breach of the Lease by
Coco, except for a breach, relating to fire safety,
which Coco acknowledged and
has remedied. Our decision on her appeal is therefore that it must be
these circumstances, it is strictly not necessary for us to rule on two further
questions that were argued before us, relating
respectively to the
characterisation of two provisions in the Lease (AC 23.01(b) and (d)) and to Ms
Lotz's claim that Coco had repudiated
the Lease. But we will record some brief
comments on each of them.
our opinion, Mr Glissan's submission that the Tribunal should have held AC
23.01(d) to be an 'essential term' of the Lease was
well founded. This provision
was a covenant by the Tenant that it must 'at the Tenant's expense repair and
maintain the essential
fire services for the Premises including fire safety
equipment, emergency lighting, smoke detectors, exit signs and fire
extinguishers'.
We agree with him that a covenant to this effect would fall
within the test that we have quoted above from
Associated Newspapers Ltd v
[1951] HCA 24
(1951) 83 CLR 322
at 337 It is 'of such importance to the promisee
that he would not have entered into the contract unless he had been assured of a
strict or a substantial performance of the promise, as the case may be, and that
this ought to have been apparent to the promisor'.
do not, however, consider that the covenant in AC 23.01(b) satisfies this test.
This was to the effect that the Tenant would 'comply
with all statutes,
regulations, by-laws or ordinances affecting the Premises or any fixtures or
fittings installed by the tenant
therein...' We view this as a very broad
covenant covering a wide range of matters. Because conduct having manifestly
trivial consequences
could amount to contravention, we would be reluctant to
characterise it as an essential term.
were not asked to rule on the Tribunal's decision that a covenant to similar
effect in AC 25.02(c) was an essential term. That
decision may well have been
justifiable because the covenant was limited in scope to the conduct of the
fit-out operations.
observe in passing that, in contrast to many other forms of lease that are
discussed in the case law, the Lease in these proceedings
did not expressly
stipulate that breach by the Tenant of an essential term would give grounds for
the Landlord to enter and take
possession of the Premises. No such statement
appears in the relevant provision (clause 12.2). We do not have to determine,
whether the absence of any such statement would in itself constitute a
bar to Ms Lotz's claim to possession. In view of the dicta
quoted above (at
Shevill v Builders Licensing Board
[1982] HCA 47
(1982) 149 CLR 620
would probably not be the case.
argument that Coco by its conduct repudiated the Lease cannot be sustained in
the light of our conclusion that, except in one
respect, it did not breach any
term of the Lease. We agree generally with what the Tribunal said on this matter
in the extracts from
paragraphs [67] to [69] that we have already quoted.
we indicated near the beginning of this decision, questions as to the costs of
the proceedings at first instance and on appeal
must still be determined.
Submissions have already been filed relating to the costs of the former
proceedings.
regard to the fact that the Respondents to the appeal (Coco and Ms Kerswell)
have been successful in both sets of proceedings,
we give the following
directions regarding costs:-
Any application by the Respondents for the costs of these appeal
proceedings must be filed and served within 28 days, along with supporting
submissions and any additional submissions they may wish to make as to the costs
of the proceedings at first instance. Any submissions
in reply by the Appellant
must be filed and served within a further 28 days. These matters of costs will
then be determined 'on the
papers', pursuant to
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act
, unless the Appeal Panel
decides that a hearing is required.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (379 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter