URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2020/74.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Galal v University of New South Wales [2020] NSWWCCPD 74 (21 December 2020)
DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A DECISION OF THE
COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
v University of New South Wales
[2020] NSWWCCPD 74
RESPONDENT:
University of New South Wales
Self-insured
FILE NUMBER:
ARBITRATOR:
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
14 August 2020
DATE OF APPEAL DECISION:
21 December 2020
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Factual determination – whether material facts were overlooked or
given too little weight;
Whiteley Muir & Zwanenberg Ltd v Kerr
39 ALJR 505
Raulston v Toll Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWWCCPD 25
10 DDCR 156
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation
(the 1998 Act) – principles applicable to a determination of
whether there is a contract of service –
Zuijs v Wirth Brothers
[1955] HCA 73
Cabra-Vale Ex-Active
Servicemen’s Club Ltd v Thompson
[2013] NSWWCCPD 49
discussed; cl 2 of
Sch 1 to the 1998 Act – deemed worker –
Scerri v Cahill
(1950) 14 NSWCCR 389
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Elizabeth Wood
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Mr B McManamey, counsel
Law Partners
Mr D Adhikary, counsel
Bartier Perry
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination dated 14 August 2020 is
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Amal Galal (the appellant) migrated to Australia from Egypt in 2000. She
completed high school and then studied at the University
of New South Wales. She
was awarded a Bachelor of Medical Science in 2016 and, in the following year, a
Bachelor of Science (Honours).
October 2017, the appellant applied for admission as a Higher Degree Research
Candidate for the purpose of obtaining a Doctor of
Philosophy (PhD). She was
offered admission as a candidate on 8 November 2017. The appellant had also
applied for, and was granted,
an Australian Government Research Training Program
scholarship (the research scholarship), which was administered by the University
of New South Wales (the respondent). In addition, the appellant was provided
with a Research Training Program fees offset scholarship
(the fees offset
scholarship) as a contribution to her training fees.
9 May 2018, the appellant was performing her research activities, which involved
injecting the tail of a mouse with a virus. On
three occasions, she failed to
find the vein with the syringe and the viral fluid sprayed onto her face. On the
first two occasions,
the fluid sprayed into her eyes and on the third occasion,
the fluid went on her lips and mouth.
days later, the appellant developed symptoms of a high fever, blocked nose,
enlarged lymph nodes, fatigue and nausea. Further
symptoms developed, and on 19
May 2018, the appellant attended the St George Hospital Emergency Department.
appellant continued to suffer from symptoms of chronic fatigue, shaking and
muscle pain. The appellant terminated her PhD studies
approximately six months
after the injury because of her continuing symptoms.
appellant made a claim for workers compensation against the respondent. The
respondent disputed that the appellant was a “worker”
Workplace Injury Management and
Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act), or a “deemed worker” in
accordance with cl 2 of Sch 1 to the 1998 Act. The appellant brought proceedings
in the Commission, claiming weekly payments and treatment expenses and the
matter proceeded to arbitration on 16 July 2020. The Arbitrator
Certificate of Determination on 14 August 2020 in which he determined that the
appellant was not a worker pursuant to s
4 of the 1998 Act,
or a deemed
worker under cl 2 of Sch 1 to the 1998 Act, at the time of injury.
appellant appeals that decision.
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the 1998 Act provides:
“(6) If the Commission
is satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection
with proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
appellant indicates that the appeal can be determined on the papers but submits
that an oral hearing may be beneficial. The respondent
is content for the appeal
to be determined on the papers.
have had regard to Practice Directions Nos 1 and 6, the documents that are
before me, and the submissions by the parties that the
appeal can be determined
on the basis of these documents. I am satisfied that I have sufficient
information to proceed ‘on
the papers.’
THRESHOLD MATTERS
is no dispute between the parties that the threshold requirements as to quantum
and time pursuant to ss 352(3) and 352(4) of
the 1998 Act have been met.
THE RELEVANT EVIDENCE
The appellant’s statement
appellant provided a statement dated 28 April
The appellant asserted that
she commenced employment with the respondent on 12 February 2018 as a PhD
student and researcher on a
full-time basis, working 40–60 hours per week.
She said her gross average earnings were $550 per week. She described her duties
as follows:
(a) laboratory activities, including fine needle
injections, pipetting, and transfer of fluids;
(b) conducting experiments;
(c) cleaning and maintenance of the laboratory;
(d) processing, organising and summarising data, and
(e) general duties incidental to undertaking research and performing general
laboratory duties.
appellant referred to the conditions of the arrangement between her and the
respondent. She said that:
(a) at the commencement of the
arrangement with the respondent, she was granted a scholarship on the condition
that she performed
her research at the respondent’s campus;
(b) her PhD topic had to be approved by the respondent, and her work was
supervised by Professor Lars Matthias Ittner and Dr Yazi
(c) the scholarship was paid fortnightly;
(d) the respondent recorded both gross pay and net pay, however, no tax was
taken out, and there was no GST identified;
(e) she did not have to work at any set time;
(f) the respondent provided all the materials she needed;
(g) she was required to regularly report and discuss the progress of her
research with her supervisors, who would make suggestions
concerning her further
research and her thesis, although it was ultimately up to her to decide what to
write about;
(h) the respondent retained the intellectual property in the results of any
research and in her PhD thesis, and
(i) her contract was an agreement that she would engage in the research and
create intellectual property for the respondent, and in
exchange, the respondent
provided payment of the research scholarship.
appellant advised that on 9 May 2018 she was working in the laboratory of the
respondent’s campus where she was required
to inject a virus into the vein
of tail of a mouse. She said she was being supervised by a post-doctorate
student and a 2nd year
PhD student, who were both working on different levels of
the laboratory. The appellant stated that on two occasions, she missed
and when she pressed on the plunger of the syringe the fluid sprayed back into
her face and eyes. She was not wearing protective
goggles. The appellant washed
her eyes out and continued the experiment wearing goggles. She said that on the
third attempt, she
again missed the vein and on this occasion the fluid landed
on her lips and mouth. The appellant washed her mouth out and she said
noticed that there was blood in her saliva. The appellant said that after work
that day, she went home and showered, thoroughly
washing her face.
appellant reported that on 13 May 2018, she suffered an onset of symptoms which
included a high fever, blocked nose, enlarged
lymph glands and extreme fatigue
and nausea. She sought treatment from a general practitioner the following day,
who performed blood
tests and certified her unfit for work for two weeks. The
blood test results disclosed that there was a suggestion of a viral infection.
The appellant said that her symptoms continued, and she began to experience
mouth ulcers and painful gums.
appellant advised that she had recovered sufficiently to return to work on 6
June 2018, but began to feel very fatigued and experienced
muscle pain,
cramping, twitching and shakiness. In July 2018 the appellant took leave of
absence until 18 February 2019, but shortly
after her return, she took steps to
terminate her PhD because of health issues and the distress about working with
appellant provided details of her ongoing symptoms and treatment.
appellant asserted that she firmly believed that she was a “deemed
worker” for the following reasons:
(a) she had a contract with
the respondent;
(b) her research topic and its parameters were set and allocated by the
respondent;
(c) the respondent provided her with all the necessary equipment;
(d) the respondent set the hours she was required to work;
(e) the end product of her research would be the respondent’s property,
as well as any potential profit flowing from the findings;
(f) the research scholarship was subject to tax and paid regularly by the
respondent, and was conditional upon her performing her
duties in the
laboratory, and
(g) she was required to remain with the respondent and not engage in any like
tasks with another employer or education institution.
The evidence of Ms Cheryl Law, Senior Administrative
Law, an employee of the respondent, provided a statement dated 11 June
She said that she had worked
for the respondent since 2011 and that her duties included reviewing scholarship
assessments, determining
scholarship applications and eligibility, as well as
issuing “award” letters in respect of all research candidates.
Law indicated that the scholarships were intended to provide the student with
assistance in living costs, additional allowances
and tuition fees. Ms Law
advised that the appellant was offered a scholarship on a conditional basis,
subject to the completion of
her degree studies at the required level. In
January 2018, the appellant provided final transcripts that showed she had
her honours degree at the requisite level, so she was offered a full
admission and scholarship in March 2018.
Law advised that the appellant’s application would have firstly been
assessed by the School of Medical Sciences and then
by the Faculty of Medicine.
If approved, a score would be allocated by the Faculty and then the Graduate
Research School (GRS) (the
centralised unit for all relevant aspects of graduate
research) would rank the applications according to merit.
Law stated that there are a finite number of scholarships and they are funded by
a research grant from the Commonwealth Government
and are allocated according to
how many students from each university complete their research degrees in one
year. Ms Law said that
the respondent determines how much of the grant will be
allocated to scholarships and the GRS allocates and awards the scholarships,
well as other, university funded, scholarships.
Law indicated that the applicant for the scholarship could, without providing
reasons, elect which semester was to be the commencement
semester and, if the
scholarship has commenced, the recipient could defer any semester if funding,
supervision and resources were
available for the new semester. Ms Law said that
the recipient had to have the status of a full-time student and, while in
of the scholarship, was precluded from being employed full-time by the
respondent.
Law advised that the appellant was permitted to perform limited paid work on the
proviso that it did not interfere with her research,
and she was required to
perform 35 hours of research per week, which is considered to be full-time. Ms
Law said that the appellant’s
scholarship was for her to complete her
doctorate over 3.5 years, but if she had chosen to downgrade the degree to a
degree, it would have been for two years,
Law explained that the stipend for the research scholarship amounted to $27,082
per annum and the procedures and guidelines indicate
that it is intended to
assist with the student’s general living costs. Ms Law asserted that the
research scholarship stipend
was not paid as a salary or paid pro-rata for the
number of hours the appellant spent studying, regardless of how many hours the
appellant might spend undertaking her research.
Law said that the appellant and her supervisor would have discussed the
appellant’s research topic prior to commencement
and would jointly decide
on the topic. The appellant’s progress would then be tracked until the
thesis was submitted. Ms Law
contended that this was different to an employment
arrangement because in those circumstances, the employee was applying to
certain duties and responsibilities specified in the contract.
Law confirmed that the payments are made fortnightly and the appellant was not
required to provide proof of her entitlement by,
for example, a timesheet. Ms
Law said the appellant’s time was managed by her supervisor and her
progress was managed by the
Research Progress Review process. Ms Law said that
the appellant was required to undertake that process by lodging a form online
(which required her to disclose how many hours of paid employment she had
undertaken) and participating in a meeting with an independent
panel to discuss
her progress. Ms Law indicated that the only impact the review process would
have on the scholarship would be if
the student’s progress was
unsatisfactory at multiple reviews, resulting in the termination of the
student’s candidature.
Law advised that the fortnightly payments were made through the payroll system
directly into the student’s account. She said
the research scholarship was
not subject to income taxation and no superannuation was paid. Ms Law said that
the appellant was entitled
to a period of sick leave if she needed to take time
off from her research because of illness and in some circumstances could
to receive the stipend during that period. Ms Law also said that the
recipient of the scholarship was entitled to recreation leave,
which was to be
negotiated with the supervisor and not requested through the human resources
system, as would be the case for an
employee. Ms Law indicated that the purpose
of the 20 days’ recreation leave was to give the student the ability to
time off from the research work.
Law observed that, to her knowledge, the respondent would not control what the
appellant did each day and it was up to the appellant
to decide how to go about
the research. She said that each student had two supervisors who were academics,
who would meet with the
student and discuss the research in order to assist the
student and progress the student’s study. Ms Law stated that the research
supervisors would have no control over the termination of the appellant’s
research scholarship. The research scholarship payments
would only be suspended
or terminated if the appellant discontinued her studies, left Australia other
than for approved overseas
study, requested the payments to be suspended or
changed her enrolment in a manner that affected her eligibility.
Law stated that the respondent was responsible for the provision of resources,
including specialised equipment and every student
had an identity card that
allowed them access to laboratories, books and other resources. Ms Law thought
that the appellant may have
had a “MyStaff” profile in order to be
able to confirm that the fortnightly payments were paid.
The documentation
The research training program acceptance form and
research training program acceptance form and conditions required the recipient
of the scholarship to acknowledge that he or she
had read and understood the
guidelines for Commonwealth scholarship holders and agreed to acknowledge the
respondent in the research
The offer of admission as a Higher Degree Research
letter of offer from the respondent dated 8 November 2017 offered the appellant
admission as a Higher Degree Research Candidate.
In the letter, the respondent
advised that if she had applied for a scholarship, she would be notified of that
application in separate
correspondence. The letter confirmed that the start date
of the candidature would be from the first semester in 2018 and the research
topic would be “frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis.” The letter provided information about the
review process, in
particular that continuing enrolment in the research program was contingent upon
satisfactory review process outcomes
during the first twelve months. The letter
also advised of the consequences of unsatisfactory reviews. It also informed the
that all domestic Higher Degree Research Candidates were awarded a
fees offset scholarship paid from the Australian Government and
appellant was required to acknowledge the Commonwealth’s contribution in
any publication or material produced that
related to the research project
carried out by the
The award of the research scholarship
29 November 2017, the respondent advised the appellant that she had been awarded
a conditional research scholarship which was available
for commencement either
in the first or second semester in 2018. The offer was conditional upon the
appellant having successfully
completed her master’s
unconditional offer was made to the appellant by letter dated 5 March 2018. The
letter advised that the research scholarship provided:
(a) a stipend
valued at $27,082 per annum (indexed annually) for 3.5 years;
(b) a fee offset to cover tuition fees during that period, and
(c) other specific allowances to assist with ancillary costs of the
The Commencement of Study Form
Commencement of Study Form required the appellant to acknowledge that, as a
research scholarship recipient, she was permitted
to receive income or undertake
paid employment provided that the source of the financial benefit did not
interfere with her research
or her ability to study full time (35 hours per
week). The form also required the appellant to acknowledge the terms in which
award would be
terminated.
The research scholarship payment summary
research scholarship payment summary confirms that the appellant was in receipt
of the research scholarship stipend from 12 February
2018, that the scholarship
was suspended from 10 August 2018 and that there was no taxation deducted from
those payments.
The Higher Degree Research Scholarships Procedure
Higher Degree Research Scholarships Procedure document set out the types of
scholarships available and described the research
scholarship as a
“stipend.” The document indicated that the Higher Degree Research
scholarships were to provide financial
assistance to recipients while they were
enrolled with the respondent for the purpose of conducting research for their
higher degree.
The scholarships were to be awarded on the basis of academic
merit, research experience and research potential. The procedure identified
necessary qualifications required and the conditions attached to the
scholarships, which included:
(a) the expectation that candidates
would spend a minimum of 35 hours per week on their research;
(b) that any employment activities undertaken would not interfere with the
research or the requirement to undertake fill-time study;
(c) the circumstances in which an award could be suspended or entitlement
could be terminated, and
(d) the entitlement to paid annual leave and sick
THE ARBITRATOR’S REASONS
Arbitrator provided a detailed summary of the evidence and both parties’
submissions. In relation to the evidence about
the research scholarship and the
fees offset scholarship, the Arbitrator observed that:
material shows the distinction between the scholarship stipend for the costs of
living and the enrolment in the PhD research
program. Only the element of the
scholarship for tuition and other fees is automatically available to all
domestic students in the
program. The stipend is a separate element of the
scholarship involving a competitive process based on
Arbitrator observed that in his view, the appellant was a full-time student at
the time of her injury and that the ‘worker’
indicia set out in the
caselaw did not assist him because they were not relevant to the true nature of
the relationship. He reasoned:
“The nature of the relationship
between [the appellant] and the [respondent] was one in which she sought and was
offered enrolment
in the PhD program in her own interest using the laboratory
facilities and other resources of the [respondent] as well as the expertise
the [respondent]’s academic supervisors. The indicia from the authorities
relied upon for [the appellant] do not apply to
this student/institution
relationship in which [the appellant] enrolled in a course of study offered to
gain the academic qualifications
The fact that [the appellant], after being offered enrolment in the
[respondent’s] PhD course, then achieved a Commonwealth
scholarship
including a stipend to assist with living expenses does not alter her status
from a student studying and researching
for a PhD into a paid worker for the
[respondent].”
Arbitrator rejected the appellant’s argument that the research scholarship
was an industrial “award.” He said
that term was used in a general
sense, rather than a reference to an industrial award. The Arbitrator added that
the “leave”
provided for in the scholarship documents was not leave
from employment but was “a set of protocols to deal with illness or
in study during which the student’s stipend may be
continued.”
The Arbitrator
observed that, just because the research scholarship stipend was paid
fortnightly, that did not make the payments
a wage in return for service. He
said that it was merely the means by which the appellant received her stipend.
Arbitrator observed that the appellant’s reliance upon the
“control” element was not consistent with an employment
The Arbitrator said that in the circumstances of this case, the control that was
exercised over the appellant was by negotiating
and jointly agreeing to the
subject matter of the study and ensuring that the appellant’s progress met
the required academic
standards. The Arbitrator reiterated that this was not
“control” in the sense of paid work for the respondent as part
contract of service. He said that there was no evidence that the respondent
dictated the topic of research or the way that the
research was conducted, or
that the research resulted in a beneficial outcome for the respondent.
Arbitrator pointed out that the respondent’s laboratories and other
equipment are, as a matter of course, offered to higher
level research students
and such students are able to access the knowledge and expertise of the academic
supervisors. He said that
a student being provided with teaching and learning
facilities was not on par with being provided with tools by an employer and was
completely at odds with working in a factory.
Arbitrator conceded that there was a degree of control and direction, but said
that it was entirely in the context of the student’s
achievement and
progression through higher education. He added that the negotiation of a topic
that was of interest to the student,
the resources available, the time limits
and how the research was relevant to the current academic world applied to all
whether they received a research scholarship or not. The Arbitrator
said that the retention of intellectual rights by the respondent
matter that applied to all students, not just those who received a research
scholarship. The Arbitrator concluded that
that fact did not establish that the
appellant had a “worker” relationship with the respondent.
Arbitrator referred to the appellant’s submissions that it was the
respondent, and not some other body, who controlled who
would be a full-time
student and who would receive a scholarship, as well as requiring the student to
work 35 hours per week. The
Arbitrator pointed out that the hours of work again
were the same for all students and were a feature of the higher degree student
relationship with a teaching body, rather than an employee.
Arbitrator considered it relevant that the Commonwealth Government paid the
research scholarship stipend for the specific purpose
of assisting the student
with his or her living expenses. The Arbitrator observed that the respondent did
not tie the grant to the
student performing work as directed by it for its
benefit and the appellant undertook her studies side by side with other students
who were not in receipt of the grant. The Arbitrator said that nothing in the
relationship between the appellant and the respondent
changed when the appellant
was granted the research scholarship.
Arbitrator observed:
“There must be an identifiable employment
contract before there is employment. The contract must involve work done by a
under a contractual obligation to another party to whom the person
delivers the work, and the skill of the ‘worker’.
There must be a
mutual intention to create legal relations in this regard, and there must be
consideration in the form of a wage
or remuneration in return for doing the
work. There must also be the creation of an obligation on one party to provide
is then undertaken by the other party.
The evidence falls short of establishing any of the above elements for the
employment of [the appellant] by the [respondent]. The
evidence is of [the
appellant] as a PhD student using the educational facilities provided by [the
respondent].”
Arbitrator added that it was his view that there was no contract of employment
that created a mutual obligation of the respondent
providing work and the
appellant performing that work. The Arbitrator referred to the High Court
Authority of
Australian Woollen Mills Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth
followed by Roche DP in
Secretary, Department of Family and Community
Services v Bee
Arbitrator said that, on the basis of those authorities and the overwhelming
evidence, the research scholarship, which was provided
by the Commonwealth
Government and administered by the respondent, was a stipend to assist the
appellant with her living expenses.
It was not consideration provided in
accordance with a contract of employment.
Arbitrator considered that the appellant’s descriptions of her activities
were “couched in terms of
employment”
and did not
reflect the actual nature of the relationship between the appellant and the
respondent. He observed that the activities
were an inherent part of the
appellant’s high level of research and study in the pursuit of her PhD and
over which she had
significant control. The Arbitrator concluded that the
appellant had not discharged her onus of proving that she was a worker within
the meaning of s 4 of the 1998 Act.
Arbitrator turned to the issue of whether the appellant was a deemed worker in
accordance with cl 2 of Sch 1 to the 1998 Act.
The Arbitrator quoted the clause.
Referring to the criteria set out in
Lindeboom v
he observed that, in
(a) there was no contract to perform work between the
respondent and the appellant;
(b) there was no work exceeding $10 in value;
(c) the appellant was not carrying out a trade or business, and
(d) there was no intention to create a legal relationship, no mutuality and
no contractual consensus for employment between the appellant
respondent.
Arbitrator concluded that the appellant was not a deemed worker pursuant to cl 2
of Sch 1 to the 1998 Act.
Certificate of Determination issued on 14 August 2020
“The Commission determines:
applicant was not a worker pursuant to
Workers Compensation
[sic, the 1998 Act]; or a deemed worker under Schedule 1, Clause 2
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
the time of injury.
in favour of the respondent.”
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant alleges that the Arbitrator erred as follows:
One: error of fact and law when he failed to consider the correct contract being
the contract created by the acceptance
of the offer dated 29 November 2017 and 5
March 2018.
(b) Ground Two: error of fact and law when considering that the
worker’s indicia were not relevant to the true nature of the
relationship.
(c) Ground Three: error of fact and law in concluding that the appellant was
not a worker.
(d) Ground Four: error of fact in finding that the respondent retained the
intellectual property in the work of all PhD students.
(e) Ground Five: error of fact and law in finding that the appellant was not
a deemed worker.
LEGISLATION
4 of the 1998 Act defines “worker” as (exceptions
means a person who has entered
into or works under a contract of service or a training contract with an
employer (whether by way of
manual labour, clerical work or otherwise, and
whether the contract is expressed or implied, and whether the contract is oral
in writing).”
1 of cl 2 of Sch 1 to the 1998 Act provides:
contractors
(cf former Sch 1 cl 2)
(1) Where a contract:
(a) to perform any work exceeding $10 in value (not being work incidental to
a trade or business regularly carried on by the contractor
contractor’s own name, or under a business or firm name), or
(b) [Repealed]
is made with the contractor, who neither sublets the contract nor employs any
worker, the contractor is, for the purposes of this
Act, taken to be a worker
employed by the person who made the contract with the contractor.”
SUBMISSIONS
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the letter of offer for admission as a higher degree
research candidate dated 8 November 2017 prescribed
the appellant’s
research topic, required that her attendance would be on a full-time basis and
that she would commence in the
first semester at Kensington. The appellant says
that there was no evidence that the offer was accepted.
appellant refers to the conditional offer of a research scholarship made on 29
November 2017 and the unconditional offer made
on 5 March 2018 and the terms
contained in that correspondence. The appellant says that further information on
the terms and conditions
made by the respondent were contained in the statement
provided by Ms Law. The appellant summarised that evidence.
appellant submits that the letters of offer and the acceptance created a
contract between the appellant and the respondent and
in accordance with the
contract the respondent was required to pay a stipend to the appellant. The
appellant says that the evidence
shows that she was paid throughout the period
between 12 February 2018 and when she terminated her studies in August 2018. The
says that neither party suggested that the acceptance of the offers
did not create a contract, which was created by accepting the
candidacy on 8 November 2017.
appellant submits that the Arbitrator’s task was to determine whether the
acceptance of those offers amounted to a contract
of service, which the
appellant asserts the Arbitrator did not do. The appellant says that, instead,
the Arbitrator considered that
the acceptance of the offer of 8 November 2017
might possibly have created a contract, which the appellant considers doubtful,
submits that “this aspect was not considered by the
Arbitrator.”
appellant contends that there was no issue as to whether the parties intended to
enter into legal relations in respect of the
acceptance.”
That is, it
was clear that the appellant had an enforceable right to be paid provided she
continued to perform her research under
the direction and supervision of the
respondent.
appellant referred to the Arbitrator’s reasoning process
(a) the appellant was a full-time student at the time of her
(b) the indicia relating to the issue of “worker” did not assist
him because they were not relevant to the true nature
of the relationship;
(c) the nature of the relationship was one in which the appellant sought and
enrolled in a PhD program in which she would use the
respondent’s
laboratories and other equipment and intellectual resources, and
(d) the indicia did not apply to the student/ institute relationship in which
the appellant had enrolled in a course of study offered
by the respondent in
order to gain the academic qualifications.
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator misunderstood the contract that he was
required to interpret. The appellant says that the
Arbitrator’s
description of the relationship as an ordinary student who accepted a place in a
university, was not the contract
the Arbitrator was required to interpret. The
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator’s description of the issue was
the appellant, after enrolment, and then receiving a research
scholarship, altered her status from that of a student into a paid
working for the respondent. The appellant submits that that was not the question
to be determined. The real issue was the
nature of the relationship created by
the contract whereby the respondent would pay a fortnightly amount to the
appellant while the
(a) met her contractual obligations
of performing research study for at least 35 hours;
(b) performed in accordance with a program agreed with her supervisors,
(c) developed research which would become the respondent’s intellectual
appellant submits that, in any event, there is no evidence that the appellant
acquired the status of a student prior to the commencement
of the contract to
make payments, which commenced from the day the appellant commenced her
appellant contends that if the Arbitrator approached the question correctly, he
would have found the appellant to be a worker.
The appellant explains that,
under the terms of the contract, the appellant was required to work 35 hours per
week and the research
was directed to a course of work approved by the
respondent. The monies were only payable while she undertook those studies for
PhD. The appellant was not free to conduct research outside of the terms of
her prescribed research topic. Sick leave and recreational
leave were included
in the terms of the arrangement and were necessary given that the appellant was
required to work 35 hours per
week. Further, the scholarship was determined and
awarded in accordance with the respondent’s own terms.
appellant points out that the Commonwealth government funding was made available
in the form of a block grant, which the respondent
was able to apply to various
purposes according to its own discretion. The appellant contends that the fact
that the monies came
from the Commonwealth was only significant because it made
the payments to the recipient of the scholarship exempt from taxation.
appellant adds that she had been allocated the same identity number as she had
been given at an earlier time when she had performed
work for the respondent.
The appellant asserts that the only factor missing from the indicia that the
appellant was a worker was
that the respondent did not pay superannuation, which
the appellant says came from a misguided view that the respondent was not
to make those contributions.
appellant contends that the approach taken by the Arbitrator by beginning with
the proposition that the relationship was one of
a student and the institution
has infected the manner in which he weighed the various elements of the evidence
and resulted in him
interpreting all of the evidence in that light. The
appellant says that the Arbitrator characterised the “weekly”
as a means of transferring the scholarship money when the proper
question was whether they were payments made contingent upon the
performing the tasks required in order to be entitled to those payments.
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator misinterpreted the significance of the
element of control in the relationship and submits
that it is not necessary for
the respondent to control the minutiae of the work task, citing
Restorations & Developments Pty Ltd
appellant says that in this case, the element of control exercised by the
respondent was:
(a) approving or disapproving the subject of the
(b) from time to time reviewing the appellant’s performance, and
(c) determining whether the appellant had satisfied her obligations in order
to be entitled to the payments.
appellant submits that those are all matters that “fall within the modern
understanding of the element of
and it was not
necessary for the respondent to dictate the way the appellant conducted her
appellant contends that the Arbitrator continued in error in dealing with the
provision of resources. The appellant makes the
observation that other students
may have had financial assistance with respect to fees in order to be provided
with resources but
submits that the question for the Arbitrator to determine was
whether, under the terms of the contract, the respondent had an obligation
provide the materials necessary to meet her obligations. The appellant asserts
that the evidence shows that this was clearly the
case. The appellant further
asserts that the Arbitrator failed to consider the arrangement in the context of
the obligations created
by the contract. The appellant contends that the
Arbitrator went beyond the evidence to speculate about whether matters related
an agreed course of research applied to all students.
appellant asserts that there was no evidence about those matters. The appellant
says that there was also no evidence about whether
the respondent retained the
intellectual property of all higher degree students. The appellant submits that
the appellant’s
evidence, which was uncontradicted, related only to her
and in the circumstances of her being in receipt of the scholarship. Further,
the requirement to acknowledge the Commonwealth contribution only applied to
those who were in receipt of a fees offset scholarship.
That is, the obligation
only arose for researchers such as the appellant, and not ordinary
appellant refers to the Arbitrator’s conclusion that there was no mutual
contractual obligation that the respondent provide
work for the appellant to
perform. The appellant submits that the Arbitrator reached that conclusion
without reference to the terms
of the contract. The appellant asserts that the
terms make it quite clear that the respondent was obliged to make payments while
the appellant performed the work required for the research topic agreed upon by
the respondent for at least 35 hours per week.
appellant contends that the Arbitrator failed to consider what actually
constituted the work for the purpose of examining whether
it was a contract for
service. The appellant submits that, had the Arbitrator considered the correct
contract created by the letters
dated 29 November 2017 and 5 March 2018, instead
of the contract whereby the appellant accepted the offer of the Higher Degree
placement made on 8 November 2017, he would have found in favour of the
appellant concludes that the Arbitrator erred in his consideration of the
contract because he failed to consider the necessary
indicia which were part of
the correct contract and erred by reaching conclusions on factual matters which
conclusions were not open
on the evidence.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent asserts that the appellant’s submissions ought not be accepted.
The respondent submits that, having regard to
the Arbitrator’s reasons as
a whole, the Arbitrator did not proceed on the basis that the
“correct” contract was
that set out in the letter dated
8 November 2017.
respondent refers to the decision in
On Call Interpreters and Translators
Agency Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation (No
in which Bromberg J
observed that the question of whether a person is an employee is “answered
by reference to an objective
assessment of the nature of the relationship that
person has with the entity that takes the benefit of that person’s
The respondent
further cites the High Court authority of
Hollis v Vabu Pty
as authority for the
proposition that the totality of the relationship between the parties must be
considered. The respondent submits
that the Arbitrator’s reasons
demonstrate that he approached the matter in a manner consistent with those
authorities.
respondent refers to the Arbitrator’s conclusion that there was no
employment relationship between the appellant and the
respondent, but rather the
appellant was a full-time student at the time of her injury. The respondent
points to the passage from
the Arbitrator’s reasons where he
“In my view the evidence is that [the appellant] was
a full-time student at the time of her injury.
The ‘worker’
indicia relied upon do not in my view assist in these circumstances because they
are not relevant to the
true nature of the relationship. The nature of the
relationship between [the appellant] and the [respondent] was one in which she
sought and was offered enrolment in the PhD program in her own interest using
the laboratory facilities and other resources of the
[respondent] as well as the
expertise of the [respondent’s] academic supervisors
. The indicia from
the authorities relied upon for [the appellant] do not apply to this
student/institution relationship in which
[the appellant] enrolled in a course
of study offered to gain the academic qualifications
(emphasis added
by the respondent)
respondent submits that the Arbitrator approached the task correctly and not on
the basis of the incorrect contract and gave further
reasons for making the
findings in the paragraphs that followed the above passage. The appellant
particularly points to the Arbitrator’s
reasons at [71]–[76], where
the Arbitrator considered the totality of the evidence and concluded
(a) the appellant failed to establish the elements of
“employment”;
(b) there was no contract between the appellant and the respondent creating a
mutual obligation for the respondent to provide work
and for the appellant to
perform that work, and
(c) applying the authorities, the scholarship, which was provided by the
Commonwealth Government and administered by the respondent
was not consideration
under a contract of employment. Rather, it was a stipend intended to assist a
full-time PhD student with living
respondent submits that, in reaching that conclusion, the Arbitrator was
“clearly cognisant of the true nature of the relationship
between the
parties ...”.
respondent says that this included the two contracts relied upon by the
appellant in her submissions to the Arbitrator and on
this appeal.
respondent refers to the appellant’s submissions (summarised by me at [61]
above) that the Arbitrator considered whether
the appellant altered her status
from that of a student into a paid worker when the real issue was the nature of
the relationship
created by the contract, whereby:
respondent paid the appellant fortnightly, and
(b) the appellant would fulfil her obligations of engaging in research for at
least 35 hours per week on a research program agreed
by her supervisors,
developing a product that would become the respondent’s property.
respondent submits that it is relevant to consider the Arbitrator’s
reasons for his conclusions, which were that:
(a) the appellant
sought and was offered enrolment in a PhD program, using the respondent’s
laboratory facilities and
(b) the research scholarship and its stipend were intended to assist the
appellant with her living
(c) the term “award” had a general meaning and was not a
reference to an industrial
(d) the provision of leave was intended as a protocol to allow for absence
from study because of illness or other
(e) the frequency of payments of the stipend did not alter its true
(f) the “control” indicia were inconsistent with an employment
situation because:
(i) the area of research was jointly agreed between the appellant and the
respondent and not dictated by the respondent, and
(ii) there was no evidence that the respondent dictated the way the appellant
would conduct her research that led to an outcome beneficial
respondent;
(g) the element of control was completely in the context of a student
progressing through higher university
(h) the use of the respondent’s facilities and resources was consistent
with a student being provided with teaching and learning
facilities provided by
an educational institution and was not analogous to a worker being provided with
tools by an employer;
(i) the retention of intellectual property rights was not a factor in
determining a worker
relationship;
(j) the hours of study were the same for all students in the PhD research
program, which was a feature of a relationship between a
higher degree student
with a teaching body and not an employer/employee
relationship,
(k) the grant was paid for by the Commonwealth and therefore did not tie the
stipend to work done by the student at the respondent’s
direction and for
the respondent’s
respondent refers to my observations in the decision of
Richardson v DF
Haulage Pty Ltd.
respondent says that those observations are also consistent with the
plurality’s remarks in
Ermogenous v Greek Orthodox Community of SA
That is, that the
intention of the parties is to be ascertained by considering what was
objectively conveyed by what was said or
done, giving regard to the
circumstances in which the statements or actions were
respondent submits that the Arbitrator made an objective assessment of the state
of affairs that existed between the appellant
and the respondent, before
determining that the parties had intended to enter into a contractual
relationship in the nature of an
agreement between a PhD student and a
university and did not intend to enter into a contract of service. The
respondent contends
that the Arbitrator considered the matter in line with the
above authorities and not in the manner asserted by the appellant.
respondent asserts that the appellant’s case is that her own subjective
intention or understanding of the relationship between
her and the respondent is
correct and that the Arbitrator should have taken the same view. The respondent
contends that had the Arbitrator
taken that approach, it would have been
inconsistent with the above authorities that require an objective assessment to
be undertaken.
The respondent cited
Guilbert v Glenworth Valley Horse Riding
as authority to say
that the onus is on the appellant to prove that an employment contract existed,
which, in the Arbitrator’s
view, the appellant failed to do. The
respondent asserts that the appellant’s submissions misconstrue the
situation between
the parties and prevent an objective assessment of the
respondent submits that in any event, the Arbitrator dealt with the
appellant’s submissions, noted binding authority and
concluded that there
was no consideration which would support the existence of a contract of
employment. The respondent points out
that the appellant did not cavil with this
finding, which is sufficient to dispense with this issue.
respondent contends that the Arbitrator did not proceed on the basis of whether
the offer of a scholarship altered the appellant’s
status. The respondent
submits that the Arbitrator’s finding should not be viewed in isolation
and the reasons should be viewed
as a whole. The respondent asserts that, when
viewing the reasons as a whole, it is clear that the Arbitrator did not proceed
the basis that the appellant bore the onus of proving that there was an
alteration of her status of being a PhD student at a university.
The respondent
says that the Arbitrator considered the matter objectively and then arrived at
his conclusions.
respondent submits that, for those reasons, the Arbitrator did not misconstrue
the task before him or ask himself the wrong question.
Grounds Two and Three
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that Grounds One, Two and Three are “intrinsically
linked” and, in respect of both Grounds Two and
Three, expresses reliance
on her submissions already made in respect of Ground One.
The respondent’s submissions
respect of Ground Two, which complains about the Arbitrator’s finding that
the “indicia” of employment were not
relevant, the respondent
submits that it is not clear which passages from the appellant’s
submissions under Ground One are
relevant to this ground of appeal. The
respondent points out that the submissions under Ground One were assertive of
error on the
part of the Arbitrator because the Arbitrator considered the wrong
contract and asked himself the wrong question, and not whether
the Arbitrator
erred in his analysis of the “indicia”. The respondent submits that
there are no separate submissions
under this ground and that the appellant has
not indicated how the Arbitrator erred, as required by s 352 of the 1998 Act.
The respondent
submits that the Arbitrator has not erred as alleged and Ground
Two should be rejected.
respect of Ground Three, the respondent submits that the Arbitrator did not err,
either in fact or law, by concluding that the
appellant was not a worker. The
respondent asserts that, again, the appellant has failed to show how the
Arbitrator erred as required
by s 352 of the 1998 Act and the appeal ground
should be rejected. The respondent adds that the appellant has not made
submissions
to substantiate a contract of employment. The respondent submits
accordingly, the Arbitrator’s finding that the appellant was not a worker
within the meaning of the 1998 Act is supported
by the fact that there was no
consideration. The respondent submits that the Arbitrator’s finding should
be upheld on that
basis alone.
Ground Four
The appellant’s submissions
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator erred in fact when he found that the
respondent retained intellectual property in the work
of all PhD students. The
appellant submits that there was no evidence to support that finding and the
finding was speculative.
appellant contends that her only evidence was in relation to her position, which
was as a recipient of a scholarship. The appellant
points to the letter of offer
dated 8 November 2017, which made provision for the requirement to acknowledge
the Commonwealth in
any published material relevant to the research project. The
appellant submits that that requirement only applies to those students
in receipt of a fee offset scholarship so that the obligation only arose for
research students in the position of the appellant,
and not for ordinary
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that the Arbitrator’s remarks in relation to the
situation with other students were only incidental findings
and did not affect
his ultimate conclusions. The respondent says that the Arbitrator did have
regard to the fact that the intellectual
property arising out of the
appellant’s research would be retained by the respondent but concluded
that where the intellectual
property vested was not a matter for consideration
in relation to whether or not the appellant was a worker. The respondent
therefore, that the Arbitrator did deal with the substance of the
appellant’s submission. The respondent submits that, in any
finding was not material to the Arbitrator’s conclusions, so that if the
finding had not been made, the outcome
would have been no different.
respondent contends that the appellant has failed to demonstrate error, and the
ground of appeal ought to be rejected.
Ground Five
The appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that the only explanation given by the Arbitrator for
concluding that the appellant was not a deemed worker
was that the contract
between the appellant and the respondent was not a contract to perform work,
which was based on his finding
that the relationship was one of a student and an
institution. The appellant asserts that the Arbitrator did not take into account
the terms of the contract or identify the contract he was referring to.
appellant contends that the relevant contract required the appellant to perform
work for a minimum of 35 hours per week. The appellant
says that the Arbitrator
did not explain why the research work undertaken by the appellant was not work,
which, the appellant submits
is clearly the same work done by a pharmaceutical
employee employed to undertake research. The appellant submits that the
did not give consideration to what constitutes work or why performing
research would not be considered as such.
appellant asserts that the Arbitrator repeated his continuing error by
considering that, because one of the relationships was
that of a student and an
institution, then “all the relationship was to be defined in those terms
The appellant
submits that the Arbitrator did not give regard to the terms of the contract,
which provided payment to the appellant
for research work performed by her for
at least 35 hours per week under the supervision of the respondent.
The respondent’s submissions
respondent submits that contrary to the appellant’s assertion, the
Arbitrator gave regard to the appellant’s allegations
“In my view the representation above does not
reflect the actual nature of the relationship with the [respondent]. There was
no ‘employment’ because there was no contract for this purpose, and
the activities listed were not segregated responsibilities
‘role’, but inherent in the conduct of [the appellant’s] own
elite research and study over which she
had significant control as a higher
degree student seeking to attain a
respondent says that the above passage was part of the Arbitrator’s
reasons in respect of the issue of “worker”
and not “deemed
worker” but submits that the Arbitrator made it clear that his conclusion
on the issue of “deemed
worker” was reliant upon his earlier reasons
and conclusions.
respondent refers to the decision of Roche DP in
, in which the Deputy
President observed:
“It follows that, even if there were an
intention to enter into legal (contractual) relations, that intention was not
by consideration for the agreement and there is no contract. As there
is no contract, Ms Bee cannot be a deemed worker under Sch
because there is no ‘contract’ to ‘perform any
respondent submits that, applying that authority, the Arbitrator’s
determination on the issue of “deemed worker”
was not erroneous. The
respondent says that it is therefore not correct to submit that the Arbitrator
formed his conclusion without
proper explanation and that there were ample
reasons to support his conclusion, given that the Arbitrator clearly indicated
on his earlier reasons.
respondent adds that the Arbitrator also gave consideration to and reasons why
the research conducted by the appellant was not
“work” in the nature
alleged by the appellant.
respondent submits that this ground of appeal should also be rejected.
RELIEF SOUGHT
appellant seeks to have the issue redetermined by a Presidential member and
otherwise the matter should be remitted to another
arbitrator for determination
of the appellant’s entitlements flowing from the injury.
respondent seeks to have the Certificate of Determination confirmed. In the
alternative, the respondent submits that if the Certificate
of Determination is
revoked, the matter should be remitted to another arbitrator in order to
re-determine the whole matter.
CONSIDERATION
The legal principles
Arbitrator was tasked with determining whether the appellant was a worker who
had entered into a contract of service or a deemed
worker within the meaning of
cl 2 of Sch 1 to the 1998 Act. In determining whether there was a contract of
service, the parties submitted
on, and the Arbitrator applied, the various
indicia which might go to establishing such a relationship, as discussed in a
of cases. In
Zuijs v Wirth Brothers Pty
the plurality observed
“There are countless examples of highly specialized
functions in modern life that must as a matter of practical necessity and
sometimes even as a matter of law be performed on the responsibility of persons
who possess particular knowledge and skill and who
are accordingly qualified.
But those engaged to perform the functions may nevertheless work under a
contract of service. In the present
case what has been proved in evidence all
points to the conclusion that the relation between the parties was that of
master and servant.
If the power of selecting the person engaged must exist in
the master in order that the contract may be one of service, that element
certainly present. If the fact that the remuneration takes the form of wages is
a mark of the relationship, that was the case
here. If a right in the master to
suspend or dismiss for misconduct is something to be looked for, then again
there could be little
doubt that the appellant was subject to that discipline.
If a right to superintend and control the manner in which the servant fulfils
his obligation must exist in some degree, a little consideration will show that
the daily relations of a performer playing a regular
part in the work of such an
organization as a travelling circus would demand a large measure of control and
superintendence. With
reference to the act itself there are many subsidiary
matters. The place it took upon the programme, the measures of safety to be
observed, the number, time and manner of the rehearsals, the costume of the
performers, the place where they dressed and their conduct
both before the
audience and otherwise, these are all matters naturally calling for
Cabra-Vale Ex-Active Servicemen’s Club Ltd v
Roche DP discussed
the relevant authorities and said (citations
Stevens v Brodribb Sawmilling Co Pty
Mason J said that a ‘prominent factor’ in determining
the nature of the relationship is the degree of control which is
exercised. His
Honour said that the importance of control lies not so much in its actual
exercise, though that is relevant, but in
the right of the employer to exercise
Zuijs v Wirth Brothers Pty Ltd
). As his Honour added,
‘[c]ontrol is not now regarded as the only relevant factor. Rather it is
the totality of the relationship
between the parties which must be
considered’.
In the same case, Wilson and Dawson JJ observed that the ‘modern
approach’ is to ‘have regard to a variety of criteria’,
this approach has its limitations because not all the accepted criteria provide
a relevant test and none is
conclusive.”
the basis of those observations, in the present matter the Arbitrator was
required to give consideration to the various indicia
raised in the
appellant’s submissions, which are informative but not conclusive. He was
also required to have regard to the
totality of the relationship between the
appellant and the respondent.
appellant argued in the alternative that she was a deemed worker within the
meaning of cl 2 of Sch 1 to the 1998 Act. In order
to fall within that
provision, the appellant was required to establish that:
was a contract between the respondent and the appellant to perform work;
(b) the work exceeded $10 in value;
(c) the work was not incidental to a trade or business, and
(d) the appellant did not sublet the contract or employ workers in the
performance of the contract.
Arbitrator in this case, determined that the contract between the appellant and
the respondent was not a contract to perform work,
so that the provision did not
apply to the appellant.
right to pursue an appeal from a decision of an Arbitrator is governed by s 352
of the 1998 Act. The scope of the appeal is limited
by s 352(5) of the 1998 Act
to the identification of error on the part of the Arbitrator, where such error
is of fact, law or discretion.
Arbitrator’s findings that the various indicia relied upon by the
appellant did not satisfy him that the contract between
the appellant and the
respondent was a contract of service and the appellant was a
“worker” or “deemed worker”
within the meaning of the
1998 Act were findings of fact. In determining whether an Arbitrator erred in
making a factual finding,
the Commission has consistently applied the principles
enunciated by Barwick CJ in
Whiteley Muir &
Zwanenberg Ltd v Kerr
Deputy President Roche provided the following summary of those principles in
Raulston v Toll Pty
Arbitrator, though not basing his or her findings on credit, may have preferred
one view of the primary facts to another
as being more probable. Such a finding
may only be disturbed by a Presidential member if ‘other probabilities so
outweigh that
chosen by the [Arbitrator] that it can be said that [the]
conclusion was wrong’.
Having found the primary facts, the Arbitrator may draw a particular
inference from them. Even here the ‘fact of the [Arbitrator’s]
decision must be displaced’. It is not enough that the Presidential
member would have drawn a different inference. It must
be shown that the
Arbitrator was wrong.
It may be shown that an Arbitrator was wrong ‘by showing that material
facts have been overlooked, or given undue or too little
weight in deciding the
inference to be drawn or the available inference in the opposite sense to that
chosen by the [Arbitrator]
is so preponderant in the opinion of the appellate
court that the [Arbitrator’s] decision is
Workers Compensation Nominal Insurer v
Basten JA considered
the application of the principles in
Whiteley Muir
in the context of s
352(5) of the 1998 Act. His Honour observed:
“With respect to
errors of fact finding, the line between preferring a different result and
identifying error is by no means
easy to draw, but that is clearly what the
Deputy President sought to do by adopting the language complained of. It was
Barwick CJ sought to do in
Whiteley Muir
in using such
language to identify the difference between an appeal based on a finding of
error and a hearing de novo (and, one must
now add, a rehearing). If, on an
appeal by way of rehearing, the court asked whether the findings of fact were
to the trial judge, that might demonstrate an unduly limited
understanding of the court’s function; however, that language
of place in determining an appeal from factual findings under
Sackville AJA observed in
Local Health Network v
where there
is no preponderance of view, it is not sufficient that the appellate tribunal
prefers a view contrary to that arrived
at by an arbitrator
order to succeed on this appeal, therefore, the appellant must establish that
the Arbitrator overlooked material facts, gave undue
or too little weight to
probative evidence or that the opposite view was so preponderant that it shows
that the Arbitrator was wrong.
The grounds of appeal
Ground One: the Arbitrator erred in fact and law when he
failed to consider the correct contract being the contract created by the
acceptance of the offer dated 29 November 2017 and 5 March 2018
appellant submits that the Arbitrator’s error was that he considered that
there was possibly a contract formed when the
appellant accepted the offer of a
candidacy in the Higher Degree Research PhD program. The appellant alleges that
the Arbitrator
then proceeded to interpret that contract as the description of
an ordinary student who had accepted a placement in a PhD program.
Arbitrator dealt with the question of whether there was an employment contract
at [72]–[79] of his reasons, in which he
observed that “there must
be an identifiable employment contract” and set out the necessary elements
of that contract.
The Arbitrator identified the principles enunciated in
relevant authorities. The Arbitrator considered that the appellant’s
description of her duties did not:
“reflect the actual nature
of the relationship with the [respondent]. There was no ‘employment’
because there was
no contract for this purpose, and the activities listed were
not segregated responsibilities of a work ‘role’, but inherent
the conduct of [the appellant’s] own elite research and study over which
she had significant control as a higher degree
student seeking to attain a
Arbitrator arrived at this conclusion after giving consideration, not just to
the offer of a placement in the PhD research program
and the appellant’s
acceptance, but also to the payment of the research scholarship stipend, which
he noted was not automatically
payable to all PhD students. The Arbitrator
clearly considered that payment as part of the contractual arrangement between
the appellant
and the respondent, as argued by the appellant, and whether that
arrangement constituted an employment contract. That is, whether
contract of service. This is abundantly apparent from the Arbitrator’s
reasons, where he took into account:
(a) that the research
scholarship was not available to all students;
(b) whether the award of that scholarship changed the nature of the
relationship between the appellant and the respondent, and
(c) whether the research scholarship was akin to an industrial award.
Arbitrator also took into account the allowance for leave, which was provided
for in the research scholarship, and the fact that
the stipend was paid
fortnightly. The Arbitrator noted that the appellant’s submissions were
“the letter of 5 March 2018, tied the stipend to [the
appellant] performing tasks as a research student with satisfactory progress
comprised an employment
relationship.”
“the documents of offer and associated correspondence and forms
establish a contract between the student and the University
such that if [the
appellant] performs the tasks of research then the payments
appellant submits that the Arbitrator “considered the contract [was]
possibly created by accepting the offer of 8 November
The appellant does
not identify where in the Arbitrator’s reasons he made that observation,
but if he did, it is immaterial.
Having noted that there was no issue between
the parties that there was a contract (of which the payment of the stipend was
an element),
the Arbitrator considered whether that contract constituted a
contract of service. He discussed and applied the relevant indicia
that might or
might not point to the contract being one of a contract of service.
is no indication from the above approach that the Arbitrator dealt with the
“incorrect” contract or misunderstood
the contract that he was
required to consider. The Arbitrator did not simply consider that the
relationship was that of an ordinary
student who accepted a place in a
university. He gave consideration to the nature of the relationship between the
appellant and the
respondent and concluded that the payment of the stipend, in
the context of the many other elements of the contract, did not elevate
relationship to the level of a contract of service. He did so in the context of
the totality of the relationship. His reasons
reproduced at [46] above, together
with his reasons as a whole, identified why he reached that conclusion, which
was open to him.
appellant has failed to identify error of the kind complained of and this ground
of appeal fails.
Ground Two: the Arbitrator erred in fact and law when
considering that the worker’s indicia were not relevant to the true nature
of the relationship
support of this ground of appeal, the appellant relies on her submissions made
in respect of Ground One, which ground specifically
alleges that the Arbitrator
erred by considering the “incorrect contract.” It is difficult to
see how submissions made
under that ground are relevant to this ground of
appeal. The respondent complains that it is not clear which submissions are
to address this ground of appeal. The respondent submits that in the
absence of submissions, the appellant has not identified error
as required by s
352 of the 1998 Act and the appeal ground should be rejected.
Direction No 6 requires that the submissions in relation to each ground of
appeal must be addressed separately under each
ground. It is not satisfactory
for a party to leave it up to the other party, or indeed the Presidential
member, to identify which
submission is relevant to which particular ground of
her submissions in respect of Ground One, the appellant refers to the various
indicia that go to the question of whether the contract
was a contract of
service. That is, the control element, the obligation to provide materials,
whether the respondent retained the
right to the intellectual property created
by the appellant’s research, the hours of work and the mutual obligation
provision of work for the appellant to perform. Again in relation to
Ground One, the appellant further submits that the Arbitrator
erred in his
conclusion because he failed to consider the necessary indicia and by reaching
factual conclusions that were not open
submissions bear no apparent relationship to the first ground of appeal and do
not advance the appellant’s case in respect
of that ground. In any event,
if they were intended to address Ground Two, they cannot be accepted. The
Arbitrator clearly referred
to and applied the indicia to the facts in this case
in his reasons at [64]–[70]. Whether the Arbitrator committed an error
fact in applying the indicia is not cited in this ground of appeal or the first
ground. The complaint is limited to the Arbitrator’s
conclusion, which was
arrived at after considering each of the indicia, that the indicia pointed to a
student/teacher relationship
and were therefore not relevant to the true nature
of the relationship. In that context, that conclusion was open to him.
follows that Ground Two of the appeal fails.
Ground Three: the Arbitrator erred in fact and law in
concluding that the appellant was not a worker
appellant again relies on her submissions made in respect of Ground One. I
reiterate the comments made by me in respect of Ground
note that, under Ground One, the appellant submitted that the purported error
identified in Ground One “infected” the
manner in which the
Arbitrator weighed the “various elements” of the evidence. The
Arbitrator did not err in the manner
alleged and so, if that submission was
intended to address this ground of appeal, it must be rejected for the reasons
cited in respect
of Ground One.
the appellant submitted that the Arbitrator was in error by characterising the
“weekly” payment made as a means
of transferring the stipend, rather
than payments made contingent upon the appellant performing the tasks required
of her. The Arbitrator
concluded that the payment of the stipend
(a) intended to assist with the appellant’s living
(b) not an award as that term is used in industrial matters;
(c) not changed from its true character by the fact that it was paid
fortnightly, and
(d) paid by the Commonwealth, rather than the respondent.
were sound reasons for determining that the payment of the stipend did not have
the character of payment in reward for work.
appellant also refers to and takes issue with the Arbitrator’s conclusions
in respect of the indicia of control, the provision
of the resources, the
retention of the intellectual property and the required hours of work. The
Arbitrator identified the element
of control exercised by the respondent over
the appellant and concluded that the exercise of that control was no more than
would be undertaken in a student/teacher relationship. In other
words, it did not assist him in relation to establishing a master/servant
relationship, rather than the student/teacher relationship that existed in any
academic situation. That conclusion was open to him.
The provision of resources
and the hours required to perform research work were also dealt with by the
Arbitrator in the same manner
and for the same reasons disclose no error.
appellant submits that there was no evidence to support the Arbitrator’s
conclusion that the intellectual property generated
by the research was retained
by the respondent in respect of all PhD students. The only evidence in relation
to the retention of
intellectual property was that of the appellant, who
“My contract was an agreement that I would engage
in the research and work to create intellectual property for the University.
exchange, the University provided my scholarship
Arbitrator dealt with this evidence at [74]–[76] of his reasons. He
“There is nothing to support [the appellant’s]
assertion of a contract created between the University and herself such
‘My contract was an agreement that I would engage in the research and work
to create intellectual property for the University.
In exchange, the University
provided my scholarship payment.’ On the contrary, in my view there was no
contract of ‘employment’
creating a mutual obligation for the
[respondent] to provide work and for [the appellant] to perform work.
The High Court held In
Australian Woollen Mills Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1954] HCA 20
, ‘[i]t is of the essence of a contract, regarded as a class
of obligations, that there is a voluntary assumption of a legally
enforceable
duty’. Following that authority, Roche DP in
Secretary, Department of
Family and Community Services v Bee
[2014] NSWWCCPD 66
found there must be
real consideration ‘for the
agreement’.
affirmed that,
‘To prove a contract, it must be established that the ‘statement
or announcement which is relied on as a promise was really
consideration for doing the act, and that the act was really done in
consideration of a potential promise inherent in
the statement or
announcement’ (
Australian Woollen Mills
at 456). In other words,
there must be a quid pro quo (‘one thing in exchange for another;
something in exchange’ Butterworths
Concise Australian Legal Dictionary,
The scholarship provided to [the appellant] by the Commonwealth Government
and administered by [the respondent] was not consideration
under a contract of
employment on the above authorities. On the overwhelming weight of evidence, it
was a stipend to help cover living
expenses for a full-time PhD student.”
is nothing inherently wrong with the Arbitrator’s reasoning process or his
conclusion that the appellant was not a “worker”
within the meaning
of the 1998 Act. The Arbitrator weighed the evidence of the appellant with the
evidence that surrounded the facts
that the respondent retained the intellectual
property generated by the appellant’s research and that the appellant
is well settled that the acceptance or rejection of evidence and the weight to
be afforded to particular evidence is a factual
exercise and generally a matter
that falls within the province of the primary decision
Findings of fact will not
normally be disturbed on appeal if they have rational support in the
the respondent submits, the Arbitrator correctly applied the authorities in
determining that an objective assessment of the relationship
was required and in
identifying the true nature of the relationship between the appellant and the
respondent. In determining whether
there was a contract of service, it is the
totality of the relationship which must be considered, and the indicia can be no
than a guide to a master/servant
relationship.
Arbitrator’s conclusion that the appellant was not a worker within the
meaning of the 1998 Act was open to him. The appellant
has failed to establish
error of the kind required in order to disturb the Arbitrator’s
conclusion. Ground Three of this appeal
therefore fails.
Ground Four: error of fact in finding that the respondent
retained the intellectual property in the work of all PhD students
have dealt with the appellant’s submission that the retention by the
respondent of intellectual property produced by the appellant
was evidence that
the contract was a contract of service. I rejected that submission. The
Arbitrator’s observations relevant
to this ground of appeal were
(a) the only evidence before him that the intellectual
property was retained by the respondent was that contained in the
appellant’s
(b) there was a likelihood that those rights were reserved generally for all
higher degree students, not solely in regard to scholarship
stipend recipients,
(c) such rights may have included rights over knowledge acquired by the
respondent and its staff.
appellant submits that there was no evidence to support the Arbitrator’s
observation that the respondent retained the rights
to the research of all
students. The Arbitrator did not make that finding. He simply observed that such
was a likelihood. The appellant
makes no submission under this ground of appeal
as to how any such error has affected the ultimate outcome reached by the
following his decision-making process.
appellant asserts that the letter of offer dated 8 November 2017 provided that
the support from the Commonwealth Government was
to be acknowledged in any
published material. The appellant submits that this condition only applied where
the student received a
fee offset scholarship so that the obligation only arose
for researchers in the position of the appellant and not for ordinary students.
letter of offer of a placement in the higher degree program dated 8 November
2017 advised the appellant that:
“All Domestic HDR Candidates
at UNSW Sydney are awarded a Research Training Program (RTP) Fee Offset
scholarship, which is paid
to the University from the Australian Government on
your behalf. The Australian Government contribution of an estimated $30,000 for
2017 is used to offset the costs of your tuition fees as a candidate of the
University.
You must ensure the Commonwealth’s contribution is acknowledged when,
at any time during or after completion of a HDR program,
you, your supervisor or
any other party, publishes or produces material (such as books, articles,
newsletters or other literary or
artistic works) which relate to the research
project carried out by you as the recipient of a Research Training Program (RTP)
scholarship.”
other words, every domestic student received a fee offset scholarship and was
thus obliged to make the acknowledgment in any published
material. In whatever
way the appellant’s submission relates to this ground of appeal it is
clearly incorrect. All domestic
students were required to meet that obligation,
not just those who were in receipt of a research scholarship.
have determined that there was no error in the approach taken by the Arbitrator
in failing to be satisfied that this factor was
indicative of an employment
relationship between the appellant and the respondent.
those circumstances, the Arbitrator’s observation that it was likely to be
the case is not indicative of error to the extent
that there is ground to
intervene in the Arbitrator’s ultimate conclusions that the fact that the
respondent retained the intellectual
property was not a factor supporting the
existence of an employment relationship.
follows that this ground of appeal also fails.
Ground Five: error of fact and law in finding that the
appellant was not a deemed worker
appellant submits that the only explanation given by the Arbitrator that the
appellant was not a deemed worker was that the contract
was not a contract to
perform work. The Arbitrator indicated that he had already determined that the
contract between the appellant
and the respondent was not a contract to perform
work. He further indicated that there was no work exceeding $10 in value, and
appellant was not working in a trade or business but was a student. Further,
there was no intention to create a mutual legal relationship
of employer and
2 of Schedule 1 to the 1998 Act requires there to be a contract to perform work.
The Arbitrator found that such a contract
was absent from the arrangement
between the appellant and the respondent. The Arbitrator gave reasons for
reaching that conclusion
when determining the issue of whether the appellant was
a “worker” within the meaning of the 1998 Act. There was no
on the Arbitrator’s behalf in so finding. The Arbitrator was
entitled to rely on his earlier, reasoned, finding that there
was not a contract
to perform work in circumstances where the finding was explained, and such a
contract was a required element in
satisfying cl 2 of Sch 1.
appellant contends that the Arbitrator did not explain why performing research
did not constitute work and maintains that it is
clearly “work” and
is akin to that performed by a research worker for a pharmaceutical company.
There is no correlation
between the work performed as an employed researcher and
that of a student pursuing a higher degree through research work. The Arbitrator
gave adequate explanation as to why he did not consider the research undertaken
by the appellant constituted “work,”
as it is understood in the
context of an employment relationship. He observed:
view the representation above does not reflect the actual nature of the
relationship with the [respondent]. There was
no ‘employment’
because there was no contract for this purpose, and the activities listed were
not segregated responsibilities
of a work ‘role’, but inherent in
the conduct of [the appellant’s] own elite research and study over which
had significant control as a higher degree student seeking to attain a
appellant’s challenge to the Arbitrator’s determination in that
regard has not succeeded and so the appellant’s
submission that the
allegation that the Arbitrator was in error, and continued that error is not
ground of appeal is not made out and fails.
appellant has failed to establish error on the part of the Arbitrator. The
Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination is
therefore confirmed.
Arbitrator’s Certificate of Determination dated 14 August 2020 is
Elizabeth Wood
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
21 December 2020
Application to Resolve a
Dispute (ARD), pp 1–8.
Application to Admit Late Documents (AALD), pp
Application to Resolve a Dispute (Reply), p
University of New South Wales
[2020] NSWWCC 275 (reasons),
Australian Woollen
[2014] NSWWCCPD
(1995) 14 NSWCCR 389
NSWCCR 297.
Appellant’s submissions,
Appellant’s
submissions, [13].
NSWCCR 751.
Appellant’s submissions,
[2011] FCA 366
[2001] HCA 44
Reasons, [61].
Respondent’s submissions,
[2018] NSWWCCPD
[2002] HCA 8
[2020] NSWWCCPD 10.
Appellant’s submissions, [35].
[1955] HCA 73
, per Dixon CJ, Williams,
Webb and Taylor JJ, [5].
[2013] NSWWCCPD 49
(1966) 39 ALJR 505
Whiteley Muir
[2011] NSWWCCPD 25
10 DDCR 156
[2020] NSWCA 54
[2013] NSWCA 255
Appellant’s
submissions, [12].
Appellant’s statement, [15], ARD p
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
[2010] HCA 16
84 ALJR 369
266 ALR 367
Shellharbour City Council v Rigby
[2003] HCA 22
214 CLR 118
Brodrib Sawmilling Co Pty Ltd
[1986] HCA 1
Reasons, [78].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.91 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter