URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
QDI [2013] NSWGT 26 (26 August 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 26
(26 AUGUST 2013)
APPLICATION FOR GUARDIANSHIP ORDER
Application Concerning:
Date and place of hearing:
26 August 2013 at Liverpool
Tribunal Members
Legal Member:
The Hon. Jennifer Boland
Professional Member:
Ms Tony Ovadia
Community Member:
Ms Freda Hilson
Guardianship – Jurisdiction –
interstate accommodation decision to be made – suitability of carer to be
- Public Guardian appointed as guardian for a period of three years
– Functions of accommodation, services, healthcare and
medical and dental
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 26 August 2013
What the Tribunal decided
the conclusion of the hearing conducted at Liverpool, NSW on 26 August 2013, the
Tribunal made an order under
Guardianship Act 1987
(“the Act”), appointing the Public Guardian as guardian for Ms
QDI. The order is for a period of three years. The Public
Guardian may make
decisions for Ms QDI in respect of accommodation, services and health care, and
may give any necessary medical
or dental consents.
are the Tribunal’s reasons for the order made.
applications and issues identified
application in respect of Ms QDI, who is aged 23, was lodged with the Tribunal
by Ms FAX on 19 June 2013. Ms FAX is a social worker.
Ms FAX has been involved
with Ms QDI’s welfare for some months while she has been an involuntary
patient at a unit in a Public
Hospital (“the unit”). Ms QDI remained
a patient in that unit at the date of the hearing.
QDI, who is of Maori descent, has been diagnosed as suffering schizoaffective
disorder and intellectual impairment. Ms QDI’s
mother and siblings live in
Queensland. A Guardianship Order was made by the Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (“QCAT”)
on 12 October 2010 appointing the
Adult Guardian as Ms QDI’s guardian and her estate was committed to
management by the Public
Trustee of Queensland. The Guardianship Order was
revoked by QCAT on 15 February 2013.
the date of the hearing Ms QDI’s admission to the unit was on a voluntary
basis, but she was anxious to leave the unit as
soon as possible.
to Ms QDI’s admission to the unit in January 2013 she had moved from
Queensland and was living with and being cared for
by her mother’s cousin,
QDI asserted to professionals engaged in her care at the unit that she had been
physically assaulted by Ms UAH, and another resident
of Ms UAH’s
household, prior to her admission to the unit. She said she did not want to
a desire to move back to Queensland
and to see her mother and siblings. It is not in dispute that Ms QDI’s
mother and her sister
suffer from an intellectual disability, and that she has
no contact with her father.
UAH, who is also of Maori descent, asserts she is the person best able to care
for Ms QDI. She says that she has restrained Ms
QDI when she demonstrates
violent behaviour. Ms UAH asserts that Ms QDI is at risk of being sexually
abused, particularly if she
is accommodated in a group home.
Z, an occupational therapist, who is Ms QDI’s current case worker, asserts
that Ms UAH is “anxious, defensive, frequently
unreasonable & verbally
aggressive towards others. She has been verbally abusive to me on a number of
occasions”.
QDI readily accepts that she requires a substitute decision maker but she does
not want to live with Ms UAH, or for her to be the
guardian. Thus the issues
requiring determination by this Tribunal were primarily whether or not Ms QDI
needs a guardian, and who
the guardian should be. Ms FAX and others involved in
Ms QDI’s care, including Ms Z, submit that the Public Guardian should
appointed as guardian.
following matters, unless noted by us to be an assertion, were accepted as
relevant facts established on the evidence before us.
QDI was born on 22 December 1989. Her mother is Ms HAX and her father is Mr XAI.
She has a brother, Mr UMA and a sister Ms OAA.
They live in Queensland. Other
family members live overseas.
Immediately
prior to her admission to the unit, Ms QDI was living with Ms UAH and another
distant relative Ms QAA. Prior to residing
with Ms UAH, whom Ms QDI refers to as
“Aunty UAH”, Ms QDI is asserted to have had admissions to mental
health units in
both Queensland and New South Wales and to being “case
managed” by the Department of Aging, Disability, and Home Care
by the social worker at the unit, Ms Y, to contact or obtain further information
have been unsuccessful. Ms UAH is
asserted to have refused to provide relevant telephone numbers of family members
X, Registrar at the Unit provided a report dated 31 May 2013. Dr X records that
Ms QDI was admitted to hospital [in January 2013]
“with a severe
deterioration of mental state with grandiosity (believing she was a
singer/having spiritual power), pressured
speech, thought disorganisation,
sexual disinhibition and running naked in street. She was expressing delusional
beliefs of having
an imaginary boyfriend and having multiple children”.
The doctor explained Ms QDI remained “significantly unwell for
months, and that a second mood stabilizer was introduced, and her antipsychotic
depot was switched”.
X asserted that Ms QDI had been living with Ms UAH for about two years prior to
admission to the unit. The doctor explained that
Ms QDI in the past “has
been at risk of sexual exploitation, more so when
X also asserted “There have been ongoing difficulties in engaging [Ms UAH]
and in involving her with social and occupational
rehabilitation
the date of the hearing all involved in Ms QDI’s care agreed she could be
discharged, provided suitable accommodation arrangements
were made for
QDI is in receipt of a Disability Support Pension. The professionals involved
with her care expressed concern that notwithstanding
she has been hospitalised
since January 2013 and has not had a mobile phone during that period, that Ms
UAH has been seeking reimbursement
of expenses from the Public Trustee including
mobile phone accounts, and that her rent has continued to be paid.
The Hearing
hearing was conducted at the Liverpool Hospital. Ms QDI participated in the
hearing and readily engaged with the Tribunal. The
Tribunal saw her in private
session, but reported the input of her evidence to the parties and Ms
UAH also attended the hearing, and put her views very firmly to the Tribunal.
She demonstrated a hostile and uncooperative attitude
towards the professionals
involved in Ms QDI’s care, particularly Ms FAX.
it makes a decision the Tribunal must try to bring the parties to a settlement
if this is possible and appropriate. Unfortunately,
the Tribunal was unable to
achieve a settlement with Ms UAH steadfastly opposing the orders proposed by Ms
was however no dispute about whether Ms QDI suffers a disability as defined in s
3 (2) of the Act. Ms QDI, after extensive discussion
with the Tribunal agreed
she needed help to access appropriate accommodation, services and healthcare.
She did not oppose the appointment
of the Public Guardian or that a guardian
could give consent to major or minor medical treatment on her behalf.
What did the Tribunal have to decide?
issues that had to be decided independently by the Tribunal in relation to
guardianship were:
does Ms QDI
suffer a disability (as defined in the Act);
Tribunal make a guardianship order and if so, what order should be made;
who should be
the guardian; and
how long should
the order last.
Is Ms QDI someone for whom the Tribunal
could make an order because she has a disability which prevents her from being
able to make
important life decisions?
Tribunal may make a guardianship order for a person if it is satisfied that
he/she is “a person who because of a disability
is totally or partially
incapable of managing his or her person.” Section 3(2) of the Act defines
“disability”.
A person with a disability is a person who
(a) intellectually,
physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled;
(b) of advanced
(c) a mentally
ill person within the meaning of the
Mental Health Act
(d) otherwise
and by virtue of that fact is restricted in one
or more major life activities to such an extent that he or she requires
supervision
or social habilitation.
Tribunal had the benefit of Dr X’s report dated 31 May 2013. Salient parts
of that report are set out earlier in these reasons.
The Tribunal had no
hesitation in accepting Dr X’s evidence.
found, having regard to the medical evidence before us that Ms QDI’s
present health and long-term intellectual disability
constituted a disability
and we were satisfied, to the requisite civil standard, it fulfilled the
criteria defined in
(2) of the Act. Further we were satisfied that her
disability affects her ability to make life-style decisions. We were accordingly
satisfied that Ms QDI is a person for whom a guardianship order could be
Should the Tribunal make a guardianship order and what
order should be made?
provisions of the Act are relevant to whether or not an order should be made.
, which section contains the overarching principles, which the
Tribunal must observe in dealing with any application under the Act,
provisions contained in
overarching principles in
include the following considerations of relevance
in this matter:
that the welfare
and interests of Ms QDI be given paramount consideration;
QDI’s freedom of decision and freedom of action should be restricted as
little as possible;
that Ms QDI
should be encouraged, as far as possible, to live a normal life in the
the views of Ms
QDI should be taken into account;
the importance
of preserving Ms QDI’s family relationships should be recognised as should
her cultural and linguistic environments;
Ms QDI should be
protected from neglect, abuse and exploitation.
requires the Tribunal to have regard to the views of Ms QDI, and any person
who has had the care of her. The section also stresses
the importance of
preserving existing family relationships, the importance of a person’s
particular cultural and linguistic
environment, and the practicability of
services being provided to the person without the need for the making of a
guardianship order.
The reasons now address the relevant matters under these
Evidence relevant to the welfare and interests of Ms
noted above, the Tribunal had the benefit reports from Dr X, as well as Ms
FAX’s application.
also had the benefit of a report of Ms Z dated 27 May 2013 supplemented by her
oral evidence. Ms Z has been Ms QDI’s case
worker since September 2011 and
thus is in a unique position to comment on her welfare.
Z explained that when Ms QDI was discharged from hospital in September 2011 she
endeavoured to have weekly contact with her at
the Community Mental Health
Centre and also by telephone. However, she said her attempts were thwarted by Ms
UAH, and also because
Ms UAH travelled with Ms QDI to Queensland to visit family
members. She explained that Ms QDI reported Ms UAH being physically abusive
her when she was mentally unstable. However, she also recorded “[Ms QDI]
is continuing to report that [Ms UAH] and Ms QHA
are verbally and physically
abusive towards her & hence she does not want to return to live with them at
Southwest Sydney”.
referring to Ms UAH taking Ms QDI to Queensland for visits to her family, Ms Z
explained that in recent weeks Ms UAH had refused
to provide Ms QDI and her
treating team her parents’ telephone numbers.
Z also explained that Ms UAH had been uncooperative and aggressive towards her
and said she had refused to allow Ms QDI to join
a walking group, to be referred
to an ADHC funded Community Participation Program, to attend a customised TAFE
course for intellectually
disabled students, or to work in a supported
enterprise. Ms Z recorded in her report “To explain this [Ms UAH] has
concern that [Ms QDI] is vulnerable to sexual & financial
exploitation”.
Z also pointed out positive aspects of Ms UAH’s care of Ms QDI including
organising new clothes and jewellery for her, and
having her hair cut and
streaked. She reported Ms UAH taking Ms QDI to a local club and groups at the
local neighbourhood centre.
She organised a twenty-first birthday party for her.
Ms Z also pointed out she had observed Ms UAH provided comfort to Ms QDI when
she is distressed. Ms Z also referred to Ms UAH assisting her with cooking,
that she was careful of her hygiene, and had a system
in place to ensure she
took her medications.
The views of Ms QDI
noted earlier in these reasons, Ms QDI participated in the hearing and welcomed
the opportunity to speak to the Tribunal in the
absence of the parties and Ms
QDI reported that Ms UAH had hit her nose causing it to bleed. She also said on
one occasion she was struck by Ms UAH across the
ear, and could not hear for
some time after she was hit. On another occasion she reported Ms UAH striking
her with a cord across
her arm. She also reported Ms QHA hitting her.
QDI cogently explained she did not want to live with Ms UAH. She did however
tell the Tribunal she really wanted to be out of the
unit, and that she was
adversely impacted by the behaviour of the other mentally ill patients.
the end of the private session, Ms QDI explained she wanted to return to
Queensland and to see her mother and father and brother.
Significantly, after
expressing her views to the Tribunal, Ms QDI independently moved herself to
seating in the hearing room as far
away from Ms UAH as possible.
earlier recorded we summarised Ms QDI’s evidence to those present at the
hearing including Ms UAH.
The views of Ms UAH
UAH presented her views in a very forthright manner. She described how she had
been involved for a significant period of time in
Ms QDI’s care as during
her infancy she had lived in the same property as Ms QDI’s mother and her
siblings. She said
when Ms QDI’s mother was unable to cope she took over
Ms QDI’s care.
UAH described Ms QDI as an adult with the mind of a child.
UAH refuted Ms QDI’s accounts of the physically assaults, although she did
not deny restraining her saying that when Ms QDI
had a tantrum she pulled her
(Ms UAH’s) hair and punched her. She said she did not report Ms
QDI’s assaults to Ms Z,
explaining that she is stronger than Ms QDI.
UAH expressed a number of concerns for Ms QDI including the fact she had gained
weight whilst in hospital. It appears this weight
gain is due, at least
partially, to Ms QDI’s medication. She expressed concern about Ms
QDI’s care at the unit noting
she had observed she was soiled, and had not
properly cleaned herself after bowel motions.
UAH explained her concern that Ms QDI is vulnerable to sexual exploitation, that
she gets bored “and likes boys around her”.
UAH conversed in an openly angry and hostile manner with the professionals
present at the hearing. She accused Ms QDI’s
treating team of improperly
“shutting her out” of the hospital.
The effect of
an order on Ms QDI’s family relationships/cultural or linguistic
environment
Tribunal sought information from Ms UAH about Ms QDI’s parents. She was
evasive in her answer, and the Tribunal was left
with the clear impression that
her evidence to us on this topic was not truthful.
the Tribunal accepts that Ms UAH has undertaken a substantial caring role for Ms
QDI in the past, and they have close cultural
and family ties.
if Ms UAH was able to communicate in an open and civilised way with service
providers for Ms QDI and cooperate with them,
if there were no safety concerns
of inappropriate physical assaults, and Ms QDI was comfortable with her
appointment, she could be
an appropriate guardian. Unfortunately, that is not
the present situation.
the Tribunal explained to Ms UAH that the Public Guardian, if appointed would
seek views, her present attitude to independent
professionals does not suggest
she will readily engage with the Public Guardian.
was otherwise nothing before us which indicated that appointing a guardian for
Ms QDI would have an adverse impact on family
relations. In fact, we formed the
view the Public Guardian should be able to reconnect Ms QDI with her parents and
siblings, and
if visits are in her best interests, authorise such
Are there decisions which need to be made by a
heard the oral evidence, particularly the views of Ms FAX and Ms QDI and read
written material including the reports referred
to above, the Tribunal found
there was a need for the appointment of a guardian to make life-style decisions
for Ms QDI.
What decision-making functions should be attached to
was no dispute that the major issue requiring determination for Ms QDI at
present is accommodation. Closely linked to that is
necessity of her receiving
appropriate services and medical care. Given Ms QDI’s unfortunate history
of mental illness we were
satisfied it is necessary for a guardian to have the
ability to give consent to major and minor medical and dental
Who should be the guardian?
Tribunal is not able to appoint the Public Guardian as a person’s guardian
if there is a private person who can be appointed
That section
has been interpreted to mean, that the Public Guardian should not be appointed
in circumstances in which an order can
be made in favour of
another person (see
[2003] NSWSC 1170
(2003) 59 NSWLR 220).
White J, set aside a guardianship order appointing the Public
Guardian in circumstances where the Tribunal was found to have erred
failing to make necessary findings that a family member could not be properly
appointed in the best interests of the person
needing a guardian. His Honour
cited, with approval, Windeyer J’s decision in
paragraphs 25 and 26.
Tribunal has to be satisfied that any person appointed as a private guardian
meets the following requirements. He/she must:
personality generally compatible with the personality of the person under
guardianship;
have no undue
conflict of interest (particularly financial) with those of the person; and
be able and
willing to exercise the functions of the order.
deciding whether a person is able to undertake the role of guardian, the
Tribunal must consider whether the proposed guardian is
able, having regard to
the circumstances, to exercise the functions in accord with the principles set
of the Act. (
C S and M Y v the Guardianship Tribunal and the
Public Guardian
(unreported per Windeyer J 29.11.99)).
the evidence before us about the physical assaults on Ms QDI is conflicting,
there is no doubt that physical assaults have been
perpetrated on her. We are
unable to determine conclusively whether those assaults occurred with Ms UAH
endeavouring to restrain
Ms QDI only using reasonable restraint or otherwise.
However, Ms QDI’s evidence before us was not given in an exaggerated or
embellished manner. We accepted her evidence as truthful. We accept she is
frightened of Ms UAH, and does not want to live with her.
In those circumstances
we are satisfied Ms UAH could not property be appointed her guardian.
we also found the evidence of Ms Z to be compelling. We observed Ms QDI’s
interaction with Ms Z demonstrated a very
good and trusting relationship between
Ms UAH’s concerns about the risk of sexual abuse of Ms QDI are real, and
cannot and should not be discounted, she lacked
insight into Ms QDI’s long
term developmental needs in thwarting attempts to enable her to attend TAFE,
learn life skills and
avoid boredom. In short, while we did not doubt her
sincere concern for what she perceives to be in Ms QDI’s best interests,
we did not find Ms UAH has the relevant capacity to make appropriate life-style
decisions for Ms QDI.
Unfortunately
as there is no family member who is available to undertake the role of guardian,
the Tribunal found the Public Guardian
should be appointed as Ms QDI’s
How long should the order last?
initial guardianship order can be made for a period of up to one year from the
date on which it is made. However, an order of up
to three years can be made, if
the person the subject of the order has permanent disabilities, is unlikely to
become capable of managing
his or her person and there is the need for an order
longer than one year.
Tribunal determined to make an order for three years when it will be reviewed.
This was because we were conscious that Ms QDI’s
intellectually disability
and schizoaffective disorder is long standing and continuing. QCAT found it
appropriate to make orders
in 2010. These matters indicate that Ms QDI is likely
to need an ongoing order for many years. Further, we wished to relieve Ms QDI
the stress to her obviously associated with further hearing in a relatively
short period of time.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (159 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter