URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAP/2025/274.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Webb v Shardana Pty Ltd [2025] NSWCATAP 274; (30 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Webb v Shardana Pty Ltd
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAP 274
Hearing Date(s):
24 October 2025
Date of Orders:
30 October 2025
Decision Date:
30 October 2025
Appeal Panel
G Sarginson, Deputy President
The application for a Stay is dismissed.
Catchwords:
APPEALS – Procedure – Application for interim stay –
Whether arguable grounds of appeal – Whether balance
of convenience in
favour of stay
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Residential Tenancies
Residential Tenancies Regulation 2019
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
Cases Cited:
Ah Sam v Mortimer
[2021] NSWCA 327
Alexander v Cambridge Credit Corp Ltd
(1985) 2 NSWLR 685
Beck v Colonial Staff Super Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2015] NSWSC
Bentran v Sabbarton
[2014] NSWCATAP 37
Boreland v Brewis
NSWCATAP 140
Canterbury-Bankstown Council v Cossu
[2025] NSWSC 717
Investment Holding Pty Ltd v Siennamia Investments Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWCA
Chatterjee v Pandya
[2024] NSWCATAP 85
Eastman v Nepean Blue Mountains
Local Health District
[2024] NSWCATAP 94
Hawkins v Wimbledon 1963 Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 1465
Hudson v Arap 1 (NSW) Pty Ltd
(2015) 90 NSWLR 477
Italiano v Carbone &Ors [2005] NSWCA 177
Kalifair Pty Ltd v
Digetic (Australia) Pty Ltd
(2002) 55 NSWLR 737
[2002] NSWCA 383
Amirbeaggi (No 3)
[2025] NSWCA 234
Lawrence v Gunner
[2015] NSWSC
Lawrence v Gunner (No 2)
[2015] NSWCA 395
McKerlie v Leeser
NSWCATAP 112
McMahon v Gould
(1982) 7 ACLR 202
Nathanson v Minister for
(2022) 276 CLR 80
[2022] HCA 26
Penrith Whitewater Stadium Ltd
v Lesvos Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 103
Prendergast v Western Murray Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 6
Qasim v PF 473 Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 248
Rayner v Rayner
[2020] NSWSC 1536
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs; Ex parte Lam
(2003) 214 CLR 1
;(2003)195 ALR 502;
Ryan v BKB Motor Vehicle Repairs Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP 39
Properties Pty Ltd t/as Central Sydney Realty v The Owners Strata Plan No 64807
[2023] NSWCA 188
Texts Cited:
Procedural rulings
Benjamin Webb (Appellant)
Shardana Pty Ltd (Respondent)
Representation:
Self-represented (Appellant)
S Kearines, agent (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00390497
Publication Restriction:
Decision under appeal:
Court or Tribunal:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Consumer and Commercial Division
Not Applicable
Date of Decision:
25 and 26 September 2025
J-P Redmond, General Member
File Number(s):
2025/00234564 and 2025/00229002
REASONS FOR DECISION
is an application for a Stay of orders for termination and possession in a
dispute under the
Residential Tenancies Act 2010
(NSW) (RT Act) that is
the subject of an internal appeal to the Appeal Panel under
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act).
a residential tenancy matter, the Tribunal, rather than a Court, has the power
to terminate a residential tenancy agreement (s
119 RT Act;
Lawrence v Gunner
Lawrence v Gunner (No 2)
[2015] NSWCA 395).
these reasons, any reference to “the tenant” is a reference to the
appellant, and any reference to “the landlord”
is a reference to the
respondent.
19 June 2025, the landlord (represented by a licenced real estate agent)
commenced proceedings in the Consumer and Commercial Division
of the Tribunal in
Case Number 2025/00234564. The orders sought were “89(5)-termination due
to non-payment of rent; s 187(1)(i)-vacant
possession order; s 187(1)(c) payment
of all unpaid rent”.
tenant also commenced proceedings in the Tribunal in Case Number 2025/00229002
seeking the landlord’s Notice to Terminate
be set aside on the basis that
it was retaliatory under s 115 of the RT Act.
18 July 2025, the Tribunal set both sets of proceedings down for a special
fixture hearing, with procedural directions regarding
the filing and serving of
documentary evidence.
contested hearing occurred at the Tribunal on 25 September 2025 before General
Member Redmond. The landlord was represented by
its agent Ms Kearines. The
tenant appeared at the hearing by telephone. The written reasons of Member
Redmond note that the landlord
relied upon documentary evidence filed on 25 July
2025 and that the tenant did not provide any documentary evidence.
25 September 2025, the Tribunal heard the proceedings and made orders. Written
reasons were given. The tenant’s claim that
the proceedings were
retaliatory was dismissed, in circumstances where the landlord has issued the
Notice to Terminate on the basis
of the tenant’s significant and ongoing
default in respect of failing to pay rent.
Tribunal made orders terminating the tenancy, with the date of vacant possession
suspended to 9 October 2025.
Tribunal’s written reasons are detailed. In respect of the application by
the landlord to terminate, the Tribunal found
that (a) there was a residential
tenancy agreement between the parties; (b) the rent arrears, as at the date of
the Tribunal hearing,
were $28,085.71; (c) the Notice to Terminate complied with
the applicable provisions of the RT Act and had been validly served; (d)
proceedings had been validly commenced in the Tribunal under the RT Act; (e) the
tenant had frequently failed to pay rent (s
89(5) of the RT Act) and the breach
was sufficiently serious in all the circumstances to justify termination of the
written reasons of the Tribunal referred to a number of issues. The Tribunal
stated at [9] that:
“The tenant kept telling the Tribunal that he wanted a stay because there
are (or were) Supreme Court proceedings before McGrath
J, and an ICAC
investigation. Indeed, the tenant kept saying he could not give evidence because
it would jeopardize his right against
self-incrimination. The tenant kept
pressing this point to which the Tribunal found it hard to reconcile as this
hearing concerned
an application for termination and vacant possession for
non-payment of rent. The tenant also suggested that he was denied procedural
fairness. The tenant kept stating that the Tribunal had already formed an
opinion and he would appeal. That is his right.”
paragraph [14], the Tribunal found that the tenant’s application under s
115 of the RT Act had “no merit (and no evidence)”
because the
Notice to Terminate was issued in circumstances where the tenant was in serious
breach of the obligation to pay rent.
That paragraph of the reasons also refers
to an “alternative” submission by the tenant that he be given 90
days to vacate
the property. The Tribunal granted a much shorter suspension of
the date of vacant possession, for reasons that included the large
rent arrears.
paragraph [14], there is also reference to the bond amount being
“exhausted”. Both parties accept that no bond was
paid for the
premises. The landlord was not seeking any order for the bond, because no bond
had been paid by the tenant at the commencement
of the tenancy.
the appeal Stay application, the tenant asserts that a number of his grounds of
appeal are based on the Tribunal referring to the
bond in paragraph [14] where
no bond was paid.
the Tribunal issued the orders on 25 September 2025, the orders included an
order that the tenant pay the landlord $28,085.71.
That order was clearly
inconsistent with the reasons at paragraph [10] of the decision, which
“The Tribunal is satisfied on the final state of the landlord’s
evidence (their rent record) that as of the date of the
hearing, the tenant owes
rent of $28,085.71 in arrears, a not insignificant sum. The Tribunal explained
to the landlord its jurisdictional
limit, which the landlord acknowledged and
stated that it would pursue the debt in the Local Court of NSW as a liquidated
“jurisdictional limit” the Tribunal was referring to in paragraph 10
of its reasons is $15,000
(Regulation 40(b)
Residential Tenancies
Regulation 2019
Hawkins v Wimbledon 1963 Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC
the Tribunal corrected that error on 26 September 2025 by setting aside the
money order for payment of $28,085.71 and reissuing
amended orders (with the
same reasons) under s 63 of the NCAT Act. Section 63 of the NCAT Act is the
equivalent of the “slip
rule:” under Reg 36.17 of the
Civil Procedure Rules 2005
Sunaust Properties Pty Ltd t/as Central
Sydney Realty v The Owners Strata Plan No 64807
[2023] NSWCA 188
10 October 2025, the tenant filed a Notice of Appeal and Application for a
tenant identified 28 grounds upon which there was an error of law or leave to
appeal should be granted. It is unnecessary to set
out each of the grounds, and
sufficient to identify them in substance. The tenant identifies his grounds of
appeal as follows:
(1) Denial of procedural fairness, because the Tribunal “discouraged
him” from giving documents and evidence “due
to concurrent criminal
law exposure (ICAC “Operation Mantis” and related Supreme Court
matters) while “refusing
to adjourn or stay to avoid prejudice.” The
Tribunal also “forced” the tenant to choose between “defending
the civil claim and preserving privilege.”
(2) The Tribunal “deprived” the tenant of a “real opportunity
to present his case and materially affected the outcome.”
(3) The Tribunal “granted relief not sought” in circumstances where
“the landlord had not sought monetary compensation
as a discrete head of
relief.” Granting relief not sought is a “legal error.”
(4) The Tribunal should not have made a money order and could not delete the
order under s 63 of the NCAT Act as it was “beyond”
the power under
(5) The Members reasons are “infected by legal error.”
(6) The Members reasons, after amendment under s 63 of the NCAT Act, still refer
to the bond.
(7) The Member had a “pre-conceived view” that a money order was
justified, even though it was not sought by the landlord.
(8) The Member’s reference to the bond being “exhausted”
despite there being no bond sought was “factually
“reinforces that this was not a standard landlord-tenant
relationship” and “infected the exercises
of discretion.”
(9) The tenancy was not a “simple tenancy” but there had been
“prior consent orders recording a contract of sale
with arrears to be
adjusted on settlement; Supreme Court freezing orders preventing settlement and
ICAT Operation Mantis context
and related Supreme Court proceedings.”
(10) The Tribunal’s finding that the tenant had frequently failed to pay
rent “misconceived the operative arrangement,
the arrears were
contractually anchored to settlement (and the settlement was later blocked by
Supreme Court freezing orders).
Notice of Appeal attached a copy of the decision of McGrath J in
Canterbury-Bankstown Council v Cossu
[2025] NSWSC 717
other documents were attached to the Notice of Appeal.
Stay Application filed on 10 October 2025 contained a statement of the tenant Mr
Webb dated 10 October 2025. That statement asserted
that the settlement of the
contract of sale for the tenant to purchase the property from the landlord was
frozen by Supreme Court
orders. The statement asserts that the tenant raised at
the Tribunal hearing “privilege against self-incrimination” due
“ICAC Operation Mantis and related Supreme Court matters.” It was
asserted that the Supreme Court had granted a Stay
of proceedings in
to “protect the right to silence pending potential
13 October 2025 (corrected under s 63 of the NCAT Act on 14 October 2025) Blake
PM of the Appeal Panel made procedural directions
setting the appeal down for a
Call Over on 24 October 2025; and the Stay application down for hearing on the
same date. The procedural
directions included a timetable for the parties to
file and serve documents and submissions in the Stay application.
20 October 2025, the tenant filed documents and submissions in the Stay
application. The Stay submissions asserted that there was
a serious issue to be
tried in the appeal on 4 basis set out at paras [7]-[10]. It was submitted that
if the Stay was not granted
the appeal would be nugatory. It was submitted that
the balance of convenience was in favour of granting the Stay, because the
would pay the occupation fee of $114.29 as a condition of granting the
Stay; and there would be “irreparable prejudice”
to the tenant if
the Stay was refused. No offer was made by the tenant to pay any amount of rent
arrears to the landlord. The tenant’s
Stay application submissions
referred to the principles of granting a Stay of proceedings in
(1982) 7 ACLR 202.
documents of the tenant contained the orders made by Member Redmond and the
decision in
No contract for a sale of the property was provided in
the tenant’s documents; nor a copy of the orders of the Tribunal consent
orders referred to by the tenant where it was asserted the landlord agreed to
deduct rent arrears from settlement of the purchase
price of the residential
premises when it was sold to the tenant. No copy or summary of the ICAC
Operation Mantis report was provided,
or evidence of any relationship between
Shardana Pty Ltd and any of the persons involved in ICAC Operation Mantis.
landlord, by its licensed agent, filed documents and submissions in the Stay
application on 23 October 2025. At the hearing of
the Stay application, the
tenant stated he had received the documents. The documents included (a) managing
agency agreement; (b)
written residential tenancy agreement between Mr Webb and
Shardana Pty Ltd for a 1 year fixed term period commencing 19 February
rent payable was $850 per week commencing 19 February 2024. Mr Pietero Cossu is
referred to as the person of the landlord
to contact in respect of urgent
repairs; (c) Notices to Terminate for non-payment of rent dated 25 October 2024
and 16 June 2025;
(d) consent orders of the Tribunal dated 6 December 2024
(Member Ng); (e) the orders of the Tribunal made by Member Redmond in September
2025; (f) a rent leger.
respect of the documents of the landlord, the consent orders of Member Ng dated
6 December 2024 (which refer to payment of rent
arrears) contain the following
“Note” The Tenant and the Landlord have entered into a Contract for
Sale to purchase the rental property, and agree that
any rent arrears at the
time of settlement will be adjusted into the final purchase price.”
rent leger shows that there were rent payments made between 5 March 2024 and 12
July 2024, although there were rent arrears, which
at that stage were $2,307.14.
There were then no payments until 16 December 2024. By that stage, the rent
arrears were $18,457.14.
There were payments, on various dates and amounts,
between 6 December 2024 and 19 May 2025. As of 19 May 2025, the rent arrears
$13,421.43. No payments had been made since 19 May 2025. The rent arrears
as of 23 October 2025 were $31,485.71.
24 October 2025, the Appeal Panel made procedural directions setting the appeal
down for hearing. The appeal is listed for hearing
on 3 February 2025. The Stay
application hearing then proceeded, in the context of a busy list with a number
of matters listed throughout
the day. However, both parties stated that they
were ready to proceed in respect of the Stay application, and neither party
an adjournment for any reason. The tenant appeared (by Audio-Visual Link)
and the respondent was represented by Ms Kearines, licensed
tenant made oral submission that were broadly consistent with his written
submissions and documents.
landlord’s agent stated that the landlord had obtained a warrant for
possession, and had contacted the office of the Sherriff,
but a date of
enforcement of the warrant was not yet scheduled by the office of the Sherriff.
The landlord opposed the Stay, on the
basis that the tenant did not have
arguable grounds of appeal; the appeal was filed to delay execution of the
order; the rent arrears
were currently over $30,000 and the non-payment of rent
was a matter of financial hardship.
Applicable Legal
Appeal Panel has the power to grant a Stay of orders pending determination of an
internal appeal under s 43 of the NCAT Act.
principles in respect of the granting of a Stay are well-established:
Alexander v Cambridge Credit Corp Ltd
(1985) 2 NSWLR 685
Whitewater Stadium Ltd v Lesvos Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 103
Beck v Colonial
Staff Super Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2015] NSWSC 1360
[2014] NSWCATAP 37
Kalifair Pty Ltd v Digetic (Australia) Pty
(2002) 55 NSWLR 737
[2002] NSWCA 383
Qasim v PF 473 Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 248
Kearney v Amirbeaggi
[2025] NSWCA
Stay does not overturn the orders, but suspends their operation until the appeal
is heard, and conditions may be imposed. The filing
of an appeal does not
automatically entitle a party to a Stay, and it is the appellant who must
satisfy the Appeal Panel a Stay should
be granted because it is in the interests
of justice to grant the Stay. Special or exceptional circumstances are not
required. The
overriding principle is what the interests of justice
are three key principles. Firstly, the appellant must establish they have an
arguable appeal. The Appeal Panel does not engage
in a detailed analysis of
whether the appeal is likely to succeed, but it must be satisfied that there are
arguable grounds identified,
such that the appeal has substance beyond being
filed simply in the hope of gaining respite against immediate execution of a
or to delay execution of decision. Secondly, the Appeal Panel must be
satisfied that refusing to grant a Stay will cause a real risk
of prejudice or
damage which will not be redressed by a successful appeal. If the Appeal Panel
is satisfied of these two criteria,
it then moves into considering the balance
of convenience. The balance of convenience involves weighing up the effects of
the respective
parties if a Stay is granted, compared to a Stay not being
There Arguable Grounds of Appeal?
, Gleeson JA stated at [10]:
“It is well-established that the Court will not generally speculate upon
the appellant’s prospects of success but may
make some preliminary
assessment about whether the appellant has an arguable case, in order to exclude
an appeal lodged without any
real prospects of success simply to gain
Kalifair Pty Ltd v Digi-Tech (Australia) Ltd
at [18] –[19].
Given that the parties diverged as to whether the appeal raises arguable
grounds, it is necessary to undertake
such a preliminary assessment on this
application.”
, Free JA stated at [22]:
Michael Hill Jeweller (Australia) Pty Ltd
v Gispac Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 128
Payne JA explained
that the principles governing the granting of a stay pending appeal are
analogous to those governing the grant
of interlocutory relief before trial. A
party applying for a stay must show that the appeal raises serious issues for
determination
and that there is a real risk that the appellant will suffer
prejudice or damage if the stay is not granted. If those matters are
established, it becomes necessary to consider the balance of convenience and the
competing rights of the parties. The absence of
arguable grounds of appeal
is likely to be determinative against a stay application:
Di Liristi v Matautia Developments Pty Ltd
internal appeal is not simply a rehearing of the original application. An error
on a question of law; or grounds for leave to appeal
must exist (
Motor Vehicle Repairs Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCATAP 39).
A self-represented
litigant should be given some latitude with the manner in which grounds are set
out, such that the focus is on
the substance of the grounds raised
Prendergast v Western Murray Irrigation Ltd
[2014] NSWCATAP 69).
Appeal Panel deals with the grounds identified by the tenant, and whether they
are arguable, as follows:
Was There a Residential Tenancy
tenant, in the Notice of Appeal, referred to there being a contract for sale of
the property. Under s 8(1)(f) of the RT Act, the
Act does not apply to an
agreement for sale of land that confers a right to occupy residential premises.
However, that provision
only applies if the contract for sale of land confers a
right to occupy residential premises on a party to the agreement as a term
the contract for sale, not where the right to is conferred by a separate
agreement; or where the contract for sale purports to
confer a right to occupy
on a third party or whether the agreement is merely a precondition to sale
rather than a term of the contract
Hudson v Arap 1 (NSW) Pty
(2015) 90 NSWLR 477
[2015] NSWCA 126).
this matter, no contract for sale of land was provided by the appellant. The
landlord’s agent submitted that there was a
contract, but it was never
signed. Even if the tenant’s submission regarding ICAC
“freezing” the sale is accepted,
there is nothing to demonstrate
that there was not a residential tenancy agreement between the parties and that
the Tribunal had
did not have jurisdiction under the RT Act.
Landlord Not Claiming Rent Arrears In The Application
submission is factually incorrect. The landlord did seek a money order for rent
arrears in the application filed with the Tribunal.
The landlord could have
submitted to the monetary jurisdiction of the Tribunal if it chose to do so, but
it is clear from the reasons
it did not press for a money order for rent arrears
because it would take action in the Local Court to recover the money.
landlord also clearly sought a finding under s 89(5) of the RT Act that the
tenant had frequently failed to pay rent. There was
ample evidence in the rent
ledger of the landlord that the tenant had frequently failed to pay
The Orders Under s 63 of the NCAT Act
Tribunal making an order under s 187(1)(c) or the RT Act regarding payment of
money is a different order making power to the power
to make orders for
termination and possession (s 187(1)(i) of the RT Act).
Tribunal made an order in error that the rent arrears be paid as an order of the
Tribunal. As discussed previously, that order
is inconsistent with what is set
out in paragraph [10] of the reasons, whether the monetary jurisdiction of the
Tribunal was raised.
The Tribunal corrected its error, and did so expeditiously.
Considering the inconsistency with the order and the reasons, the Tribunal
the power to do so under s 63 of the NCAT Act within the
principles. Even if it did not have the power to set aside the order under s 63
of the NCAT Act, it had a power to do so under s
188 of the RT Act.
tenant asserts that the order for payment of rent arrears “infects”
the other orders. However, the orders for termination,
possession and payment of
an occupation fee are not dependent on whether or not a money order is made for
payment of rent arrears.
A tenancy is terminated for non-payment of rent on the
basis of factual findings, including a factual finding that the tenant was
than 14 days in rent arrears when the Notice to Terminate was issued and served.
The Tribunal found that the tenant was significantly
in rent arrears, and there
is no evidence to suggest that the information contained in the rent ledger of
the agent for the landlord
is incorrect.
tenant’s criticism that the Tribunal had used the word
“entitled” in respect of the arrears also does not demonstrate
arguable error on a question of law or grounds to grant leave to appeal.
The Reference to a Bond
parties accept that no bond was paid. The brief reference in the reasons to the
rent arrears exceeding the bond appear to have
arisen by reason of the Member
assuming a 4 week bond had been paid. However, the non-payment of a bond makes
no difference to the
factual findings that (a) there was a residential tenancy
agreement; (b) the Notice to Terminate was validly issued; and (c) the
was approximately $28,000 in rent arrears as at the date of the Tribunal
hearing. No arguable error on a question of law or
grounds to grant leave to
appeal are identified by reason of the reference to a “bond” in the
The Issue of Self-Incrimination and Stay of Termination
Proceedings Sought By the Tenant
substance of this ground is that the Tribunal should have granted a Stay of
proceeding (or otherwise adjourned generally) the
landlord’s termination
and possession application until the issue of whether any criminal proceedings
were brought against
the tenant were determined, or otherwise that hearing the
proceedings infringed the tenant’s right not to give evidence in
Tribunal proceedings that may incriminate himself in respect of a criminal
investigation or criminal proceedings.
tenant submits that the principles in
are applicable, and the
Member should have Stayed the landlord’s application for termination and
possession.
involved an application by Canterbury-Bankstown Council for declaratory and
other relief arising from alleged misappropriation of
monies and assets by Mr
Cossu and various other defendants. The tenant was not a party to those
proceedings, although Ivan Webb was
party. Shardana Pty Ltd was also not a party
to those proceedings.
J referred to the Operation Mantis investigation and report of ICAC at
paragraphs [7]-[13] of the reasons. ICAC had referred
to the ODPP that the ODPP
consider various potential criminal charges, including that Mr Cossu had
corruptly given financial benefits
to the tenant in the tenant’s (then)
capacity as a senior employee of the Council.
orders sought by the Council in the Supreme Court proceedings are set out at
paragraphs [31]-[42], including declarations; tracing
orders; account of
profits; and other relief.
paragraphs [45]-[54], McGrath J sets out the submissions of the parties as to
why a Stay of the Council’s proceedings should
be granted. Mr Cossu gave
detailed submissions as to how the Council’s proceedings against himself
could affect his right to
silence in any criminal investigation and prejudice
any defence of criminal proceedings brought by the ODPP.
paragraph [43] of the decision, McGrath J set out the principles for whether a
Stay of civil proceedings should be granted pending
potential criminal
proceedings. Included in those principles are (at [43](7)) that to warrant a
Stay of civil proceedings, it must
be apparent that the accused is at risk of
prejudice in the conduct of his or her defence in criminal proceedings if the
not granted.
paragraph [56], McGrath J stated that the Council’s claims in the civil
proceedings against Mr Cossu and the other defendants
(which did not include the
tenant in these proceedings) arose from the same serious allegations that were
the subject of the referral
to the ODPP by ICAC. That was an important
consideration in favour of granting the Stay of the civil proceedings (see
McGrath J granted the Stay, but on certain conditions.
this matter, there is a residential tenancy dispute between Mr Webb and Shardana
Pty Ltd. The tenant, Mr Webb, does not articulate,
even in broad terms, how
granting a Stay of the residential tenancy proceedings affects any ability of
him to give evidence as to
why he had not paid rent to Shardana Pty Ltd, or any
other matter that may be relevant to termination of a residential tenancy
such that there is a risk his right against self-incrimination would
be affected. In
, it was explained clearly to McGrath J how
defending the civil proceedings brought by the Council may infringe the right
self-incrimination.
Webb did not provide in the Stay application any sound recording or transcript
of the proceedings before Member Redmond. However,
he broadly asserted what
occurred; and the Member’s reasons refer to him raising the issue of
self-incrimination.
Tribunal is not satisfied that Mr Webb asserting before the Member (and in the
Stay application to the appeal) merely that there
was some relationship between
Operation Mantis and the residential tenancy agreement is arguably sufficient
that the Member committed
an error on a question of law, or otherwise leave to
appeal should be granted, because the Member did not Stay or adjourn the
application for termination and possession.
tenant referred to the decision of Wootten J in
McMahon v Gould
in support of his assertion that the Member erred by not granting a
Stay of the landlord’s application for termination and
possession. In that
matter (which involved a claim by a liquidator for recovery of monies that were
the subject of criminal proceedings
against Mr Gould for conspiracy and fraud)
Wootten J refused to grant a Stay of proceedings. The principles for granting a
proceedings are referred to in the decision (at 206-207).
those principles were also discussed in
, and the principles do not
require repetition. The tenant has failed to identify how the refusal to adjourn
or Stay the landlord’s
termination application affected his ability to
give evidence in the Tribunal proceedings on the issues relevant to termination
a residential tenancy agreement for failure to pay rent; or potentially
affects his right to silence in any criminal investigation
or future criminal
proceedings arising from Operation Mantis.
Denial of Procedural
tenant’ submissions contained broad assertions that the manner in which
the hearing was conducted constituted a denial of
procedural fairness. However,
merely referring to procedural fairness is not sufficient to demonstrate an
arguable appeal. The tenant
has failed to identify any arguable matter that the
way in which the hearing was conducted caused him any practical injustice or
otherwise was inconsistent with s 38 of the NCAT Act (
Re Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; Ex parte Lam
; (2003) 195 ALR 502;
[2003] HCA 6
Eastman v Nepean Blue
Mountains Local Health District
[2024] NSWCATAP 94
[2021] NSWCA 327
Italiano v Carbone &Ors
NSWCA 177 at [88];
Nathanson v Minister for Home Affairs
(2022) 276 CLR
[2022] HCA 26
Carrano Investment Holding Pty Ltd v Siennamia
Investments Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWCA 262
Boreland v Brewis
[2024] NSWCATAP 140
only matters of practical injustice that the tenant refers to in substance is
the refusal to grant a Stay of proceedings; or that
“dissuaded” from giving evidence. However, as discussed previously,
there is nothing put forward by the tenant
to explain how he was
“dissuaded” or how that affected any evidence he may give other than
the issue of the right to
self-incrimination, which has been discussed
previously.
Other Matters
tenant submitted “this is not a usual tenancy agreement.” However
there was nothing to indicate the tenant had any
arguable legal interest in the
premises beyond the existence of the residential tenancy agreement. A mere
assertion of an equitable
interest does not demonstrate an error on a question
of law or that leave to appeal should be granted (
Rayner v Rayner
NSWSC 1536).
respect of the dismissal of the tenant’s claim that the Notice to
Terminate was retaliatory, the relevant principles are
set out in decisions
Chatterjee v Pandya
[2024] NSWCATAP 85
[2023] NSWCATAP 112.
The Notice to Terminate was issued by reason of
the breach of the tenant by failing to pay rent, and there are no arguable
identified as to why the decision that the Notice was not retaliatory
within s 115 of the RT Act contains an error on a question
of law or leave to
appeal should be granted.
tenant refers to the consent orders of the Tribunal dated 6 December 2024.
However, contrary to the submission of the tenant,
the notation (which is not an
order) noted the parties had entered into a contract of sale and agree that any
rental arrears at the
time of settlement would be adjusted into the purchase
price. Assessed objectively, that is not an agreement that the tenant did
have to pay rent in accordance with the terms of the residential tenancy
agreement. Simply, it notes that if settlement did occur,
any arrears at that
time would be adjusted into the purchase price.
tenant also referred vaguely to the Tribunal Member having a predetermined view.
However, there is nothing to indicate that the
tenant has an arguable ground of
appeal based on apprehended bias; or actual bias, or any other inappropriate
intervention by the
Appeal Panel is not satisfied that arguable grounds of appeal are
demonstrated.
Would There Be Harm or Prejudice to the Tenant If
The Stay Was Not Granted That Would Not Be Repaired By a Successful
Appeal Panel is satisfied that if the Stay is refused and the landlord executes
the warrant and takes possession that the appeal
will be rendered nugatory or
futile because a successful appeal will not likely restore the tenancy. However,
that, of itself, is
not sufficient to grant a Stay.
Convenience
Appeal Panel is not satisfied the balance of convenience is in favour of
granting a Stay. The only condition the tenant has put
forward is to pay an
occupation fee. However, as the landlord’s agent pointed out, there is no
evidence to indicate this condition
would likely be complied with, in
circumstances where the tenant has not made any payments to the landlord since
May 2025. Further,
the tenant did not offer to pay back any amount of the rent
arrears. The arrears are clearly significant.
tenant also did not provide any evidence of hardship or other matters to
consider regarding the balance of convenience. No evidence
was provided as to
who is living in the residential premises; or that the tenant (or any other
occupant) has any particular medical,
disability or hardship issues that would
cause homelessness if the landlord executed the warrant. There is no evidence
the tenant,
or any other person, could not obtain alternative accommodation,
including rental accommodation.
tenant has failed to establish the necessary grounds to grant a
(1) The application for a Stay is dismissed.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (308 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter