URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSIRADRS/2020/252.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:13:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AQZ v GIO (Merit Review) [2020] NSWSIRADRS 252 (3 November 2020)
AQZ v GIO (Merit Review)
NSWSIRADRS 252
NSW DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICE (NSWDRS)
Merit Review
Merit Review – reviewable decision affirmed - legal costs for a
medical assessment of minor injury – likely prospects
of success –
time expended by legal representatives – Insurer’s offer appropriate
Legislation Cited
Motor Accident Injuries Act
, Schedule 1
Cases Cited
AQZ – Claimant
GIO– Insurer
This decision has been edited to remove all Unique Personal
Identification including the name of the Claimant
Merit Review
Date of Accident:
21 July 2018
Suncorp Group Limited trading as GIO
Insurer Claim Number:
DRS Reference:
APP-10335566
Date of reviewable decision:
4 August 2020
Nature of reviewable decision:
Recovery of legal costs
Merit Reviewer:
Tajan Baba(DRS)
Date of certificate:
27 November 2020
Certificate
Issued under
section 7.13(4)
Motor Accident Injuries Act
Insurer’s reviewable decision dated 4 August 2020 is affirmed:
The Insurer is to pay AQZ’s legal costs in the amount of $1,100.00
(inclusive of GST) in respect to the medical assessment
of minor injury (medical
assessment certificate dated 3 March 2020).
date: This determination takes effect on 27 November 2020.
reasons for this decision are attached to this certificate.
Merit Reviewer and Claims Assessor Dispute Resolution
Claimant: AQZ
Reference: APP-10335566
REASONS FOR DECISION – MERIT REVIEW
Issued in accordance with Schedule 2 of the
Accident Injuries Act
was injured in a motor vehicle accident on 21 July 2018.
Group Limited trading as GIO (“the Insurer”) accepted AQZ’s
claim under the
Motor Accidents Injuries Act
Insurer made a decision on 21 November 2018 to decline liability for statutory
benefits after 26 weeks of AQZ’s claim on
the basis that she suffered a
‘minor injury’ for the purposes of the Act. AQZ’s legal
representatives, CMC Lawyers,
lodged an application for internal review. On
internal review, the Insurer affirmed its decision by way of notice dated 13
disputed the Insurer’s decision and lodged an application for medical
assessment with the Dispute Resolution Service (“DRS”)
November 2019.
referred AQZ for a medical assessment with Assessor Dr Alan Home. Assessor Home
determined in a certificate dated 3 March 2020
that the injuries AQZ sustained
in the motor accident was a ‘minor injury’ for the purposes of the
legal representatives subsequently issued a tax invoice to the Insurer for
recovery of legal costs in the amount of $1,826.17
(inclusive of GST).
Insurer did not make payment of the invoice. In an email dated 4 August 2020,
the Insurer offered payment of legal costs in the
sum of $1,000.00 (exclusive of
GST). This is the ‘reviewable decision’ for the purposes of the Act.
The issue in dispute
is whether AQZ is entitled to recover from the Insurer the
legal costs incurred pursuant to section 8.10 of the Act.
note that clause 10(d) of the Regulations excludes disputes arising under
section 8.10 of the Act from the requirement for internal
legal representatives lodged an application with the DRS on 21 September 2020,
referring the dispute in relation to legal
costs. The application was accepted
and falls within the jurisdiction of the DRS as a merit review matter under
Schedule 2(1)(aa)
of the Act.
DOCUMENTS CONSIDERED
10. I have considered the documents provided in the
application and the reply and any further information and submissions provided
by the parties.
LEGISLATION
11. In conducting my review, I have considered the
following legislation and guidelines:
Accident Injuries Act
(NSW) (“the Act”)
Motor Accident
Guidelines 2017 (as amended on 20 December 2019) (“the Guidelines”)
Accident Injuries Amendment Regulation
(NSW) (“the
Regulations”).
SUBMISSIONS
the application for merit review, AQZ’s legal representatives provide a
background to the dispute and make the following
submissions on AQZ’s
disagrees with the amount of $1,000.00 put forward by the Insurer, noting that
the work undertaken by AQZ’s legal representatives
in relation to the
claim totals $8,369.00.
legal representatives refer to Section 8.10 of the Act and provide an extract of
section 8.10(1).
is submitted that given that the request of $1,826.17 is significantly less than
that of the legal representatives’ time
sheet, this amount is fair in the
circumstances.
Insurer makes, in summary, the following submissions in its reply:
injured persons have a right to have medical disputes determined by a medical
assessor, there is no automatic entitlement to
recover legal costs, particularly
the maximum amount of legal costs in matters such as this.
noted that the AQZ’s legal representatives provided brief and generalised
submissions in the application for medical assessment.
The submissions do not
articulate how AQZ meets the criteria for a non-minor injury, as set out in the
Act. Further, AQZ’s
legal representatives did not provide reasons as to
how the subject evidence would undertake the effect of altering the outcome of
the dispute, as decided at internal review level. It is noted that the DRS
medical assessment certificate affirmed the Insurer’s
classifying AQZ’s injuries as minor.
AQZ was not under a legal disability and no exceptional circumstances exist in
this matter that would justify payment of
legal costs incurred by AQZ.
August 2020, the Insurer contacted AQZ’s legal representatives to try and
negotiate legal costs at $1000.00 plus GST. The
Insurer advised in their
communication that this offer had been calculated after considering the amount
of time AQZ’s legal
representatives would have invested in arranging a
client consultation, reviewing the internal review outcome, preparing the DRS
application and submissions. However, to date the Insurer has not received a
response or a counteroffer to attempt to negotiate costs.
Merit Reviewer should only make a minimal allowance for costs in relation to
this dispute. Given the level of submissions/reasons
provided and overall
consideration put into the application, it would not be appropriate to award the
maximum costs claimed. The
Insurer is of the view that maximum costs should be
awarded in circumstances where a claimant’s solicitor has put significant
and justified time and effort into the application. In this instance, there were
very brief submissions attached to the application
and no references as to why
the medical assessor should prefer the AQZ’s medical evidence.
it is the Insurer’s submission that it is not in line with the objects of
the Act to award the maximum amount of
legal costs.
issue in dispute between the parties is AQZ’s entitlement to legal costs
relating to the medical assessment of minor injury,
determined in Assessor Alan
found in this certificate
that the injury suffered by AQZ resulting from the
motor accident, was a minor injury for the purposes of the Act.
8.3 of the Act provides for the fixing of maximum costs recoverable by
Australian legal practitioners. Section 8.10(1) provides
that a claimant for
statutory benefits is (subject to that section) entitled to recover from the
insurer ‘reasonable and necessary’
costs and expenses incurred in
connection with the claim. This is qualified by subsections (3) and (4) which
provide that the recovery
of costs is allowed if payment is permitted by the
Regulations or the DRS.
1, Part 1(2)(1) of the Regulations fixes the maximum amount recoverable per
medical assessment matter at 16 monetary units
(currently equalling $1,660.16).
It provides:
The maximum costs for legal services provided to a
claimant or an insurer in connection with a medical assessment under Division
of the Act, as allowed by the claims assessor or court, are 16 monetary
units (to a maximum of 60 monetary units per claim).
this matter, AQZ’s legal representatives issued a tax invoice to the
Insurer dated 15 July 2020, for recovery of legal costs
in the amount of
$1,826.17 (inclusive of GST). I note that this is the maximum amount provided
above, with the inclusion of GST.
Insurer did not make payment of the invoice but sent an email to AQZ’s
legal representatives on 4 August 2020 and offered
payment of legal costs in the
sum of $1,000.00 plus GST. This is the ‘reviewable decision’ for the
purposes of the Act.
DRS has jurisdiction to determine disputes arising in relation to costs as merit
review matters under Schedule 2 of the Act, where
agreement between the parties
in relation to costs cannot be reached. The dispute is outlined at clause 1(aa)
whether for the purposes of section 8.10 (Recovery of
costs and expenses in relation to claims for statutory benefits) the costs and
expenses incurred by AQZ are reasonable and necessary.
the email dated 4 August 2020, the Insurer advised:
The reason we
have put forward this amount is because we have considered the amount of time
invested in arranging a consultation,
reviewing the internal review outcome,
preparing the DRS application form and drafting submissions. Additionally, I
note that the
DRS application was unmeritorious as the Claimant’s physical
injuries were determined to be a minor injury.
review of the application for medical assessment I note that it contains
submissions, more than half a page in length, providing
a background to the
dispute and referring the dispute for medical assessment. A list of the injuries
be referred for assessment is
provided and it is stated that “The claimant
submits her injury is not a minor injury”.
Insurer makes a number of submissions in relation to AQZ’s legal
representatives providing brief and generalised submissions.
I acknowledge these
submissions and that the submissions do not address the medical evidence and how
AQZ’s injury is though
to have met the definition for a minor injury under
also acknowledge that AQZ’s injury was ultimately determined to be a minor
injury by Assessor Home, and accordingly was not
a ‘successful’
application.
having regard to the reasonable prospects of success of the application for
medical assessment, I note that while the medical
information available at the
time did not indicate the presence of radiculopathy, the results of a CT scan of
the cervical spine
dated 21 August 2018 indicated a number of issues. Assessor
– superimposed upon underlying degenerative change”.
the number of injuries referred for assessment and the medical complexity of
the cervical spine injury, it is reasonable that
a legal practitioner would be
unable to make the same distinction as the medical assessor and that a
determination as to whether
the injury is a minor injury under the Act may not
have been easily ascertainable for Assessor Home.
this case, it is reasonable that the likely prospects of success of the
application for medical assessment would not have been
clear to AQZ’s
legal representatives. For the same reason, making detailed submissions as to
how the injury satisfied the criteria
for minor injury under the Act would also
be onerous.
that the reasonable prospects of success of the application for medical
assessment may not have been clear to AQZ’s legal
representatives, and
considering the time expended by AQZ’s legal representatives in consulting
with AQZ, reviewing and considering
the available information and internal
review decision and preparing the application and submissions, I consider some
costs are reasonable
and necessary in this matter.
legal representatives make submissions in relation to their total costs for work
undertaken in the claim totalling $8,369.00
and have submitted a timesheet dated
21 September 2020 reflecting this. However, I note that this timesheet relates
to the total
costs of the claim to date, from initial instructions taken in
September 2018. The scope of this review, under Schedule 2(1)(aa)
of the Act, is
merit review of a dispute about whether for the purposes of section 8.10
(Recovery of costs and expenses in relation
claims for statutory
) the costs and expenses incurred by AQZ are reasonable and
necessary. The claim for statutory benefits in dispute in this matter
incurred in respect of the medical assessment. Accordingly, I am only able to
consider costs associated with the medical
assessment of minor injury.
further costs outlined in the timesheet, which makes up the sum of $8,369.00,
are costs that can be considered in a claims assessment.
noted above, the Insurer considers $1,000.00 to be an appropriate amount for
costs for the costs associated with the medical assessment
and made an offer for
this amount to AQZ.
considering the appropriate costs in this matter, having regard to the brief and
somewhat general nature of the submissions made,
as well as the ultimate outcome
of AQZ’s application, I do not consider the recovery of maximum costs of
$1,660.16 is reasonable
and necessary. I do consider some costs are reasonably
incurred however for the tasks noted above and outlined in the timesheet
by AQZ’s legal representatives.
my discretion and experience, I consider legal costs of $1,000.00, as offered by
the Insurer, are an appropriate amount for
costs in this matter.
allow costs in the amount of $1,100.00 (inclusive of GST) in respect to the
medical assessment of minor injury in AQZ’s claim.
DETERMINATION
Insurer’s reviewable decision dated 4 August 2020 is affirmed:
The Insurer is to pay AQZ’s legal costs in the amount of $1,100.00
(inclusive of GST) in respect to the medical assessment
of minor injury (medical
assessment certificate dated 3 March 2020).
date: This determination takes effect on 27 November 2020.
Tajan Baba (DRS)
Merit Reviewer
Dispute Resolution Service
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (26.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter