URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/2025/1344.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:12:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Boyded Industries Pty Ltd & Anor v Heartland One Pty Ltd & Ors [2025] NSWSC 1344 (14 November 2025)
Supreme Court
New South Wales
Boyded Industries Pty Ltd & Anor v Heartland One Pty Ltd &
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWSC 1344
Hearing Date(s):
8-11 and 15-19 September 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
1. Direct that the parties are to bring in short minutes of order by 5pm on
28 November 2025 to give effect to the reasons for judgment.
Direct that, in the event the parties are unable to agree on orders to give
effect to the reasons for judgment, the parties are
to exchange and provide to
the Associate to Nixon J, by 5pm on 28 November 2025, the orders which each
party proposes and submissions
(limited to 5 pages) on those orders, indicating
whether, and if so why, an oral hearing is requested to deal with the matters in
Catchwords:
TRUSTS – whether directors of trustee resolved to amend trust deed
and to approve appointment of a new appointor – whether
amendment was
outside power – whether appointor exercised power to appoint a supervisor
for an improper purpose – whether
supervisor exercised power to remove and
replace trustee upon real and genuine consideration – whether appointments
of appointor,
supervisor and replacement trustee were invalid and of no
EMPLOYMENT – where employment of chief executive
officer terminated on payment of five weeks’ pay in lieu of notice –
whether employment governed by written executive employment agreement –
whether a mutual intention to abandon or vary the terms
of the written agreement
is imputed to the parties – whether employment could only be terminated on
reasonable notice –
whether employer breached implied obligations of good
faith and reasonableness – whether there were grounds for summary
CONTRACT – offer and acceptance – where
parties exchanged emails regarding the terms of a proposed bonus in return for
the successful implementation of a strategy to develop pubs – whether
there was a binding agreement as to this “hospitality
CORPORATIONS – Oppression – whether the
affairs of group of companies were conducted in a manner oppressive to minority
shareholder – whether there was a strategy to remove minority shareholder
as chief executive officer and as a director of operating
entities for purpose
of persuading him to agree to sell shares – whether there was commercial
unfairness in removing minority
shareholder from those roles
Legislation Cited:
Corporations Act 2001
Evidence Act 1995
Fair Work Act 2009
Cases Cited:
Adventure World Travel Pty Ltd v Newsom
(2014) 86 NSWLR 515
[2014] NSWCA
Australian Institute of Fitness Pty Ltd v Australian Institute of Fitness
(Vic/Tas) Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2015] NSWSC 1639
Baba v Sheehan
[2021] NSWCA
Blythe Chemicals Ltd v Bushnell
(1933) 49 CLR 66
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Browne v Dunn (1893) 6 R
Burger King Corporation v Hungry Jack's Pty Ltd
(2001) 69 NSWLR 558
[2001] NSWCA 187
Campbell v Backoffice Investments Pty Ltd
(2009) 238 CLR
[2009] HCA 25
Catalano v Managing Australia Destinations Pty Ltd
Commissioner of Taxation (Cth) v Sara Lee Household & Body Care
(Australia) Pty Ltd
(2000) 201 CLR 520
[2000] HCA 35
Commonwealth Bank
of Australia v Barker
(2014) 253 CLR 169
[2014] HCA 32
Concut Pty Ltd v
[2000] HCA 64
Cordon Investments Pty Ltd v Lesdor Properties Pty
[2012] NSWCA 184
David & Ros Carr Holdings Pty Ltd v Ritossa
Easling v Mahoney Insurance Brokers
(2001) 78 SASR 489
ET-China.com International Holdings Ltd v Cheung
(2021) 388 ALR 128
[2021] NSWCA 24
Fexuto Pty Ltd v Bosnjak Holdings Pty Ltd
(1998) 28 ACSR
[1998] NSWSC 413
Fexuto v Bosnjak
[2001] NSWCA 97
Telstra Super Pty Ltd
(2010) 242 CLR 254
[2010] HCA 36
Fitzwood Pty Ltd v
Unique Goal Pty Ltd
(2001) 188 ALR 566
[2001] FCA 1628
Fox v Percy
214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
Goozee v Graphic World Group Holdings Pty Ltd
[2002] NSWSC 640
In the matter of Heartland Group Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC
In the matter of Heartland Group Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 875
matter of Mobius Distilling Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2025] NSWSC 539
[2025] NSWCA 31
Karger v Paul
[1984] VicRp 13
[1984] VR 161
Lancedale Holdings Pty
Ltd v Health Group Australasia Pty Ltd
[1999] NSWSC 609
McClelland v Northern
Ireland General Health Services Board
[1957] 1 WLR 595
Mercanti v Mercanti
[2015] WASC 297
Mercanti v Mercanti
(2016) 50 WAR 495
[2016] WASCA
Millsave Holdings Pty Ltd v Connective Group Pty Ltd
(2023) 75 VR
[2023] VSCA 326
Montevento Holdings Pty Ltd v Scaffidi
(2012) 246 CLR
[2012] HCA 48
Morgan v 45 Flers Avenue Pty
(1986) 10 ACLR 692
Moubarak by his tutor Coorey v Holt
[2019] NSWCA 102
Munstermann v Rayward; Rayward v Munstermann
[2017] NSWSC 133
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
New South Wales Cancer Council v Sarfaty
(1992) 28 NSWLR 68
South Wales Rugby League Ltd v Wayde
(1985) 1 NSWLR 86
[1999] UKHL 24
[1999] 1 WLR 1092
v Vergottis [1968] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 403
Onefone Australia Pty
Ltd v One.Tel Ltd
[2010] NSWSC 1120
Owies v JJE Nominees Pty Ltd (in its
capacity as the trustee for the Owies Family Trust)
[2022] VSCA
Quinn v Jack Chia (Australia) Ltd
[1992] VicRp 37
[1992] 1 VR 567
Vestey’s Settlement
[1951] Ch D 209
Re Dernacourt Investments Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 588
Re Heartland Group
[2025] NSWSC 367
Re Heartland Group
[2024] NSWSC 875
Re Norvabron Pty Ltd (No 2)
(1986) 11 ACLR
Renard Constructions (ME) Pty Ltd v Minister for Public Works
Sangha v Baxter
[2009] NSWCA 78
Scaffidi v Montevento Holdings
[2011] WASCA 146
Shepherd v Felt and Textiles of Australia Ltd (1931)
45 CLR 359;
[1931] HCA 21
Spartalis v BMD Constructions Pty Ltd
120 SASR 575
[2014] SASCFC 124
Steinberg v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1975) 134 CLR 640
[1975] HCA 63
Sunbird Plaza Pty Ltd v Maloney
[1988] HCA 11
Tallerman and Company Proprietary Ltd v Nathan’s
Merchandise (Victoria) Proprietary Ltd
(1957) 98 CLR 93
Thacker v Key
[1869] UKLawRpEq 131
(1869) LR 8 Eq 408
Tobin v Ezekiel
(2012) 83 NSWLR
[2012] NSWCA 285
Tomanovic v Global Mortgage Equity Corp Pty
[2011] NSWCA 104
Turner v Richards
[2025] NSWCA 83
Tzavaras & Sons Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 168
Watson v Foxman
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR
Wayde v New South Wales Rugby League Ltd
(1985) 180 CLR
[1985] HCA 68
Westpac Banking Corporation v Wittenberg
[2016] FCAFC 33
Principal judgment
Boyded Industries Pty Ltd (First Plaintiff)
Heartland Motors
Pty Ltd (Second Plaintiff)
Chicago Properties Pty Ltd (Third
Heartland One Pty Ltd (First Defendant)
Kieran Turner
(Second Defendant)
Anthony Turner (Third
Cross-Claim
Kieran Turner (First
Cross-Claimant)
Turnercorp Pty Ltd (Second Cross-Claimant)
Heartland One
Pty Ltd (Third Cross-Claimant)
Joanne Marie Richards (First
Cross-Defendant)
Bernice Melinda Hooker (Second Cross-Defendant)
Pty ltd (Third Cross-Defendant)
Bernley Corporation Pty Ltd (Fourth
Cross-Defendant)
Heartland Group Pty Ltd (Fifth Cross-Defendant)
Industries Pty Ltd (Sixth Cross-Defendant)
Chicago Properties Pty Ltd
(Seventh Cross-Defendant)
BGW Nominees Pty Ltd (Eighth
Cross-Defendant)
Heartland Motors Pty Ltd (Ninth
Cross-Defendant)
Heartland Blacktown Pty Ltd (Tenth
Cross-Defendant)
Heartland Penrith Pty Ltd (Eleventh Cross-Defendant)
Parts Pty Ltd (Twelfth Cross-Defendant)
Rossfield Nominees Pty Ltd
(Thirteenth Cross-Defendant)
T S Management Pty ltd (Fourteenth
Cross-Defendant)
Sallyann Marie Turner (Fifteenth Cross-Defendant)
Representation:
M Ashhurst SC / A R Langshaw (Plaintiffs/Cross-Defendants)
R Elliott SC / D G Healey
(Defendants/Cross-Claimants)
Solicitors:
MinterEllison
(Plaintiffs/Cross-Defendants)
McCabes (Defendants/Cross-Claimants)
File Number(s):
2025/176273
Publication Restriction:
proceeding concerns a group of companies known as the “
Heartland Motors
”, which operates a car sales business. The ultimate holding
company of the Heartland Motors Group is
Heartland Motors Group
was founded by the late Mr Bernard George Webb. Mr
Webb had three daughters: Ms Joanne Richards, Ms Bernice Hooker and the late Ms
Kathryn Turner.
proceeding is the latest instalment in a long-running dispute between, on the
one hand, Ms Richards and Ms Hooker and, on the
other, Mr Kieran Turner and Mr
Anthony Turner (who are children of Ms Turner).
estates of Ms Turner and her late mother, Ms Dulcie Webb, have significant
shareholdings in BG Webb, which have not yet been distributed.
It was common
ground that such distribution will occur and that, upon completion, the
shareholdings in BG Webb will be as follows:
(1) Ms Richards will hold 320 shares (approximately 30%);
(2) Ms Hooker will hold 320 shares (approximately 30%);
(3) Turnercorp
Pty Ltd, a company of which Mr Kieran Turner is the sole
director and shareholder, will continue to hold 108 shares (approximately
(4) Mr Kieran Turner will hold 80 shares (approximately 7.5%);
(5) Mr Anthony Turner (the brother of Mr Kieran Turner) will hold 80 shares;
(6) Mr Ben Turner (who is also the brother of Mr Kieran Turner) will hold 80
shares; and
(7) Ms Sallyanne Turner (who is the sister of Mr Kieran Turner) will hold 80
avoid confusion, I will refer to Mr Kieran Turner below as
to his siblings, where relevant, by their full names.
Webb holds all of the issued shares in
Corporation Pty Ltd which,
in turn, holds 599 of the 600 issued shares in
Heartland Group
The remaining share in Heartland Group is held by
Industries Pty
Ltd (which is itself a subsidiary of Heartland Group).
directors of each of BG Webb, Bernley and Heartland Group are Ms Richards,
Ms Hooker and Mr Turner.
Group holds all of the issued shares in the following companies, which largely
comprise the operating entities of the Heartland
Motors Group:
(1) Rossfield Nominees
(A.C.T.) Pty Ltd;
(2) T S Management
(3) BGW Nominees
(4) HMG Parts
(5) Boyded;
(6) Heartland Motors
(7) Heartland Blacktown
Pty Ltd; and
(8) Heartland Penrith
Operating Entities
early May 2025, Ms Richards and Ms Hooker have been the directors of each of the
Operating Entities.
chart showing the structure of the Heartland Motors Group is attached as
Annexure A to this judgment.
of the main issues for determination in this proceeding is whether Boyded was,
on 30 April 2025, validly removed and replaced
as trustee of the Rossfield Group
RG Trust is a discretionary trust that was established by way of a Deed of
Settlement dated 28 March 1980 (
RG Trust Deed
). Its assets
(1) a portfolio of shares listed on the Australian Stock Exchange;
(2) real property at the following locations in New South Wales:
(a) folio identifier 10/201177, known as 8 Romford Road, Kings Park;
(b) folio identifier 11018-239, known as 206 Hume Highway, Greenacre;
(c) folio identifier 1/127943, known as 220 Hume Highway, Greenacre;
(d) folio identifier 100/1007863, known as 196 Sunnyholt Road, Kings Park;
(e) folio identifier 32/1180330, known as 2166 Castlereagh Road, Penrith;
(f) folio identifier 89/137508, known as 130 Sunnyholt Road, Blacktown;
(g) folio identifier 1/582182, known as 2 Steel Street, Blacktown;
(h) folio identifier 52/1060302, known as 1 Packard Avenue, Castle Hill;
(i) folio identifier 1/1293988, known as 277-283 Hume Highway, Greenacre;
(j) folio identifier 1/511595, known as 43 Edgar Street, Maroubra;
(k) folio identifiers 22/548100 and 23/548100, known as 97 Glossop Street, North
St Marys; and
(l) folio identifier 30/SP20856, known as Seascape, 53 Bay Street, Tweed Heads;
(3) cash and other financial assets; and
(4) the issued shares in
Chicago Properties
Pty Ltd and the issued units
Chicago Unit Trust
, of which Chicago Properties is trustee.
Chicago Unit Trust owns real property located at 18 Chicago Avenue in Blacktown,
NSW. This site is partly occupied by the head
office of the Heartland Motors
Blacktown Office
) and otherwise consists of premises leased to
third parties.
claim brought by the Plaintiffs (Boyded, Heartland Motors and Chicago
Properties) concerns steps taken by Mr Turner and his brother,
Turner, for the purpose of removing Boyded as trustee of the RG Trust and
appointing the First Defendant,
Heartland One
Pty Ltd, as trustee.
Heartland One is an entity of which Mr Turner is the sole director and
shareholder. The Plaintiffs contend that
those steps were invalid and of no
effect, and seek declarations that, inter alia, Boyded remains the trustee of
the RG Trust.
early May 2025, shortly after Ms Richards and Ms Hooker learned of the purported
removal and replacement of Boyded as trustee of
the RG Trust, Mr Turner was
removed as a director of the Operating Entities and his employment as Chief
Executive Officer (
) of the Heartland Motors Group was terminated. At
around the same time, Mr Anthony Turner’s employment as Chief Operating
was also terminated.
their Cross-Claim, Mr Turner and Turnercorp:
(1) allege that Mr Turner’s employment as CEO was not “validly and
effectively” terminated, and seek damages for
breach of his employment
contract; and
(2) allege that, principally by reason of the events surrounding the termination
of Mr Turner’s employment as CEO and his removal
as a director of each of
the Operating Entities, the affairs of the Heartland Motors Group have been
conducted in a manner that is
contrary to the interests of the members of BG
Webb as a whole, or oppressive to, unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly
discriminatory
against the Cross-Claimants, within the meaning of
Corporations Act 2001
proceeding came on for hearing on an expedited basis. The Cross-Claimants were
unable to complete their expert evidence on the
issue of relief before the
commencement of the hearing. Neither party sought an adjournment of the hearing
in order to allow this
evidence to be completed. Instead, the parties agreed
that the Court should proceed to hear and determine all issues with the
of any orders for relief in respect of the Cross-Claim. This was done
on the basis that, if the Court determined that the Cross-Claimants
succeeded on
either the breach of contract claim or the oppression claim, there would need to
be a separate hearing dealing with,
for example, damages for the breach of Mr
Turner’s employment contract, or the valuation of the shares in BG Webb
and the appropriate
relief for any oppressive conduct.
section of the judgment provides an overview of the factual background to these
proceedings, including the history of litigation
between the parties. Particular
factual issues that are contested between the parties are dealt with separately
below, when addressing
the parties’ claims.
management of Heartland Motors Group
business of the Heartland Motors Group was originally established in the 1960s
by Mr Bernard Webb, together with Mr John Down
and members of the Auswild
family. Mr Down appears to have left the business in its early stages.
18 February 1998, Mr Webb passed away. From that time until around 2009, the
Heartland Motors Group was owned and controlled by
members of Mr Webb’s
family and members of the Auswild family.
1998, Ms Richards was appointed as a director of various entities within the
Heartland Motors Group, including BG Webb, Bernley,
Boyded, Heartland Group,
Rossfield Nominees and T S Management. Ms Richards has remained a director of
those entities since that
time and has subsequently been appointed as a director
of the remaining Operating Entities.
Motors Group while he completed university. Following
a brief period spent
studying abroad and subsequently working for an accounting firm, he returned to
the Heartland Motors Group and
was employed in various administrative, and later
executive, roles from 2003 to 2009.
whether Mr Turner ought to be appointed as the CEO
of the Heartland Motors
Group. This dispute was resolved on the basis that the Auswilds ceased their
involvement in the Group.
May 2009, Mr Turner was appointed as CEO of the Heartland Motors Group. Around
that time, a parcel of shares in BG Webb was issued
to Turnercorp, which
represented around 10% of the shares then on issue. The other 90% of the shares
was held, as to around 22.5%
each, by Mr Webb’s three children (Ms
Richards, Ms Hooker and Ms Turner) and by Mr Webb’s widow (Ms Dulcie
Events concerning the Parramatta Sale
2017, there was a dispute between the parties regarding the distribution of the
proceeds of the sale of a substantial property
in Parramatta that was owned by
the RG Trust. This sale was structured so as to complete in two
“tranches”, involving
a payment of $50m followed by a payment of
until this point in time, distributions from the RG Trust had generally been
made in proportion to the shareholdings in BG Webb.
However, for at least the
first tranche of the Parramatta sale proceeds, it was agreed that there would be
a departure from the usual
course, with distributions instead being made to the
eight grandchildren of Mr Webb (being the two children of Ms Richards, the two
children of Ms Hooker and the four children of Ms Turner).
dispute which subsequently arose in early 2017 concerned:
(1) whether it had been agreed that Turnercorp would receive 10% of the sale
proceeds, prior to the remaining 90% being split equally
between the eight
grandchildren (including Mr Turner);
(2) whether it had been agreed that both tranches of the Parramatta sale
proceeds (or only the first) would be split in this way;
(3) whether it had been agreed that the proceeds of the sale of another property
which the RG Trust owned at Lakemba, NSW, would
be distributed in the same
manner as the Parramatta sale proceeds.
address this dispute below. For present purposes, it is sufficient to note that
there was a heated disagreement on this issue (with
Mr Turner accusing
Ms Richards of being “a shit stirrer” and complaining about his
aunts “craft[ing] up these lies
and gossip about poison”), and that
the dispute appears to have contributed to a deterioration in the relationship
Ms Richards and Mr Turner.
Documents relating
to Mr Turner’s appointment as Appointor
March 2017, Mr Turner was informed that there was currently no Appointor of the
RG Trust, by reason that the Appointor nominated
in the RG Trust Deed was a
company which had since been deregistered. Mr Turner instructed the
Group’s solicitors, HWL Ebsworth
), to prepare the necessary
documentation for the appointment of himself as the Appointor of the RG Trust.
24 April 2017, HWLE sent Mr Turner a draft Deed Poll to vary the RG Trust Deed
and a draft minute of a meeting of the directors
of Boyded. The draft minute
contained a resolution approving Boyded’s entry into the Deed Poll and
approving Mr Turner’s
appointment as the Appointor of the RG Trust.
will return to the balance of the correspondence exchanged between
Mr Turner and HWLE below, when dealing with the Plaintiffs’
concerning the RG Trust.
Turner contends that the board of Boyded passed a resolution in the terms
drafted by HWLE at a meeting on 1 May 2017, which was
attended by himself (in
person) and Ms Richards (by telephone), and that he was therefore validly
appointed to the office of Appointor
of the RG Trust. The Plaintiffs dispute
that any such meeting took place and that Ms Richards gave her approval for this
appointment.
21 July 2017, Mr Turner sent signed documents to HWLE relating to his
appointment as Appointor. Several days later, he departed
to Biarritz, France,
where he remained on an extended sabbatical for a period of around
Events in 2019
Mr Turner’s return from France in early February 2019, he informed the
other shareholders that he intended to leave
the business and to sell
Turnercorp’s shares in BG Webb. The relevant events were the subject of
factual findings made in a
prior proceeding in this Court between the parties
Re Heartland Group Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 875
key events were as follows:
(1) Mr Turner offered to sell his 10% share in BG Webb for an amount of around
(2) the other shareholders rejected this offer on the basis that it exceeded the
value of Mr Turner’s shares by “many
multiples”, but indicated
that they were open to selling the entirety of the business to a third party;
(3) Mr Turner indicated that he was in discussions with a third party who was
interested in purchasing only his shares;
(4) the other shareholders responded that they were concerned about a third
party having a role in the management of their family
business; and
(5) although Mr Turner indicated that he would pursue such a sale (and
circulated a resolution to approve this sale), no such transaction
eventuated,
with Mr Turner stating that his buyer had “walked”.
this period, the communications between the parties were characterised by an
increasing level of hostility. For example, on
18 March 2019, Mr Turner accused
Ms Richards of being “foolish”, and said: “I am exiting the
business because of
you and yet here you are trapping me in. Very strange,
although not unusual ... you will regret this.”
in 2021-2022: Buyout Offer and Litigation Commences
3 June 2021, Ms Kathryn Turner passed away.
November 2021, there was a board meeting at which Ms Richards told
Mr Turner that the other shareholders wished to sell. Mr Turner
that “he wasn’t a seller”, but agreed that it was
“okay” for them to speak with Mr Nick Politis,
who owned a number of
car dealerships.
afterwards, Ms Richards and her mother met with Mr Politis, who indicated that
he was not interested in purchasing only their
shares (and thereby being in
business with Mr Turner), but “would be interested in buying the whole
group”. Mr Turner
later informed Mr Politis that the Turner family had no
plans on selling, and this appears to have brought an end to those
negotiations.
26 December 2021, Ms Dulcie Webb passed away
noted above, it is common ground between the parties that, when the estates of
Ms Turner and Ms Webb are fully distributed (which
has not yet occurred), each
of Ms Richards and Ms Hooker will hold around 30% of the shares in BG Webb, Mr
Turner will hold around
17.5% (including the 10% interest held by Turnercorp),
and each of Mr Turner’s three siblings will hold around 7.5%.
1 April 2022, Mr Turner made an offer to purchase each of Ms Hooker’s and
Ms Richards’ shares in BG Webb for a total
price of approximately $45m. He
stated that this represented “the approximate net sale price as you would
have received if
Nick Politis bought the whole group for c$150m”.
26 May 2022, Ms Richards issued a notice of an Extraordinary General Meeting of
BG Webb to be held on 29 June 2022 (
2022 EGM Notice
), for the purpose of
considering resolutions to increase the number of directors from two to three,
and to appoint Ms Hooker as a
director of BG Webb (in addition to
Ms Richards and Mr Turner).
1 June 2022, Mr Turner’s then solicitors, Madison Marcus, sent a letter to
Ms Richards’ solicitors, demanding that
the 2022 EGM Notice be withdrawn,
failing which Mr Turner would apply to this Court seeking injunctive relief. The
matters raised
by the letter included that Ms Hooker had no experience as a
company director and no experience within the automotive industry, and
appointment would put at risk the various franchise agreements which the Group
had with car manufacturers (
Manufacturers
Richards refused to withdraw the 2022 EGM Notice.
27 June 2022, Mr Turner and Turnercorp commenced a proceeding in this Court (the
2022 Oppression Proceeding
(1) an interim injunction restraining Ms Richards and Ms Hooker from
proposing any resolution to change the board of BG Webb; and
(2) final relief pursuant to
of the Act for alleged oppressive conduct.
28 June 2022, Hammerschlag CJ in Eq refused the application for interlocutory
relief in the 2022 Oppression Proceeding.
29 June 2022, the Extraordinary General Meeting was held, and Ms Hooker was
appointed as a director of BG Webb.
Turner commenced a further proceeding against Ms Richards and Ms Hooker in
this Court on 5 July 2022, in relation to Ms Dulcie
Webb’s estate (the
2022 Estate Proceeding
), seeking, inter alia, an order that the grant of
probate be revoked and that he be appointed as administrator of Ms Webb’s
estate. The 2022 Estate Proceeding was subsequently settled.
26 August 2022, Mr Turner and Turnercorp discontinued the 2022 Oppression
Proceeding.
26 September 2022, Ms Hooker was appointed as a director of Bernley by a
resolution of the board of BG Webb.
Purported appointment of Mr
Anthony Turner as director of Operating Entities
6 December 2022, Mr Turner convened board meetings of various Operating Entities
within the Heartland Motors Group at which he
purported (over Ms Richards’
opposition) to pass resolutions appointing his brother, Mr Anthony Turner,
as a director of each
of those entities. Mr Turner claimed to be able to pass
such resolutions unilaterally, by reason that he had been appointed chairman
all of the companies in the Group and had a casting vote. (This contention was
subsequently rejected by this Court, both at first
instance and on appeal.)
3 February 2023, Mr Turner sent an email to Ms Richards, stating that she was
not to contact any staff member of the Heartland
Motors Group other than
himself, and that he had directed staff not to respond to any communications
May 2023, Mr Turner offered to purchase his aunts’ 60% interest in BG Webb
for around $53.86m. In July 2023, Ms Richards
and Ms Hooker indicated that they
were willing to proceed with a buy-out of their shares, but wanted $135m in cash
and properties
in return for their interest. Mr Turner responded shortly
afterwards, describing this offer as “ugly”, “risky”
“simply a joke”, and stated that “even my last offer is
outdated because we have had market changes since”.
In September 2023, Mr
Turner made a non-indicative binding offer to purchase his aunts’ 60%
interest for $47.34m in cash and
property (that is, around 10% lower than his
May 2023 offer). The buy-out negotiations seem to have stalled at this point in
May to July 2024: Attempt to remove Ms Richards as
director and subsequent litigation
23 May 2024, Mr Turner issued notices of Board meetings to be held on
30 May 2024 to consider resolutions for the removal of Ms
Richards as a
director of Boyded, Heartland Penrith, Heartland Blacktown and HMG Parts.
30 May 2024, Mr Turner and Mr Anthony Turner purported to pass those
resolutions, over Ms Richards’ opposition.
3 June 2024, Ms Richards and Ms Hooker commenced a proceeding in this Court
seeking declarations regarding the composition of the
boards of various entities
within the Heartland Motors Group (the
2024 Directors Proceeding
19 July 2024, Black J delivered reasons for judgment in the 2024 Directors
Proceeding, finding that Mr Anthony Turner had not been
validly appointed as a
director of various Operating Entities on 6 December 2022 (see paragraph [
] above) and that,
accordingly, the resolutions removing Ms Richards (which were passed with Mr
Anthony Turner’s vote) were
invalid and of no effect:
In the matter of
Heartland Group Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 875.
15 August 2024, the Court made declarations giving effect to those findings in
the 2024 Directors Proceeding:
In the matter of Heartland Group Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 1029.
25 July 2024, Ms Richards sent an email to Mr Turner stating that she and Ms
Hooker were “not sellers”, adding that:
“what we want is to
ensure the ongoing success of the Group for the family”.
Events from September 2024 to April 2025
12 September 2024, Mr Turner served a notice of intention to appeal from Black
J’s orders in the 2024 Directors Proceeding.
He subsequently filed a
summons seeking leave to appeal on 22 October 2024.
15 September 2024, Mr Turner executed a deed, by which he purported to exercise
his power as Appointor of the RG Trust to appoint
Mr Anthony Turner as
Supervisor of the RG Trust. The Plaintiffs dispute the validity of this
appointment.
8 November 2024, Mr Turner made a non-binding indicative offer to purchase his
aunts’ 60% interest in BG Webb for around
$47.344m. This was, in effect, a
restatement of the offer that he had previously made in September 2023 (see
paragraph [
3 February 2025, the board of Bernley passed resolutions, over Mr Turner’s
opposition, convening an Extraordinary General
Meeting of Heartland Group for 26
February 2025 (the
February 2025 EGM
), for the purpose of considering
resolutions to appoint Ms Hooker as a director of Heartland Group (and to
remove, to the extent
he was validly appointed, Mr Anthony Turner as a director
of Heartland Group).
25 February 2025, Mr Turner applied to the Federal Court for short service of an
application for an interlocutory injunction restraining
his aunts from proposing
any resolution at the February 2025 EGM to change the composition of the board
of Heartland Group (the
2025 Federal Court Proceeding
). In addition, Mr
Turner sought, in the 2025 Federal Court Proceeding, relief for alleged
oppressive conduct. Orders for short service
were made, but the application was
not served. The 2025 Federal Court Proceeding was discontinued on the following
26 February 2025, Mr Turner failed to attend, on behalf of Boyded, the February
2025 EGM, with the result that it was rendered
inquorate. (The two members of
Heartland Group were Bernley as to 99.83% and Boyded as to 0.17%.)
4 March 2025, Ms Richards commenced a proceeding in this Court seeking orders
pursuant to
of the Act for the convening of a further
Extraordinary General Meeting of Heartland Group, including a direction that a
representative of Bernley would constitute a quorum of members (the
2025 EGM Proceeding
26 March 2025, the Court of Appeal heard the appeal from the 2024 Directors
Proceeding (the
2025 Directors Appeal
), and judgment was reserved.
15 April 2025, the 2025 EGM Proceeding was heard. On 17 April 2025, Black J
delivered judgment in that proceeding and made orders
convening an Extraordinary
General Meeting of Heartland Group for 2 May 2025 (
May 2025 EGM
29 April 2025, the parties were informed that judgment in the 2025 Directors
Appeal would be delivered on 1 May 2025.
30 April 2025, a deed was executed by Mr Turner, on behalf of Heartland One, and
by Mr Anthony Turner, whereby Mr Anthony Turner
purported, as Supervisor of the
RG Trust, to remove Boyded as trustee of the RG Trust and to appoint Heartland
One in its place.
The Plaintiffs contend that the purported exercise of this
power by Mr Anthony Turner was invalid and of no effect.
1 May 2025, Mr Anthony Turner sent an email to Ms Richards attaching this deed,
and a document headed “Notice of Removal
and Appointment of Trustee”
which was addressed to Boyded and which required Boyded to transfer legal title
to all property
of the RG Trust to Heartland One.
terminated as CEO and removed as director of Operating Entities
1 May 2025, the Court of Appeal dismissed the 2025 Directors Appeal:
[2025] NSWCA 83.
2 May 2025, the May 2025 EGM was held, and resolutions were passed appointing Ms
Hooker as a director of Heartland Group.
5 and 6 May 2025, Heartland Group passed resolutions appointing Ms Hooker
as a director of each of Boyded, Heartland Motors and
BGW Nominees, and removing
Mr Turner as a director of each of those entities.
6 May 2025, the directors of Heartland Motors (being Ms Richards and
Ms Hooker) passed a resolution resolving to terminate Mr Turner’s
employment as CEO and Mr Anthony Turner’s employment as Chief Operating
Officer, and to appoint Mr Rohan Meyer as CEO. On the
same day, letters of
termination were sent to Mr Turner and Mr Anthony Turner.
on 6 May 2025, Ms Richards and Ms Hooker made an offer to purchase Mr
Turner’s and Turnercorp’s shares in BG Webb
for a cash amount of
$30m. The offer letter noted that Mr Turner’s offer in November 2024 of
$47.344m for his aunts’
60% interest implied a valuation of $13.44m for
the 17.5% interest held by himself and Turnercorp, and that the cash offer of
represented a 223% premium to that valuation. Mr Turner responded by
stating that Ms Richards and Ms Hooker had gone “rogue”
“lost control of the RGT [RG Trust]” (this being, apparently, a
reference to the removal of Boyded and appointment
of Heartland One).
7 May 2025, Heartland Group passed resolutions removing Mr Turner as a director
of Heartland Blacktown and Heartland Penrith, and
appointing Ms Hooker as a
director of each of those entities.
8 May 2025, the Plaintiffs commenced this proceeding seeking, inter alia,
declarations that Heartland One had not been validly
appointed as trustee of the
RG Trust and that Boyded remained the trustee, and that Mr Turner had been
validly removed as CEO.
15 May 2025, a meeting of Heartland Group was held, at which resolutions were
passed removing Mr Turner as a director of HMG Parts,
Rossfield Nominees and T S
Management, and appointing Ms Hooker as a director of each of those entities.
29 May 2025, Heartland One, Mr Turner and Mr Anthony Turner gave an undertaking
to the Court, pending further order, not to do,
or to resolve or determine to
do, the following:
“a. distribute, sell, transfer, dispose of, mortgage, encumber or
otherwise deal with, the assets of the [RG Trust] or any
interest therein
(whether it comprise capital or income);
b. interfere with the entry onto or occupation or use of the properties
described in Schedule 1 [being the various properties owned
16 June 2025, Mr Turner, Turnercorp and Heartland One brought the Cross-Claim
against Ms Richards, Ms Hooker and entities in the
Heartland Motors Group,
seeking, inter alia, damages for breach of Mr Turner’s employment contract
and relief for alleged oppressive
Witnesses –
of Ms Richards, Ms Hooker, Mr Turner and Mr Anthony Turner gave evidence, and
each was cross-examined.
cross-examination of each of Ms Richards and Mr Turner extended over several
Defendants submitted that Ms Richards had a poor memory, which “can be
conceived of in two ways”, namely:
“The first is a genuine failure to recall details, sometimes acknowledging
memory loss, other times not. The second is one
of convenience, remembering what
she wants to remember and forgetting the rest.”
the Defendants submitted that Ms Hooker had a poor memory, and that she had a
“pre-determination to answer questions
on a topic a particular way,
regardless of what documents were going to be shown to her”.
is not surprising, in circumstances where the events at issue extend back more
than eight years and concern a wide range of dealings
and transactions during
that period, that each of Ms Richards and Ms Hooker had a limited ability to
recall the detail of specific
events, or the specific order in which events
occurred, or their state of mind at particular points in time.
in circumstances where the main participants in these events have been in
dispute for a long time, including various court
proceedings over the past few
years, their recollections will be, consciously or unconsciously, affected by
the entrenched views
which each holds regarding the merit of their own position.
For example, Ms Richards acknowledged, in cross-examination, that as
a result of
her dealings and disputes with Mr Turner over the past eight years, her mind was
“poisoned” against him.
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315
at 319, McLelland CJ in
Eq made the following often-quoted observations regarding the fallibility of
human memory, particularly when
disputes intervene:
“...human memory of what was said in a conversation is fallible for a
variety of reasons, and ordinarily the degree of fallibility
increases with the
passage of time, particularly where disputes or litigation intervene, and the
processes of memory are overlaid,
often subconsciously, by perceptions or
self-interest as well as conscious consideration of what should have been said
or could have
been said. All too often what is actually remembered is little
more than an impression from which plausible details are then, again
subconsciously, constructed. All this is a matter of ordinary human
experience.”
Jeffreys v Sheer
[2025] NSWCA 31
, Adamson JA (with whom
Mitchelmore JA and Basten AJA agreed) quoted with approval the following
observations by Lord Pearce in
Onassis v Vergottis
2 Lloyd’s Rep. 403 at 431:
“‘Credibility’ involves wider problems than
mere ‘demeanour’ which is mostly concerned with whether
the witness appears to be telling the truth as he now believes it to
be... Witnesses, especially those who are emotional, who think
are morally in the right, tend very easily and unconsciously to conjure up a
legal right that did not exist. It is a truism,
often used in accident cases,
that with every day that passes the memory becomes fainter and the imagination
becomes more active.
For that reason a witness, however honest,
rarely persuades a Judge that his present recollection is preferable to that
taken down in writing immediately after the accident occurred.
Therefore, contemporary documents are always of the utmost importance.
lastly, although the honest witness believes he heard or saw this or that, is it
so improbable that it is on balance more likely
that he was mistaken? On this
point it is essential that the balance of probability is put correctly into the
scales in weighing
the credibility of a witness. And motive is one aspect
of probability. All these problems compendiously are entailed when a Judge
assesses the credibility of a witness; they are all part of one judicial
process. And in the process contemporary documents and admitted
incontrovertible facts and probabilities must play their proper part.”
matters underline the importance of the Court reasoning to its conclusions, as
far as possible, on the basis of contemporary
materials, objectively established
facts and the apparent logic of events:
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
[2003] HCA 22
per Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ. This does not
eliminate the established principles about witness credibility, but it tends to
reduce the occasions where those principles are seen as critical: ibid.
oral testimony needs to be carefully assessed in light of the objective
contemporaneous evidence, particularly when given by
a party to litigation many
years after the events, such testimony can provide important context for
understanding particular documents
and their significance. In
ET-China.com
International Holdings Ltd v Cheung
(2021) 388 ALR 128
[2021] NSWCA 24
, Bell P (as his Honour then was) (with whom Bathurst CJ and Leeming JA
agreed) observed as follows:
“Documents and events have to be understood in their context, and evidence
of context will often be furnished by witnesses
in their oral evidence.
Documents, moreover, will not always present a complete picture of events.
Indeed it would be rare that they
do. Nor do contemporaneous documents
necessarily or invariably convey or record the background or context in which
events took place.
That background or context will be familiar to the actors at
the time of those events but may not always emerge from documents.”
addition to advancing the submissions set out above regarding Ms Richards’
memory, the Defendants submitted that Ms Richards
is “someone who is not
prepared to be honest when it comes to her intention to sell”, including
“in her evidence
in this case”. This submission was advanced in the
context of submissions made by the Defendants regarding a strategy allegedly
pursued by Ms Richards, which was said to involve terminating Mr Turner’s
employment in order to weaken him and put pressure
on him to sell. I address
this issue below. In considering this issue, and in determining Ms
Richards’ state of mind at various
points in time, I have been guided
primarily by the objective documentary evidence, rather than her oral evidence
regarding her intentions
at particular points in time. That is not because I
have formed the view that her evidence on those matters was dishonest. Rather,
it is because such oral evidence, particularly in the context of an acrimonious
dispute spanning an extended period of time, is inherently
unreliable, to be
treated with caution, and to be carefully assessed in the light of other
available evidence. Similar observations
may be made regarding the evidence of
Ms Hooker and Mr Anthony Turner regarding their respective states of mind
at various points
the case of Mr Kieran Turner, the Plaintiffs went further and made a number of
submissions to the effect that his evidence was
not merely unreliable, but
contained “deliberate fabrications”.
have determined that Mr Turner’s evidence is untruthful in a number of
specific respects, which are identified when resolving
the various factual
disputes that are addressed below.
I formed the view, over the course of Mr Turner’s extensive
cross-examination, that he was at times, and particularly
when presented with
matters which were inconsistent with his account, evasive and reluctant to make
concessions. In particular, there
were various instances, which are addressed
below, where Mr Turner claimed to be able to recall events that assisted his
a remarkable degree of specificity (even as to matters which had
occurred more than eight years ago), but claimed a complete lack
recollection about matters which cast doubt upon his account (including actions
which he had taken in the days or weeks before
he gave evidence).
Turner deposed, in his 9 July 2025 affidavit, that his ability to put on
evidence in support of his Cross-Claim had been hampered
by the fact that, in
early May 2025, access to his Heartland email account “was disabled
without notice”. In response,
the Plaintiffs filed affidavit evidence
establishing that Mr Turner had, at around the time of his termination, sought
the entire content of his email inbox (which was able to be
substantially recovered from an earlier backup). There was also evidence
suggested that Mr Turner and Mr Anthony Turner had co-ordinated the deletion of
their emails at around this time. Specifically,
on 7 May 2025, Mr Anthony Turner
sent his brother the following text message: “Shall we tomorrow delete all
our emails from
the server and save them on a usb?” When taken to this
message, Mr Turner claimed to have no recollection of it, or of discussing
the deletion of emails with his brother, or of copying his emails on a USB, or
of whether he has in fact had access to a copy of
his emails since 8 May 2025.
(In that regard, the Plaintiffs referred, in their closing submissions, to
various emails from Mr Turner’s
Heartland email address which were
exhibited to his affidavit evidence, and which could only have been obtained by
his having access
to a copy of those emails.)
have not, however, made a global assessment of Mr Turner’s credibility, or
made any findings on the basis of any such global
assessment. As Basten JA
observed in
Sangha v Baxter
[2009] NSWCA 78
(Handley AJA
agreeing), there “are risks in making global findings about credibility of
any particular witness”:
“Because a witness has not told the truth with respect to a particular
matter does not mean that other parts of his or her
evidence are untruthful.
Where possible, an assessment should be made of the reasons for the
untruthfulness in order to see if other
aspects of the evidence are likely to be
infected by the same concern. Further, evidence may be rejected because it is
unreliable, possibly mistaken or deliberately untruthful or capable
of being categorised in a variety of ways which are unlikely
to be capable of
clear delineation in some cases.
Further, findings of credibility are not usually findings with respect to
factual issues in the case, but are rather subsidiary findings
on the way to
determination of issues. Like many aspects of the evidence in a trial, the
evidence of a witness who is believed to
have lied in a particular respect, will
nevertheless be able to bear some weight and should be placed into a balance,
material evidence, before a conclusion is reached in relation to a
critical fact. The rejection of a witness in total, absent corroboration
likely to mean that, even where corroborated, little attention will be paid to
the evidence of the witness and less to the possible
consequences which might
flow from the fact that particular evidence is shown to be truthful: see
King v Collins
[2007] NSWCA 122
I have, in the light of the findings which I have made about the truthfulness or
credibility of certain aspects of Mr Turner’s
evidence, approached his
evidence with caution when determining the specific factual issues that arise in
the proceeding, and have
evaluated such evidence in light of the contemporaneous
documents, the objectively established facts, the apparent logic of events,
existence and nature of corroborative evidence, and the effect of the evidence
as a whole.
in deciding whether I am satisfied that the Plaintiffs and the Cross-Claimants
have established their respective claims on
the balance of probabilities, I have
taken into account the nature of the cause of action, the nature of the subject
matter of the
proceeding, and the gravity of the matters alleged:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 361-362 per Dixon J;
[1938] HCA 34
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan
Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 110 ALR 449
at 449-450 per Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane
and Gaudron JJ;
[1992] HCA 66.
TRUSTEE CLAIM
Overview of Issues
Plaintiffs seek declarations that Mr Turner was not validly appointed as
Appointor of the RG Trust; that Mr Anthony Turner was
not validly appointed as
Supervisor of the RG Trust; that Heartland One was not validly appointed as
trustee of the RG Trust; and
that Boyded is and remains the trustee of the
RG Trust. The Plaintiffs also seek a final injunction restraining the
Defendants from
dealing, or purporting to deal, with the property of the RG
Cross-Claimants seek an order compelling Boyded to transfer legal title to the
property of the RG Trust to Heartland One, to deliver
all books and records
relating to the RG Trust to Heartland One, and to assign or novate all contracts
relating to the RG Trust in
favour of Heartland One.
Defendants/Cross-Claimants contend that the following sequence of events
resulted in Boyded being removed, and Heartland One being
appointed, as trustee
of the RG Trust.
on 1 May 2017:
(1) the directors of Boyded (Mr Turner and Ms Richards) met and resolved:
(a) to approve the entry by Boyded, as trustee of the RG Trust, into a Variation
by Deed Poll (the
Appointor Deed
), whereby the RG Trust Deed was amended
so as to give Boyded the power to appoint a replacement Appointor if the office
of Appointor
is vacant for any reason; and
(b) to approve, subject to the Appointor Deed being executed, the appointment of
Mr Turner as Appointor; and
(2) immediately following this meeting, and in accordance with this authority,
the Appointor Deed was executed and Mr Turner was
appointed as Appointor of the
on 15 September 2024, Mr Turner exercised his powers as Appointor to appoint Mr
Anthony Turner as Supervisor of the RG Trust,
this appointment being effected by
a “Deed of Appointment of Supervisor” that was signed by each of
Supervisor Deed
on 30 April 2025, Mr Anthony Turner exercised his powers as Supervisor of the RG
Trust to remove Boyded and to appoint Heartland
One as trustee of the RG Trust,
this being effected by a “Deed of Appointment and Variation”
Trustee Deed
). The Trustee Deed was signed by Mr Anthony Turner as
Supervisor and by Mr Turner on behalf of Heartland One.
Plaintiffs submitted that each of those three steps was invalid and of no
effect. In particular, the Plaintiffs submitted that:
(1) the directors of Boyded did not resolve to approve either the entry into the
Appointor Deed or the appointment of Mr Turner as
Appointor, and his purported
appointment was therefore invalid and of no effect;
(2) even if the directors of Boyded did pass a resolution to that effect, the
Appointor Deed was outside the power of amendment in
the RG Trust Deed and,
therefore, the amendment was invalid and of no effect;
(3) by reason that Mr Turner’s appointment as Appointor was invalid and of
no effect, his purported exercise of his power as
Appointor to appoint
Mr Anthony Turner as Supervisor was invalid and of no effect, and therefore
Mr Anthony Turner’s purported
exercise of his power as Supervisor to
remove and replace the trustee was invalid and of no effect;
(4) even if Mr Turner’s appointment as Appointor was valid, his purported
appointment of Mr Anthony Turner as Supervisor was
invalid and of no effect
because Mr Turner exercised his powers as Appointor for an improper purpose;
(5) even if Mr Anthony Turner’s appointment as Supervisor was valid, his
purported removal of Boyded and appointment of Heartland
One as trustee of the
RG Trust was invalid and no effect because:
(a) Mr Anthony Turner did not exercise his powers upon any real and genuine
consideration; or
(b) alternatively, the appointment of Heartland One as trustee was “for
the benefit of the Appointor” and was therefore
beyond the power of
appointment in the RG Trust Deed.
response to the first of these issues, the Defendants/Cross-Claimants submitted
that, even if the entry into the Appointment Deed
and the appointment of Mr
Turner as Appointor had been approved only by Mr Turner (rather than by each of
Mr Turner and Ms Richards),
this was a “procedural irregularity”,
and the Court should exercise its discretion to declare this approval to be
invalid” pursuant to s 1322 of the Act.
address each of these issues below.
Did the directors of Boyded
pass the resolutions in the 1 May 2017 minutes?
Relevant Facts
The RG Trust
RG Trust was established in March 1980 by the RG Trust Deed. The General
Beneficiaries of the RG Trust include, relevantly, the
children and
grandchildren of the late Mr Webb.
Turner estimates, in his affidavit evidence, that the shares and units held by
the RG Trust are worth approximately $26.5m. The
financial statements of the RG
Trust as at 30 June 2023 record “Land and buildings at cost” in the
amount of $43.576m.
(I do not intend, by referring to those matters, to make any
finding regarding the current value of the RG Trust’s assets,
but only to
indicate that those assets are very substantial and appear to be worth in the
tens of millions of dollars.)
real property owned by the RG Trust is, for the most part, leased back to
various Operating Entities pursuant to informal leases
and used for the
operation of the car dealership business.
was appointed as a trustee of the RG Trust on 15 December 1992 and became sole
trustee on 3 July 1994. It is a wholly owned
subsidiary of Heartland Group, and
its ultimate holding company is BG Webb.
all material times up until 5 May 2025, the directors of Boyded were
Mr Turner and Ms Richards. On that date, Mr Turner was removed
Ms Hooker was appointed as a director of Boyded.
Turner deposed that, during the period in which he and Ms Richards were
directors, Boyded generally resolved that the annual income
of the RG Trust was
paid either to family members in a manner proportionate with their respective
shareholdings in BG Webb, or to
companies within the Heartland Motors Group.
However, as addressed below, there was a departure from this usual course with
to the distribution of the proceeds of the sale of two properties, which
were located in Parramatta and Lakemba.
Dispute regarding sale
proceeds of Parramatta and Lakemba Properties
around 2015, Mr Turner was responsible, as CEO of the Heartland Motors Group,
for negotiating the sale of land owned by the RG
Trust at Church Street in
Parramatta, which had been the site of the Boyded Holden dealership (the
Parramatta Property
). This property was sold to a group of companies
known as the “Gateway Group” for $150m. The sale proceeds were to be
received in two tranches of $50m and $100m respectively. The first instalment
was paid in 2016, and the second instalment was paid
was common ground that there was a discussion between Ms Richards and Mr Turner
in which it was agreed that a distribution should
be made from the proceeds of
the sale of the Parramatta Property to the eight grandchildren of Mr Bernard
Webb and Ms Dulcie Webb
(that is, the four children of Ms Turner, the two
children of Ms Richards, and the two children of Ms Hooker).
there was a dispute as to whether this agreement:
(1) related only to the first $50m tranche of the sale proceeds (as
Ms Richards contended) or was an agreement in relation to the
(as Mr Turner contended);
(2) was an agreement:
(a) that the sale proceeds be distributed equally between the eight
grandchildren (as Ms Richards contended), such that Mr Turner
12.5% of those proceeds; or
(b) that 10% of the sale proceeds be distributed to Turnercorp, with the
remaining 90% being distributed equally between the eight
grandchildren,
including Mr Turner (as Mr Turner contended), such that Mr Turner received
21.25% of those proceeds; and
(3) extended to the distribution of the proceeds of the sale of another property
owned by the RG Trust located at Canterbury Road
in Lakemba, New South Wales
Lakemba Property
), which was sold for around $18.35m.
is unnecessary to determine this issue. There are no claims advanced in this
proceeding concerning the distribution of the sale
proceeds of either the
Parramatta Property or the Lakemba Property.
relevance of this dispute for present purposes is that the parties’
hostile exchanges in early 2017 regarding these matters
provide important
context for understanding their subsequent dealings in relation to the RG Trust
and the Heartland Motors Group
more generally. For this reason, a number of the
communications regarding these matters are set out below.
29 January 2016, Mr Turner sent an email to the Group’s external
accountant, Mr Jepsen, copied to Mr Anthony Turner. In this
email, Mr Turner
stated that: “Its been agreed to distribute the $150m Parramatta
settlement direct to the 8 gran[d]kids separate
to my 10% as per the attached
calculation which [Mr Jepsen] set up for me some time ago”. The attached
spreadsheet set out
the distributions which were to be made from the $150m sale
proceeds in accordance with this “agreement”. Neither Ms
nor Ms Hooker was copied on this email.
around February 2017, Mr Anthony Turner telephoned Ms Richards to ask her about
the possibility of borrowing money from her. During
the course of this telephone
call, Mr Anthony Turner told Ms Richards that his brother had received an extra
10% of the sale proceeds
of the Parramatta Property. Subsequently, Mr Anthony
Turner’s wife showed Ms Richards a copy of the spreadsheet showing the
manner in which the sale proceeds of the Parramatta Property were distributed.
The spreadsheet also showed distributions in respect
of the sale proceeds of the
Lakemba Property.
2 March 2017, Ms Richards attended a meeting with Mr Jepsen, Ms Turner and Ms
Webb. At this meeting, Mr Jepsen told Ms Richards
that: “Lakemba was
piggybacked off the Parramatta sale and the proceeds were distributed the same
way”. Following the
discussion with Mr Jepsen, Ms Richards informed
Ms Hooker of these matters.
the following day, 3 March 2017, Ms Richards sent a text message to
Mr Turner and Ms Hooker, stating as follows (emphasis added):
“Mum Kate and I had a meeting yesterday with Greg Jepsen to sign our tax
returns. During our talks Greg told us that the sale
of Lakemba was being
divided the same as it was for the first $50M of [the Parramatta property] and
not divided into the proper shareholding.
I spoke to Bess and she also confirmed
we have never been told this at a board meeting or any other time.
found out that the division for the $50M wasn’t equally among all the
grandkids as we were told it was going to be.
We heard you got your 10% and then
it was divided amongst you all. We were very disappointed that this also
wasn’t conveyed
to us as we agreed it should go equally to the 8 of [you]
as a one off
. I also said that [you] should divide it into 9 giving mum a
share. I said at the last board meeting that the rest of the settlement
Parramatta Property], if it goes through, was to go in the proper shareholding
too (meaning 10% you and 22-1/2% nan KATE
Bess and I). Happy to sit down with
you when your mum gets back and Bess said she will fly down so we can discuss
all this and what’s
happening going forward.”
the same day, Mr Turner replied as follows (emphasis added):
“I’ll get Greg to explain to you the tax advantages of Lakemba as
Neal and I did some time ago at a board meeting. Basically
it meant the company
retained more and paid about $6m less in tax and the family members got less.
Regarding my 10% that’s completely different and separate to any
distributions which was agreed unanimously some time ago. What’s
of me being rewarded the 10% if the other grandkids get the same.
I’m sitting in a dealer award conference to receive a Hyundai platinum
award 2016 and I get this text. It’s a disgrace.
Stop looking in the past Jo I’m getting sick of you picking fights with
me. Be happy for your set up. If it weren’t for
me your life would be very
different. I look forward to meeting you all at the next board meeting.”
on the same day, Ms Hooker sent the following response by text message to Mr
Turner and Ms Richards:
“We are very happy with you and more than happy for you to have your 10
percent,, what we don’t understand is why the
8 grandchildren have equal
shares as the company wasn’t left to them ,,, I understand it was for tax,
but the division was
wrong,, so don’t think it’s a disgrace for us
to query, you probably would too, after all we are family and this is a
question,, sorry if you feel that way ,, look forward to seeing you soon ,
afterwards, Mr Turner replied as follows (emphasis added):
“You all unanimously agreed in January 2016. We have records, personal
discussions, text messages and statements in a tax audit
to prove this.
you personally spoke to Anthony and agreed. Jo, nan and mum personally spoke to
me and agreed. Stop looking back, this business
is hard enough without all your
lack of trust and attempts to rewrite the history books. Jo is just a jealous
person because I am
going on a 1 year holiday after 23 years of working for
heartland and that Adam wasn’t mentioned in an article recently and
turners were. Driven by pure jealousy and bad blood which is breaking the family
business up. Just sell out if you don’t
like how I run the business
Greg Jepsen or anyone will tell you how well I run it and how much money I have
made you all. My integrity should never be questioned
and saying I distributed
money wrongly is disgusting! Good bye!”
Turner subsequently said to Ms Richards words to the effect that “the
split can’t be changed and the proceeds for Stage
2 [of the sale of the
Parramatta Property] have to be distributed in the same way as the first
are, in evidence, minutes of meetings of Boyded’s board dated,
respectively, 30 June 2016 and 30 June 2017. Each is signed
by Mr Turner, and
each states that Ms Richards attended the relevant meeting. According to these
minutes, the board of Boyded (Ms
Richards and Mr Turner) resolved to approve the
distribution of all of the net income of the RG Trust for, respectively, 30 June
2016 and 30 June 2017, by distributing 9/89ths to Turnercorp, and 10/89ths to
each of the eight grandchildren (including Mr Turner).
Richards deposed that she was overseas at the time when these meetings are
recorded to have taken place and that she did not attend
any meeting of Boyded
on either of those dates. There was no evidence that the meetings referred to in
those minutes occurred on
any other date.
Richards did, however, subsequently sign financial statements of the RG Trust
recording distributions which appear to relate to
the sale proceeds of the
Parramatta Property. In particular, she signed the financial statements of the
RG Trust for the financial
year ended 30 June 2016 on 22 December 2016, and
those for the financial year ended 30 June 2017 on 15 December 2017. When
to this material in cross-examination, Ms Richards stated that she signed
the financial statements on the recommendation of management,
without the trust
income distribution being pointed out to her. (The financial statements do not
refer to any distribution being
made to Turnercorp, but do refer to a
distribution being made to the Turner Family Trust. Mr Turner gave evidence that
accepted distributions from the RG Trust in its capacity as trustee
of the Turner Family Trust.)
Communications with HWLE in March
and April 2017
20 March 2017, just over a fortnight after the exchange of messages regarding
distributions from the RG Trust which is set out
at paragraphs [
Mr Turner sent an email to Mr Dennis Bluth of HWLE, stating that he had
been informed that the Australia and New Zealand
Banking Group (
“an issue” with the fact that the Appointor of the RG Trust was a
deregistered company. Mr Turner stated that the
Appointor of the RG Trust was
“an important role” and asked for a quote “to update this deed
to nominate me as
the Appoint[o]r”. He also made the following further
request: “Can you also please quote to update our whole group for
deeds, constitutions, articles of association etc that are inadequate, old,
lost, unsigned or signed by dead people? We need
to clean these loop holes
up.” In addition, Mr Turner made the following request to Mr Neal Duggin
and Ms Amanda Kragh (who
were copied on the email): “Neal / Amanda –
do you known any other companies, trusts etc that have such inadequate
documentation?”.
At this time, Mr Duggin was the Company Secretary and
Chief Financial Officer of various entities in the Heartland Motors Group,
Ms Kragh was the Administration Manager.
23 March 2017, Mr Bluth forwarded to Mr Turner an email from another partner of
HWLE, Mr David Clarke, regarding the Appointor
for the RG Trust, which stated as
“The issue would appear to be that there is no incumbent Appointor for the
Rossfield Group Trust. The former Appointor is a
company which has been
deregistered. ...
The alternatives are as follows:
1. re-register the former Appointor and complete the appointment of the
replacement Appointor before again deregistering the former
Appointor; or
2. amend the Trust Deed to permit the Trustee to appoint a replacement Appointor
where the office of Appointor has been vacated.
The Trustee can then appoint the
replacement Appointor.
We believe that (2) is the cleaner approach. ...
We would need to prepare the relevant document together with the appropriate
minutes of the Trustee resolving to enter into and execute
half an hour later, Mr Turner replied to Mr Bluth’s email, stating as
“Ok happy to go with option2 as recommended. Please nominate me as the
Appoint[o]r.
Do we need to update any other deeds or constitutions in our Group re unsigned
docs, lost, old, dead people etc per the attached
structure?”
response, Mr Bluth sent an email later that day, proposing a meeting with
Mr Turner, Mr Duggin and Mr Clarke to “go through
the corporate
structure”.
one month later, on 24 April 2017, Mr Clarke sent an email to Mr Turner, copied
to Mr Bluth and Mr Duggin, attaching the draft
Appointor Deed and a draft minute
of Boyded. Mr Clarke stated that:
“These documents give effect to the variation to the Trust Deed to enable
the Trustee from time to time to appoint the Appoint[o]r
in circumstances where
the office of the Appoint[o]r is vacant. The minute approves the execution of
the Deed of Variation and the
appointment of you as the Appoint[o]r, subject to
your consent to act. You should separately by letter to the Trustee advise as
‘I, Kieran Turner, hereby accept with immediate effect my appointment as
the Appoint[o]r of the Rossfield Group Trust settled
under a Trust Deed dated 28
March 1980’.
This letter should post date the minute.”
ten minutes later, Mr Turner responded, stating as follows:
“I will do the below as instructed but I would also like you to do that
group audit as previously mentioned. Can you please
provide a cost and time
estimate to do this and what you need from Neal?”
26 April 2017, Mr Clarke sent an email to Mr Duggin, copied to Mr Bluth and Mr
Turner, requesting a number of documents required
by HWLE to undertake the audit
requested by Mr Turner.
Appointor Deed
recitals to the Appointor Deed which HWLE sent to Mr Turner were as
“A. [Boyded] is currently the sole trustee of the [RG]
Trust established by the [RG] Trust Deed.
B. Under clause 23 of the Trust Deed, [Boyded] may, at any time
and from time to time, by deed of appointment or other deed, declare
other powers concerning the Trust Fund, and such powers may relate to the
management or control of the Trust Fund.
C. [Boyded] wishes to amend the [RG] Trust Deed by this deed
poll to give itself the power to fill the currently vacant office
of Appointor
on the terms set out in this deed poll.
D. This deed poll is supplemental to the [RG] Trust
3 of the Appointor Deed provided as follows:
“In accordance with clause 23 of the [RG] Trust Deed, on and from the date
of this deed poll, the Trust Deed is amended as
Insert a new subclause 19(3) to read as follows:
‘Notwithstanding any other provision of this clause 19, the trustee may,
if the office of the Appoint[o]r is vacant at any
time for any reason
whatsoever, appoint a replacement Appoint[o]r in its absolute
discretion’.”
The minutes of the “1 May 2017” meeting
draft minutes for a meeting of the directors of Boyded, which HWLE sent to Mr
Turner on 24 April 2017, read as follows (the
“1 May 2017”
XXX (Sydney
In attendance:
XXX) (in person)
(by teleconference)
The Chair confirmed that a
quorum was present.
Trust Deed Variation:
IT WAS NOTED THAT
(a) the Company is currently the sole trustee of the Rossfield
Group Trust ABN 13 563 017 330 (
(b) the original appointor under the Trust, Rossfield Appointor
Pty Ltd ACN 001 339 171, was de-registered on 30 September 1997
and so cannot
perform its duties under the Deed of Settlement dated 28 March 1980 that
establishes the Trust (
(c) the office of appoint[or] under the Trust is currently
(d) clause 19 of the Trust Deed permits an existing appoint[or]
to replace itself but does not provide a procedure to fill the
appointor where that the [sic] office is vacant;
(e) clause 23 of the Trust Deed allows trustees of the Trust,
at any time and from time to time, to declare by deed any new or
other powers
concerning the trust fund of the Trust (
), and that such new or
other powers may relate to the management or control of the Trust Fund;
(f) the appointment of a new appointor under the trust is
practically necessary and desirable for the ongoing management and control
the Trust Fund.
a Variation by Deed Poll to be executed by the Company
pursuant to which subclause 19(3) is inserted into the Trust Deed to empower
trustees of the Trust to appoint a replacement appointor in the event that the
office of appoint[or] is vacant for any reason whatsoever
IT WAS RESOLVED THAT:
(a) the Deed Poll Variation and the variation to the Trust Deed
that it contemplates is approved; and
(b) the Deed Poll Variation be executed by the Company in its
capacity as trustee of the Trust, in substantially the form tabled
by the Chair
(with such amendments as to form as any director of the Company may approve,
such execution to be conclusive evidence
of such approval).
(c) Subject to execution of the Deed Poll Variation and Kieran
Turner consenting to act as Appoint[or], the Trustee appoint Kieran
the Appoint[or] of the Trust.
There being no further business, the meeting
was closed.”
were, in evidence, three different versions of the “1 May 2017”
Minutes which were signed by Mr Turner.
each of those three versions, Mr Turner has inserted, in his handwriting, the
(1) “1 May 2017” alongside the “XXX” appearing next to
(2) “Kieran Turner” alongside “XXX (Chair)”; and
(3) “Neal Duggin” alongside “In attendance: XXX (Mr/Mrs XXX)
(in person)”.
two of those versions (but not the third), Mr Turner has inserted, in his
handwriting, the words “Jo Richards” alongside
“XXX (Mr/Mrs
XXX) (by teleconference)”.
will address below the circumstances in which the two versions containing the
references to “Jo Richards” were created.
evidence regarding 1 May 2017 meeting
Turner deposed that a meeting of the board of Boyded took place on 1 May 2017,
at which he and Ms Richards passed the resolution
recorded in the
“1 May 2017” Minutes; that, immediately following this meeting,
he filled in and signed the minutes (neglecting
to add Ms Richards’ name)
and executed the Appointor Deed; and that he placed these signed documents in
the files kept at the
Blacktown Office. He further deposed that, after he sent
the signed documents to HWLE in July 2017, it was brought to his attention
he had omitted to record Ms Richards’ attendance, and that he amended the
minutes at that time by adding her name.
will address below the details of Mr Turner’s account, which was the
subject of extensive challenge in cross-examination.
Mr Duggin or Ms Richards had any recollection of attending any board meeting of
Boyded, on around 1 May 2017 or at any other
time, at which the subject matter
of the “1 May 2017” Minutes was discussed.
Richards gave unchallenged evidence that she had searched her email inbox for
the period from 23 March 2017 to 30 September 2017
and had been unable to
(1) any email referring to, or attaching or containing any notice of, a board
meeting of Boyded held on or around 1 May 2017; or
(2) any email referring to, or attaching copies of, “the minutes of the
supposed board meeting on 1 May 2017” or the
Appointor Deed, or the notice
signed by Mr Turner purporting to accept his appointment as Appointor.
Duggin acknowledged that his signature appears on the Appointor Deed, but
deposed that he does not have any independent recollection
of signing this
document, including “how that came about, or any other discussion or
circumstances surrounding my doing so”.
Communications with
HWLE from May to July 2017
12 May 2017, Mr Turner sent an email to Mr Clarke and Mr Duggin, copied to Mr
Bluth, seeking an update on the status of his request
for an audit of the
corporate structure of the Heartland Motors Group. Over the course of the
following week, Mr Turner and Mr Clarke
exchanged a number of emails in respect
of this audit.
21 May 2017, Mr Clarke sent an email to Mr Turner, enclosing a diagram which
summarised the details of the trustees, appointors
and unitholders of the
various entities within the Heartland Motors Group and requesting that
Mr Turner “review this document
and advise if any changes are
required”. The attached document set out the following information in
respect of the “Appointor”
of the RG Trust:
“Rossfield Appointor Pty Limited...
HWLE prepared draft documentation to replace the Appointor with Kieran Turner.
We are not certain whether this documentation has
been put in place.”
Turner replied shortly afterwards, stating that he would review the document in
detail on the following day, and asking:
“... how does it work if the appoint[o]r is a company? Do the
directors/chairmen then have control?
Also, do you register the chairman?”
the same day, Mr Clarke responded as follows:
“Where a company is an appointor, it will pass a resolution of its board
resolving to exercise its power as an appointor. I
am not sure what you are
referring to when you mention registering the Chairman. What register are you
referring to? My initial feeling
would be no.”
4 July 2017, HWLE issued an invoice to Mr Turner in relation to the audit of the
Heartland Motors Group’s corporate structure.
Mr Turner replied that he
would pay the invoice, and asking for an update on this audit.
5 July 2017 at 9:52am, Mr Clarke responded to Mr Turner’s email, enquiring
whether Mr Turner wanted HWLE to update his address
with the Australian
Securities and Investments Commission (
) in respect of the Operating
Entities of which he was a director.
10:18am, Mr Turner responded as follows:
“David – you were going to review the groups deeds and constitutions
and replace me with any dead or ex-shareholding
11:03am, Mr Clarke replied, stating that HWLE had undertaken ASIC searches and
that Mr Duggin had confirmed that he was comfortable
with the identities of the
officeholders and shareholders of the Heartland Motors Group “and did not
identify any that needed
changing”. Mr Clarke added that:
“We separately reviewed the trust deeds to identify appointors and
unitholders. There are no individual appointors or unitholders
excepting for
yourself as appointor of the Rossfield Group Trust (see attached).”
“attached” document relating to the RG Trust, to which Mr
Turner’s attention was directed, was a copy of the
document referred to at
paragraph [
which stated that: “HWLE prepared draft documentation to replace the
Appointor [of the RG Trust] with Kieran Turner.
We are not certain whether this
documentation has been put in place.”
1:56pm, Mr Turner responded to Mr Clarke’s email as follows (emphasis
“Ok so the only real change is the appointer [sic] of RGT to me
still need to get signed and will do at our July Board meeting
. I will email
you this when done so you can register such.”
2:05pm, on 5 July 2017, Mr Clarke responded to Mr Turner’s email, by
inserting comments in red text (which are set out in
bold and italics
“Ok so the only real change is the appoint[o]r of RGT to me which I still
need to get signed and will do at our July Board
will email you this when done so you can register such.
There is no
external register. You just need to keep the details with the register you
maintain for the Unit Trust. It would be useful
if you could send copies of the
final signed documents to us for our records.
will address below the significance of this exchange of messages on 5 July 2017
and, in particular, the issue of precisely what
“still” needed to be
done as at that date in respect of the “change” to “the
appoint[o]r of RGT”.
set out in this email exchange, Mr Turner contemplated that there would be a
meeting of the board of Boyded later in July 2017.
As events transpired, no such
meeting occurred. On 18 July 2017, Ms Richards sent a text message to Mr Turner,
apologising for the
late notice and stating that she “[c]an’t make
[Board] meeting Friday having something done to my eye”. The following
day, on 19 July 2017, Mr Turner informed Mr Duggin and Ms Kragh that the board
meeting scheduled for 21 July 2017 had been “cancelled”.
Events immediately prior to Mr Turner’s departure to
21 July 2017, Mr Turner sent an email to Mr Clarke, enclosing a scanned PDF
file, and stating:
“See attached signed docs for our register appointing me as the RGT
Appoint[o]r, please file and note.”
scanned PDF file comprised of three documents:
(1) a copy of the “1 May 2017” Minutes, in which Mr Turner had
inserted the date and the attendees as being Mr Turner
and Mr Duggin (with no
reference to Ms Richards);
(2) a copy of the Appointor Deed signed by Mr Turner and Mr Duggin; and
(3) a letter dated 1 May 2017 and signed by Mr Turner, accepting his appointment
as Appointor (this being drafted in the terms proposed
by Mr Clarke in his email
of 24 April 2017: see paragraph [
later, Mr Turner sent the same scanned PDF file to Mr Greg Jepsen of
Auswild & Co, who was the external accountant and
auditor of the Heartland
Motors Group.
24 July 2017, Mr Clarke responded to Mr Turner’s email of 21 July 2017,
stating as follows:
“There is no public register that would need updating in the same way as
you might notify ASIC of a change to the shareholders
or officeholders of a
company. However, we assume that you have a register for the Trust. These
documents should be included with
that Register. Let me know if you need a hand
with maintaining this Register.”
that day, Mr Turner responded to Mr Clarke’s email, stating that his email
of 21 July 2017 was an “FYI” and
“for your files for future
reference if necessary”.
27 July 2017, Mr Turner flew to Biarritz, where he stayed for approximately 18
Direct evidence of “1 May 2017”
closing submissions, Senior Counsel for the Defendants identified that the
“factual issue to be determined is whether Joanne
[Richards] participated
in a telephone call with Kieran [Turner] and Mr [Duggin] on 1 May [2017].
It’s that simple.”
specifically, as stated in the Defendants’ written closing submissions,
the issue is:
“whether more likely than not, Joanne participated by telephone in a short
informal board meeting held on about 1 May 2017
with Kieran and Mr Duggin
(company secretary), at which it was decided that Boyded would enter into [the
Appointor Deed] so as to
enable the trustee to appoint a replacement Appointor,
and subject to that occurring, for Boyded to exercise that power to appoint
Kieran as the Appointor.”
only direct evidence that Ms Richards participated in this meeting is as
(1) the two versions of the “1 May 2017” Minutes in which Mr Turner
has, by hand, inserted “Jo Richards”
as attending by telephone;
(2) the entry shown in a photograph which Mr Turner took of his 2017 diary, that
refers to a telephone call with Ms Richards and
Mr Duggin on 1 May 2017; and
(3) Mr Turner’s affidavit evidence of this meeting.
deal with each below.
Minutes of “1 May 2017” Meeting
recording attendance of “Jo Richards”
Mr Turner’s evidence – Addition of Ms Richards’
Turner gave the following explanation in his affidavit as to how
Ms Richards’ name came to be added to the “1 May 2017”
“Between 21 July 2017 and the end of July 2017, I received a call from HWL
Ebsworth. I do not have a clear recollection of
whether I received that call
from David Clarke or Dennis Bluth. In that conversation, the caller thanked me
for my business and told
me that the particular matter with HWL Ebsworth was now
finalised. In that phone call, I was asked if Joanne was present at the meeting
on 1 May 2017. I replied saying that ‘yes’ she was, but she was not
in the room and participated via speakerphone. In
response, I was told that the
minutes which I had signed would need to be amended to include Joanne's name as
an attendee and that
the amended minutes should be put with the other records of
meetings of Boyded Industries.
Following my call with HWL Ebsworth in late July 2017, I took the minutes of the
meeting of 1 May 2017 out of my manilla folder and
amended those minutes to
record that 'Jo Richards' had attended by teleconference. ...
I then placed the amended written minute back into the manilla folder.
I have since searched for the original signed minute from 2017, but have been
unable to find it. That search included my home office,
and the Coogee Office. I
have not searched the Group's head office at Chicago Avenue, Blacktown as I am
not permitted to access that
office anymore. I do not know what would have
happened with the original minute, or when it may have been removed from my
are a number of difficulties with Mr Turner’s account.
the time records of HWLE do not contain a reference to any such telephone call
with Mr Turner between 21 and 31 July 2017.
HWLE was issued with a subpoena to produce any file note evidencing or recording
any such telephone call, and nothing was
on 24 July 2017, Mr Turner stated to HWLE that the “1 May 2017”
Minutes were sent “for your files for future
reference if necessary”
(see paragraph [
above). If HWLE had raised with Mr Turner, shortly after receipt of those
minutes, a concern that the minutes did not record Ms
Richards as attending the
meeting, and if Mr Turner had immediately addressed this issue by adding Ms
Richards’ name, it would
be expected that he would have sent a copy of the
amended minutes to HWLE for their “files” and for “future
reference”.
He did not, however, do so at that time, or at any time
thereafter.
if HWLE had contacted Mr Turner to raise an issue about the omission in the
“1 May 2017” Minutes of any reference
to Ms Richards, and had
advised that “the minutes which [Mr Turner] had signed would need to be
amended to include Joanne's
name as an attendee”, it would be expected
that HWLE would have requested a copy of the corrected minutes (particularly
on 5 July 2017, HWLE had expressly asked Mr Turner to “send copies
of the final signed minutes to us for our records”:
see paragraph [
] above). However,
there is no evidence that HWLE made such a request, at this time or any time
thereafter.
if HWLE had advised that the corrected minutes “should be put with the
other records of meetings of Boyded Industries”,
it would be expected that
Mr Turner, after correcting the minute, would have done so. The
unchallenged evidence of Mr Duggin is that,
during his time as Company
Secretary, minutes and resolutions “were kept in filing cabinets and
cardboard boxes in a cubicle
adjacent to the board room at the [Blacktown]
Office”. In that regard, Mr Turner deposed that he could recall placing
documents “in a manilla folder” that was kept in his
office at the Blacktown Office. No file meeting the description
“manilla folder” has been found, despite extensive searches of the
Blacktown Office by the Plaintiffs’
solicitors.
Mr Turner’s account does not explain why there are two copies of the "1
May 2017" Minutes which bear Ms Richards’
name, in Mr Turner’s
handwriting. If he had created a version in late July 2017, which he kept in an
identified place in the
Group’s records, there would have been no need for
him to create a further copy at some other point in time.
no original signed copy of the amended “1 May 2017” Minutes has been
located. There are two scanned copies with
Ms Richards’ name which date
from 2024. As addressed below, when regard is had to the events surrounding the
creation of those
scanned copies, it is likely that the two versions of the
minutes which were scanned in 2024 were created around that
Communications in 2024 regarding “1 May 2017”
13 March 2024, Mr Turner sent a text message to Ms Kragh, attaching a photograph
of the “1 May 2017” Minutes, which
included the handwritten names of
only himself and Mr Duggin as the attendees. Mr Turner asked Ms Kragh:
Did we invite Jo to this meeting?
led to the following exchange of text messages (emphasis added):
Mrs Kragh: “Sorry I know nothing of this meeting. I can
try ask Lee [Payne] but she may not know as would be Greg [Jepsen]
wording sounds like Auswild would be involved. Want me try Lee?”
Mr Turner: “Yes and can you please ask Chris to search
Neal’s [Mr Duggin’s] email to Jo [Ms Richards] around/before
Ms Kragh: “I’ve got ND [Neal Duggin] email will
Mr Turner: [Thumbs up]
“Ok thanks it’s v[ery] important”
The deed mentions a director by teleconference so I’m hoping she
was invited and she agreed to attend by phone
Ms Kragh: “In email now searching inbox and
Mr Turner: [Thumbs up]
Mr Turner: “Also check emails from hwl [HWLE] or
Auswild’s on this meeting/date thanks”
Ms Kragh: “I’ve got some HWL emails they prepared
the minutes and instructions I’ve got them bundled to forward
to find anything re Jo or even after meeting or about meeting still
Just emailed what I could find. Nothing re meeting or Jo.
Auswild will let you know”
“Lee [Payne] on a zoom will call me around 1 hr.”
Mr Turner: [Thumbs up]
Kragh’s statement – “Just emailed what I could find”
– appears to be a reference to an email which
she sent to Mr Turner on the
same date (13 March 2024) with the subject line “emails re Boyded around
01.05”, and which
led to the following email exchange on that afternoon:
Mr Turner: “Nothing to Jo? About a meeting?”
Ms Kragh: “Nothing tried sent and inbox. Nothing. Not
even between you and [Neal Duggin] talking [about] meeting. Nothing
Mr Turner: “Ok I’m hoping he gave the original to
Greg [Jepsen] and he knows more?”
in turn, appears to have led to the following further text messages on the same
Ms Kragh: “Spoke to Lee she is calling Greg and will
advise outcome. But not sure they were involved with this one she believes
just HWL but maybe Greg can recall something worth a try.”
Mr Turner: [Thumbs up]
Ms Kragh: “Lee just called me back Greg advised Auswild
were not involved and found out after when provided the deed. He
unfortunately not aware of meeting attendance etc. recommended maybe trying ND
[Neal Duggin] if he recalls? If you want me to
Mr Turner: “Nah all good it’s not a major
terms of Mr Turner’s question – “
Did we invite Jo to this
” – are inconsistent with any recollection on Mr
Turner’s part that Ms Richards had not only been invited to, but
attended, the 1 May 2017 board meeting. In cross-examination, he sought to
explain away this message by focussing on the word
“invite”, and
asserting that he was looking for evidence of an “invitation” at
this point in time:
“Q. Look at what you ask Ms [Kragh]. ‘Did we invite Jo to this
meeting?’ See that?
Q. Do you recall yesterday when I asked you some questions whether you had a
vivid recollection of this meeting?
A. I don’t recall you asking that.
Q. I can assure you that I did. Remember I asked you your evidence about where
people were standing in the meeting--
A. Yes, yes, yes.
Q. --and how you filled out the minutes immediately the meeting was over?
Q. Then I suggested to you whether you had a good recollection of the meeting,
and you said you did.
Q. Why then, were you asking Ms [Kragh] on 13 March 2024 whether you had in fact
invited Jo to that meeting?
A. I was looking for the invite that was sent prior to the meeting.
Q. You weren’t asking Ms [Kragh] whether or not you’d actually
invited Jo to the meeting?
A. I was asking her to check [Neal’s] emails to see whether he had invited
Jo to the meeting in 2017.
Q. Your evidence that I asked you about yesterday--
Q. --was that you had added your aunt’s name to these minutes after your
solicitors rang you and told you that her name was
not on them; correct?
Q. What I’m asking you, if that’s right, if that really happened,
why didn’t you send the minutes with your aunt’s
name on them to Ms
[Kragh] in this text message?
A. I don’t recall.
Q. I want to suggest to you that the document at page 14098 [that is the
document which was photographed and sent to Ms Kragh] is
a document that you
found in your records in or about 13 March 2024.
A. I don’t recall.
Q. I want to suggest to you that it’s a document you created just before
you went to Biarritz back in 2017.
A. I don’t recall.
Q. I want to suggest to you that that document had been sitting in the
company’s records from 2017 through to 2024 in the condition
it’s now shown at page 14098.
A. I don’t recall.
Q. What you were doing was asking Ms [Kragh] as to whether or not it was
possible that Jo might have attended this meeting.
A. No. I asked her to look for an invite that we had sent Jo to the meeting, and
I said to please check - please ask Chris to search
[Neal’s] emails to Jo
around/before 1 May 2017.”
do not accept Mr Turner’s explanation that he was, in early 2024, looking
for evidence that Ms Richards had been invited to
the “1 May 2017”
meeting, rather than looking for evidence of her attendance.
it is inconsistent with the text of Mr Turner’s message to Ms Kragh, in
which he explained why he was asking whether
Ms Richards was invited: “The
deed mentions a director by teleconference
so I’m hoping she was
invited and she agreed to attend by phone
” (emphasis added). Mr Turner
accepted in cross-examination that the reference to the “deed” in
this message was
a reference to the “1 May 2017” Minutes which he
had photographed and sent to Ms Kragh. Mr Turner was not only
that Ms Richards was “invited”, but was also
“hoping” that “she agreed to attend by phone”. He
plainly concerned that the copy of the “1 May 2017” Minutes which he
sent to Ms Kragh did not refer to Ms Richards
as having attended, and he was
unsure whether or not she had agreed to attend, and had attended, this meeting
by telephone.
it is difficult to see why Mr Turner would have needed, in March 2024, to find
evidence of an invitation if he had, in the
Group’s records, a copy of a
minute recording Ms Richards’ attendance, which he had signed, and if he
had a clear recollection
that she had, in fact, attended the meeting.
if Mr Turner had, as at March 2024, a copy of the “1 May 2017”
Minutes of the meeting with Ms Richards’
name, there is no explanation as
to why he attached a copy of the minute which omitted her name (or how he came
to take a photograph
of the version without her name). According to his
affidavit evidence, he created the version of the “1 May 2017”
which did not include her name on 1 May 2017 and put it in a specific
folder on that date; and then took it from that folder in July
2017, added Ms
Richards’ name, and put it back in that same folder. If that was the case,
and he was making enquiries about
the 1 May 2017 meeting in March 2024, it is
likely he would have opened the relevant folder and obtained a copy of the
2017” Minutes with Ms Richards’ name, rather than
finding (from some unidentified source) a copy of the unaltered minute,
photograph of that document, and asking if Ms Richards was invited.
presented with these difficulties, Mr Turner could not offer any explanation but
instead, as set out above (and as occurred frequently
cross-examination), responded by saying that he had no recollection as to these
Two versions of “1 May 2017” Minutes with
Ms Richards’ name
23 May 2024, Mr Turner gave notices convening board meetings of Boyded and other
Operating Entities to consider resolutions to
remove Ms Richards as a director
of those entities. On 30 May 2024, Mr Turner purported to pass those resolutions
with the support
of Mr Anthony Turner.
those steps, Mr Turner sent himself, on 28 May 2024, a scanned copy of the
“1 May 2017” Minutes, in which he
had inserted, in his handwriting,
“Jo Richards” as having been in attendance by teleconference.
3 June 2024, Ms Richards and Ms Hooker commenced the 2024 Directors Proceeding,
seeking declarations as to the identity of the
current directors of the entities
in the Heartland Motors Group, including Boyded, and challenging the validity of
the purported
resolutions removing Ms Richards as a director of various
entities, including Boyded.
16 June 2024, Mr Turner sent himself another scanned copy of the “1 May
2017” Minutes in which he had inserted, in
his handwriting, “Jo
the handwriting in respect of the two “Jo Richards” entries is
slightly different in the two versions of the “1
May 2017” Minutes
which include her name, the other handwritten entries are identical in all three
versions of this document:
“Q. Do you agree that the handwriting, other than for the name of Jo
Richards, is identical on page 1593, 14131 and 14200 [the
three versions of the
“1 May 2017” Minutes]?
A. Yes, it’s all my handwriting.
Q. Not only is it all your handwriting, it’s the same version of your
handwriting, that is, that 14131 is a copy of 1593 and
14200 is also a copy of
A. It looks like it, yes.
Q. The only thing that’s changed between the handwriting on 1593 and the
handwriting at 14131 and the handwriting at 14200
is how the words “Jo
Richards” has been written?
A. Yes. All in my handwriting, though.”
correspondence suggests that the two “Jo Richards” versions were
created from the version without her name, which
was sent to HWLE on
21 July 2017.
16 June 2024, shortly after scanning and sending the second “Jo
Richards” version of the minutes to himself, Mr Turner
forwarded a copy to
his solicitors, McCabes.
the following day, 17 June 2024, Mr Turner caused Heartland One to be
incorporated. At this time, it was named Heartland Two Pty
Ltd and Mr Anthony
Turner was a director. Mr Anthony Turner accepted, in cross-examination, that
the purpose for which this entity
was incorporated was to act as a replacement
trustee for the RG Trust.
Turner could not offer any explanation, in cross-examination, as to how there
came to be, in mid-2024, two different scanned versions
of the “1 May
2017” Minutes in which he had inserted Ms Richards’ name. He
appeared at one stage to suggest that
he must have wanted to create a second
copy of this document for his own records. However, he could not offer any
reason as to why
he needed to do so, or why, if there was such a need, he did
not simply photocopy the existing hard copy, rather than creating a
handwritten version. When pressed on these matters in cross-examination, Mr
Turner stated that he could not recall the circumstances
in which these copies
“Q. Why would you make a copy in handwriting instead of taking a photocopy
or scanning a copy?
A. Because I would have already had copies and I just did a second one for my
own records.
Q. You needed another handwritten copy rather than a photocopy of the original?
Is that your evidence?
A. I don’t recall. Just giving an option. Not unusual for me to take
Q. See, what I want to suggest really happened is that the only copy of any
minute that you held involving the meeting of 1 May 2017
as at March 2024 was
the version that you see at page 14098 [that is, the version sent to Ms Kragh,
which did not include Ms Richards’
Q. I want to suggest to you that there was no version with your aunt’s
name on it for these minutes prior to 28 May 2024.
Q. I want to suggest to you that on 28 May 2024 you wrote the name Jo Richards
on the document at page 14131.
Q. Where do you say you got that document from then?
A. Which one?
Q. The document at page 14131 [the version sent to himself on 28 May 2024].
A. They’re just photocopies, I suppose. I don’t recall.
Q. You just found it in a drawer and then scanned it to yourself? Is that your
A. I don’t recall where I found it.
Q. Do you recall scanning it?
A. No, I don’t, actually.
Q. Do you recall why--
A. No, I don’t.
Q. --you might have scanned it?
Q. So you just can’t say - you can’t tell his Honour at all why it
is that there is a scanned document at page 14130?
A. To myself.
Q. To yourself. No idea?
A. I don’t recall.”
when pressed on his reasons for sending a copy of the scanned minutes to his
solicitors on 16 June 2024, shortly after
the commencement of the 2024 Directors
Proceeding and on the day before the incorporation of Heartland One, Mr Turner
answered that he had no recollection:
“Q. On 16 June ’24, you sent the minutes - sorry - after you scanned
the document at page 14199, you sent that document
to your solicitors, did you
A. I don’t recall.
Q. What I want to suggest to you was that you sent the document at page 14200 to
your solicitors for the purposes of creating a fraudulent
series of documents
that would allow you to take control of the Rossfield Group Trust.
A. I don’t recall.
Q. You don’t recall whether you committed a fraud?
A. No, I don’t recall scanning these documents like you say.
Q. I want to suggest to you that you scanned those documents for the purposes of
being able to cause a new trustee to be appointed
to the Rossfield Group
Q. Why did you scan these documents then, on 16 June 2024?
A. I don’t recall.
Q. Then how do you know it wasn’t for the purposes of trying to get your
trustee appointed to the Rossfield Group Trust?
A. I don’t recall.
Q. You do understand that the proceedings were commenced by your aunts in June
2024 to try and get control of the BG Webb entities?
You knew that, didn’t
A. I think that was the chairman court battle, wasn’t it?
Q. Before Black J.
A. The chairman issue. Yes.
Q. You were disputing the validity of the appointment of Bess to that board and
your aunts were disputing the validity of the appointment
of Anthony to those
Q. Whoever won that battle was going to have control of the BG Webb group of
companies. That was your understanding, wasn’t
A. I don’t recall.
Q. What I’m suggesting to you is that within a couple of weeks of your
aunts commencing those proceedings, you scanned the
document at page court book
14200. It’s not a coincidence, is it, Mr Turner, that that scan took
place within a few weeks of
your aunts commencing the proceedings that were
heard by Black J?
A. I don’t recall.”
is implausible that, in circumstances where Mr Turner had, in 2024, shown great
concern to locate any evidence that might prove
that Ms Richards attended a
meeting of the board of Boyded on 1 May 2017, he would have had no recollection
as to the means by which
he came to have two different versions of the minutes
with her name in May and June 2024, or why he sent those minutes to his
solicitors,
in the midst of litigation with his aunts over the control of
it is notable that, although Mr Turner sought evidence or confirmation of Ms
Richards’ attendance at the 1 May 2017
meeting from Ms Kragh, from Mr
Duggin’s records, from HWLE’s emails, and from Mr Jepsen and Ms
Payne of Auswild &
Co, he did not make any enquiry of Ms Richards herself.
There was no explanation for his failure to do so. It must have been a
omission on his part. The likely reason for his failure to do so is
that he did not wish to alert Ms Richards to the fact that there
was no evidence
of her attendance at a meeting of the board of Boyded on 1 May 2017 which had
purportedly approved his appointment
as Appointor, or to the fact that he was
intending to exercise his powers as Appointor to appoint Mr Anthony Turner as
of the RG Trust.
closing address, Senior Counsel for Mr Turner accepted that, having regard to
the fact that the scanned versions of the “1
May 2017” Minutes with
Ms Richards’ name were created shortly after Mr Turner was seeking to find
documentary proof for
her attendance at a meeting of board of Boyded on that
date, the Court “might accept [the Plaintiffs’] submissions that
documents first had Joanne’s name added to it at that
“1 May 2017” Minutes -
regard to the chronology set out above, and the terms of Mr Turner’s
messages with Ms Kragh in March 2024, I find, that:
(1) Mr Turner did not, prior to May 2024, have any copy of the “1 May
2017” Minutes which referred to Ms Richards as
having attended the
purported 1 May 2017 board meeting, and could not otherwise locate any evidence
to substantiate his “hope”
that she had been present;
(2) he created the two versions of the “1 May 2017” Minutes which
include “Jo Richards” as having attended
by teleconference at around
the time that he scanned those documents in May and June 2024, in circumstances
where he did not know
whether or not Ms Richards had in fact attended;
(3) he did so in order to fabricate documentary evidence to support a contention
that the board of Boyded (including Ms Richards)
had approved his appointment as
Appointor of the RG Trust; and
(4) his evidence that he could recall amending the “1 May 2017”
Minutes in July 2017 to add Ms Richards’ name,
following a telephone
conversation with HWLE, was untruthful.
Entry for 1 May 2017 shown in photograph of 2017 Diary
his 7 August 2025 affidavit, Mr Turner included a number of photographs which he
stated were images of his “diary for the
period of 24 April 2017 to 14 May
2017”. The first handwritten entry for 1 May 2017 was “Ring Jo Re
Appointer, with Nd.”
Mr Turner deposed that he had written this
“action item” in his diary “[p]rior to 1 May 2017”.
photograph showed that this item had been ticked. Mr Turner deposed that it was
his practice to tick an appointment or task in
his diary to signify once it had
been completed.
Accordingly,
the photograph was, according to Mr Turner, contemporaneous documentary evidence
that Mr Turner had scheduled a telephone
call with Ms Richards
(“Jo”) and Mr Duggin (“Nd”) regarding the change of
“Appoint[o]r” on 1
May 2017, and that this telephone call had taken
Photographs taken before any allegation that the 1 May
2017 meeting did not occur
Turner deposed, in a further affidavit of 5 September 2025, that he had taken
these photographs of his diary on 1 June 2025.
follows that, on Mr Turner’s evidence, the photographs of these pages from
the diary were taken several days
the Statement of Claim was
served by the Plaintiffs (on 5 June 2025), and therefore
Plaintiffs had advanced any allegation that the “1 May 2017” Minutes
“did not record proceedings at any actual
meeting of Kieran and
‘Neal Duggin’ that occurred on 1 May 2017, or at all”.
Turner could not, in cross-examination, offer any explanation as to why, prior
to any such allegation being raised, he had decided
to take out a diary from
eight years earlier and take a number of photographs (including of the entries
in his diary for 1 May 2017).
He claimed to have no recollection of the
circumstances surrounding the taking of those photographs:
“Q. The statement of claim that I’ve just showed you in which the
allegations were made against the genuineness of your
evidence about the 1 May
2017 meeting weren’t made until 5 June 2025. Are you able to explain why
you were looking at your
diary four days before that?
A. I don’t recall.
Q. Where were you when you took those photographs?
A. It says here I was at home.
Q. Where had this story - this diary been stored before you took the photographs
that you refer to at paragraph 5 of this affidavit?
A. I assume it was at home.
Q. Do you have all your diaries stored at home or just the diary for 2017?
A. I have some.
Q. Why some and not others?
A. I don’t recall.
Q. Why did you take the photographs of your diary on 1 June 2025 that you
describe in paragraph 5 of your affidavit?
A. I don’t recall.
Q. Just for old times’ sake, you thought you’d go through some old
diaries and take some photographs of some particularly
good days? Was that the
A. I don’t recall.
Q. Do you recall going and getting your diary, and taking these photographs?
A. I don’t recall.
Q. You don’t recall getting your diary on 1 June 2025, and taking
photographs of it?
A. I don’t recall.
Q. Less than five months ago, you go and take a diary that’s the best part
of eight years old, take it out, and take photographs
of specific pages, and you
don’t recall why you did this?
A. I don’t recall.
Q. Did you take photographs of any other diaries whilst you were taking
photographs of your 2017 diary?
A. I don’t recall.”
Original of 2017 diary is not produced by Mr Turner
Turner also claimed to have no recollection of what he did with his diary after
he took the photographs on 1 June 2025, or after
he took some further
photographs on 5 August 2025.
21 August 2025, the Plaintiffs served a
Notice to Produce
for Inspection
on Mr Turner’s solicitors, seeking, inter alia:
“The complete original physical diary from which images included at
paragraphs 66 and 67(d) (and TUR.0005.0001.0133, enclosed)
in the affidavit of
Kieran John Turner sworn on 7 August 2025 were made.”
cross-examination, Mr Turner initially claimed that he had no recollection of
being told, by his solicitors, that they had received
a Notice to Produce which
required him to produce his diary. However, he was then taken to his
5 September 2025 affidavit, in which
he had expressly referred to the
Notice to Produce. He then gave the following evidence:
“Q. Did you look for the diary after your solicitors received the notice
to produce on or about 21 August 2025?
A. I don’t recall.
Q. You’ve got no recollection of whether you looked for your diary after
the notice to produce was served?
Q. I want to suggest to you, you knew prior to 28 August 2025 that your
solicitors had received on your behalf a notice to produce
your diary by
28 August 2025.
A. I don’t recall.
Q. I want to suggest to you, you deliberately chose to ignore that notice to
produce and to not produce your diary in accordance
with the notice to
A. I don’t recall.
Q. Do you recall going at any stage after receiving the notice to produce - do
you recall going looking for your diary?
A. Yes, towards - closer to more recently, I remember looking for the
3 September 2025, the matter was listed for argument before me regarding whether
the Notice to Produce should be set aside. There
was no reference, in the course
of that argument, to any inability to locate the diary. It was only after I had
indicated that I
would not set aside the part of the Notice to Produce that
required production of the diary that the Court was informed that Mr Turner
unable to locate his diary.
Evidence of Ms Bargwanna
order to explain this turn of events, the Defendants filed an affidavit from
Ms Brigid Bargwanna, which was sworn on 5 September
2025. Ms Bargwanna
is Mr Turner’s mother-in-law.
Bargwanna deposed that, in either the week starting 11 or 18 August 2025, she
had cleaned the house of her daughter and Mr Turner,
as she typically did; that
this had involved “throwing out what appeared to be rubbish”; and
that, in the course of doing
so, she had picked up “a black diary”
which had been left on the kitchen bench and threw it into the recycling bin
first consulting with anyone whether she should do so.
the Notice to Produce which was served on 21 August 2025 (and was likely
forwarded by Mr Turner’s solicitors to him
on that date) required
production of his diary by 28 August 2025, Mr Turner deposed that he did not
take any steps to locate the
diary, or make any enquiries as to what had
happened to it, until 2 September 2025 (which happened to be several days after
the recycling
was collected on 27 August 2025).
Ms Bargwanna was, in cross-examination, challenged as to why she concluded,
without asking anyone, that a diary on a kitchen
bench was rubbish, Ms Bargwanna
stated that the kitchen bench was, in effect, where the members of the household
left paper which
they wanted to be recycled. (This appears to be inconsistent
with Mr Turner’s own evidence, in his 5 September 2025 affidavit,
regularly leaves his briefcase “and other papers” – apparently
a reference to papers on which he is working,
or which he wishes to retain
– “on the kitchen bench when I come home at the end of the
the correctness of Ms Bargwanna’s evidence regarding this household
practice, there was no explanation as to why Mr
Turner, having kept his 2017
diary safely for eight years and having identified that it contained critical
evidence for this proceeding,
left the diary lying on his kitchen bench, when he
was (presumably) aware that the household practice was that any paper left there
was regularly gathered up and thrown away. Mr Turner deposed that he had
“no memory of leaving my 2017 Diary on the kitchen
bench” and that
due to his “movements, level of activity and stress”, he “must
have put it down there at
some point and then neglected to put it away”.
It would be expected that, if his stress were due to the issues in the
proceeding,
he would have taken particular care to preserve important evidence
in the proceedings which was in his possession, instead of leaving
it, for some
unidentified period (which appears to have been at least some days), in a place
where the members of the household put
paper for recycling.
there is evidence that suggests that Ms Bargwanna may have discussed her
evidence with Mr Turner prior to swearing her affidavit.
At 8.17am on 5
September 2025, Mr Turner’s wife had sent a message to Mr Turner
stating as follows: “She hasn’t
answered. I’ll text her and
say we need to speak tomorrow and not to speak to them till she’s spoken
is likely that this is a reference to Mr Turner and his
wife needing to speak to Ms Bargwanna, prior to her speaking to the solicitors
for the purpose of giving evidence in the proceeding. Mr Turner responded by
“liking” his wife’s text message.
messages were deleted by Mr Turner before he produced his mobile phone for
inspection. When asked about the deletion of these
messages, Mr Turner
responded “I don’t recall”, despite the messages having been
sent only shortly before Mr Turner
was cross-examined. Mr Turner sought to
explain this lack of recollection by stating that “it’s been a bit
of a whirlwind”.
messages give rise to a concern about the reliability of
Ms Bargwanna’s evidence, particularly where there is evidence
Turner has, in the past, communicated with Mr Anthony Turner regarding the
content of his evidence and has proposed changes
to that evidence, which were
subsequently included in Mr Anthony Turner’s affidavit. In
particular:
(1) On 23 June 2022, Mr Turner asked his brother to send him his
“memory” of two conversations with Ms Hooker in 2009
(2) On the same day, Mr Anthony Turner responded, setting out his recollection
of those conversations, which included the following
statement attributed to Ms
Hooker on Christmas Day, 2009:
“She also said she is happy to sit in her beach house in qld...”
(3) Shortly afterwards, Mr Kieran Turner send an email back to his brother,
asking him to “change” the recollection which
he had set out,
including the words which are marked in bold and underlining below.
“She also said she is happy to sit in her beach house in qld
Kieran be her Director
(Mr Turner’s email reads: “change the below min black and send
back in a new email”. It is likely from the context
and the events which
followed that Mr Turner was requesting that his brother “change” the
recollection “below”
by adding the words “in black” and
then re-send the email).
(4) On 26 June 2022, Mr Anthony Turner swore an affidavit in the 2022
Oppression Proceeding in which he attributed to Ms Hooker, in
a conversation on
Christmas Day, 2009, the words set out above, including the text added by his
brother. When these matters were
put to Mr Anthony Turner, and it was suggested
to him that his brother had told him what he should say in his evidence, he
to a series of questions, that he could not recall.
Conclusion – 2017 diary
is unnecessary to make any finding regarding the circumstances in which the
diary came to be unavailable by the time of the hearing.
In particular, I do not
make any finding that this evidence was destroyed, or draw any inference from
such a finding.
the fate of the hard copy paper diary, the key issue for present purposes is
whether there is an adequate basis for the Court
to conclude that the entry in
the photograph of the diary for 1 May 2017 – “Ring Jo Re Appointer,
was written prior to, or around, 1 May 2017, as opposed
to being added at some unknown time prior to 5 June 2025 (when the photographs
were taken). The photograph itself is capable of proving only that the entry was
in the paper diary as at the date that the photograph
was taken. The sole
evidence that the entry was written in the diary on around 1 May 2017 is Mr
Turner’s affidavit evidence
to this effect.
am unable to give this evidence any significant weight, having regard to my
findings that, in 2024, Mr Turner fabricated two versions
of the “1 May
2017” Minutes which included Ms Richards’ name, in circumstances
where he was aware that there was
otherwise no documentary evidence that she had
been invited to or had attended any such meeting.
there is reason to doubt that Mr Turner had in his possession, prior to 2025, a
copy of his 2017 diary which included an
entry confirming that a meeting had
been arranged with Ms Richards and Mr Duggin on 1 May 2017 to discuss the
Appointor of the RG
Trust, and that this meeting had occurred. In particular, if
Mr Turner had such an entry in his 2017 diary as at early 2024, it is
to see why he was asking Ms Kragh to search Mr Duggin’s inbox to see if
there was any evidence that Ms Richards had
been invited to, and had attended,
such a meeting.
those reasons, I have disregarded the entry for 1 May 2017 in the photograph of
the 2017 diary.
Mr Turner’s affidavit evidence regarding
the 1 May 2017 meeting
an affidavit sworn on 7 August 2025, Mr Turner gave the following
“On 1 May 2017, I met with Neal at the Group's head office of 18 Chicago
Avenue, Blacktown, and we called Joanne to discuss
the appointor issue. Prior to
that meeting, I printed the documents emailed to Neal and me by HWL Ebsworth on
24 April 2017... I
cannot recall if an unsigned copy of these documents were
emailed to Joanne before the meeting took place.
Joanne did not attend the meeting on 1 May 2017 with Neal and I in person.
Rather, Neal and I telephoned her.
At the start of the meeting on 1 May 2017, I explained to Joanne that this was
not an ordinary operations or performance 'board meeting'
of directors of the
Group, it was specifically a meeting of Boyded Industries for the purpose of
giving effect to HWL Ebsworth's
advice and to nominate a new appointor to the
RGT and that there were no other agenda items. Joanne said ok.
Neal was sitting at his desk and read out loud to Joanne over the phone by
reference to the unsigned documents which had been printed
out and were in front
of him. I cannot recall if Neal read aloud the entirety of the contents of each
document which had been printed,
or if he provided a high-level overview. I
recall leaning against Neal's filing cabinet while Neal was speaking. Neal then
Joanne if she had any questions. Joanne said she did not.
After reading out the proposed resolution contained on the draft minutes, I
called for the resolution to execute the deed poll to
be voted upon. Joanne and
I both said we agreed with the resolution.
After the meeting ended, and in Neal's presence:
(a) I signed and dated the minutes of the meeting, recording
myself and Neal as attendees and myself as chairperson;
(b) Neal and I signed the Deed of Variation; and
(c) I signed a document accepting my appointment as the
Appointor of the RGT which I had prepared consistent with HWL Ebsworth’s
advice of 24 April 2017.
I then took the signed documents to my office in the Group’s head
I did not, however, on 1 May 2017, include Joanne’s name in the minutes of
the meeting of Boyded Industries at the time of
signing them.
To the best of my recollection, the call with Joanne only lasted about 5 or 10
I recall placing the signed documents (being the signed minutes of meeting, the
signed Deed of Variation and the document accepting
my appointment as appointor
of the RGT in a manilla folder in my office at the Group’s head office
located at 18 Chicago Avenue,
Blacktown where the Group’s business records
were kept. I no longer have access to those premises.”
are a number of difficulties with this evidence.
it is inherently implausible that Mr Turner, who repeatedly stated his lack of
recollection of matters relevant to these proceedings
(including events
concerning a critical piece of evidence – the diary – which occurred
in the month before he was cross-examined),
would have a detailed recollection
of what was, on his evidence, a routine telephone call concerning the
administration of the RG
Trust, which occurred more than eight years earlier and
which “only lasted about 5 or 10 minutes”. On his account, he
able to recall not only the substance of the matters said at this meeting, but
could “recall leaning against Neal’s
filing cabinet while Neal was
speaking”, and could recall that “Neal was sitting at his desk and
read out loud to Joanne
over the phone by reference to the unsigned documents
which had been printed out and were in front of him”. Further, he claimed
to have an actual recollection not only of signing the minutes and the Appointor
Deed immediately after the conclusion of this meeting
in Mr Duggin’s
presence, but of placing the signed documents “in a manilla folder in my
office” (which has not
been located, despite extensive searches of the
Group’s records).
there are specific features of the account which are implausible.
particular, it is implausible that Ms Richards (who had, only a month or so
earlier, been involved in an acrimonious argument with
Mr Turner regarding
distributions from the RG Trust) would, when presented with a proposal that
Mr Turner be appointed as Appointor
of the RG Trust, simply reply
“ok”. Ms Richards deposed that she was, following the dispute
the Parramatta and Lakemba Properties, “wary
and distrustful of the manner in which Kieran was dealing with dividends and
distributions
from the Trust” (as is shown by her message set out at
paragraph [
above), and that she therefore considered it “highly unlikely” that
she “would have readily agreed, in the course
of a brief conversation, to
the taking of steps to give Kieran any further control over the Trust, at least
without an opportunity
to properly understand the nature and effect of anything
that was being proposed”. That evidence is logical and accords with
sense. In that regard, Mr Duggin gave evidence that, in his experience, Ms
Richards would usually, when presented with legal
documents of this nature,
request an opportunity to get advice before providing her consent. That evidence
is supported by the numerous
examples in evidence of Ms Richards seeking advice
from her solicitors on materials provided to her as a director, or proposals put
to her for her agreement.
is also implausible that, if Mr Turner had, immediately after a meeting with Ms
Richards and Duggin, completed the “1 May
2017” Minutes in
Mr Duggin’s presence, he would have recorded only himself and Mr
Duggin as attendees, without including
any reference to Ms Richards (and without
Mr Duggin noticing this omission).
Mr Turner claimed, in his affidavit, that after completing the “1 May
2017” Minutes immediately after the meeting,
he put them in a manila
folder at the Blacktown Office. However, there was unchallenged evidence from Mr
Duggin that the file name
of the scanned document, which was sent by
Mr Turner to Mr Clarke on 21 July 2017, indicated that this document
was scanned at the
Group’s office at King Street Wharf. There was no
explanation given by Mr Turner in his affidavit evidence as to how it came
that the minutes which, according to his version of events, were signed on 1 May
2017 and thereafter kept in a hard copy file
at the Blacktown Office came to be
in the King Street Wharf office on 21 July 2017. When this matter was raised
with Mr Turner in
cross-examination, he stated that he was carrying the “1
May 2017” Minutes with him from office to office during 2017,
HWLE’s audit was ongoing and in case the documents needed to be
“registered”. For example, he gave the following
“Q. Is this what you’re telling his Honour: that after these
documents were created on 1 May 2017, they went into the
Blacktown office, do
you agree with that much?
Q. But for some reason, at some later point in time, you picked them up and took
them to the King Street office?
Q. You could have just sent them to the solicitors from the Blacktown office;
couldn’t you?
A. I hadn’t registered them.
Q. Oh, you hadn’t registered them, in the register that you don’t
know what it is, in that register? Is that the register
you’re referring
A. I didn’t know what register, yes.
Q. So you create the documents at the Blacktown office, you with me so far? You
don’t - and you place them in the offices,
in a manila folder, in your
office at Blacktown? Yes?
Q. But then you pick them up and take them to the King Street office so that
they can go into the register that you don’t know
A. The file travelled with me to and from the offices in a briefcase while the
matters were ongoing. The audit was still going, the
register hadn’t been
Q. Your evidence is that instead of these documents that I’ve just taken
you to being stored in the filing cabinets and cardboard
boxes maintained by the
Company Secretary in head office at Blacktown, you personally took these
documents with you wherever you
happened to be during this period?
Q. Took them home as well?
A. If I didn’t go from Blacktown straight to King Street Wharf, I would
take them home and then I’d take them to King
Street Wharf. King Street
Wharf was my main office.
Q. If you left them at King Street Wharf and then went to Blacktown, you
wouldn’t have had them available to you if they were
required for the
audit. That’d be right. Wouldn’t it?
Q. You could end up with the documents, these important company documents, in an
entirely different office from when they were, from
where they were usually
stored. Is that your evidence?
A. It’s possible.
Q. All because, you say, you wanted to keep these documents with you so that
they would be available when the auditors required them.
evidence is implausible. It is highly unlikely that Mr Turner was carrying
documents relating to the Appointor of the RG Trust
with him throughout the
period from 1 May 2017 to 21 July 2017 in case they were needed for some
register (which he could not identify),
or for the audit of the companies in the
Group being conducted for HWLE. If the documents were needed for either of those
it is likely that he would have provided copies of the documents to
HWLE as soon as they were executed.
even if the version of the “1 May 2017” Minutes which was sent to
HWLE in July 2017 were regarded as a reliable
contemporaneous record of events,
it is inconsistent with Mr Turner’s account, since it indicates that any
meeting to address
the issue of the Appointor of the RG Trust (whether on
1 May 2017 or at some other unidentified time) was attended by Mr Turner
Mr Duggin, but not by Ms Richards, and that she therefore was not asked to,
and did not, approve at any such meeting, the appointment
of Mr Turner as
Appointor of the RG Trust.
the terms of Mr Turner’s exchange of messages with Ms Kragh indicate that
he did not, in 2024, have any recollection
of whether Ms Richards was invited
to, or attended the meeting, but instead “hoped” that this was the
case (see paragraphs
on 3 May 2025, Mr Turner sent a text message to Mr Anthony Turner, which
attached a letter sent by Ms Richards’ solicitors
in response to the
purported notification of removal and replacement of Boyded as the trustee of
the RG Trust. In this text message,
Mr Turner stated as follows (emphasis
added): “It’s not as bad as I thought it would be. Seems they
any documents and so far I’m happy. Once we give them the
docs then we will find out if they have an argument.
And they haven’t
said jo was away on 1 May etc so that’s good
.” The italicised
statement would be an odd statement to make if (as Mr Turner deposes) he had a
vivid recollection of Ms Richards
attending the meeting with him and Mr Duggin
on 1 May 2017, and he had a copy of the minutes recording her attendance, which
created in 2017, and a hard copy diary indicating that such a meeting had
taken place. It does, however, make sense if Mr Turner
did not in fact have any
such recollection, and was aware that the only evidence that Ms Richards had
attended such meeting was the
version of the “1 May 2017” Minutes
that he had created in mid-2024.
the credibility of Mr Turner’s affidavit evidence regarding these events
is seriously undermined by his conduct in
creating documentary evidence, in
2024, of Ms Richards’ attendance at a meeting of the board of Boyded on
1 May 2017, in circumstances
where he was aware, from his enquiries,
that no such documentary evidence existed.
regard to those matters, I find that Mr Turner’s affidavit evidence,
which he maintained in cross-examination, that he
had a detailed recollection of
Ms Richards’ participation in a meeting of the board of Boyded on 1
May 2017, and a recollection
of amending, in July 2017, the “1 May
2017” Minutes so as to include Ms Richards’ name was
untruthful.
Plaintiffs submitted that Mr Turner’s conduct in fabricating the “1
May 2017” Minutes not only undermined his
credit, but provided a basis for
concluding that he was aware that no such meeting in fact occurred. In this
regard, the Plaintiffs
Tobin v Ezekiel
(2012) 83 NSWLR
[2012] NSWCA 285
per Meagher JA (Basten and Campbell JJA agreeing).
In that passage, his Honour referred, among other authorities, to the
observations
made by Gibbs J in
Steinberg v Federal Commissioner of
[1975] HCA 63
(1975) 134 CLR 640
[1975] HCA 63
(citations omitted),
namely, that:
“The fact that a witness is disbelieved does not prove the opposite of
what he asserted ... It has sometimes been said that
where the story of a
witness is disbelieved, the result is simply that there is no evidence on the
subject ..., but although this
is no doubt true in many cases it is not correct
as a universal proposition. There may be circumstances in which an inference can
be drawn from the fact that the witness has told a false story, for example,
that the truth would be harmful to him; and it is no
doubt for this reason that
false statements by an accused person may sometimes be regarded as corroboration
of other evidence given
in a criminal case ... Moreover, if the truth must
lie between two alternative states of fact, disbelief in evidence that one of
the state of facts exists may support the existence of the alternative state of
the present case, I would not draw from the fact that, in 2024, Mr Turner
fabricated evidence indicating that Ms Richards attended
a meeting of the board
of Boyded on 1 May 2017, an inference that no such meeting had occurred. It is
apparent, from the messages
exchanged with Ms Kragh in March 2024, that Mr
Turner fabricated this evidence in circumstances where he had
Ms Richards had been invited and had attended such a
meeting, and was therefore unsure whether or not this was the case. His conduct
in fabricating this evidence, in circumstances where he knew that there was
otherwise an absence of contemporaneous documentary evidence
to show that Ms
Richards had been present, was dishonest, and likewise his affidavit account of
Ms Richard’s attendance at
this meeting was untruthful. This dishonest
conduct significantly damages Mr Turner’s credit, but does not, of
itself, provide
a basis for drawing an inference that the alleged meeting did
not take place.
Inferences from other available evidence?
Defendants submitted that – even if the Court were to determine (as I have
found) that no weight should be placed on Mr
Turner’s affidavit account of
the 1 May 2017 meeting, or on the “1 May 2017” Minutes which include
Ms Richards’
name, or on the photographed entry in the 2017 diary
– the Court would infer from the following objective matters that it was
more likely than not that an informal telephone meeting of the directors of
Boyded occurred on 1 May 2017, at which the directors
resolved to approve
Mr Turner’s appointment as Appointor:
(1) in late March 2017, HWLE had informed Mr Turner that there was no incumbent
Appointor of the RG Trust, and recommended amending
the RG Trust Deed so as to
permit Boyded to appoint a replacement Appointor when the office was vacant;
(2) communications on that specific subject matter then ensued between HWLE, Mr
Turner and Mr Duggin, in March and April 2017;
(3) in the week prior to 1 May 2017, HWLE sent an email to Mr Turner and Mr
Duggin, attaching a set of documents to implement this
recommendation, including
the Appointor Deed and a minute of a meeting to be held of Boyded’s
directors that set out resolutions
to enter into the Appointor Deed and, subject
to that occurring, to appoint Mr Turner as Appointor;
(4) 1 May 2017 fell on the Monday in the week following receipt by Mr Turner and
Mr Duggin of this document pack from HWLE;
(5) Mr Duggin told the Plaintiffs’ solicitors in May 2025 that board
meetings were pretty informal, with Ms Richards usually
dialling in by
telephone. It would therefore be unsurprising, and indeed expected, that a
meeting held on 1 May 2017 would have been
attended by Ms Richards by phone,
particularly where it was an “impromptu” meeting to address a
one-off item that had
been recommended by HWLE;
(6) Mr Duggin (who was company secretary) and Mr Turner signed the Appointor
Deed in 2017; and
(7) Mr Duggin acknowledged in cross-examination that he understood that, as
company secretary, he was the guardian of corporate governance
of the Group, and
in performing that role, ensured that:
(a) when board meetings were required in order for decisions to be made for a
company in the Heartland Motors Group, those meetings
were arranged and held,
(b) when he signed a contract as an officer of a company in the Group, he
ensured that the board had met and authorised for that
matters in paragraphs (1)-(3) and (6) above establish that, as was common
ground, documents to change the Appointor of the RG
Trust were prepared by HWLE
in April 2017 on Mr Turner’s instructions, and were subsequently completed
and signed at some time
in 2017. The critical issue is whether those documents
were signed after a meeting of the board of Boyded on 1 May 2017, which was
attended by Ms Richards and at which approval was given to execute such
documents. In support of an inference that this was the case,
the Defendants
relied on the matters in paragraphs (4), (5) and (7). Each is addressed
1 May 2017 was the Monday after the documents were
provided to Mr Turner
matter in paragraph (4) above – namely, that 1 May 2017 was the Monday
following the provision of the draft documentation
to Mr Turner – is a
simple matter of fact. However, it has implicitly bundled up in it a suggestion
that there was some need
to deal with this matter promptly, leading to Mr Turner
calling a meeting several days later, on short notice, and with no papers
provided in advance.
is no indication in the contemporaneous correspondence that there was thought to
be any need (or that Mr Turner understood that
there was any need) to deal with
this issue before the next scheduled board meeting, which was to be held on 21
July 2017. For example,
HWLE did not advise that the documentation should be
executed as soon as possible.
company which was named as Appointor in the RG Trust Deed (namely, Rossfield
Appointor Pty Ltd) had been deregistered almost twenty
years earlier. There was
no indication that the lack of an Appointor had caused, was causing, or was
difficulty. Although there was reference in the
email correspondence to a “friend” of Mr Turner at ANZ indicating
the bank had some “issue” with the Appointor being a
deregistered company, there is no indication that this presented
any pressing
impediment or problem for the conduct of the affairs of the RG Trust or of the
Heartland Motors Group.
only power given to the Appointor by the Trust Deed is the power specified in
clause 19, which (prior to any amendment affected
by the Appointor Deed) read as
“(1) THE Appointor named or described in the Seventh Part
of the Schedule may from time to time by instrument in writing
appoint any other
person or persons as Supervisor hereunder and may at any time revoke any such
appointment.
is no contemporaneous documentary evidence that, as at May 2017, there was any,
or likely to be any, occasion for the power
in clause 19(1) to be exercised at
any time in the near future. No contemporaneous document refers to any need to
appoint a Supervisor
of the RG Trust, or otherwise refers to any intention on
the part of Mr Turner to take any step as Appointor shortly after his
appointment.
those circumstances, there was no need for a meeting of the board of Boyded to
be arranged at short notice, to deal with the appointment
of an Appointor to the
RG Trust, rather than leaving it to be addressed when the board next met.
the communications between Mr Turner and HWLE after 1 May 2017 support a finding
that no meeting of the board of Boyded had
yet been held to deal with the
Appointor issue and that Mr Turner was planning to deal with this at the next
scheduled board meeting
in July 2017.
21 May 2017, HWLE sent Mr Turner a document which stated, in relation to the RG
Trust, that “HWLE prepared draft documentation
to replace the Appointor
with Kieran Turner. We are not certain whether this documentation has been put
in place.” Mr Turner
did not respond to this query by stating that this
documentation had already been executed, and providing a copy. Instead, he
“how does it work if the appoint[o]r is a company?”; whether
in such circumstances, the “chairman” or “directors”
have control; and whether it was necessary to register the
“chairman” (see paragraphs [
] above). As previously noted, Mr Turner was of the
view that he was “chairman” of the companies within the Heartland
Motors Group. This email indicates that, as at 21 May 2017, Mr Turner was
contemplating whether the new Appointor should be a company
within the Group and
wanted to know, in order to assist with this decision, whether the Appointor
would be controlled by the directors
of the company (who would likely be himself
and Ms Richards) or by the “chairman” (that is, solely by Mr
Turner). HWLE
responded that the power of a corporate appointor would be
exercisable by its board.
5 July 2017, HWLE provided Mr Turner with an update on the outcome of their
audit of the Heartland Motors Group, and specifically
referred Mr Turner to the
attached document, which was a copy of the document sent to him on 21 May 2017,
stating that HWLE were
“not certain whether [the documentation to replace
the Appointor of the RG Trust] had been put in place”. On the same
Turner responded that the “change” of the “appoint[o]r of RGT
to me” was something “which I
still need to get signed and will do
at our July Board meeting”, promising to “email you this when
done” (paragraphs
Turner was cross-examined about this email exchange. He claimed that what he
“still need[ed] to get signed” was a “register”
relation to the change of the Appointor of the RG Trust. However, he could not
identify this “register”, or explain
why the register needed to be
signed at a meeting of the Board (if the relevant documents to effect the change
had already been executed
on the Board’s authority), or why he would need
to send a signed “register” to HWLE “so [they] can register
such”. An extract from the cross-examination is set out below:
“Q. The word ‘still’ means something that you’d already
undertook to do. Doesn’t it?
A. No. It doesn’t. I haven’t signed the register.
Q. You weren’t talking about the register, Mr Turner. Were you?
A. Yes. I was.
Q. You were talking about the documents at 1575 through to 1583 [the draft Board
minute and the Appointor Deed]. Weren’t you?
A. I talk about register, register, register, register. It’s clear
I’m talking about the register.
Q. No, no, no, Mr Turner, your next sentence is, ‘I will email you
this when done so you can register’, not you producing
a register or
completing a register. You’re sending the documents to your solicitors for
them to register.
A. Yes, so before he responded, I didn’t know what register, legal
register, an internal register or an [Auswild] & Co
register. He has
confirmed there is no external legal register, but he has confirmed that there
is a register that does exist.
Q. What register do you claim you maintain for the unit trust?
A. I don’t know. That’s the whole point.
Q. Why would you say, have a look at the next sentence, ‘I will email you
this when done so you can register such.’ Why
would you say, ‘I will
email you this register when done so you can register such’? You
wouldn’t say that; would
A. I’ve told you, there’s many registers.
Q. Right. So, I just want to make this clear. The second sentence, after the
word noted.
Q. ‘I will email you this.’ You say that reference to this is a
reference to a register?
Q. ‘So I will send you this register when done so you can register.’
That’s your evidence?
A. ‘I will send you the documents so you can register such.’
Q. Hang on, the documents? You mean the documents that were sent to you on 24
April 2017?
Q. Right. So you are saying, and they’re the same documents that
you’re referring to in the line above; correct?
Q. Right. So you are saying that when those documents are signed, you will send
them to your solicitors so that they can register
A. There’s a legal register, there’s a financial register,
there’s an internal register. Here’s one piece
of the puzzle.
Q. Just listen to my question. You agreed with me that the documents that
you’re saying, ‘I will email you this when
done so you can
register’, is in fact a reference to the documents referred to in the
first sentence. You just agreed with
me on that.
A. It’s the documents that required to be registered. You need the
documents for the registration.”
do not accept Mr Turner’s explanation of his email of 5 July 2017. In that
communication, he expressly stated that, as at
that date, he “still
need[ed] to get signed” the “change” of “the appoint[o]r
of RGT to [himself]”
(that is, the documentation to effect this change was
yet to be executed) and that he intended to get this signed at a forthcoming
meeting of the board of Boyded later in July 2017. That is important
contemporaneous evidence that, as at 5 July 2017, no such documentation
been executed, and that this was because the necessary board meeting had not yet
in his 5 July 2017 email to HWLE, Mr Turner promised to “
email you this
when done so you can register such
”, that is, to send the completed
documentation regarding the change of Appointor once it was executed.
Mr Turner subsequently
emailed that material to HWLE and the Group’s
external accountants on 21 July 2017, stating as follows in his email to HWLE:
“See attached signed docs for our register appointing me as the RGT
Appoint[o]r, please file and note.” It is likely,
having regard to the
terms of the emails of 5 and 21 July 2017, that the documentation (including the
”1 May 2017” Minutes)
was executed around the time that it was sent
to the Group’s lawyers and accountants.
Meetings were
sometime “impromptu” and by telephone
regards the matter in paragraph [
](5) above, I accept that there was evidence that
meetings of the directors of Boyded (Ms Richards and Mr Turner) could be,
from time to time, organised outside the scheduled meetings, and Ms
Richards sometimes attended such ad hoc meetings by teleconference.
there is no communication from Mr Turner or Mr Duggin to Ms Richards
referring to such a meeting, either before or after
it occurred, despite Ms
Kragh having apparently undertaken extensive searches for such evidence in 2024.
is there any documentary evidence of Ms Richards being informed, at any time,
whether before or after 1 May 2017, of any issue
regarding the Appointor of the
RG Trust, or any proposal to amend the provisions of the RG Trust Deed in
respect of the Appointor,
or any proposal to appoint a replacement
is there an entry for any such meeting on 1 May 2017 in Mr Duggin’s
electronic diary, in circumstances where he gave unchallenged
evidence that:
“It was my usual practice to diarise all board meetings attended by me in
my Microsoft Outlook calendar.”
Defendants submitted that this omission was not significant, because
Mr Duggin “gave evidence that he would not necessarily
informal meetings of the kind that occurred”. In fact, the relevant part
of Mr Duggin’s affidavit read as follows:
“I am aware that, on
occasion, the directors had informal meetings (i.e. a meeting not identified in
the meeting schedule)
to address urgent matters. I do not recall ever
participating in these meetings, and I would not expect them to be recorded in
diary”. That is, Mr Duggin’s evidence was that
(unsurprisingly) his diary would not record any informal meeting of Mr
and Ms Richards which Mr Duggin did not attend. However, the purported board
meeting of 1 May 2017 is said to be a meeting
which Mr Duggin did in fact
attend. Mr Duggin stated, in a proof of his evidence which the Defendants
tendered, that he was “fairly
rigorous” in his practice of diarising
board meetings, and if the meeting of 1 May 2017 had occurred (which he is said
attended), he would expect it to be in his diary. The lack of any
reference to this meeting in his diary is therefore a significant
Duggin also gave unchallenged evidence that, ahead of each board meeting, Ms
Kragh would send out a board pack which he would approve
and that “[i]f
additional documents were to be considered at a board meeting, [he] would
ordinarily provide them, or arrange
for [Ms Kragh] to provide them, to the
directors ahead of the meeting”. That accords with good corporate
governance and common
sense. However, there is no record of the Appointor Deed
being sent to Ms Richards prior to the meeting. There is no explanation
Turner’s affidavit as to why this did not occur.
Duggin’s practices as Company Secretary
regards the matter in paragraph [
(7)] above, Mr Duggin gave the following evidence
regarding his practices as Company Secretary:
“Q:...You understood that one of your roles as company secretary of the
companies in the [BG] Webb Group was to act as guardian
of corporate
governance?
Q. And you sought to act accordingly when performing your role as company
secretary, that is--
Q. --to act as guardian of corporate governance?
Q. In that role, acting as guardian of corporate governance, you would ensure
that where board meetings were required in order for
decisions to be made for
the company, that those meetings were arranged and held?
Q. You ensured that where you signed a contract in your capacity as an officer
of the company that the board had met and authorised
you to do so; correct?
the basis of this evidence, the Defendants submitted that “it is unlikely
that Mr Duggin would have signed the Deed of Variation
unless a board meeting
had been arranged and held to approve this occurring”.
the evidence above was couched in terms of what Mr Duggin would do “where
board meetings were required in order for
decisions to be made for the
company”. It was not put to Mr Duggin that he understood, or would have
appreciated, at the relevant
time, that there needed to be a board resolution
before he could sign the Appointor Deed as Company Secretary. The Appointor Deed
does not refer to any authority from the board of directors being required or
obtained in relation to the document. He was not asked,
in cross-examination,
any questions about the extent of his understanding as to the circumstances in
which the authority of the board
of Boyded (Mr Turner and Ms Richards) was
required, and in which the authority of the CEO (Mr Turner) would not be
sufficient. In
those circumstances, the generalised concessions which he made
regarding his practices are of minimal significance.
– 1 May 2017 meeting
regard to the matters set out above, I find that Ms Richards did not, on 1 May
2017 or at any other time, participate in a
meeting of the board of directors of
Boyded at which it was resolved to approve the entry into the Appointor Deed and
the appointment
of Mr Turner as Appointor of the Trust.
1322 application
Plaintiffs pleaded that, if and to the extent that the “1 May
2017” Minutes recorded an actual meeting of Mr Turner
and Mr Duggin (which
Ms Richards did not attend), any such meeting was not a quorate meeting of
the board of Boyded that was capable
of passing a resolution in the terms
recorded, and that at no time has a quorate meeting of Boyded passed any
resolution to that
effect (see Further Amended Statement of Claim,
[29]-[30]).
Defendants admitted that, at all material times, a quorum of two directors was
required for the transaction of business by the
board of Boyded (Defence [15]).
However, in response to the allegations in paragraphs [29]-[30] of the Further
Amended Statement
of Claim, the Defendants pleaded that:
“... even if there had been such procedural irregularity (denied), such a
procedural irregularity does not render the resolution
invalid, or
alternatively, the Court may, and it is contended should, make an order
declaring the resolution, the amendment deed
and the appointment of Kieran Tuner
as appointor of the trust not invalid under
Corporations
reference to “
” is presumably a reference to
Act, which relevantly provides as follows:
(1) In this section, unless the contrary intention appears:
(a) a reference to a proceeding under this Act is a reference
to any proceeding whether a legal proceeding or not; and
(b) a reference to a procedural irregularity includes a
reference to:
(i) the absence of a quorum at a meeting of a corporation, at a
meeting of directors or creditors of a corporation, at a joint
creditors and members of a corporation or at a meeting of members of a
registered scheme; and
(ii) a defect, irregularity or deficiency of notice or time.
(4) Subject to the following provisions of this section but
without limiting the generality of any other provision of this Act,
may, on application by any interested person, make all or any of the following
orders, either unconditionally or subject
to such conditions as the Court
(a) an order declaring that any act, matter or thing purporting
to have been done, or any proceeding purporting to have been instituted
taken, under this Act or in relation to a corporation is not invalid by reason
of any contravention of a provision of this Act
or a provision of the
constitution of a corporation;
(6) The Court must not make an order under this section unless
it is satisfied:
(a) in the case of an order referred to in paragraph (4)(a):
(i) that the act, matter or thing, or the proceeding, referred
to in that paragraph is essentially of a procedural nature;
(ii) that the person or persons concerned in or party to the
contravention or failure acted honestly; or
(iii) that it is just and equitable that the order be made; and
(c) in every case--that no substantial injustice has been or is
likely to be caused to any person.
closing written submissions regarding this issue, the Defendants contended that,
irrespective of whether there was any resolution
of the board of Boyded, Ms
Richards had given Mr Turner “sole responsibility as director for handling
and making decisions
Boyded, decide who to appoint as Appointor”, with the effect that
(irrespective
of whether Ms Richards was involved in the decision) the execution
of the Appointor Deed and appointment of Mr Turner as Appointor
were valid.
accept the Plaintiffs’ submission that there is no pleaded case advanced
by the Defendants to the effect that Mr Turner had
been given “sole
responsibility” for “legal matters” related to Boyded, such
that he had unilateral authority
to execute the Appointor Deed and to appoint
himself as Appointor of the RG Trust. It would be a substantial denial of
fairness to the Plaintiffs to permit such an issue to be raised by
the Defendants in closing submissions, in circumstances where
the Plaintiffs
were not afforded any opportunity to address the issue in evidence in chief.
any case, the evidence before the Court was insufficient to make out any such
contention. The Defendants principally relied on
the following concessions by Ms
Richards in the course of her cross-examination:
“Q. You just left it to Kieran to run the enterprise; correct?
A. Correct.
Q. Gave him responsibility to make decisions concerning the affairs of the
A. Correct.
Q. Including legal decisions?
A. Including?
Q. Legal decisions.
A. What do you mean by legal decisions?
Q. Decisions relating to legal matters affecting the group?
Q. You gave him responsibility to look after that, didn’t you?
propositions leave entirely at large how such responsibility was given to Mr
Turner (including whether it was given by the board
of one or more corporate
entities), when it was given (including whether it was given before or after
2017), what was the scope of
any responsibility to “look after”
decisions, and what was the scope of “legal matters”. Those matters
otherwise unexplored on the evidence because no issue regarding the
existence, source and scope of any delegated authority was pleaded.
any contention that Mr Turner had been given, as at 1 May 2017, “sole
responsibility” to approve and execute,
on behalf of Boyded, documents
such as the Appointor Deed, is at odds with:
(1) the documents drafted by HWLE in April 2017, which indicated that a
resolution of the Board was required in order to give effect
Turner’s appointment;
(2) Mr Turner’s statement to HWLE, on 5 July 2017, that he intended to get
the relevant documentation signed at the forthcoming
board meeting; and
(3) Mr Turner’s concern to find (and subsequently create) some evidence in
2024 which indicated that Ms Richards had attended
a board meeting on 1 May 2017
at which a resolution to approve Mr Turner’s appointment as Appointor had
been passed.
turn then to the Defendants’ pleaded contention that any lack of a quorum
was a “procedural irregularity” which
the Court should determine did
not invalidate the passing of the relevant resolution. In this regard, the
Defendants advanced the
following submissions:
“Further, even if Joanne’s absence meant that the Deed and
appointment were invalid, the appropriate course would be
for the Court to
exercise power under
Corporations Act
declaring such
items not invalid. There is no evidence that a different decision would have
been made in 2017 if Joanne had been present
when the decision was made. She had
given Kieran complete responsibility for the making of decisions in relation to
the Group, including
relevantly here, decisions relating to legal matters
affecting the Group. He was the Group’s managing director. Joanne
nothing or almost nothing of what she was told on any legal or
accounting matter, would not read documents that were provided to
attempt to understand them, and did not know what an appointor was. As such,
even if she had been present, the result (Deed
of Variation and the appointment
of Kieran) would have been the same. A director who pays such disregard for
their duties and responsibilities,
and consequentially leaves another director
with all of the burdens, should not be allowed to later complain about and take
of a procedural irregularity in order to confer, years after the
relevant events, some personal advantage that she would never have
enjoyed even
if she had been involved in the decision. It was clear that Boyded needed a
legal issue to be solved in 2017 by the
appointment of an Appointor to the
Rossfield Trust and that the person who was the obvious choice for that role was
reject this submission, for four main reasons.
it proceeds on the basis that there was in fact a meeting of the directors of
Boyded, which was attended by Mr Turner and Mr
Duggin (but not
Ms Richards), at which a decision was made to approve Mr Turner’s
appointment. The only evidence that any such
meeting occurred is the version of
the “1 May 2017” Minutes which Mr Turner sent to HWLE on 21 July
2017. Mr Turner did
not assert that any such meeting (attended only by himself
and Mr Duggin) took place. Nor did Mr Duggin have any recollection of
a meeting at which the subject matter of the “1 May 2017” Minutes
was discussed. Further, Mr Turner did not
assert that there was any
occasion, whether on 1 May 2017 or otherwise, on which he purported to
unilaterally pass a resolution of
the board of directors of Boyded. I am not
satisfied that any such meeting was in fact held.
assuming that there was a meeting on 1 May 2017 which was attended by Mr Turner
and Mr Duggin, but not Ms Richards, the
relevant “act, matter or thing
purporting to be done” which the Defendants seek to have declared
“not invalid”
is the purported passing of a resolution at that
meeting approving the amendment to the RG Trust Deed and Mr Turner’s
appointment
as Appointor. This would not be a case of a “procedural
irregularity”. On this scenario, the thing that was in fact done
the passing of a resolution by Mr Turner alone) differed in form, substance and
effect from the thing that ought to have
been done (namely, the consideration
and, if thought fit, passing of a resolution by Boyded’s board): see
Onefone Australia Pty Ltd v One.Tel Ltd
[2010] NSWSC 1120
(Barrett J).
I am not satisfied that, assuming Mr Turner did purport to pass a resolution in
relation to the Appointor of the RG Trust
in Ms Richards’ absence, he was
acting honestly in so doing. He was aware (from the materials provided to him by
any appointment of a new Appointor to the RG Trust had to be approved
by the board of Boyded. He did not, in his affidavit evidence
cross-examination, give any evidence that he believed, in 2017, that such a
decision could be taken by himself, without any
reference to Ms Richards, let
alone identify any basis for such a belief. His conduct in creating, in 2024,
two versions of the “1
May 2017” Minutes which included
Ms Richards’ name indicates that he in fact understood that her
agreement was essential.
the Defendants focussed, in the submissions quoted above, on
Ms Richards’ lack of interest in various other legal
concerning the Heartland Motors Group. However, Ms Richards had, as at May 2017,
a keen interest in the administration of
the affairs of the RG Trust and, in
particular, in the distributions made from the sale proceeds of the Parramatta
and Lakemba Properties.
This was evident in the discussions which occurred, and
messages which were sent, about this topic in early 2017 (see paragraphs
] above). One of the
relevant distributions which was the subject of dispute – being a payment
of more than $8.5m to Mr Turner
– was made on 16 May 2017. Having regard
to those matters, I accept Ms Richards’ evidence that if the proposal to
Mr Turner as Appointor of the RG Trust had been brought to her attention
on or around 1 May 2017, it is highly unlikely that she
would have agreed to
this proposal, without seeking an opportunity to obtain legal advice in order to
understand the nature and effect
of what was proposed. Further, it is likely
that, if she had been advised as to the nature and effect of what was proposed,
have opposed it.
light of the matters set out above, I am not satisfied that it would be just and
equitable, in the circumstances of this case,
for an order now to be made
validating any resolution which Mr Turner purported to unilaterally pass,
approving the execution of
the Appointor Deed and the appointment of himself as
Appointor. Further, I consider that, assuming Mr Turner had purported to
unilaterally
pass such a resolution, substantial injustice would have been
caused by the failure to seek Ms Richards’ agreement to the resolution,
particular because she would likely not have supported the resolution, and
Mr Turner has subsequently purported to use his powers
as Appointor to
appoint Mr Anthony Turner as Supervisor, who in turn has purported to
remove Boyded and appoint Heartland One as
trustee of the RG Trust, thereby
moving the valuable assets of the RG Trust outside the control of the Heartland
Motors Group.
follows that I reject the Defendants’
application.
Was the amendment of the RG Trust Deed within
my findings that there was no resolution by the board of Boyded on 1 May
2017 (or at any other time) approving the execution
of the Appointor Deed or the
appointment of Mr Turner as Appointor of the RG Trust, it is unnecessary to
consider the Plaintiffs’
contentions that, even if there was such a
resolution, those acts were beyond power. However, in case I have erred in
reaching those
findings, I have addressed these contentions briefly
Scope of amendment power
23 of the RG Trust Deed, which is headed “Amendment”, provides as
follows (emphasis added):
“THE Trustee for the time being may at any time and from time to time by
deed of appointment or other deed
revoke add to or vary all or any of the
trusts herein-before limited
or the trusts limited by any variation or
alteration or addition made thereto from time to time and may by the same or any
deed or deeds declare any new or other trusts or powers concerning the
Trust Fund or any part or parts thereof the trusts whereof
shall have been so
revoked added to or varied but so that the law against perpetuities is not
thereby infringed and so that such
new or other trusts powers discretions
alterations or variations:
(i) may relate to the management or control of the Trust Fund
or the application or investment thereof or to the Trustee’s
discretions in these presents contained;
(ii) shall not be in favour of or for the benefit of the
Settlor or result in any benefit to the Settlor but shall otherwise be
benefit of all or any one or more of the General Beneficiaries hereunder or, if
there shall be none, for the benefit of all
or any one or more of the statutory
next of kin of the last surviving Primary Beneficiary;
(iii) shall not affect the beneficial entitlement to any amount
set aside for any beneficiary prior to the date of the variation
alteration or
1.1(vii) defines the Appointor as meaning “successively the person or
persons named and described as such in the Seventh
Part of the Schedule”.
The person named in the Seventh Part of the Schedule is Rossfield Appointor Pty
Ltd (which was deregistered
on 30 September 1997).
3 of the Appointor Deed provided as follows:
“In accordance with clause 23 of the Trust Deed, on and from the date of
this deed poll, the Trust Deed is amended as follows:
Insert a new subclause 19(3) to read as follows:
‘Notwithstanding any other provision of this clause 19, the trustee may,
if the office of the Appoint[o]r is vacant at any
time for any reason
whatsoever, appoint a replacement Appoint[o]r in its absolute
discretion’.”
Plaintiffs submitted that the power in clause 23 to “vary all or any of
the trusts herein-before limited” does not
extend to a power to vary the
Trust Deed insofar as it contains provisions concerning the office of Appointor,
as distinct from a
variation of the RG Trust created by the Trust Deed.
support of this submission, the Plaintiffs relied on
[2015] WASC 297.
In that case, there was an issue as to whether, in
respect of two different trusts (described as the MMF Trust and the FW Trust),
purported amendment to the trust deed so as to change the identity of the
appointor was valid. The power of amendment was, in each
trust deed, couched in
different terms, and this difference was critical to Le Miere J’s
reasoning at first instance.
amendment clause in the MMF trust deed provided, relevantly, that “the
Trustees ... may ... vary ... the trusts terms and
conditions hereinbefore
contained” (at [87]). Le Miere J concluded as follows (at [91],
emphasis added):
“In my opinion the natural and ordinary meaning of the words of cl 28 are
that the trustees
may amend the provisions of the trust deed, including the
items in the Schedule naming or describing the Appointor
and the Guardian.
In my opinion there is nothing in the remaining provisions of the trust deed
that necessarily imply that the trustees
cannot amend the deed by removing the
Appointor or Guardian and replacing them.”
appeal from his Honour’s decision in respect of the MMF trust deed was
Mercanti v Mercanti
(2016) 50 WAR 495
[2016] WASCA
amendment clause in the FW trust deed provided as follows (at [98], emphasis
“14.1 The Trustee may at any time and from time to time
(but whilst there shall be an Appointor only after having given not
less than 30
days written notice to the Appointor of his intention so to do) by deeds
revoke add to or vary all or any of the trusts hereinbefore provided
the trusts provided by any variation alteration or addition made thereto from
time to time and may by the same or any other deed
declare any new or other
trusts or powers concerning the Trust Fund or any part thereof the trusts
whereof shall have been so revoked
added to or varied.
14.2 The powers specified in clause 13.1 shall not be exercised
14.2.1 any interest under the trusts as so revoked added to or
varied may vest after the expiry of the perpetuity period;
14.2.2 any member of the Excluded Class is becomes or may
become entitled to any interest or benefit under the trusts as so revoked
to or varied; or
14.2.3 the beneficial entitlement to any amount set aside for
any Beneficiary prior to the date of the variation alteration or
addition is
14.3 Save as provided in clauses 14.1 and 14.2 these presents
shall not be capable of being revoked added to or varied.”
clause is in similar terms to clause 23 of the RG Trust Deed. In respect of this
clause, Le Miere J concluded as follows (at
[100]-[102], emphasis added):
The crucial words of cl 14.1 are ‘the Trustee may ... vary ...
the trusts hereinbefore provided’
. In my opinion the trusts
hereinbefore provided are the trusts provided for in the earlier provisions of
the trust deed. Clause 2
(Declaration of Trust) declares that the trustee shall
stand possessed of the Trust Fund and the income thereof upon the trusts and
with and subject to the powers and provisions hereinafter expressed. The trusts
and powers expressed are found in cl 2 (Declaration
of Trust), 4 (Profits of the
Trust), 5 (Vesting of Trust), 6 (Benefits in Addition), 7 (Trustee Powers), 8
(Trustee’s General
Powers). The identity of the Appointor is not
‘any of the trusts hereinbefore provided ...’.
In my opinion the natural and ordinary meaning of the words ‘the
Trustee may ... vary ... the trusts hereinbefore provided’
does not extend
to varying the terms and conditions of the trust deed dealing with the office of
Appointor as distinct from the trusts
created by the trust deed. The FW Trust
Deed distinguishes between ‘the trusts’ and ‘the trusts powers
and provisions’
of the trust deed.
The definition clause defines
‘Trust’ to mean ‘the trusts powers and provisions as
constituted by this Deed of
Settlement’. The word ‘Trust’
appears in cl 15.4 which refers to persons claiming a beneficial interest in
or upon ‘the property subject to this Trust’. Clause 15.10
specifies that the law applicable to ‘this Trust’
shall be the law
of the place of the residence of the Trustee. In contrast, the power of
amendment in cl 14 refers to varying ‘the
‘Trusts” herein
before provided not ‘the Trust’. Perhaps more persuasive is that cl
2.1, in which the Settlor
declares the trust, distinguishes between ‘the
trusts’ and ‘the powers and provisions’ in the trust deed.
Similarly, cl 3.1, which is concerned with indemnity and exclusion of liability,
distinguishes between ‘Trusts’ and ‘authorities,
discretions’ of the trust deed by referring to the execution or failure to
exercise ‘any of the trusts authorities
powers and discretions’ of
the trust deed ‘by virtue of being Trustee of the Trust’. Section 8
of the trust deed,
which deals with trustee’s powers, distinguishes
between ‘trusts’ and ‘powers’ and ‘powers and
provisions’. Clause 8.19 refers to questions arising under or in relation
to the execution of ‘the trusts and powers
of this Deed’. Clause
8.29 refers to the trustees appointing the whole or any part of the Trust Fund
to be held upon other
trusts and thereupon ‘the trust herein declared
concerning that property’ shall cease and the property shall be subject
‘the trusts powers and provisions contained in the other
settlement’.
Clause 14 of the FW Trust Deed does not empower the Trustee to remove the
Appointor and appoint a new Appointor in his, her, or their
Honour’s findings in respect of the FW trust deed were not the subject of
any appeal.
closing written submissions, the Defendants did not engage with the reasoning in
, asserting as follows (emphasis added):
“The power of amendment in clause 23 expressly includes a power to add to
vary the trust recorded in the deed
. On the natural meaning of these
words, this would enable the deed to be varied so as to enable the trustee to
appoint an appointor
where the position becomes vacant.”
Defendants’ submission does not accurately reflect the language of the
relevant clause in the RG Trust Deed. Clause 23 does
not provide a power to
vary the trust recorded in the deed
”, but rather (as in the
FW trust deed considered in
a power to “
all or any of the trusts herein-before limited
was the case with the FW trust deed in
, the clause of the RG
Trust Deed by which the Settlor declares the trust distinguishes between the
“trusts” and the “powers
and provisions” in the Trust
Deed, providing as follows:
“IN consideration of the premises the Settlor as Settlor HEREBY DECLARES
that the Trustee shall and the Trustee HEREBY DECLARES
that it will henceforth
stand possessed of the Trust Fund and of the income thereof
upon the trusts
and with the powers and subject to the provisions hereinafter
Defendants did not address, in their submissions, the manner in which the term
“the trusts” is used in the RG Trust
Deed, nor explain, by reference
to such use, why a power of the trustee to “vary the trusts herein-before
limited” would
extend to a power to amend the provisions of the trust deed
so as to replace the Appointor specified in the RG Trust Deed. The Defendants
did not identify any basis, in terms of the language of the RG Trust Deed, for
distinguishing the reasoning in
regarding the scope of the
similarly worded power in the FW trust deed.
Nonetheless,
I consider it preferable not to express any concluded view on the scope of the
amendment power in the RG Trust Deed,
in circumstances where it is unnecessary
to express any view on that issue in this proceeding, in particular because the
received only scant attention in the written and oral submissions of
the parties and there has been no analysis undertaken, in submissions,
terms used in clause 23 in light of the other provisions of the RG Trust Deed,
such as was undertaken in
Simultaneous
amendment of RG Trust Deed and exercise of power
Plaintiffs further contended that, even if the “1 May 2017” Minutes
were (contrary to my findings above) an accurate
record of a meeting of the
directors of Boyded:
(1) those minutes “record the simultaneous authorisation of Boyded’s
execution of the deed of amendment (to give itself
power to appoint an
appointor) and the exercise of the power arising consequent upon the
amendment”;
(2) the Appointor Deed (which amended the RG Trust Deed) must have been executed
after the authorisation was given by the board of
Boyded; and
(3) it follows that Boyded purported to exercise the power to appoint an
Appointor before it conferred upon itself that power.
support of this argument, the Plaintiffs referred to authorities to the effect
that a trustee must exercise a power at the time
it falls to be exercised, and
cannot fetter its exercise of discretion by determining to exercise a power in
Fitzwood Pty Ltd v Unique Goal Pty Ltd
(2001) 188 ALR 566
[2001] FCA 1628
per Finkelstein J, citing
Thacker v Key
[1869] UKLawRpEq 131
LR 8 Eq 408
Re Baron Vestey’s Settlement
[1951] Ch D 209.
Plaintiffs submitted that:
“A corollary of that position is that a trustee cannot determine to
exercise a power that it does not presently have, even
if it will obtain that
power in the future. Assuming that it had power to vary its trust powers in the
manner provided for by the
Deed Poll, and in fact exercised that power, it did
not until the subsequent execution of the Deed Poll have that power, and thus
could not have validly exercised the new trust power it had granted to itself at
the time of the alleged meeting and thus fetter
its future discretion as to
whether, and if so how, to exercise that discretionary power created after that
it were necessary to decide this issue (in the event that I had determined that
a meeting of the board of Boyded had occurred on
1 May 2017 with Ms Richards in
attendance, as recorded in the amended “1 May 2017” Minutes, and as
recounted in Mr Turner’s
affidavit), I would have rejected these
submissions.
it is important to have regard to the terms of the resolution recorded in the
“1 May 2017” Minutes (emphasis added):
IT WAS RESOLVED THAT
(a) the [Appointor Deed] and the variation to the Trust Deed
that it contemplates is approved; and
(b) the [Appointor Deed] be executed by the Company in its
capacity as trustee of the Trust, in substantially the form tabled by
Subject to execution of the [Appointor Deed] and Kieran
Turner consenting to act as Appoint[or],
the Trustee appoint Kieran Turner
as the Appoint[or] of the Trust
short, the Board resolved that the Deed Poll be executed and that, subject to
this occurring, Mr Turner be appointed as the Appointor
of the Trust.
describe this as the Board “fettering its future discretion”
regarding the exercise of its power to appoint an Appointor
is to seek to draw a
temporal distinction between events which were, as a matter of substance, all
part of one transaction. In particular,
if I had accepted the accuracy of Mr
Turner’s account of the 1 May 2017 meeting, I would have found
(1) Mr Turner printed out and brought to the 1 May 2017 meeting copies of each
of the draft documents provided to him by HWLE –
namely, the draft
minutes, the Appointor Deed and the document by which Mr Turner was to accept
the appointment as Appointor;
(2) Mr Duggin either read out or provided a summary of each of those documents,
following which Ms Richards and Mr Turner resolved
to approve both the execution
of the Appointor Deed and Mr Turner’s appointment as Appointor; and
(3) immediately following this meeting, which lasted around 5 or 10 minutes, Mr
Turner signed each of those documents in Mr Duggin’s
presence (with Mr
Duggin also signing the Appointor Deed).
I had made findings to the above effect, then I do not think it could be said,
in any substantive sense, that Boyded had impermissibly
“fettered its
discretion” regarding the manner in which its power would be exercised in
the future, by determining that
Mr Turner should be appointed as Appointor of
the RG Trust in advance of Boyded’s having (mere moments later) the power
Accordingly,
if I had found that the meeting of 1 May 2017 had occurred, as set out in the
amended “1 May 2017” Minutes
and as recounted in Mr Turner’s
affidavit, and had found that Boyded had power, pursuant to cl 23 of the
RG Trust Deed, to
amend the RG Trust Deed so as to confer upon itself the
power to replace the Appointor of the RG Trust, I would not have concluded,
the basis of this “timing” issue, that the exercise of that power
was invalid.
Was the appointment of the trustee for a proper
have determined that the board of Boyded did not authorise the execution of the
Appointor Deed and that this document was therefore
invalid and of no effect.
follows that:
(1) Mr Turner did not have power to appoint Mr Anthony Turner as Supervisor of
the RG Trust, when he purported to do so on 15 September
(2) Mr Anthony Turner did not have power to remove Boyded as trustee of the RG
Trust, and to appoint Heartland One to that office,
when he purported to do so
on 30 April 2025.
Accordingly,
it is unnecessary to determine whether or not those powers were validly
exercised, or were exercised for an improper
in case I am wrong in my conclusions that Mr Turner and Mr Anthony Turner did
not have the powers which each purported to
exercise as, respectively, Appointor
and Supervisor, I have considered the Plaintiffs’ contentions below and
have, in particular,
made findings regarding the purpose(s) for which those
powers were exercised. Further, the events leading up to the change of the
trustee of the RG Trust are also relevant to the Cross-Claim, insofar as the
Cross-Defendants relied on those matters as providing
a basis for the
termination of the employment of each of Mr Turner and Mr Anthony
Relevant principles
was no dispute regarding the relevant principles.
a power to appoint a trustee might not be correctly characterised as a
“fiduciary power”, such a power is controlled
by the doctrine of
“fraud on a power”, such that it must be exercised bona fide for the
purpose for which it was conferred:
Baba v Sheehan
per Brereton JA.
Lancedale Holdings Pty Ltd v Health Group Australasia Pty Ltd
, Bryson J observed that:
“It is very common to find that the manner of exercise of powers is
limited by requiring that they be exercised in good faith
and for the purposes
for which they were conferred; sometimes this is a limitation imposed in Equity
on the conduct of trustees or
other persons with fiduciary responsibilities who
deal with rights which exist only in Equity; and sometimes a control of that
is implied in the terms of the instrument creating the power. Similar
implications are usual for powers in public law.”
doctrine of “fraud on a power” operates to avoid the exercise of a
power where it has been exercised for a purpose,
or with an intention, beyond
the scope of, or not justified by, the instrument creating the power. Such an
exercise of power for
an extraneous purpose is invalid and void:
at [6] per Brereton JA and see also at [50] per Emmett AJA (with
whom Simpson AJA agreed).
purpose of a trust deed, in conferring a power, is to benefit the objects of the
relevant trust. If the power is exercised for
an unauthorised purpose, which
benefits the person on whom the power is conferred, the exercise of such power
will be for a foreign
purpose. A power will be exercised for a foreign purpose
if it is exercised with the intention of benefiting someone who is not an
of the power: ibid at [49] (Emmett AJA).
Baba v Sheehan
, Emmett AJA summarised the issue for determination on that
appeal as follows (at [49]-[50]):
“The objects of the Trust, as specified in the Trust Deed, are the
Unitholders. The exercise of the power conferred by cl 2
of the Trust Deed must,
accordingly, be for the purpose of benefiting the Unitholders. If the power were
to be exercised for the
purpose of enabling Mr Sheehan [who exercised the power
of appointment] to control the Trust Business and the affairs of the Trust,
would be an exercise for a foreign purpose.
In that context, it is relevant that each of Mr Baba, Mr Carney and Mr Sheehan
was a director and shareholder of Smart Street [the
former trustee]. On the
other hand, the only directors and shareholders of Silktote [the replacement
trustee] are Mr Sheehan and
his wife. Thus, the effect of replacing Smart Street
with Silktote was to remove from Mr Baba and Mr Carney any capacity to have
say in the affairs of the Trust and to limit those who have such a say to Mr
Sheehan and his wife. If that were the purpose and
intention of Mr Sheehan in
exercising the power, it would be for a foreign purpose and be void and
ineffective. However, if Mr Sheehan,
as Appointor, in good faith formed the view
that it was in the interests of all of the Unitholders that Smart Street be
with Silktote because Silktote was better qualified to manage the
affairs of the Trust and the Trust Business, there would be no
fraud on the
that case, the problem for the appellants was that the primary judge had found
that Mr Sheehan did not in fact exercise the power
of appointment for the
improper purpose of obtaining control of the Trust, and the appellants did not
identify any basis for challenging
this finding, which was open on the evidence
(at [52], [57]).
, the appointor of the MMF trust had removed the
corporate trustee of the MMF Trust and had replaced it with a different
entity which he controlled. Le Miere J held as follows (at
[175]-[176]):
“Appointing a company controlled by [the appointor] as trustee was not of
itself the exercise of the power by [the appointor]
for a foreign or improper
purpose. [The appointor’s] purpose was to appoint in place of [the
former trustee] ... a company
which would reinstate the management of
the business which had been removed without consultation or notice by [the
former trustee]
... acting by its shareholders ... There is no evidence that
[the appointor] intended to effect any purpose beyond putting [the replacement
trustee] in control of the [MMF Trust] and the management of the family
business. For example, there is no evidence that [the appointor]
intended [the
replacement trustee] to deal improperly with trust assets. As trustee, [the
replacement trustee] was bound to exercise
its powers, including its power in
relation to the assets and income of the trusts, as a fiduciary.
[The appointor’s] purpose was to restore the status quo in the sense I
have described. There is no evidence that [the appointor]
did so to achieve any
purpose other than the proper and effective management of the business. ... The
plaintiffs have not established
that [the appointor] executed the notices of
removal and acceptance of appointment of trustee for any improper or ulterior
dismissing an appeal from Le Miere’s decision, Newnes and Murphy JJA said
Mercanti v Mercanti
(2016) 50 WAR 495
[2016] WASCA 206
“The question of the purpose for which [the appointor] appointed [the
replacement trustee] as Trustee was a question of fact.
The judge found, in
effect, that [the appointor’s] purpose was to appoint [the replacement
trustee] to reinstate the management
of the business. The reinstatement of the
management of the trust’s business was not, as the judge said, an improper
in itself. Even though the reinstated ‘management’ was
effectively [the appointor], the exercise of the power of the
Appointor was, in
the circumstances of this case, as the judge found, consistent with a legitimate
concern for ‘the proper
and effective management of the business’.
The effective management of the trust’s business would be to the benefit
all the objects of the trust. There is no error in the judge’s
reasoning or conclusion.”
authorities indicate that the question of the purpose for which an appointor
exercises a power to replace the trustee is a question
of fact and that, if the
appointor does so as a result of a legitimate concern to protect or advance the
interests of the objects
of the trust, then the appointor will be acting for a
proper purpose (even if the appointor replaces the existing trustee with a
trustee which the appointor controls). For example, if the appointor, in good
faith, has formed the view that the replacement trustee
(which the appointor
controls) is better qualified to manage the affairs of the trust, in the
interests of the objects of the trust,
then there will be no “fraud on the
power”. If, however, the appointor is not, in fact, acting out of any
concern for the interests of the objects of the trust, but is instead
replacing the existing trustee in order to gain, or maintain,
control of the
management of the affairs of the trust, or to remove such control from other
directors or shareholders of the existing
trustee, then the appointor will be
exercising the power for a foreign purpose, and this will be void and
ineffective.
the present case, it was common ground that these principles applied both to the
power of the Appointor of the RG Trust to appoint
a Supervisor, and to the power
of the Supervisor of the RG Trust to remove and replace the Trustee.
as a discretionary power, a power to appoint a trustee may, like a discretionary
power of a trustee, be impugned on the basis
that it was exercised without
giving a real or genuine consideration to the exercise of the discretion. The
concept of giving “a
real or genuine consideration” requires that
there be “the exercise of an active discretion” and that there be
consideration of whether or not to exercise the power:
Owies v JJE
Pty Ltd (in its capacity as the trustee for the Owies Family
[2022] VSCA 142
(Kyrou, Niall and Walker JJA).
The Victorian Court of Appeal there referred to McGarvie J’s observations
Karger v Paul
[1984] VicRp 13
[1984] VR 161
at 164 that it was relevant to look at
“the inquiries which were made ... , the information [the trustees] had
and the reasons
for, and manner of, their exercising their
discretion”.
Karger v Paul
principles, a decision may be reviewable for want of
“properly informed consideration”. If the consideration is not
informed, it is not genuine:
Finch v Telstra Super Pty Ltd
(2010) 242 CLR 254
[2010] HCA 36
(French CJ, Gummow, Heydon, Crennan
and Bell JJ).
a discretionary power to remove or appoint a trustee must be exercised
personally and not in conjunction with, or under the
direction of, another
Scaffidi v Montevento Holdings Pty Ltd
[2011] WASCA 146
per Murphy JA and Hall J (which was overturned on appeal on unrelated
Montevento Holdings Pty Ltd v Scaffidi
(2012) 246 CLR 325
[2012] HCA 48)
Owies v JJE Nominees
Relevant facts
Overheard conversation between Ms Richards and her lawyers
20 March 2023, Mr Turner, Mr Anthony Turner and Ms Richards attended a
meeting of directors of the Operating Entities in the Heartland
Motors Group. Ms
Kragh also attended this meeting in her capacity as company secretary. Ms
Richards attended the meeting by Zoom,
with the others being present at the King
Street Office. At the conclusion of the board meeting, the screen in the King
Street Office
went black, but Ms Richards’ audio link remained live. Mr
Turner and Mr Anthony Turner did not alert Ms Richards to this, but
stayed on the line and listened as Ms Richards proceeded to have a privileged
conversation with her lawyers, which was recorded.
(The Plaintiffs waived
privilege in respect of this conversation at the hearing, and tendered the
recording and transcript.)
Turner implausibly asserted in cross-examination that he did not realise at the
time that this was a conversation between Ms Richards
and her lawyers. Having
regard to the contents of the conversation, this must have been obvious,
especially to an experienced businessperson
such as Mr Turner (who plainly
followed the conversation intently, as he claimed that it was
“etched” in his memory).
That conclusion is reinforced by the fact
that on 22 March 2023, just two days after the relevant board meeting, Mr Turner
following text message to Ms Kragh (emphasis added):
“Hi Ak. Can you please add
the jo legal discussion that we taped
into our minutes of the last board meeting – technically it formed
part of our meeting.”
taken to this message in cross-examination, Mr Turner gave the following
“Q. Didn’t you understand that was a legal discussion you
A. The Jo legal discussion, what was 22 March, maybe at that time I knew.
Q. Right. So you did know it was a legal--
A. That was the board meeting?
Q. The 20th, so--
A. So at the time I heard it, no, I didn’t. At this stage, two days
Q. You’ve had an epiphany? Two days later you’ve had an epiphany,
and now you realise it was a legal discussion?
A. Well, I’ve referred to it. I don’t understand - I don’t
recall why I’ve described it as a legal discussion,
Q. I think the more important question, Mr Turner, is why you didn’t
concede a few minutes ago that you knew that it was a
legal discussion?
A. Because at the time I didn’t.
Q. But two days later you did?
A. Potentially, I don’t even know if that is my state of mind by saying
the legal discussion. I’m not saying they were
lawyers, it just sounded
like a legal discussion. Maybe that’s all I’m referring to.
Q. Ah, legal discussion between non-lawyers?
Turner’s failure to acknowledge that the conversation which he overheard
was a discussion between Ms Richards and her legal
advisors, and his attempts to
explain away his 22 March 2023 text to Ms Kragh, damage his credit.
taped conversation is lengthy. The relevant part of the conversation between Ms
Richards (“JR”) and her solicitor,
Mr Hugh Scott (“HS”),
which Mr Turner identified as having given rise to his concern about the
manner in which Ms Richards
would manage the RG Trust, was as
“JR: Yeah. What’s the other issue, the big issue that you’re
That $7 million, $12 million, that extra 10%
JR: Yeah. Is that all null and void because it’s over 7 years ago? Like we
can’t go back on that?
HS: It’s going to be difficult because you approved the distribution.
JR: But I didn’t sign anything.
HS: I think you signed the minutes that approved it. But...
JR: Not the extra 10%
HS: The distributions were 10%. Let me go back over it, but I’m pretty
sure you signed the relevant minute and approved some
distributions out of that
trust, that equate to an additional 10%.
JR: Oh really? Did I sign something?
HS: A minute yeah. But we’ve got cases where people have effectively just
signed what they were told to sign and proceeded
to overturn it. But I think
possibly the better approach is to equalise the distributions in [?] by
effectively altering future distributions.
Cause you as director... you as
trustees have discretion to make distributions under that trust. And you can
say... you’d have
to do it properly, but you can say, $30 million has been
paid to Kieran and his siblings which represented 15%, 10% of... therefore
next distribution of something – x distribution, won’t be to Kieran
and his siblings.
JR: To even it up?
HS: Correct. And that way you’re not contesting this one, but you’re
equalising the overall distributions.
JR: He’ll just say no.
HS: Of course. But you have control, and there will be a court case obviously.
But, but you’ll have the fact of what he did
here will then come out, but
not in the context of seeking to overturn what has already happened and
potentially approved, but rather
to make it equal, at this point, fair. So
that’s my thinking. And I think that’s probably the best way to go.
JR: Okay. I didn’t realise I’d signed anything.
HS: I’m pretty sure you have. I’d have to go back.”
Mr Turner’s affidavit of 7 August 2025, he deposed that he held the
following concern as a result of hearing this conversation:
“What Joanne was discussing with those with her, who I understand to be
her lawyers, made me think that the assets of the [RG
Trust] were not likely to
be administered properly if Joanne, and possibly also Bernice, were in control
of Boyded Industries. What
they said also made me think that, under
Joanne’s administration, the distributions of the trust would not be
administered
taken to this evidence, and asked to look at the transcript and identify what
words in the relevant passage caused him to hold
this view, Mr Turner gave
the following evidence:
“I don’t recall all of my thoughts in this meeting about words and
lines. The overall recording that I heard made me
feel that she was up to no
good with the future trust distributions, and it was gross misconduct and in
complete bad faith.”
Turner stated that this recording was “etched in [his] memory
forever”. This led to the following further questions:
“Q. What else is said in what is etched in your memory ... do you say
caused you to form the view that the trust would not
be administered fairly?
A. What is etched in my memory is that it was a fraudulent plot.
Q. So if it’s etched in your memory, can you please tell us what words you
relied upon to reach the conclusion that it was
a fraudulent plot?
A. I don’t recall.”
Registration of Heartland One and creation of “1 May 2017”
Minutes with Ms Richards’ name
30 May 2024, Mr Turner and Mr Anthony Turner purported to pass resolutions, over
Ms Richards’ opposition, removing her as
a director of various Operating
Entities (including Boyded).
3 June 2024, Ms Richards and Ms Hooker commenced the 2024 Directors Proceeding,
challenging the validity of the appointment of
Mr Anthony Turner as a director
of various Operating Entities and the removal of Ms Richards as a director of
those companies, and
seeking a declaration that the only two directors of Boyded
were Ms Richards and Mr Turner (see paragraph [
have determined that, around this time, Mr Turner fabricated two versions of the
“1 May 2017” Minutes recording that
Ms Richards had attended a
meeting of the Boyded board on that date and joined in a resolution approving
the appointment of Mr Turner
as Appointor of the RG Trust (see paragraph [
] above). The second
of those documents was fabricated by Mr Turner on or around 16 June 2024, when
he (for the first time) sent a
copy of that document to his solicitors (see
paragraphs [
the following day, 17 June 2024, Mr Turner caused Heartland One to be
registered. At the time of its registration, Heartland One
was named Heartland
Two Pty Ltd, and each of Mr Turner and Mr Anthony Turner was appointed as a
director. In cross examination, Mr
Anthony Turner accepted that the purpose for
which Heartland One was incorporated was to act as a replacement trustee of the
He also gave the following evidence:
“Q. You were aware by at least 17 June 2024, when that company was
incorporated, that Kieran had formulated a new plan to seek
to retain control
over that trust by changing the trustee?
A. I believe so.
Q. That was because Kieran wanted to maintain control over the Rossfield Group
Trust; correct?
A. No, he wanted to protect the trust.
Q. When you say protect the trust, he wanted to protect the trust by maintaining
control over the trust?
A. For its beneficiary, yeah.
Q. He wanted to replace Boyded with a company of which he was a director and
shareholder?
Q. So he wished to maintain control over the Rossfield Group Trust?
Q. He asked you for help in enacting that plan to replace the trustee of the
A. Yeah, because we both heard the recording.
Q. I’m just asking - if you can just listen to my question.
Q. He asked you for help enacting that plan to replace the trustee of the
Rossfield Group Trust?
A. Enacting, yes.”
Execution of Supervisor Deed
19 July 2024, Black J delivered reasons for judgment in the 2024 Directors
Proceeding. Relevantly, Black J determined that Mr Anthony
Turner had not been
validly appointed as a director of various Operating Entities, and that the two
directors of those companies
were Mr Turner and Ms Richards. His Honour
subsequently made declarations to that effect on 15 August 2024 (see paragraphs
12 September 2024, Mr Turner filed a notice of intention to appeal from Black
J’s orders.
15 September 2024, each of Mr Turner and Mr Anthony Turner executed the
Supervisor Deed, which purported to appoint Mr Anthony
Turner as the Supervisor
of the RG Trust.
recitals to the Supervisor Deed include the following matters:
“D. By a resolution of the trustee, Boyded Industries Pty
Ltd, dated 1 May 2017 and the written acceptance of the Appointer
dated 1 May
2017, the Appoint[o]r was appointed as the sole appoint[o]r of the Trust and has
continually held office up to the date
of this deed.
E. Clause 19(1) of the Trust Deed provides that:
The Appointor named or described in the Seventh Part of the Schedule may from
time to time by instrument in writing appoint any other
person or persons as
Supervisor hereunder and may at any time revoke such appointment.
F. The office of Supervisor for the Trust is currently
G. The Appoint[o]r wishes for the purpose of good governance to
appoint the New Supervisor [Mr Anthony Turner] as the Supervisor
operative part of the Supervisor Deed states as follows:
2. Appointment of Supervisor
(a) Pursuant to clause 19(1) of the Trust Deed, by way of
execution of this deed the Appointor appoints [Mr Anthony Turner] as
Supervisor of the Trust with all the powers of the Supervisor vesting in [Mr
Anthony Turner] with effect from the Effective Date.
(b) By way of execution of this deed, [Mr Anthony Turner]
accepts his appointment as Supervisor of the Trust with effect from the
Effective Date.
3. Powers of the Supervisor
(a) The powers of the Supervisor are set out in clause 19(2) of
the [RG] Trust Deed as follows:
19(2) The Supervisor shall be entitled by instrument in writing at any
time and from time to time: -
(a) in his absolute discretion to remove any Trustee
hereunder or of the Trust Fund;
(b) appoint any additional Trustee or Trustees hereunder or
of the Trust Fund;
PROVIDED ALWAYS that if and so long as either the Appointor or the Supervisor
is a member of the class of General Beneficiaries neither
the Appointor nor the
Supervisor shall be eligible to be appointed as Trustee hereof and the
Supervisor shall not make any appointment
for his own personal benefit or the
personal benefit of the Appointor.
(b) [Mr Anthony Turner] acknowledges the powers of the office
of Supervisor and agrees to act in accordance with and be bound by
the powers,
discretions and obligations conferred by the [RG] Trust Deed.
(c) The Appointor acknowledges that upon his appointment as
appointor of the Trust, he was excluded from the class of General Beneficiaries
pursuant to the proviso to the definition of ‘General Beneficiaries’
in clause 1(ii) of the [RG] Trust Deed.
(d) [Mr Anthony Turner] acknowledges that he will exclude from
the class of General Beneficiaries from the Effective Date pursuant
proviso to the definition of ‘General Beneficiaries’ in clause 1(ii)
of the [RG] Trust Deed.”
Anthony Turner gave evidence that the sole purpose of his appointment as
Supervisor was so that he could subsequently appoint Heartland
trustee of the RG Trust, in place of Boyded:
“Q. --I’m not asking what you were advised. I’m asking for
your understanding at the time you executed this document
as to the purpose of
your appointment as supervisor.
A. Cause then I’d nominate Kieran to how they wanted him to be the
trustee, I believe.
Q. Yes. So the sole purpose which you understood you were being appointed as the
supervisor of the trust was to subsequently appoint
Heartland One as the trustee
of the Rossfield Group Trust?
Events leading up to execution of Trustee Deed
6 September 2024, Mr Anthony Turner ceased to be a director of Heartland One.
Since that date, Mr Kieran Turner has been the sole
director of this
17 September 2024, two days after the Supervisor Deed was executed by Mr Turner
and Mr Anthony Turner, McCabes, on instructions
from Heartland One, lodged an
application with the Office of State Revenue (
) for a private ruling
as to the stamp duty consequences of a change of the trustee of the RG Trust
from Boyded to Heartland One.
This application stated as follows:
“The Supervisor proposes to appoint the Applicant [Heartland One] as the
sole trustee of the [RG] Trust.
A Deed of Appointment and Variation (
) has been prepared to remove
the current trustee and appoint the Applicant as the new trustee. An Application
to record a new registered
proprietor (
Application
) for the Dutiable
Trust Property has been prepared for lodgement with NSW Land Registry
Before executing the Deed and the Application, the Applicant considers it
prudent to determine the liability for duty on the Dutiable
Trust Property if it
is appointed as trustee of the Trust.”
“Deed of Appointment and Variation” referred to in this application
was the Trustee Deed which was subsequently executed
in April 2025, a draft of
which was provided to the OSR.
26 September 2024, the OSR responded, seeking further information in respect of
this application. In particular, the OSR:
(1) noted that Recital K of the draft Trustee Deed stated that the recently
appointed Supervisor:
“has legitimate concerns that the Removed Trustee [Boyded Industries Pty
Ltd] is not capable of the proper and effective management
of the Trust and,
with the intention of protecting the interests of all Beneficiaries, wishes to
remove the Removed Trustee and appoint
the New Trustee as trustee of the
(2) noted that Boyded was not a party to the draft Trustee Deed, suggesting
that this was “a case of a forced removal of the
current trustee (who has
been the sole trustee of the trust since 1994) rather than an amicable
retirement of trustee”; and
(3) asked for an explanation of “the reason(s) for the proposed change
in the trustee of the trust”.
OSR’s request went unanswered for a period of around six months.
22 October 2024, Mr Turner filed a summons seeking leave to appeal from the
orders made in the 2024 Directors Proceeding.
25 January 2025, Ms Richards issued a notice convening a board meeting of
Bernley on 3 February 2025. At this meeting, resolutions
were passed, over Mr
Turner’s opposition, for the convening of the February 2025 EGM of
Heartland Group in order to consider
resolutions to appoint Ms Hooker, and to
remove (in the event that he had been validly appointed) Mr Anthony Turner, as a
of various Operating Entities. Notices duly convening the February 2025
EGM were issued on the same day.
18 February 2025, Ms Richards emailed Mr Turner a signed circulating resolution
and instrument of appointment which provided for
Mr Turner to be appointed
as the corporate representative of Boyded at the February 2025 EGM. Mr Turner
did not respond to this correspondence,
and did not subsequently attend the
February 2025 EGM on behalf of Boyded, thereby rendering the meeting
4 March 2025, Ms Richards commenced the 2025 EGM Proceeding.
19 March 2025, McCabes sent a response to the OSR's letter of 26 September
2024, which is referred to in paragraph [
] above, stating as follows (emphasis added):
2. Reasons for the proposed change in trustee
Kieran as the Appointor and Anthony as the Supervisor have formed a view that
the current trustee of the Trust, Boyded Industries,
is not presently capable of
the proper and effective management of the Trust
. These concerns arise as
(a) On 3 June 2024, Joanne commenced, by way of originating
process (Supreme Court of NSW Proceedings 2024/205160), proceedings
Kieran, Anthony, Boyded Industries and twelve other entities within the
Heartland group.
(b) Joanne sought declarations and orders regarding the
appointments of directors of
Boyded Industries Pty Ltd and
restraints against Kieran and Anthony.
(c) On 19 July 2024, his Honour Justice Black made findings as
to the validity of the appointment and removal of directors of the
defendants to the proceedings:
In the matter of Heartland Group Pty Limited
[2024] NSWSC 875
. In his judgment, the corporate governance
affairs of the group of companies is described by Justice Black as to be "
" (at [8]). In respect of Boyded Industries, the purported
appointment of Anthony as a director by Kieran on 6 December 2022 was held
invalid (at [68]) and the purported appointment of Bernice as a director by
Joanne on 13 December 2022 was held to be invalid
(at [101]).
(d) On 15 August 2024, his Honour made further orders and
declarations as to the governance of each company:
In the matter of Heartland
Group Pty Limited and others
[2024] NSWSC 1029.
(e) The orders of Justice Black are subject to appeal, those
proceedings are listed for final hearing on 26 March 2025 before the
Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
The removal of Boyded Industries and appointment of the applicant is for the
purpose of providing stability for the beneficiaries
of the Trust in the context
of continuing litigation
. The Trust is the entity by which the profits of
the Heartland group flow through to the living descendants of Bernard Webb.
Historically,
the profits have been distributed between the descendants either
proportionately according to the shareholdings of the ultimate holding
BG Webb Pty Ltd or, where capital gains have been realised from the sale of
property, to the 8 grandchildren equally.
Kieran and Anthony are concerned
that a deadlock of the directors of Boyded Industries would prevent the usual
distribution of income
between the current beneficiaries and that further action
by Joanne to gain majority control of Boyded Industries could result in
exclusion of certain beneficiaries.
Subject to complying with relevant trustee duties, the applicant has no
intention to vary future distributions from the Trust to
exclude any of the
current beneficiaries.”
26 March 2025, the Court of Appeal heard the 2025 Directors Appeal, and reserved
15 April 2025, the 2025 EGM Proceeding was heard. Judgment was delivered by
Black J on 17 April 2025, and orders were made convening
an EGM of the Heartland
Group at 10:00am on 2 May 2025 and directing that a corporate representative of
Bernley would constitute
a quorum of members of Heartland Group at the May 2025
Re Heartland Group
[2025] NSWSC 367.
28 April 2025, Heartland One obtained the private ruling which it had sought
from the OSR.
4:39pm on 29 April 2025, the Associate to Payne JA advised the parties that the
Court of Appeal would deliver judgment in the 2025
Directors Appeal at 10:15am
on 1 May 2025.
30 April 2025, Mr Anthony Turner purported to execute the Trustee Deed, in his
capacity as Supervisor of the RG Trust. Clauses
2.1-2.3 of the Trustee Deed
provided as follows:
2.1 Removal of Trustee and appointment of New Trustee
Pursuant to clause 19(2) of the Trust Deed, the Supervisor removes [Boyded] and
appoints [Heartland One] as trustee of the [RG] Trust
in place of [Boyded] to
undertake and to assume as from the Effective Date the trusts, powers,
discretions and obligations conferred
by the Trust Deed upon the trustee of the
[RG] Trust subject to the irrevocable condition that [Heartland One] is
absolutely prohibited
from being a Beneficiary under the Trust Deed or from
otherwise directly or indirectly benefiting under the Trust Deed.”
2.2 Acceptance of the New Trustee
By way of execution of this deed, [Heartland One] accepts its appointment as
trustee of the [RG] Trust and agrees to accept the transfer
from [Boyded] of all
assets belonging to the Trust and to hold those assets in accordance with and be
bound by and administer the
trusts, powers, discretions and obligations
conferred by the Trust Deed.
2.3 Declaration by New Trustee
[Heartland One] hereby declares that notwithstanding anything else contained in
the Trust Deed, [Heartland One]:
(a) is absolutely prohibited from being a Beneficiary under the
[RG] Trust or otherwise directly or indirectly benefiting under
(b) disclaims any interest or entitlement to any benefits of
income, capital or other benefits from the [RG] Trust, and this declaration
not capable of amendment.”
Anthony Turner gave evidence in cross-examination that he did not believe that
there was any urgency in signing the Trustee Deed.
However, it is significant
that this document was executed on the day after the Court of Appeal indicated
it would deliver its decision
in the 2025 Directors Appeal, the day before that
decision was delivered, and two days before the Court-ordered May 2025 EGM was
scheduled for the purpose of considering whether to appoint Ms Hooker as a
director of various Operating Entities (including Boyded).
1 May 2025, Mr Anthony Turner sent the directors of Boyded a “Notice of
Removal and Appointment of Trustee”, informing
them that he had exercised
his powers as Supervisor to remove Boyded and to appoint Heartland One,
effective immediately, and requiring
“1. Transfer legal title to the property of the Trust to
the New Trustee.
2. Deliver to the New Trustee all books, documents and records,
investments, funds and all indicia of title to real estate and
property whatsoever relating to the Trust.
3. Assign or cause the novation of any contractual arrangement
with a third party relating to the Trust so that the New Trustee
shall succeed
to the Existing Trustee to the extent necessary to effect such
succession.”
6 May 2025, Mr Turner emailed NAB, requesting that the name of the bank account
for the RG Trust be changed from “Boyded
Industries P/L atf RGT to
Heartland One P/L atf RGT”.
Did Mr Turner act for a proper
purpose in appointing Mr Anthony Turner as Supervisor?
is clear that Mr Turner appointed his brother, Mr Anthony Turner, as Supervisor
of the RG Trust, in order that Mr Anthony Turner
would exercise his powers as
Supervisor to remove Boyded as trustee of the RG Trust and appoint Heartland One
as replacement trustee.
Mr Anthony Turner gave evidence that this was the
purpose of his appointment as Supervisor and, consistently with this, McCabes
a letter to the OSR on behalf of Heartland One two days after Mr Anthony
Turner’s appointment, stating that: “The Supervisor
proposes to
appoint [Heartland One] as the sole trustee of the [RG] Trust.”
question which then arises is what was Mr Turner’s purpose in taking those
steps for the removal and replacement of Boyded.
Defendants placed reliance on Mr Turner’s evidence that he believed, as a
result of the privileged conversation which he
had overheard on 20 March 2023,
that “the assets of the [RG Trust] were not likely to be administered
properly if [Ms Richards],
and possibly also [Ms Hooker], were in control of
Boyded Industries: and that “under [Ms Richards’] administration,
distributions of the trust would not be administered fairly.”
Defendants submitted that it was not put to Mr Turner that he did not, in fact,
hold those views from 20 March 2023 and that,
in those circumstances, an
“alternative finding is not reasonably open”, having regard to the
evidence before the Court
and the rule in
(1893) 6 R 67.
closing written submissions, the Plaintiffs contended as follows:
“Kieran steadfastly in cross-examination, often in an entirely
unresponsive manner, adhered to the use of phrases to the effect
that he took
these actions ‘to protect the trust’ and to prevent a supposed plot
to ‘change the trust distributions
away from the beneficiaries in the
trust’. These mantras drawn from his affidavit evidence obscure, rather
than reveal, the
true reason Kieran in fact sought to appoint Anthony as the
supervisor of the RG Trust: it was for the fixed and sole purpose of
turn effecting a change of trustee to a company under the sole control of Kieran
so as to ensure that Kieran could retain
personal control over the RG Trust
rather than face a situation in which he could be outvoted by Ms Richards and Ms
Hooker on the
board of Boyded. This was part of a broader plan on the part of
Kieran to prevent, at all costs, a situation in which he would not
have ultimate
sole control over the assets of the RG Trust.”
do not accept that the Plaintiffs were infringing the rule in
by putting a submission in those terms. The Plaintiffs tested, at some
length, Mr Turner’s affidavit evidence regarding the
concerns which he
held as a result of the privileged conversation which he overheard on 20 March
2023, and the Plaintiffs put to
Mr Turner, in cross-examination, that he was in
fact acting for the purpose of taking control of the RG Trust away from his
and placing it in his own hands. In response to those questions, Mr
Turner repeated that he was seeking to “protect the trust
“Q. You agree that the change was for the purposes of trying to take the
control of the trust away from your aunts?
A. Protect the trust assets, yes.
Q. You were trying to take control of this trust away from shareholders who
owned almost 60% of the shares of this company?
A. Protect the trust assets.
Q. And when you say protect, you mean make sure that you stayed in control of
them? That’s what you mean by protect?
A. No. Protect the trust assets from the fraudulent plot I heard.”
the question to be determined is Mr Turner’s subjective purpose in
exercising his powers as Appointor to appoint his
brother as Supervisor, it does
not follow that Mr Turner’s repeated assertions in cross-examination that
he was acting to “protect
the trust assets” are decisive. Such
evidence regarding a person’s state of mind at the time of particular past
must be approached with caution, particularly because of the risk that it
may be, consciously or unconsciously, influenced by the
issues raised and
positions adopted by the parties in the litigation (see paragraphs [
are a number of difficulties with Mr Turner’s evidence that the reason why
he wanted to gain control of the RG Trust was
due to a desire to
“protect” the trust assets from the “fraudulent plot”
which Ms Richards had discussed
with her lawyers.
Mr Turner could not identify, by reference to the recording and transcript of
the conversation between Ms Richards and her
lawyers, any particular statements
made in the course of that conversation which caused him to have this alleged
concern about a
“fraudulent plot” (see paragraphs [
it is difficult to see how the statements made in the overheard conversation
could give rise to any rational apprehension
of a “fraudulent plot”.
The highest the conversation goes is that Mr Scott suggested to Ms Richards that
the trustee
might be able to make a distribution with the effect of
“equalising” distributions made by the RG Trust, so as to bring
into line with the shareholdings in BG Webb, and thereby make the overall
position “fair”. This was said in a context
where it was common
ground that, other than in respect of sale proceeds of the Parramatta and
Lakemba Properties, distributions had
been made in the past in accordance with
those shareholdings, and Mr Turner was aware that Ms Richards had previously
disputed whether
there had been agreement to vary this practice in respect of
distributions from the Parramatta and Lakemba sale proceeds (other than
respect of the first tranche of the sale proceeds of the Parramatta Property).
In response, Ms Richards did not indicate any intention
to pursue this
recommendation and stated that it would be opposed by Mr Turner. Mr Scott
acknowledged that any such decision by the
trustee would need to be done
“properly” and that there would need to be “a court
case”, to consider whether
this was “fair”.
Ms Richards was not, at any time, in control of the administration of the RG
Trust. At all relevant times up until the execution
of the Trustee Deed by Mr
Anthony Turner on 30 April 2025, the trustee of the RG Trust was Boyded, and the
directors of Boyded were
Mr Turner and Ms Richards. The ultimate holding company
of Boyded is BG Webb, in which Ms Richards held an interest of approximately
30%. Ms Richards therefore did not have control over the administration of the
trust assets or over distributions from the RG Trust.
Although Mr Turner
was aware, in 2024 and 2025, that Ms Richards and Ms Hooker (who also held 30%
of BG Webb) were seeking to take
control of various entities within the
Heartland Motors Group, including Boyded, he does not state in his affidavit
that he had any
genuine concern that Ms Hooker (who has been a director of
Boyded since Mr Turner was replaced) would not properly administer the
assets of the RG Trust, or would act unfairly in making distributions, let
alone identify any basis for such a concern. Instead,
he states that, as a
result of the overheard conversation between Ms Richards and her lawyers, he had
a concern that “Joanne
and possibly Bernice” would not administer
the RG Trust properly. He did not elaborate on how a conversation, in which Ms
did not participate, could give rise to any such concern about Ms
regard to those matters, I do not consider that there was any rational basis for
Mr Turner to hold the view, based on the recorded
conversation between Ms
Richards and her lawyers, that if Ms Richards and Ms Hooker obtained control of
Boyded, the trust would be
administered, or distributions would be made, in a
manner that was “fraudulent”, or that there was a need to
the trust assets from any such “fraudulent
plot”. The lack of any rational basis for such a concern makes it unlikely
that any such concern was genuinely held by Mr Turner.
accept that, on a number of occasions prior to the commencement of this
proceeding, Mr Turner made statements to the effect that
the recording of
Ms Richards’ conversation with her lawyers indicated that she
intended to engage in “fraud”. For
(1) on 14 May 2024, Mr Turner sent an email to Ms Richards, in which he referred
to “your overarching fraudulent scheme, which
is clearly evident in our
Board Meeting recording”, and stated that: “if you don’t
remember the level of fraud,
you and your legal team are embroiled in then I
suggest you listen clearly, it’s absolutely shocking and simply
unacceptable”;
(2) on 19 November 2024, Mr Turner sent an email to Ms Richards in which he
referred to her recorded conversation with Mr Scott,
stating as follows:
“... Hugh turned up and discussed your fraudulent conduct in detail with
you and the female lawyer. Anthony, Amanda, and I
witnessed this. I have given
you a recording of this and it is within our legal proceedings.”
(3) on 13 February 2025, Mr Turner wrote to Ms Richards’ solicitor,
stating that Ms Richards had, at meetings via Zoom, been
“hiding lawyers
and other advisers out of [sight] ... while strategizing fraudulent
the fact that Mr Turner stated, in hostile communications with Ms Richards
(which were, as explained below, often characterised
by insulting language),
that she was guilty of “fraud” does not establish that he, in fact,
held any genuinely founded
concerns about the manner in which the RG Trust would
be administered in the event that Ms Hooker and Ms Richards obtained control
Boyded. Nor do I consider that matters are significantly advanced by the fact
that Ms Richards conceded, in cross-examination,
that Mr Turner communicated to
her that he was “very upset”, and appeared to feel very strongly,
that he had overheard. The issue is not whether Mr Turner
angrily and forcefully questioned Ms Richards’ motivations in his
communications with her, but whether he took steps to remove Boyded as trustee
out of any genuine concern to protect the trust assets,
or for some other
Defendants also relied on the fact that Mr Anthony Turner had given unchallenged
evidence that, after overhearing the recorded
conversation between Ms Richards
and her lawyers, Mr Turner had expressed to him a concern that “Joanne
(including possibility
[sic] with Bernice) may take steps to take control of
Boyded, and in turn the [RG Trust] and that should that occur, would be in
position to alter distributions”. That bears a close similarity with Mr
Turner’s evidence regarding his concerns, after
overhearing the
conversation, “if Joanne, and possibly also Bernice, were in control of
Boyded”. Although Mr Anthony
Turner’s evidence of the conversation
was not specifically challenged, I do not place significant weight on his
recollection
of a conversation around two-and-a-half years ago, which is not
recorded in any contemporaneous document, particularly where there
that such evidence may, consciously or unconsciously, be affected by subsequent
events and the allegations advanced in
the proceeding, and where there is
evidence that Mr Anthony Turner has previously, as a result of
Mr Turner’s intervention,
adjusted his evidence of a recollected
conversation in proceedings relating to the Heartland Motors Group (see
paragraph [
reasons given above, I have serious reservations about the credibility and
reliability of Mr Kieran Turner’s testimony.
Given those reservations, it
is necessary to evaluate his testimony as to his subjective purpose in light of
the objectively established
facts and the apparent logic of events.
particular, it is necessary to place Mr Turner’s appointment of his
brother as Supervisor in the context of the broader struggle
for control of the
Heartland Motors Group between Mr Turner and Ms Richards, which had been going
for some time, and was continuing,
as at September 2024. In
particular:
(1) in June 2022, Ms Richards and Ms Hooker had sought to have Ms Hooker
appointed as a director of BG Webb and Mr Turner had brought
the 2022 Oppression
Proceeding in an (unsuccessful) attempt to prevent this from occurring;
(2) in December 2022, Mr Turner had purported, over Ms Richards’
opposition, to appoint his brother, Mr Anthony Turner, as
a director of various
Operating Entities including Boyded (in circumstances where he had, in fact, no
power unilaterally to do so);
(3) in May 2024, Mr Turner and his brother purported to pass resolutions
removing Ms Richards as a director of various Operating
Entities, including
(4) in June 2024, Ms Richards and Ms Hooker brought the 2024 Directors
Proceeding challenging those actions, which led to the Court
finding that Mr
Anthony Turner was not, and Ms Richards was, a director of various Operating
Entities, including Boyded;
(5) in the midst of the events set out in paragraphs (3) and (4) above,
Mr Turner fabricated the two versions of the “1 May
Minutes which purported to record Ms Richards as having approved his appointment
as Appointor, and incorporated Heartland
One for the purpose of removing Boyded
as trustee;
(6) shortly after the 2024 Directors Proceeding was determined adversely to him,
and a few days after filing a notice of intention
to appeal that decision, Mr
Turner purported to exercise his powers as Appointor to appoint his brother as
Supervisor of the RG Trust
and caused a letter to be sent to the OSR stating
that the Supervisor intended to replace Boyded with Heartland One as Trustee of
the RG Trust; and
(7) subsequently, in April 2025, Mr Anthony Turner purported, as Supervisor, to
remove and replace Boyded as Trustee of the RG Trust
on the day before the
decision in the 2025 Directors Appeal was delivered, and two days before the May
2025 EGM was to be held to
consider resolutions to appoint Ms Hooker as a
director of Heartland Group.
regard to those matters, I find that Mr Turner’s purpose in appointing his
brother as Supervisor was so that he could,
in the event that his aunts gained
control of the Operating Entities in the Heartland Motors Group (and, in
particular, Boyded),
take away control of the RG Trust from the Group and to
place such control exclusively in his own hands. It was a move that was,
the others which he had taken, designed to frustrate his aunts’ attempts
to gain control of the Heartland Motors Group,
including Boyded.
Turner gave the following evidence when asked, in cross-examination, why he had
decided that he, rather than any corporate entity
of the Heartland Motors Group,
should be appointed as Appointor of the RG Trust:
“Q. Can you please explain why then, at page 1572, you asked Mr Bluth to
have you personally nominated as the appointor of
this trust instrument and not
to have a company in the BG Webb group of companies as the appointor?
A. Because the appointor was the boss of the trust, and I was the boss.
Q. Didn’t you understand that you were a shareholder?
A. I was the CEO.
Q. Did you think that that meant that you could override the decisions of all
the other shareholders?
A. No, I was just the boss of the trust, CEO of the trust.”
is likely that, in appointing his brother as Supervisor of the Trust, Mr Turner
was seeking to ensure that, if he lost control
of Boyded, he would remain
“boss of the trust”.
short, Mr Turner was not acting out of a legitimate concern to protect the
interests of the objects of the RG Trust, but was instead
acting out of a desire
to gain exclusive control of the management of the affairs of the RG Trust and
to frustrate his aunts’
attempts to gain control of the Heartland Motors
Group (including the corporate trustee of the trust which held the valuable real
estate assets that were integral to the operation of the Group’s car
dealership business). As such, he was exercising his powers
as Appointor for an
improper purpose.
Accordingly,
if (contrary to the findings set out above), I had determined that
Mr Turner was validly appointed as Appointor of the
RG Trust, I would have
found that his purported exercise of his powers as Appointor to appoint
Mr Anthony Turner as Supervisor of
the RG Trust was invalid and of no
Did Mr Anthony Turner act upon any real and genuine
consideration in appointing Heartland One as trustee?
the findings I have made above, the question as to whether Mr Anthony Turner
acted for a proper purpose in exercising his powers
as Supervisor to replace
Boyded with Heartland One as trustee of the RG Trust does not arise. In case I
am wrong on those antecedent
issues, I have addressed this matter briefly
Kieran Turner gave evidence that the execution of the Trustee Deed one day
before judgment in the Directors Appeal was delivered
coincidence”, but otherwise responded “I don’t recall”
to various questions regarding the execution
of that document. For example, he
stated that he could not recall “the reason why this document was
prepared”, or whether
he was the person responsible for the document being
drafted, or whether his “concerns” about the existing trustee were
“the reason why this document was prepared”, or whether he asked his
brother to execute the document, or even whether
he understood that the purpose
of the document was to remove Boyded as the trustee of the RG Trust (adding
to get legal advice”). Mr Turner stated, in
cross-examination, that the decision to remove and replace the trustee was a
taken by his brother, and not by him:
“Q. Just listen to my question please. Do you remember that you wanted
Boyded Industries removed as trustee of the Rossfield
Group Trust and you wanted
Heartland One appointed?
A. When are you talking about?
Q. In 2025.
A. When exactly are you talking about?
Q. Can you answer my question please?
A. I don’t recall. I don’t even know when you’re trying to get
me to recall from.
Q. You know that a company that you control, Heartland One Pty Limited--
Q. --has purportedly been appointed as the trustee of the Rossfield Group
Q. You know that, don’t you?
A. Yes. Once they sign it.
Q. And that’s something that you wanted to happen, isn’t it?
A. It was Anthony’s decision.
Q. I haven’t asked you that, have I? That was something you wanted to
happen, isn’t it?
A. It was Anthony’s decision.”
Defendants submitted that the Plaintiffs had not challenged Mr Anthony
Turner’s evidence concerning his reasons for executing
the Trustee Deed.
In particular, Mr Anthony Turner deposed that, “[a]t the time of executing
the [Trustee Deed]”, he
“considered ... the concerns” which he
held as a result of the overheard conversation between Ms Richards and her
namely, his concerns that:
“[Ms Richards] (possibly with [Ms Hooker]) was planning to, and would,
take steps to exclude Kieran and myself from the management
of the Heartland
Motor Group and exercise the control they held over the trustee of the [RG
Trust], take control of its assets and
to prefer their own interests and to
exclude the other beneficiaries from the future distributions”.
do not accept the submission that there was no challenge in cross-examination to
the proposition that Mr Anthony Turner “considered”
“concerns” at “the time of executing” the Trustee Deed.
In particular, Mr Anthony Turner was, in cross-examination,
directed to the
terms of Recital K to the Trustee Deed, which states as follows:
“The Supervisor has legitimate concerns that [Boyded] is not capable of
the proper and effective management of the Trust and,
with the intention of
protecting the interests of all Beneficiaries, wishes to remove [Boyded] and
appoint [Heartland One] as trustee
of the Trust”.
Anthony Turner was then asked the following question:
“Q. Are the matters that are recorded in recital K matters to which you
turned your mind at the time of executing this deed?
A. Turn my mind? No.”
evidence is directly inconsistent with, and undermines the reliability of,
Mr Anthony Turner’s affidavit evidence on this
Mr Anthony Turner gave evidence in cross-examination that:
(1) he was not aware that a draft of the Trustee Deed had been prepared more
than seven months earlier, in September 2024 (when it
was provided to the
(2) he did not provide any instructions or any input into the preparation of the
Trustee Deed;
(3) he was “probably not” aware of the powers of the Supervisor at
the time he signed the Trustee Deed; and
(4) he did not, at the time of signing the Trustee Deed, “
consideration at all
” to the consequences of doing so.
light of this evidence, if it were necessary to determine the issue, I would
have found that Mr Anthony Turner did not, in executing
the Trustee Deed,
exercise the power to remove and replace the trustee of the RG Trust upon any
real and genuine consideration. In
particular, there was not the “exercise
of an active discretion” by Mr Anthony Turner, involving any informed
consideration
of whether or not to exercise the power to remove and replace
Boyded as the trustee, since he proceeded to execute the Trustee Deed
having provided any input into its drafting, without turning his mind to the
matters stated in the Recitals as being his
reasons for the entry into the
Trustee Deed, and without giving “any consideration at all” to the
consequences of executing
the Trustee Deed. Having regard to those matters, it
is likely that Mr Anthony Turner executed the Trustee Deed because his brother
asked him to do so and that he was therefore, in effect, acting under the
direction of Mr Kieran Turner when he purported to exercise
his powers as
Supervisor.
those reasons, even if Mr Anthony Turner was validly appointed, the purported
removal and replacement of Boyded as trustee of
the RG Trust was invalid and of
Appointment for benefit of Appointor?
the Plaintiffs submitted that, even if each of the issues set out above was
determined adversely to them, the appointment
of Heartland One was invalid,
having regard to the terms of the express proviso in clause 19(2) of the RG
Trust Deed. This clause
provides as follows:
“The Supervisor shall be entitled by instrument in writing at any time and
from time to time: -
(a) in his absolute discretion to remove any Trustee hereunder
or of the Trust Fund;
(b) appoint any additional Trustee or Trustees hereunder or of
the Trust Fund;
PROVIDED ALWAYS that if and so long as either the Appointor or the Supervisor is
a member of the class of General Beneficiaries neither
the Appointor nor the
Supervisor shall be eligible to be appointed as Trustee hereof and the
Supervisor shall not make any appointment
for his own personal benefit or the
personal benefit of the Appointor.”
Plaintiffs submitted that the power to remove and replace the trustee was
exercised, on 30 April 2025, in order to “preserve
(and enhance)
Kieran’s ability to control the affairs of the RG Trust” and was
therefore exercised “for the personal
benefit of the Appointor”,
thus offending the proviso set out above and rendering the purported exercise of
ultra vires
and invalid.
as this submission is a variant of the Plaintiffs’ submission that
Mr Turner was not acting for a proper purpose in
appointing Mr Anthony
Turner as Supervisor, and Mr Anthony Turner was not acting for a proper purpose
in removing and replacing the
trustee of the RG Trust, and relies on the same
factual matters, then this submission adds nothing of substance to the matters
have already been addressed above.
as this submission arises in the event only that the other matters set out above
have been determined adversely to the Plaintiffs
(and therefore, in the event
that each of Mr Turner and Mr Anthony Turner was validly appointed and was
acting for a proper purpose),
then it would arise only where I had determined
that the appointment of Heartland One was made for the purpose of protecting the
interests of the beneficiaries of the RG Trust, and ensuring that distributions
were made fairly to beneficiaries (with Mr Turner
being excluded, by reason of
his appointment as Appointor, from the class of General Beneficiaries in the
RG Trust Deed). It follows
that, if the issue had arisen in the context of
such findings, I would have concluded that the appointment of Heartland One as
of the RG Trust was not for Mr Turner’s personal
Relief in respect of Trustee Claim
the reasons set out above, the Plaintiffs have established their claim. It
follows that the purported appointment of Heartland
One as trustee of the
RG Trust was invalid, and that Boyded remains the trustee. The Plaintiffs
are entitled to declaratory relief
to this effect.
also follows that the Cross-Claimants’ claim for an order compelling
Boyded to transfer all property of the RG Trust to Heartland
One will be
Plaintiffs submitted that the Court should, in addition, permanently restrain
each of Mr Turner, Mr Anthony Turner and Heartland
One from purporting to deal
with the property of the RG Trust, in circumstances where they have previously
made demands for the transfer
of all property held by the RG Trust to Heartland
One, and where they ceased such demands after each of them gave an undertaking
to the Court, on 29 May 2025:
“not to do the following or resolve or determine to do so:
a. distribute, sell, transfer, dispose of, mortgage or encumber
or otherwise deal with the assets of the Rossfield Group Trust
established by
deed of settlement dated 28 March 1980 (Trust) or any interest therein (whether
it comprise capital or income);
b. interfere with the entry onto or occupation or use of the
properties described in Schedule 1.”
is also relevant that, on 29 April 2025, Mr Turner had asserted to a
representative of the NAB that he was the Appointor of the
RG Trust and, as
such, had “the legal power to buy, sell, finance, etc these Trust/assets
properties.”
Defendants did not advance any submission to the effect that, if the Plaintiffs
succeeded in their claim, such final injunctive
relief should not be granted.
regard to the matters outlined above, I am satisfied that it is appropriate to
grant the relief sought by the Plaintiffs.
TERMINATION OF MR
TURNER’S EMPLOYMENT AS CEO
Overview of Issues
6 May 2025, Ms Richards sent a letter on behalf of Heartland Motors to Mr
Turner, which was headed “Termination of your employment
with Heartland
Motors Group (Company)” (
Termination Letter
Termination Letter stated that the Board had decided to terminate Mr
Turner’s employment “in accordance with clause
9.2 of your
employment contract dated 17 March 2009”.
the Further Amended Statement of Claim, Heartland Motors seeks a declaration
that Mr Turner’s employment was terminated on
6 May 2025.
the Further Amended Cross-Claim, Mr Turner contends that his employment was not
“validly and effectively terminated”,
and seeks damages for breach
of contract. (Senior Counsel for Mr Turner confirmed in opening address that his
client did not press
his claim for specific performance of the employment
closing submissions, the Cross-Claimants identified the following primary
questions arising on Mr Turner’s claim for breach
of contract.
(1) First, what was the form of his contract of employment as at 6 May 2025 (in
particular, was it written or implied, or some combination
of the two)?
(2) Secondly, what were the terms of the contract relevant to the exercise of
any power of termination?
(3) Thirdly, what was the purpose, manner and effect of the termination on 6 May
(4) Fourthly, having regard to the answers to (1)-(3) above, did Heartland
Motors breach the terms of the employment contract by
the termination of Mr
Turner’s employment on 6 May 2025?
Form and terms of contract of employment?
Parties’ contentions
Cross-Defendants contended that the contract of employment was written, and was
in the form of the
Executive Employment Agreement
which was executed by
Heartland Motors and Mr Turner, and was dated 17 March 2009.
recitals to the Executive Employment Agreement stated as follows:
“A. The Employer [Heartland Motors] has offered the
Executive [Mr Turner] employment on the terms of this Agreement and the
Executive has accepted that offer.
B. This Agreement sets out the terms and conditions of the
Executive’s employment.”
2.1 provided as follows:
“2.1 The Employer will employ the Executive in the
position of Deputy Chief Executive Officer or such other position or positions
determined by the Employer from time to time in accordance with this Agreement
and with the consent of the Executive which consent
shall not be unreasonably
5.1 and 5.2 provided as follows:
“5.1 The Executive shall perform such duties and
responsibilities as the Employer may reasonably require from time to time.
5.2 The Executive shall report to the CEO or such other person
nominated by the Board from time to time.”
2.2 provided that the Executive’s employment shall commence on
1 September 2008 “and will continue until terminated
in accordance
with clause 2.3 or 9 of this Agreement (the
)”. There was no
clause 2.3 of the agreement. Clause 9 was headed “Termination” and
clauses 9.1-9.4 relevantly provided
as follows:
“9.1 The Employer may terminate this Agreement without
notice or payment in lieu of notice if:
(a) the Executive commits any serious or persistent breach of
any of the provisions of this Agreement;
(b) the Executive is guilty of any misconduct or wilful neglect
in the discharge of their duties;
9.2 Either party may terminate this Contract by giving to the
other party not less than one month’s notice in writing.
9.3 The Employer may require the Executive to work out the
whole or some part only of the notice period.
9.4 At the option of the Employer, the Employer may pay the
Executive not to work out the whole or some part of the notice period
tendering a payment in lieu of such period of the notice period as is not to be
worked by the Executive.”
Cross-Claimants contended that:
(1) the Executive Employment Agreement was intended to regulate the employment
relationship in the period when Mr Turner was employed
as Deputy CEO, which
lasted until May 2009 (at which time he was employed as CEO, following the
retirement of Mr Ware); and
(2) the employment relationship between Mr Turner and Heartland Motors as at May
2025 was “materially different from that recorded
in this old
document”, including by reason that:
(a) he was occupying, and had occupied for sixteen years, “a different
(and indeed the most senior) position in the organisation”;
(b) his role and responsibilities were “fundamentally different from what
they were in March 2009”;
(c) “contrary to the terms of the old contract he was not answerable to
and did not have to report to Mr Ware and had not done
so for 16 years and was
instead vested with responsibility for managing the entire enterprise and given
the autonomy to do so”;
(d) his remuneration package was, since his employment as CEO, “entirely
different from that set out in the old contract (both
in terms of his salary,
and as to car and bonus entitlements that did not even exist in the old
contract)”.
Cross-Claimants submitted that the appropriate conclusion to be drawn is that
the parties did not intend for the terms of the
Executive Employment Agreement
to govern Mr Turner’s employment at any time since he was employed as CEO,
and that, as at May
2025, the terms of his contract were unwritten, with the
contract arising from a course of conduct between the parties over an extended
period of time. Specifically, the terms of that contract were said to
(1) an obligation on the part of Heartland Motors to act in good faith towards
Mr Turner, including in the exercise of powers and
in performance of the
contract; and
(2) an obligation, if and to the extent it was open to Heartland Motors to
terminate, to give Mr Turner reasonable notice of termination.
Relevant principles
and Company Proprietary Ltd v Nathan’s Merchandise (Victoria) Proprietary
[1957] HCA 10
(1957) 98 CLR 93
[1957] HCA 10
, Taylor J observed
“It is firmly established by a long line of cases ... that the parties to
an agreement may vary some of its terms by a subsequent
agreement. They may, of
course, rescind the earlier agreement altogether, and this may be done either
expressly or by implication,
but the determining factor must always be the
intention of the parties as disclosed by the later agreement.”
Commissioner
of Taxation (Cth) v
Sara Lee Household
& Body Care (Australia) Pty
(2000) 201 CLR 520
[2000] HCA 35
, Gleeson CJ, Gaudron,
McHugh and Hayne JJ said that Taylor J’s observations in
accorded with principle and authority.
Pty Ltd v Worrell
[2000] HCA 64
–[19], Gleeson CJ, Gaudron
and Gummow JJ referred to the decisions in
and observed that, as with other issues of contractual formation,
whether a change to the employment relationship results in a variation
existing contract of employment or its replacement is to be ascertained
objectively in all of the circumstances.
Quinn v Jack Chia
(Australia) Ltd
[1992] VicRp 37
[1992] 1 VR 567
at 576, Ashley J observed that:
“where employer and employee agree to an alteration in the
employee’s duties and responsibilities which is profound,
a court should
be more ready to hold (unless the original contract of employment provided for
the contingency) that a new contract
has replaced the old; or at least that the
old contract, as varied, contained terms objectively appropriate to the new
relationship
J found (at 577-578) that, on the facts of that case, a far-reaching change in
the plaintiff’s situation which was “not
within the original
contemplation of the parties and not comprehended by [their original
contract]” gave rise to a fresh contract
of service, not merely a
variation of the original one.
Westpac Banking Corporation v
(2016) 242 FCR 505
[2016] FCAFC 33
, Buchanan J (with whom McKerracher and White JJ agreed)
said that the decision in
Quinn v Jack Chia
did not represent “any
new statement of principle”, but instead represented the application of
“ well established
contract and employment law principles” to
the “striking facts” of that case.
J observed (at [257]) that, in a case where it is said that a contract of
employment has been replaced in an ongoing relationship
of employment (or even
that its terms have been varied), the search is for an
intention that such a change in the contractual
landscape has occurred.
v Mahoney Insurance Brokers
(2001) 78 SASR 489
[2001] SASC 22
at [8], Doyle CJ observed that: “a court should not too readily
assume that a change in working arrangements, or in the duties
of an employee,
involves either a variation to an existing contract, or the making of a new
contract.” His Honour added (at
[9]-[10]) that:
“In my respectful opinion the issue is whether the original agreement
gives the employer the right to make the changes that
have been made, and if it
does, then neither a varied contract nor a new contract arises.
The application of the relevant principles to the facts of a particular case
will often be difficult. In some fields of employment
changes in the working
arrangements and tasks performed will occur gradually. The application of the
relevant principles of law may
be difficult in such a case.”
v BMD Constructions Pty Ltd
(2014) 120 SASR 575
[2014] SASCFC 124
Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia referred to the observations
of Doyle CJ in
, and to the decision in
Quinn v Jack
, and said that:
“A court should not too readily find that a change in working arrangements
or in the duties of an employee entails either a
variation to an existing
contract or the making of a new contract. If the original agreement gives the
employer the right to make
the changes that have occurred, there will be neither
a variation of contract nor a new contract.”
, Buchanan J, after reviewing the relevant authorities, made
the following observations (at [261]-[262]):
“Whether changes occur incrementally and slowly, or more rapidly pursuant
to an intended program of development and expansion,
unless it can be said that
an employer has breached a contract by an unjustified and unlawful attempt to
impose change (in which
case the employee has the normal remedies for breach or
repudiation) it would not be readily inferred, in my view, that the entire
contract of employment has been replaced by a new one. In the case of a
comprehensive written contract dealing with a range of important
including but by no means confined to, methods and occasions for termination of
the contract, that could have drastic and
potentially damaging results for both
parties. Such an intention should not lightly be imputed to them in a continuing
relationship.
A suggestion of consensual variation raises different issues. The variation
suggested must arise directly from the altered circumstances
and respond to them
in a way which can be objectively attributed and imputed to both parties. The
test for implication of the term,
or the implied abandonment of an existing
term, leaving a void to be filled, is not supplied by the view of a court that
would itself be reasonable. Unless it can be said that abandonment of
a term represents a common intention it may not be assumed
in my respectful
, the altered circumstances are consensual; so must
be the contractual variation, if any.”
Determination – Form of Contract
outlined above, it is common ground that the Executive Employment Agreement was
executed by Heartland Motors and Mr Turner, and
that this contract governed
their employment relationship after it was entered on 17 March 2009. The
question for determination is
whether the parties must have intended that it
ceased to govern the employment relationship from around the time that Mr Turner
appointed as CEO in May 2009.
Cross-Claimants placed particular reliance on the fact that the Executive
Employment Agreement provided that Mr Turner would be
employed in the position
of Deputy CEO, that he would be required to report to the CEO (Mr Ware), and
that he would be required to
perform such duties as his employer (Heartland
Motors) may reasonably require from time to time: clauses 2.1, 5.1 and 5.2.
the agreement provided that Mr Turner’s remuneration was
specified to be a base salary of $315,000, together with superannuation
contributions and the provision of “a fully expensed motor vehicle”:
clauses 3.1 and 3.5.
Cross-Claimants submitted that the changes to the employment relationship
between Mr Turner and Heartland Motors, which occurred
following the execution
of the Executive Employment Agreement, included that:
(1) Mr Turner was appointed as CEO following Mr Ware’s retirement;
(2) as CEO, he reported directly to the Board, and to nobody else;
(3) as CEO, he had extensive delegated responsibility for the conduct of the
Group’s affairs, including decisions on a range
of operational matters,
such as negotiating deals with Manufacturers, leasing premises and settling
salaries; and
(4) several entities in the Group did not exist while he was Deputy CEO
(including Heartland Blacktown, Heartland Penrith, BGW Nominees
(5) on employment as CEO, his salary was increased to $550,000 and was further
increased over time to be, as at May 2025, $1,015,000,
plus bonuses of about
$50,000 per month.
Motors did not dispute that those changes had occurred. The critical issue is
whether, having regard to those changes, the
Court should objectively impute to
the parties a mutual intention that the employment relationship between them
should no longer
be governed by the terms of their written agreement.
an intention should not be lightly imputed, as it could have drastic and
potentially damaging results for both parties: see
, quoted above.
Significantly,
the Executive Employment Agreement was not specified to be a contract for Mr
Turner’s employment as Deputy CEO.
Instead, it provided for his employment
“in the position of Deputy Chief Executive Officer or such other position
or positions
determined by [Heartland Motors] in accordance with this Agreement
and with the consent of [Mr Turner] which consent shall not be
unreasonably
withheld” (clause 5.1).
oddity of the present case is that the Executive Employment Agreement was
executed by Mr Turner not only in his own right, but
also as “Chairman of
Directors” of Heartland Motors.
was plainly contemplated by both parties, at the time of entry into this
agreement in March 2009, that Mr Turner would become the
CEO of Heartland Motors
upon the retirement of Mr Ware (which occurred shortly afterwards).
Mr Turner deposed that his grandfather,
Mr Webb, had stated that it was his
dying wish that Mr Turner “become CEO of the Group when [he] was ready to
take on the role”,
and that Mr Ware had, in the period between 2005 and
2009, “trained [Mr Turner] to take over as CEO”. Further, the plan
to instal Mr Turner as CEO had led to a dispute, in 2008, between the Webb
family and the Auswild family, which appears to have precipitated
latter’s departure from the business.
regard to those matters, it is likely that the parties, in framing the agreement
as an Executive Employment Agreement which
would apply to the position of Deputy
CEO “or such other position ... as determined by” Heartland Motors
intended that
the agreement would apply to Mr Turner’s prospective
employment as CEO.
terms of the Executive Employment Agreement regarding the Executive’s
duties and responsibilities were sufficiently broad
to address the contemplated
promotion of Mr Turner to this role. Clause 5.1 required the Executive to
perform “such duties
and responsibilities as the Employer may reasonably
require from time to time”, and clause 5.3 provided as follows:
“The Executive must:
(a) perform to the best of the Executive’s ability the
duties assigned to the Executive by the Employer;
(b) use all reasonable efforts to promote the interests and
business of the Employer;
(c) serve the Employer faithfully and diligently to the best of
the Executive’s ability; and
(d) comply with all policies of the Employer in place from time
accept that, over the course of the period of sixteen years since the entry into
the Executive Employment Agreement, there have
been significant increases to Mr
Turner’s salary, and that there have been new corporate entities added to
the Heartland Motors
Group. However, those matters are not sufficient to
establish, either individually or in combination with the other matters set out
above, that there has been such a fundamental change in the employment
relationship between Mr Turner and Heartland Motors that the
Court should impute
to those persons an abandonment of their written agreement. For example, while
new corporate entities may have
come into existence, Mr Turner deposed that, for
“the majority of [his] time as CEO”, he was “performing duties
for Heartland Motors” (that is, the counterparty to the Executive
Employment Agreement) and “reporting to the directors
of Heartland Motors
and BG Webb”. Further, the increase to Mr Turner’s salary over the
course of his sixteen years of
employment equates to an increase of
approximately 8% year-on-year, which is not a level of increase such as to
indicate that there
has been a fundamental change in his role or
responsibilities.
addition, Mr Turner has previously, in the course of earlier litigation
regarding the Heartland Motors Group (in which he was legally
represented),
asserted that his employment as CEO is governed by the terms of the Executive
Employment Agreement. For example, in
an affidavit sworn in the 2024 Directors
Proceeding, he deposed that he was “appointed CEO of the Group” in
identified his “employment agreement” as being the
Executive Employment Agreement dated 17 March 2009 (which he exhibited
affidavit). He also made a similar statement in an affidavit which he prepared
for the 2025 Federal Court Proceeding. In his
affidavit in the present
proceeding, Mr Turner claimed that he “did not look carefully” at
the Executive Employment Agreement,
at the time of swearing either of those two
earlier affidavits. I do not accept this evidence. It is plain that Mr Turner is
who is heavily invested in the various proceedings relating to the
Heartland Motors Group. It is likely that he has been closely
involved in the
preparation of his affidavit evidence and has reviewed its contents carefully.
It is unlikely that he would have
expressly referred to the Executive Employment
Agreement, and exhibited it to his affidavit, if he was of the view that it was
and of no relevance to his role as CEO. The suggestion that some other
agreement governs his employment appears to have first been
raised following his
termination.
Executive Employment Agreement contained a number of provisions regarding
various matters which were undoubtedly of importance
to Heartland Motors,
including provisions regarding intellectual property rights (cl 7), confidential
information (cl 8), and restrictive
covenants (cl 10).
this agreement contains other provisions which were undoubtedly of importance to
Mr Turner, such as provisions relating
to superannuation (cl 3), reimbursement
of expenses (cl 3.7), hours of duty (cl 4) and leave (cl 6).
would be no reason to think that such important provisions would cease to apply
by reason of Mr Turner’s promotion from
Deputy CEO to CEO (particularly
where that promotion was contemplated by both parties at the time of entry into
the agreement). Having
regard to those matters, any change in Mr Turner’s
responsibilities would, at its highest, give rise to a question as to whether
the terms of the contract had been varied, rather than abandoned (see
that regard, Mr Turner contended that the Court should find that it was a term
of his contract of employment that termination could
only occur on reasonable
notice and that, having regard to matters such as the length of his employment,
the seniority of his position,
the size of the business, the amount of his
salary, his qualifications and experience, and the difficulty of finding new
of a similar nature, a reasonable notice period was two years.
variation (like any notion of replacement or novation) would depend upon an
intention imputed to the parties:
if I had determined that Mr Turner’s responsibilities as CEO fell outside
the scope of the Executive Employment Agreement,
I would have found that Mr
Turner had consented to the expansion of his responsibilities and had, in
return, been rewarded by the
receipt of a substantial salary and other
inducements. There would be no reason to impute to the parties, from such
circumstances,
a mutual desire to abandon the provisions of clause 9.2 –
which provided that
either party
may terminate the Executive Employment
Agreement by giving to the other party “not less than one month’s
notice in writing”
– in favour of some unspecified limitation, which
may well have fettered Mr Turner’s own discretion (see
at [284]-[285]).
those reasons, I find that the terms of the Executive Employment Agreement,
including clause 9.2, continued to apply to the employment
relationship between
Heartland Motors and Mr Turner as at 6 May 2025.
Was there a
requirement to give reasonable notice?
Cross-Claimants submitted that, even if the Court found (as set out above) that
the Executive Employment Agreement (including
cl 9.2) continued to apply as at 6
(1) there was implied into the contract a term requiring Heartland Motors to
give reasonable notice of termination;
(2) this implied term was not “wholly excluded” by clause 9.2, which
provided that the contract “could not be terminated
than’ one month’s notice”; and
(3) it followed that, while the period of notice could in no case be less than a
month, the period of notice which was to be given
remained governed by the
implied term of reasonableness.
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Barker
(2014) 253 CLR 169
[2014] HCA 32
, French CJ, Bell and Keane JJ observed that employment contracts have
attracted a number of implied terms in the course of the evolution
employment relationship, including an implied term to give reasonable notice of
the termination of the contract other than
for breach. Their Honours added:
“All such terms are subject to the express provisions of the particular
contracts and any
applicable statutes.”
New South Wales Cancer Council v Sarfaty
(1992) 28 NSWLR 68
Gleeson CJ and Handley JA referred to the decision of the House of Lords in
McClelland v Northern Ireland General Health Services Board
[1957] 1 WLR
, and made the following observations:
“It is now well-established that, as a general rule, if the parties to a
contract of employment make no provision as to the
circumstances in which
brought to an end, the law will imply a term to the effect that the
contract is terminable by either party upon reasonable notice
other... However, some of the speeches in
and indicate that, even where a contract of service contains some express
provisions relating to termination, the parties
will be taken to have
intended that it may also be terminated on reasonable notice unless the
language they have chosen evinces a
clear intention to the contrary. Other
things being equal, the courts have shown a strong inclination to impute
such an intention
to the parties. Even so, as
shows, where, as in the present case, the parties have expressed detailed
provisions as to the right of either party to terminate,
it is ultimately a
question of construction as to whether they intended those provisions to
be comprehensive. If they did, that intention
will prevail and there will
be no implication of a right to terminate on reasonable notice.”
the present case, clause 9.2 expressly provided that each of Heartland Motors
and Mr Turner was able to terminate the agreement
“on not less than one
month’s notice”. That is inconsistent with any intention that
neither party could terminate
unless reasonable notice was given. Any such
restriction on termination would give rise to uncertainty, for both parties to
the contract,
and undercut the evident intention of clause 9.2, which was to
ensure that both parties were free to terminate so long as at least
month’s notice was given.
does not mean, however, that notions of reasonableness and good faith have no
part to play.
Cross-Claimants referred to the decision in
Adventure World Travel Pty Ltd v
(2014) 86 NSWLR 515
[2014] NSWCA 174.
In that case, a contract of
employment provided that: “Either party may terminate this agreement and
the Employment at any
time by giving the other party not less than 12 months
prior written notice during the 2 years period from the Commencement Date
thereafter by providing 3 months prior written notice.”
employee, Mr Newsom, issued a notice shortly before the end of the two-year
period specified in this clause, giving 12 months’
notice of his
resignation. The employer then purported, after the conclusion of the specified
two-year period, to give three months’
notice (thereby seeking to
terminate the employment at an earlier date than would have been the case
pursuant to the employee’s
notice). In contending that the contract should
be interpreted as permitting multiple notices, the employer argued that, were
not so, the employee could give notice terminating the employment in 5, 10
or 20 years’ time, each of which would be “not
less than 12
months”, and the employer would be bound to that period. Meagher JA (with
whom McColl and Leeming JJA agreed)
dealt with this submission as follows (at
“The power to fix a period of ‘not less than’ 12 months is
conferred for the purpose of giving advance notice of
the termination of the
agreement. Where a contractual power is given to one party for a purpose but in
terms wider than necessary
for the protection of its legitimate interests, the
exercise of the power may be constrained by implied obligations of
reasonableness
and good faith, as was held in relation to the exercise of the
powers given in the agreement in
Burger King Corporation v Hungry Jack's
[2001] NSWCA 187
69 NSWLR 558
, [185]. A constraint in
those terms would prevent the fixing of a period of notice for an extraneous
purpose or one which could not
on any view be justified as reasonable having
regard to the purpose for which such a notice is given. That purpose, described
is to enable the parties to end their existing relationship and have
a reasonable time to obtain either a substitute employee or
other employment:
Birrell v Australian National Airlines Commission
[1984] FCA 378
at 458 (Gray J); and, in relation to a distributorship
Crawford Fitting Co v Sydney Valve & Fittings Pty
(1988) 14 NSWLR 438
at 448 (McHugh JA). In my view the power in cl
14.1(a) is to be read subject to such a constraint.”
regard to these principles, I accept that the exercise of the power in clause
9.2 of the Executive Employment Agreement to
terminate on not less than one
month’s notice is constrained by implied obligations that such power be
exercised in good faith
and reasonably, and not capriciously or for some
extraneous purpose. This does not amount to a finding that, despite the terms of
clause 9.2, the Executive Employment Agreement could only be terminated by
either party on reasonable notice. In
Burger King Corporation v Hungry Jack's
(2001) 69 NSWLR 558
[2001] NSWCA 187
, the Court (Sheller,
Beazley and Stein JJA) observed that:
(1) the relevant authorities make no distinction of substance between the
implied term of reasonableness and that of good faith,
with Priestley JA stating
Renard Constructions (ME) Pty Ltd v Minister for Public Works
26 NSWLR 234
at 263 that: “The kind of reasonableness I have been
discussing seems to me to have much in common with the notions of good
faith” (at [169]; and see also [170]); and
(2) the concept of good faith is understood as including “an obligation on
the parties to co-operate in achieving the contractual
objects (loyalty to the
promise itself)”, “compliance with honest standards of
conduct” and “compliance with
standards of conduct which are
reasonable having regard to the interests of the parties” (at [171],
referring to
Alcatel Australia Ltd v Scarcella
[1998] NSWSC 483
(1998) 44 NSWLR 349
367; and see also
Cordon Investments
Pty Ltd v Lesdor
Properties Pty Ltd
[2012] NSWCA 184
per Bathurst CJ (Meagher
and Macfarlan JJA agreeing)).
Importantly,
the implied obligation of good faith and reasonableness does not require a party
to act in the interests of the other
party or subordinate its own legitimate
interests to those of the other party, although it does require it to have due
the rights and interests of the other party:
Cordon Investments
question as to whether this implied obligation was breached by Heartland Motors
in terminating Mr Turner’s employment is
considered below.
What was the purpose, manner and effect of the termination on 6
Cross-Claimants’ contentions
Cross-Claimants submitted that, having regard to the purpose, manner and effect
of the termination of Mr Turner’s employment
on 6 May 2025, Heartland
Motors breached its implied obligation of good faith and reasonableness.
regards the purpose of the termination, the Cross-Claimants submitted that Ms
Richards and Ms Hooker caused Heartland Motors to
terminate Mr Turner’s
employment “in execution of a pre-arranged strategy to enable a sale of
the Group’s shares
to a third party”, believing that this
termination would “cause him significant distress and weaken his
attachment to
the Group, and that this would make Turnercorp more willing to
sell its shares”.
regards the manner of the termination, the Cross-Claimants submitted that Ms
Richards and Ms Hooker adopted a “secretive
blitzkrieg” strategy,
which involved not taking any steps which might forewarn Mr Turner of their
intention to remove him,
until they were ready to put their plan into effect.
The Cross-Claimants submitted that this strategy demonstrated a lack of good
faith, since it was “calculated to, and had the effect of, ensuring that
[Mr Turner] could not seek to protect himself, including
by seeking the
assistance of this Court” and “involved giving him no opportunity to
consider and be heard on any so-called
ground for termination”.
regards the effect of the termination, the Cross-Claimants submitted that the
intended, actual and foreseeable effect of the termination
was to “deprive
[Mr Turner] of his long standing and much valued employment, and leave him
immediately unemployed and humiliated”,
despite his having “worked
hard over decades to grow and develop the businesses, in the process making and
distributing millions
upon millions of dollars for the personal use and
enjoyment of [Ms Richards] and [Ms Hooker], who themselves had contributed next
to nothing”.
the Cross-Claimants contended that the effect of the termination was to cause
the dealer subsidiaries in the Group “to
commit events of default under
most dealership agreements”. (I will deal with this issue separately
below, when considering
the oppression claim.)
Strategy to
persuade Turnercorp to sell its shares?
Cross-Claimants submitted that Ms Richards and Ms Hooker took steps to remove Mr
Turner as CEO of the Heartland Motor Group and
as a director of the operating
entities for the purpose of “persuading Turnercorp to sell its shares [in
BG Webb] so as to
facilitate their exit from the Group (and possibly with the
benefit of Turnercorp’s shares as well if, in its weakened state,
agreed to be bought out following Kieran’s termination)”.
of Ms Richards and Ms Hooker had, in the past, expressed an interest either in
selling the entirety of the Heartland Motors Group
to a third party (such as Mr
Nick Politis, with whom they had discussions in 2021: see paragraph [
] above), or in selling
their shares to Mr Turner. There had been a number of discussions with Mr Turner
regarding such a sale, but
none had progressed very far.
Cross-Claimants’ submissions on this issue focussed, in particular, on a
sale strategy which was said to have been formulated
by Ms Richards and Ms
Hooker following the engagement of Dr Tony Rumble of The Wealth Partnership, who
in turn engaged Mr Rohan Meyer
as a consultant in around December 2023. The
engagement letter for Mr Meyer stated that Ms Richards and Ms Hooker were
seeking advice
and services “in relation to their dispute with Kieran
Turner, and to assist with the maximisation and monetisation of the
their capital invested in the Heartland Group of Companies”. The
particular services to be provided by Mr Meyer included
the following (emphasis
“(a) advise in relation to business strategy especially as it relates to
the fair market valuation of, and
potential sale of the business/es and
assets owned by the Heartland Group of companies
(b) advise as to strategy and tactics to aid [Ms Richards’ and Ms
Hooker’s] negotiations with all stakeholders (including
purchasers, related service providers and motor vehicle manufacturer/s,
Government and regulatory agencies) and participate
in such negotiations as
expressly required by [The Wealth Partnership];
(c) assist and advise in respect of
any proposed sale of the assets/
businesses of the Heartland Group
in November 2023, Dr Rumble sent an email to Ms Richards and Ms Hooker
regarding his discussions with another consultant,
Mr Steve Rivers, in which Dr
Rumble reported that he had informed Mr Rivers that “[Ms Richards and Ms
Hooker] don’t wish
to continue to be [in the] motor business going forward
ie [their] goal is to monetise the value of the businesses”.
Richards conceded, in cross-examination, that at the end of 2023 she was
intending to pursue a process that would culminate in
a sale of her shares in
January 2024, Mr Meyer, likely with input from Dr Rumble, prepared a document
headed “Heartland Group – High-Level
Business Strategy 2024”.
This strategy involved three phases:
(1) “Phase 1: Recalibrate Board and Appoint Advisory Board”. This
phase involved appointing Ms Hooker to the Board “and
any other Board
changes” (which, Ms Richards acknowledged, involved removing
Mr Turner). It also involved appointing advisors,
such as Mr Meyer, and
advising Manufacturers of the changes;
(2) “Phase 2” involved an “in-depth business review”.
There were two “scenarios” for this phase,
one of which involved
working with existing executive management (including Mr Turner) and the other
of which involved appointing
a new CEO; and
(3) “Phase 3: Business Sale”. This phase involved reviewing the
business for sale readiness, preparing an information
memorandum, identifying
potential buyers, agreeing on a sale process, and implementing that process.
Meyer gave evidence that, when he provided his strategy document to Ms Richards
and Ms Hooker, they told him that they were “unhappy
with Kieran in the
role of CEO, but were open to the possibility of Kieran continuing in that
role” and “selling the
business was an option they wished to
consider and explore, but not a certainty if the issues that they were having
with Kieran could
be resolved”.
May 2024, Dr Rumble sent a letter to Mr Meyer proposing that “effective
immediately upon Jo Richards and Bess Hooker securing
management control of the
Heartland Group, you will be employed by Heartland Group as CEO”.
20 December 2024, Dr Rumble sent a Confidentiality, Non-Disclosure and
Non-Circumvention Agreement to McCarrolls, which is a car
dealership business.
The recitals to this agreement stated that Ms Richards and Ms Hooker had, in
their capacity as shareholders
of the Heartland Motors Group, financial
information relating to the Group, including entities which own real property
used by the
Group (described as the “Confidential Information”), and
that McCarrolls was “desirous of receiving the Confidential
Information to
consider an acquisition of [Ms Richards’ and Ms Hooker’s] shares in
the Business”. Clause 1.2 of
this agreement provided that McCarrolls would
advise Ms Richards and Ms Hooker, as soon as practicable after receiving this
information,
whether it was interested in acquiring those shares.
23 December 2024, Dr Rumble sent a slide pack to McCarrolls that was headed
“Heartland Group – Financial Information
provided to McCarrolls
Automotive Group”. The “Background” section stated that
Ms Richards and Ms Hooker owned
60% of the Heartland Motors Group and were
in a dispute with Mr Turner, who was CEO and owned 17%. It continued:
“Strategic goal is to secure control, restore value across operation and
asset base, and to (in due course) monetise at ‘best
value’ (eg 2-3
year process)
Discussions regarding sale now assume that:
Sale of 100% of shares in Heartland Group can be arranged
Sale consideration can include a subsequent component reflecting uplift in value
of assets.”
this document referred to a goal of selling 100% of the business in around a
“2-3 year” timeframe, there were discussions
with McCarroll’s
in early 2025 regarding the sale of the property and business at Castle Hill,
for the purposes of generating
funds to buy out Mr Turner’s interest in BG
Webb (in the event that he agreed to sell). In circumstances where Mr Turner had
been threatening to bring an oppression claim (and had commenced, but then
discontinued, such a claim in the 2025 Federal Court Proceeding),
understandable that Ms Richards and Ms Hooker were exploring whether they would
be able, in the event that Mr Turner sought,
or agreed, that his shares be
bought out by his aunts, to raise the funds necessary to complete such a
purchase. Further, it should
be noted that Mr Turner had himself taken similar
steps at around this time. In November 2024, he had communications with ANZ
a proposed $40m loan, and informed the bank that one of the purposes
of this loan was a “family buy out”.
Cross-Claimants relied on the fact that Dr Rumble had, in an email of 13 May
2025, referred to McCarrolls having a “first
and last right of
refusal”. There was otherwise no evidence of the nature of any such right.
Further, Dr Rumble mentioned this
“right” in the context of
referring to an “eventual sales process” (without indicating any
timeframe for
such a process to be “eventually” undertaken). In this
email, Dr Rumble also referred to a previous indication by Ms
Richards and Ms
Hooker that they wanted “to install management to stabilise and improve
the value of the businesses, with a
view to a potential sale of assets at a
point in time which you decide to be appropriate”.
cross-examination, Ms Richards agreed that she recognised, in around 2021 or
early 2022 (that is, after the dealings with Mr Politis
did not proceed), that
Mr Turner’s attachment to the business represented an obstacle for her aim
of achieving a sale of all
of the shares in the Group; and that, by around 2024,
she thought that if he was removed as CEO, this might lead to him being more
willing to sell his shares.
it does not follow that Ms Richards, let alone Ms Hooker, implemented a strategy
of removing Mr Turner as CEO and as director
of the Operating Entities for the
purpose of achieving a sale of the whole of the business. When this proposition
was put to Ms Richards
in the same passage of cross-examination, she responded
that there were “a lot of reasons” why Mr Turner was removed
and that “[w]e just didn’t want to work with him anymore”. She
maintained this evidence throughout the
course of her lengthy cross-examination.
Similarly, Ms Hooker rejected any suggestion that she took steps to remove Mr
CEO for the purpose of persuading him to sell his shares, so that the
whole of the business could then be sold.
key part of the Cross-Claimants’ case, both in respect of the termination
claim and the oppression claim, was that the
sole purpose
of terminating
Mr Turner as CEO was to effect a sale strategy. That is apparent from the
following submissions made by Senior Counsel
for the Cross-Claimants in closing
address (emphasis added):
”HIS HONOUR: Isn’t that enough for a board to say, We don’t
trust our CEO? ...
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR CROSS CLAIMANTS]: What your Honour I think is really asking
me is, was there more than one purpose? Was one purpose
to weaken Turner Corp to
facilitate a sale? Was the second purpose, Well, we don’t trust him
anymore. Here are these grounds
we set out in our letter, and that’s why
we’re doing it?
We say that the only purpose was to weaken Turner Corp
for sale, and we say that is obvious in circumstances where there were all
manner of alternatives that could have been deployed to deal with that issue if
it was genuine, and we highlight the fact that they
said in their evidence that
as far as relationships and trust was concerned, that had gone long ago, well
before 6 May. That wasn’t
a reason to terminate him
accept that Ms Richards and Ms Hooker had been exploring, during the course of
their long-running dispute with Mr Turner, options
for the business in the event
that Mr Turner was removed, including the potential sale of either the whole
business or some of the
assets, following an in-depth review of the business
under new management. However, that does not mean that the removal of Mr Turner
as CEO was undertaken for the sole purpose of effecting such a sale. Instead,
for reasons given below, I am satisfied that Ms Richards
and Ms Hooker
terminated Mr Turner’s employment because they had lost trust and
confidence in him as CEO. In those circumstances,
they were, understandably,
taking steps to ensure a management team was in place who could operate the
business upon his removal,
and were exploring what options might be open to them
(including a potential sale) once they achieved control.
trust and confidence in Mr Turner
Termination Letter provided the following reason for the termination of
“The reason for the decision to terminate your employment with the Group
is that the Board no longer has trust and confidence
in your judgment or ability
to perform your role of Chief Executive Officer ...”
am satisfied that the “Board” (that is, Ms Richards and Ms Hooker)
had, as at 6 May 2025, lost trust and confidence
in Mr Turner as CEO, having
regard to the following matters.
Mr Turner had, for several years prior to May 2025, repeatedly sought to
frustrate attempts by Ms Richards and Ms Hooker (who
together controlled 60% of
the shares in BG Webb) to have a say in the management of the Heartland Motors
Group. For example:
(1) in December 2022, Mr Turner purported unilaterally to appoint his brother as
a director of various Operating Entities, over Ms
Richards’ opposition,
despite having no power to do so (see paragraph [
(2) in February 2023, Mr Turner sent an email to Ms Richards (who was a director
of all entities within the Heartland Motors Group),
stating that she was not to
to respond to her. There
was evidence that Mr Turner subsequently took
steps to enforce this directive, including by sending texts to the Group
Controller, Ms Kragh, after learning that she had answered a telephone
call from Ms Richards, asking Ms Kragh not to “breach
[this] policy
again” and directing as follows: “Do not answer or reply to any
phone, text or email”;
(3) in May 2024, Mr Turner wrote to Ms Richards demanding that she resign as a
director within seven days, and then purported to
Ms Richards’ opposition and with the support of Mr Anthony Turner
(who had not been validly appointed as a director),
resolutions removing
Ms Richards as a director of each of the Operating Entities;
(4) in February 2025, Mr Turner used his powers as an officer of Boyded to
frustrate attempts to hold the February 2025 EGM for the
purpose of appointing
Ms Hooker as a director of Heartland Group; and
(5) after being unsuccessful in the 2024 Director Proceeding, Mr Turner
purported to appoint Mr Anthony Turner as Supervisor of the
RG Trust and then,
after the determination of the 2025 EGM Proceeding, Mr Anthony Turner
(likely at Mr Turner’s request) purported
to exercise his powers as
Supervisor to replace Boyded with Heartland One as trustee of the RG Trust.
final matter was specifically referred to in the Termination Letter as being a
reason why, as at 6 May 2025, the Board had lost
trust and confidence in Mr
Turner, stating as follows:
“... the Board no longer has trust and confidence in your judgment or
ability to perform your role of Chief Executive Officer
in circumstances where a
majority of directors [namely, Ms Richards and Ms Hooker] are concerned that:
you have purported to change the trusteeship of the trust which was controlled
by the Group and is integral to the continued viability,
sustainability and
commercial integrity of the Group's business, without any consultation, and
which raises the risk of occasioning
significant financial loss to the
purported appointment of Heartland One was the culmination of a series of steps
taken by Mr Turner over the course of eight years,
commencing with Mr
Turner’s purported appointment of himself as Appointor of the RG Trust in
2017, without informing, consulting
with, or seeking the approval of
Ms Richards.
removal of Boyded and appointment of Heartland One as trustee of the RG Trust
had the effect, and was undertaken for the purpose,
of removing from the
Group’s control the valuable assets of the RG Trust, which were integral
to the conduct of the Group’s
business, and placing such control
exclusively in Mr Turner’s hands. I accept that these matters seriously,
and justifiably,
undermined Ms Richards’ and Ms Hooker’s trust and
confidence in Mr Turner as CEO.
Mr Turner had sought to enlist the aid of Manufacturers in frustrating his
aunts’ attempts to have Ms Hooker appointed
as a director of various
entities within the Heartland Motors Group. The Termination Letter identified
this conduct as having contributed
to Ms Richards’ and Ms Hooker’s
loss of trust and confidence in Mr Turner:
“you have written to the dealers in your personal capacity, and in
conflict with your position as CEO, seeking to lobby them
in relation to
governance issues (we refer to your solicitors’ correspondence of 23
August 2024) and misrepresenting the true
of this correspondence are emails which Mr Turner sent on 14 June 2022 to
Motor Company Australia Pty Ltd,
Australia Pty Ltd and
SAIG Motor Australia Pty Ltd (
) (each being a Manufacturer which sold
cars through the Heartland Motors Group). Mr Turner copied Ms Hooker into those
emails, which
stated as follows:
“As discussed, my aunty Bernice Hooker is a major shareholder of Heartland
and has recently proposed to be elected as a Director
of our parent company on
29 June 2022.
I am vehemently against this change of control for the following reasons:
1. No business experience
2. No automotive experience
3. Has been trying to sell her shares without success
4. Lives in QLD
5. Will sack Anthony or I
6. Will breach a verbal agreement I have with her
7. Not known to any manufacturer
8. Won’t fulfill her legal duties as a director
9. Will cause senior management Heartland resignations or
10. Will bring the companies into disrepute
11. Will trigger immediate Supreme Court and Family Court
Th[e] only sensible decision is to not support Bernice as a Director or a
shareholder and recommend she immediately sells her shares.”
examples are the letters which Mr Turner’s solicitors wrote to various
Manufacturers on 23 August 2024 (which are referred
to in the Termination
Letter), stating that the Manufacturers should not respond to
Ms Hooker’s requests for consent to her
being appointed to the boards
of the Operating Entities. Mr Turner was, in effect, seeking to engineer a
Catch-22 situation, in order
to entrench his own position. He was maintaining
that Ms Hooker could not be appointed as a director of the various entities
the Heartland Motors Group without the Manufacturers’ consent,
while ensuring that the Manufacturers could not give such consent
(because only
the directors of the board of those entities could request such consent and,
while he and Ms Richards were the directors,
he would not agree to any such
request being made). He outlined this strategy in an email which he sent to his
father-in-law, Mr
Stephen Bargwanna, on 5 September 2024:
“Yep, had a win. Basically, the manufacturers said they won’t
consider adding Bernice as a Director unless the company
that is contracted with
them asks for this with both Directors signing this request. And obviously I
wont sign this request so they
don’t have to even consider it ... at this
stage 7 of our 12 manufacturers have written this to them. So, I feel my job is
safe, the first time in 3 years.”
Hooker was not aware of these letters at the time, but became aware of them in
early 2025 when Mr Turner deployed this material
in the 2025 Federal Court
Proceeding, in support of a claim (which he subsequently abandoned) for an
injunction restraining Ms Richards,
Ms Hooker and Bernley from proposing any
resolution at the 2025 February 2025 EGM to appoint Ms Hooker as a director of
are numerous other examples of such communications with Manufacturers to which
Ms Hooker was not privy.
Turner suggested that he was taking such steps for the benefit of the Heartland
Motors Group and the various Manufacturers. However,
it is more likely that he
was motivated by self-interest and, in particular, his desire to ensure that Ms
Hooker was not appointed
as a director, in particular because he was concerned
that, if Ms Hooker and Ms Richards obtained control of the Group, it would
the end of his tenure as CEO. That is apparent from the terms of Mr
Turner’s email to his father-in-law on 5 September
2024, set out in
paragraph [
in which he stated that as a result of his manoeuvrings with Manufacturers to
prevent Ms Hooker’s appointment “I
feel my job is safe”. It is
also apparent from the following text message which Mr Turner sent to
Ms Hooker on 13 June 2022,
when she was seeking to be appointed to the
board of BG Webb (emphasis added):
“Hi bes, I’m reaching out as family and not an enemy.
can’t let you out vote me on the board because I know you will try to sack
me. I won’t let this happen. This is going
to get messy, just being up
front. Supreme Court and Manufacturers will expose dirty laundry
happens from here is a direct response to your attempts to sack me after 27
successful years. I offered you a chance to take
cash and move on happily but
you threw it in my face by trying to sack me. The beginning of massive turmoil
is unfortunately here
and I’m disappointed it’s come to this from
Turner was threatening to “expose dirty laundry” to Manufacturers in
order to encourage Ms Hooker to abandon her attempt
to be appointed as a
director, because he was concerned to ensure that he could not be removed as
two weeks later, on 29 June 2022, Mr Turner sent a text message to Mr Golden of
Hyundai referring to the “dirty laundry”
in question, namely, the
alleged prior association of Ms Hooker’s husband with a bikie gang:
“If these black uhlan bike
director and shareholder affiliations end up in
the newspaper or on tv I will rely on these m[e]ssages as legal
December 2022, Mr Turner again urged Hyundai to intervene in the dispute between
himself and his aunts, but Hyundai declined to
get involved. In particular,
there was the following exchange of emails between Mr Turner and Mr Anthony
Rogers of Hyundai:
Mr Turner: “... my aunties have called a board meeting
tomorrow to remove Anthony [Turner] as a director for an unknown reason
Bernice [Hooker] to Heartland Group P/L and Boyded Industries P/L. Would you
like to meet with my aunties to contest this
until you understand why and
determine if it’s in the best interests of the company? ...”
Mr Rogers: “Unfortunately, under the terms of the Hyundai
Franchise Agreement, HMCA employees are not in a position to contest
any changes
on your board, and it is appropriate that we leave those matters to be resolved
within Heartland Group.”
Turner was not content with this response, and sought to agitate the matter
further. On 13 December 2022, he asked Mr Rogers to
send him an email requesting
a meeting between Hyundai and Ms Hooker and seeking an explanation regarding
“who she is and her
experience etc”. He told Mr Rogers that if Ms
Hooker agreed to attend, he would “attend with her to ensure she tells
whole story”. In cross-examination, he explained that the “whole
story” which he intended to reveal was as
“That she’d never had a job, she’d never worked in the car
motor industry, she lived in Queensland, she wasn’t
interested in the
business, she’d never been interested in the business, she wasn’t
capable of being in the business,
she was married to a bikie. I can keep
17 March 2023, Mr Turner again sought that Hyundai intervene in his battle with
his aunts for control of the Group, sending an
email which stated as
“Can you please advise your position on my aunties proposals below before
our next Board Meeting on 20.3.23 at 1030am;
1. Add Bernice Hooker as a Director to Heartland Group P/L and Boyded Industries
2. Remove Anthony Turner as a Director to Heartland Group P/L and Boyded
Industries P/L.
As CEO, I would recommend ‘NO’ to both proposals simply because
Anthony has 27 years of Automotive experience and Bernice
has 0 years. Plus you
know Anthony very well and Bernice not at all.
I will be voting ‘NO’ to both proposals.”
again declined to express a position on this matter of internal governance; and
Mr Turner again urged them, unsuccessfully,
to get involved, out of a concern
that “if my aunties get control of the Board as they propose by adding [Ms
Hooker] and removing
Anthony [Turner] then they can sack me and or sell
Heartland Hyundai”. He concluded this communication by stating that
I or we suffer damage I will refer to these emails”.
Mr Turner exchanged the following text messages with Mr Kevin Gannon of
Motors Australia Pty Limited in June 2022:
“[Mr Turner]: Hi Kevin, how are you? I need you to meet my Aunty Bernice.
She is an existing substantial shareholder but since
my mum and nan died within
the past 12 [months] she is now trying to come onto the Board and i don’t
want her to as her husband
is a Bikie for the Black Uhlans and if the press get
a hold of this then it’ll be on the front page and tv and destroy both
brands. Based on that and her nil experience it should be plenty reason for you
to reject her.
[Kevin Gannon]: Hi Kieran, currently overseas, will call on my return late July.
My initial thoughts are we are unable to decide
on company board members or
decisions, we can only control who is the designated DP [Dealer Principal] of a
business, or if an ownership
change was happening. I will investigate further
and advise.
[Kieran Turner]: Yes that is possibly true but regardless I strongly suggest you
request an INTRO MEETING as she is a shareholder/director
and get to know her. I
voted against her appointment but was outvoted. I am putting manufacturers on
NOTICE that I disagree with
her appointment because of her inexperience and
affiliations with bikies which are material threats to our brands. I will leave
decision to you and your senior mgt team from here and take no
responsibility hereafter.”
were numerous other examples of such correspondence in evidence. I accept the
Cross-Defendants’ submission that Mr Turner
encouraged Manufacturers to
enforce rights (including rights which they did not in fact have) adversely to
entities within the Heartland
Motors Group, with a view to enlisting their aid
in frustrating the attempts by Ms Richards and Ms Hooker to exercise their
as substantial shareholders to have a say in the composition of entities
within the Group.
a further matter which Ms Richards and Ms Hooker identify, in their respective
affidavits, as undermining their relationship
with Mr Turner was the fact that
he regularly addressed them, or spoke about them, in contemptuous and offensive
Hooker deposed that when Mr Turner spoke to her on business matters, she
“often felt belittled” (his tone likely reflecting
regarding Ms Hooker that he expressed in the messages set out above).
Hooker also deposed that Mr Turner was “often rude, especially to Jo [Ms
Richards]”. There are numerous examples of
such conduct referred to in the
evidence. For example:
(1) Ms Richards sent an email to Mr Turner regarding the minutes which he had
prepared of a meeting held on 31 January 2023, expressing
the view that those
minutes were not accurate or complete and, in particular, stating as follows:
“As for your note of the 31 January 2023 meeting, I note that you have
queried why the BG Webb transfers set out in your mother’s
estate have not
been signed off. I told you that they hadn’t been done correctly, to which
you then called me a ‘fucking
bitch’ and told me to ‘fuck
off’. In the face of that abuse I said I wasn’t going to listen any
was leaving the meeting. Your note does not properly record that
exchange. For your benefit the reasons why the transfers have not
been finalised
are set out in our lawyer’s correspondence with your lawyer.”
(2) on 21 February 2023, Ms Richards sent an email to Mr Turner in which she
stated that:
“Your abusive language and conduct has become intolerable. Calling me a
‘f...... b....’, a ‘coward’,
‘disgusting’, a
‘low life grub’ and telling me to ‘f... o..’ is simply
unacceptable.”
(3) on 7 February 2025, Mr Turner sent an email to Ms Richards regarding the
meeting of Bernley on 3 February 2025 (at which an EGM
was called for the
purpose of considering a resolution to appoint Ms Hooker as a director), stating
“Your ignorance and greed are making you act insane, and I seriously
question your mental health and capacity to act as a reasonable
their closing written submissions, the Cross-Claimants conceded, in something of
an understatement, that “there have been
occasions when [Mr Turner] has
spoken to his aunts in ways that he should not have”.
I accept that there was evidence that Ms Richards is herself a party to a group
chat with her children in which offensive and
disparaging remarks have been made
family (which were
not intended to be conveyed to or read by Mr Turner) are
distinct from Mr Turner’s demeaning, belittling and offensive remarks
directed at Ms Richards in the course of their dealings in respect of the
management of the Heartland Motors Group over a number
of years, in meetings, in
text messages to her and in emails. It is unsurprising that, in response to this
conduct, Ms Richards formed
the view that she was, as a director of the entities
with the Heartland Motors Group, unwilling and unable to continue to work with
Mr Turner in the role of CEO.
Conclusion – implied
obligation of good faith and reasonableness
issue for determination is whether Heartland Motors complied with its implied
obligations of good faith and reasonableness in
terminating Mr Turner’s
employment pursuant to clause 9 of the Executive Employment Agreement. In
considering that issue, it
is necessary to consider whether Heartland Motors was
acting to promote its own legitimate interests, or whether Heartland Motors
acting capriciously, or otherwise failed to co-operate in achieving the
contractual objects, failed to comply with honest standards
of conduct, or
failed to comply with standards of conduct which are reasonable having regard to
the interests of the parties.
regard to the matters set out above, I am satisfied that Ms Richards and Ms
Hooker had, as stated in the Termination Letter,
lost trust and confidence in Mr
Turner as CEO as at 6 May 2025, which was the result of a series of events over
an extended period
culminating in the steps taken by him to remove control of
the RG Trust from the Heartland Motors Group and to place such control
exclusively in his own hands. In those circumstances, I am satisfied that
Heartland Motors Group was not acting capriciously, but
was promoting its own
legitimate interests by exercising its contractual right under clause 9.2 to
terminate Mr Turner’s employment.
Accordingly, Heartland Motors did not
breach any implied obligations of good faith and reasonableness by exercising
that right.
Breach of contract?
the reasons set out above, the employment relationship between Heartland Motors
and Mr Turner was governed by the Executive Employment
Agreement, which included
cl 9.2, permitting either party to terminate that agreement on not less than one
month’s notice.
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth), Heartland Motors was not
entitled to terminate Mr Turner’s employment unless:
(a) the time between giving the notice and the day of the termination is at
least the period (the
minimum period of notice
) worked out
under subsection (3); or
(b) the employer has paid to the employee ... payment in lieu of notice of
at least the amount the employer would have been liable
to pay to the employee
... at the full rate of pay for the hours the employee would have worked had the
employment continued until
the end of the minimum period of notice.
regard to the length of Mr Turner’s employment and his age, the minimum
period of notice “worked out under
” was five weeks, which
was slightly longer than the period specified in clause 9.2. Pursuant to
s 117(2)(b)
, Heartland Motors was entitled to make payment of five
weeks’ pay to Mr Turner in lieu of notice. (Similarly, clause 9.4 of
Executive Employment Agreement provided that Heartland Motors could, at its
option, pay Mr Turner “not to work out the
whole or some part of the
notice period by tendering a payment in lieu of such period of the notice period
as is not worked by [him]”.)
the Termination Notice issued on 6 May 2025, Heartland Motors stated that it was
terminating Mr Turner’s employment in accordance
with cl 9.2 of the
Executive Employment Agreement and that it would, in accordance with cl 9.4 and
Fair Work Act
provide “payment in lieu of
notice of five weeks’ pay (to be paid today less applicable tax)”.
This sum was paid
into Mr Turner’s bank account on 9 May 2025.
Accordingly,
the steps taken by Heartland Motors in terminating Mr Turner’s
employment complied with clauses 9.2 and 9.4 of
the Executive Employment
Agreement, and with
Fair Work Act
. Further, for the reasons
given above, Heartland Motors did not, in exercising those rights, breach any
implied obligations of good
faith and reasonableness. It follows that the claim
for breach of contract must be dismissed.
Grounds for summary
Cross-Defendants submitted that, in any event, Heartland Motors was entitled to
summarily dismiss Mr Turner from his employment
as at 6 May 2025 by reason of
his misconduct.
is well established that an employee’s dismissal may be justified upon
grounds on which the employer did not act and of which
the employer was unaware
at the time of termination (and even though the ground actually relied upon is
found to be without substance):
Shepherd v Felt and Textiles of Australia
(1931) 45 CLR 359 at 377 per Dixon J;
[1931] HCA 21
Sunbird Plaza
Pty Ltd v Maloney
(1988) 166 CLR 245
at 262 per Mason CJ;
employee in a position of confidence can “be dismissed without notice or
compensation if he acted in a manner incompatible
with the due and faithful
performance of his duty, or inconsistent with the confidential relation between
himself and [the employer]”:
Blythe Chemicals Ltd v Bushnell
[1933] HCA 8
at 72-73 per Starke and Evatt JJ; and see also at 81-82 per Dixon and
McTiernan JJ;
[1933] HCA 8.
These observations were quoted with approval by
Gleeson CJ, Gaudron and Gummow JJ in
Concut v Worrell
at [25]. In that
case, Kirby J observed (at [51]) that:
“it cannot be disputed (statute or express contractual provision aside)
that acts of dishonesty or similar conduct destructive
of the mutual trust
between the employer and employee, once discovered, ordinarily fall within the
class of conduct which, without
more, authorises summary dismissal”
that I have determined that Heartland Motors did not breach the terms of Mr
Turner’s employment contract by terminating
his employment on five
weeks’ notice, it is unnecessary to determine this issue. Further, I
consider it undesirable, in circumstances
where it is unnecessary to do so, to
express a view on each of the various allegations of misconduct that Heartland
Motors advanced
against Mr Turner (which do not otherwise arise). It is
sufficient for present purposes to address Heartland Motors’ contention
that Mr Turner’s conduct in relation to the change of the trustee of the
RG Trust was such as to justify his summary dismissal
by Heartland Motors.
am satisfied that the following conduct on the part of Mr Turner prior to 6 May
2025 was incompatible with the due and faithful
performance of his duty and was
destructive of the mutual trust between the employer and employee, such as to
justify his summary
(1) his purported execution, in around July 2017, of the Appointor Deed on
behalf of Boyded, in circumstances where he was aware
that the board of Boyded
had not given its approval for his appointment as Appointor of the RG Trust;
(2) his failure to inform his fellow director of Boyded, Ms Richards, that he
had purported to appoint himself as Appointor of the
(3) his fabrication, in 2024, of two versions of the “1 May 2017”
Minutes which purported to record that Ms Richards
had in fact approved his
appointment as Appointor of the RG Trust; and
(4) his purported exercise of his powers as Appointor to appoint his brother as
Supervisor of the RG Trust, for the improper purpose
of frustrating his
aunts’ attempts to obtain control of the Heartland Motors Group, by taking
away from the Group control of
the valuable assets of the RG Trust, which were
used to conduct the business of the Group, and placing such control exclusively
his own hands.
those reasons, even if I had determined that Mr Turner’s employment was
not governed by the terms of the Executive Employment
Agreement, or that
Heartland Motors was required by the terms of his employment contract to give
him reasonable notice of termination,
I would have determined that Heartland
Motors was, as at 6 May 2025, entitled to summarily dismiss Mr Turner.
have not gone on to consider what relief would have been granted if I had
determined that Mr Turner’s employment contract
had been breached.
is because an order was made, by consent, on 18 August 2025, that the question
of damages for any such breach be determined separately,
and following the
determination of the other issues in the proceedings. This order was sought in
circumstances where the proceeding
was brought on for hearing on an expedited
basis, and the parties were unable, in the time available, to complete their
expert evidence
on this issue. In particular, there was some complexity to any
assessment of damages for breach of contract by reason of the claim
for damages
for loss of the opportunity to earn a bonus under the alleged “Hospitality
Bonus Term”, which I consider
below. The parties submitted that the Court
should, in this judgment, determine the existence and content of any
“Hospitality
Bonus Term”, so that those findings could be taken into
account in preparing the evidence on damages
Cross-Claimants accepted that, if I found that liability was not established,
then it would be an arid exercise to have a further
hearing at first instance to
determine what relief would have been awarded in the event that those claims had
been established, and
the appropriate course would be to dismiss those claims,
with the Cross-Claimants then being able to pursue any rights of appeal.
Nonetheless,
in case I am wrong on the issue of breach, I have gone on to consider whether
there was a Hospitality Bonus Term in the
terms pleaded by the Cross-Claimants,
since there was substantial argument on this issue and the determination of this
issue could,
in the event of any successful appeal against the finding of
breach, be taken into account in any subsequent assessment of damages
Hospitality Bonus Term?
Cross-Claimants pleaded that, in or around March 2021, Mr Turner’s
employment contract was varied to include the following
term, which was
described as the “
Hospitality Bonus Term
“a term that [Heartland Motors], or one of its related entities, would
seek to carry out a project to develop and convert the
properties at 1 Packard
Avenue, Castle Hill and 206-220 Hume Highway, Greenacre (
by [Boyded] and operated by [Heartland Motors] to hospitality venues including
obtaining development consent in respect of
the Properties (each, a
) for that purpose, and upon each Hotel DC being obtained, Kieran would
become entitled to bonus payments comprising:
a. an amount equal to 30% of those parts of the Properties
which was shown as being occupied by the approved development (being
parking facilities) in the relevant Hotel DC; and. following development:
b. an amount equal to 30% of any other returns made in respect
of the project (including profits made from the operation and sale
developed business).”
term was said to arise from an exchange of emails. It is necessary to go through
the history of the negotiations in some detail,
as individual emails need to be
interpreted not only having regard to their own terms, but also having regard to
the preceding communications.
19 February 2020, Mr Turner sent an email to Ms Richards, Ms Hooker, Ms
Kathryn Turner and Ms Dulcie Webb, which set out a proposal
to develop a
hospitality business and to reorganise the shareholdings of BG Webb:
“I have come up with an idea to add pubs to our existing car dealerships
where we are zoned appropriately. My research to date
confirms we could lodge a
DA and if successful an application to LGA for pubs on our Castle Hill site and
Chullora site.
I would like to be an equal partner so we are all 20% equity owners. I am doing
all the work by myself these days and if the above
strategy is approved my life
will turn upside down. I will sacrifice a lot of time and stress with no
guarantees of success hence
a gift of 2.5% equity from each of you would make
all 5 of us equal partners at 20% each.”
March 2020, Ms Richards responded by requesting a meeting in person to discuss
Mr Turner’s proposal. Around this time, the
first COVID-19 lockdown began.
On 21 March 2020, Mr Turner suggested that a meeting occur when COVID-19 was
“contained”
and stated that he was “not willing to further
expand my time, duties and stress levels by buying additional group investment
properties and planning and building major metro pubs without additional equity
to 20% so we are all equal”. Ms Richards agreed
that it was “not a
good time to do any transactions at the moment”, and it appears that
discussions were put on hold
for a number of months.
12 June 2020, Mr Turner sent an email to Ms Richards, Ms Hooker and Ms Turner,
in which he provided an update on the impact of
COVID-19 on the Heartland Motors
Group business, and stated as follows:
“I don’t see a way out of these big losses unless we recreate
ourselves. Have you thought more about my hotel for equity
... how about we structure this as a bonus. Ie, 5% group equity per pub
approval? That’s 1.25% from each of you per pub. And
to be clear the pubs
will be worth about $70m each if it comes off so that’s putting about $30m
in each of your pockets in
3 years for doing nothing ... It’s a no
outlined above, Mr Turner’s proposal was that he receive additional equity
in BG Webb in return for each pub that was developed.
15 June 2020, Ms Turner expressed her support for her son’s proposal. On
the same day, Ms Richards responded as follows:
“[Ms Hooker] is coming down in the next month so maybe we could have a
board meeting then to discuss your proposal. Can you
give a bit more info on
this before the meeting like what are we doing with the other sites? Will they
still be operating as Heartland?
and any other proposals you have going forward.”
Turner agreed to the proposed meeting, and provided the following responses to
Ms Richards’ queries:
“The pubs will be in the corners of the car dealerships at Castle Hill and
Chullora ...They can continue on as cars for the
balance albeit in a smaller
capacity but the pubs will earn about $4m each and more than offset the car
losses at these sites. The
pubs themselves will run under me and the Heartland
structure ...”
meeting took place on 24 August 2020. Mr Turner deposes that, at this meeting:
(1) Ms Richards indicated that she, Ms Hooker and Ms Webb were agreeable
“in principle” to the suggestion that the Heartland
Motors Group
diversify its operations to include pubs; and
(2) Mr Turner reiterated his proposal that his “bonus for doing this work
would be an increase in Turnercorp’s 10% equity
stake in BG Webb to
20%” (that is, an additional 5% group equity per pub).
27 August 2020, Mr Turner sent a revised proposal to Ms Richards, copied to
Ms Turner and Ms Hooker, which stated as follows (emphasis
“My proposal of a personal bonus of 5% group equity per pub was countered
by you for 5% equity only in the pubs per pub approval.
In principal, I was in
agreement with this and grateful the negotiation went forward. However,
it’s more complicated doing
it that way as I flagged to you in the
The big killer for me is the FSR not being transferred if we subdivide.
I propose we change the equity proposal to be 5% equity in the pub
and the whole site it sits on (without subdivision) per pub approval?
is apparent, from the terms of this email, that Mr Turner’s proposal for
increased equity in BG Webb (“5% group equity
per pub”) had been
countered with a proposal that he receive “5% equity
only in the
” (emphasis added). In response, he requested “5% equity in
the “whole site” on which each pub was
located. This was set out in a further email sent by him later on the same day:
“Ok all good, to be clearer:
1. My original offer was an extra 10% on 6 car dealerships, 2
pubs and all 12 properties.
2. Your counter was an extra 10% on 2 pubs and part of their 2
properties.
3. My counter is an extra 10% on 2 pubs and whole of their 2
properties.
My counter is because of reasons already supplied below, basically we lose very
valuable FSR for possible re zoning one day, if we
subdivide the hotels.
And to answer your question Joe, there are five different entities owning the 12
properties”
3 September 2020, Ms Richards responded that she, Ms Hooker and Ms Webb were
“not averse to considering [Mr Turner’s]
counter but just need some
clarification on some things”. On the same day, Mr Turner responded,
stating that his “additional
10% equity bonus will be measured on the
‘approval’ of the pubs from both Council and OLGA [that is, Liquor
NSW]”. At around this time, Mr Turner prepared a short form
“Family Agreement” which set out the terms of his proposal,
including, relevantly the following item (emphasis added):
“The bonus offer to Kieran is an additional 10% equity in each of the new
and the whole land it sits on
if the pub is approved by Council and
11 September 2020, Ms Richards sent an email to Mr Turner, copied to
Ms Hooker and Ms Turner, stating that she was seeking advice
solicitor, Mr Hugh Scott, in respect of “a few Trust issues”. Mr
Turner responded on the same day, indicating
that he had spoken with Mr Greg
Jepsen (from the Group’s external accountants, Auswild & Co) in
respect of engaging KPMG
to prepare a revised form of agreement and that he
would provide this draft agreement to Mr Scott as soon as possible.
14 September 2020, Mr Turner sent an email to Mr Scott, enclosing a document
entitled “Priority Distribution Deed”
and a revised corporate
structure of the Heartland Motors Group prepared by KPMG. In this email, Mr
Turner stated that KPMG “propose
a Property Agreement instead of setting
up new companies and stamp duty on transferring properties which is different to
what I recommended
but fine by me”. Mr Turner sent a follow-up email to
his mother and aunts on the morning of 24 September 2020, indicating that
not received a response from Mr Scott, and stating as follows (emphasis added):
“This should be a no brainer and we
should be going forward together on
I have accepted your offer in principal
and come back a long way to
12:28pm on 24 September 2020, Mr Scott responded, stating that it is “in
everyone’s interest not to rush what is a
complicated proposal” and
disputing Mr Turner’s suggestion that there was any “in
principle” agreement:
“Your email today stated that you had accepted Jo, Bess and Dulcie’s
offer in princip[le], but the documents are drafted
on the assumption that there
is agreement on your 10% 'equity' offer relating to the pubs and to the whole of
the subject properties.
The offer that had been made to you was for 10% equity
of the pubs and the part of the properties referable to the pubs. Given the
matters below there are difficulties with both offers, and it may be that some
other more achievable and certain form of incentive
for achieving the approvals,
such as a $ sum, may have to be discussed and agreed.”
Scott also noted that there were various issues with the draft Priority
Distribution Deed which had been provided by Mr Turner,
including that this
document “provides no detail of, nor indeed make[s] any reference to, the
proposal for hotel development
and the threshold hurdles for approvals from the
council and Liquor and Gaming NSW”. Mr Scott asked if he could speak to
12:40pm, Mr Turner sent a response to Mr Scott, which was copied to Ms Richards,
Ms Hooker and Ms Turner, stating as follows:
“Your [sic] killing me, this has been going on since Feb. As stated many
times, if I get the pubs approved by Council and [Liquor
& Gaming] then I
get an additional 10% in the pubs and their property. If this is agreed the
finer details can be done when/if
they get approved and the incentive is
I’m not responding to Hugh again... Let me know if the deal is accepted or
not, either way I’m fine.”
around 2:05pm, Ms Richards responded to Mr Turner’s email, copied to Ms
Hooker, suggesting that the best way forward was
for Mr Scott to speak to KPMG
in respect of his concerns regarding the Priority Distribution Deed. Later that
evening, Mr Turner
replied, reiterating that his proposal is “the extra
10% in the pubs and properties they sit on” and stating: “If
that’s not agreed then forget it”. He requested a response by the
following day.
28 September 2020, Mr Scott sent an email to Mr Turner, which was copied to Ms
Richards, Ms Turner and Ms Hooker, and which set
out a counterproposal, as
follows (emphasis added):
“Jo, Bess and Dulcie together with their grandchildren have met to discuss
the pub proposal. In general terms
they are happy to offer the following
alternative proposals each of which will need trustee approval
1. A cash amount(s), to be discussed and negotiated, in the
event required approvals are obtained to the development and operation
pubs, the detail, scale, scope and operation of the developments, and sites, of
the pubs to be agreed. This would be payable
on receipt of the approvals. It
would be tantamount to a payment by the trust of a consultancy fee for achieving
the approvals, not
a distribution, and could be documented now.
In substance their previous proposal, which they
understand you accepted in principal, of 10% equity in the pub businesses and
of the part of the properties on which the pubs are sited
. The latter
would be 10% of the net proceeds of the sale of the future subdivided lots upon
which the pubs are sited. The pre-condition
to the incentive will be obtaining
the required approvals to the development and operation of the pubs, of which
the detail, scale,
scope and operation of the development, and sites, of the
pubs is to be agreed. Subject to the approvals, the 10% equity in the pub
businesses would be transferred or allotted on establishment of the businesses
and the 10% of the net sale proceeds on completion
of the future sale of the
subdivided lots.”
is plain from the terms of this email that the other shareholders were rejecting
Mr Turner’s proposal that he receive 10%
of the pubs and
the whole of
on which they were located, and were offering 10% of the pubs and
10% of the land
on which they were located. Mr Turner’s response of
29 September 2020 indicates that he was well aware that his proposal had
“In February 2020 I proposed a Pub Strategy for an additional 10% equity
in the whole group so we would be equal partners,
considering I literally do
everything and have made you more money than BG would ever have dreamed.
In August 2020 you countered with an additional 10% equity in the pubs and part
property (totalling 20%).
In September 2020 I countered with an additional 10% in the pubs and the whole
property they reside (totalling 20%).
I’m not negotiating anymore....”
Turner responded to Mr Turner’s email shortly thereafter, stating that it
seemed “that a straight forward [negotiation]
has got out of hand”.
Around half an hour later, Mr Turner responded, stating as follows (emphasis in
“It’s a disgrace that I have to deal with this crap when I’m
trying to help you and save the business just like
I have for the past 25 years.
And it’s a disgrace how you all exclude Mum.
LET’S KEEP THIS SIMPLE... I have taken advice this morning on these
emails and its clear Hugh is up to something so my offer
is back to my original
one – I want to be an equal partner ie 20% in the whole group
If this is unacceptable then fine I’ll happily enjoy life with less stress
but I’m not being tricked by Hugh and these
wordy emails that have beaten
me down over 7 months while I have saved YOUR car business throughout a global
pandemic without one
phone call to see how I or the business is going...”
on the same day, on 29 September 2020, Mr Turner sent another email to Ms
Turner, copied to Ms Richards and Ms Hooker, apologising
for his tone and
indicating that his offer was withdrawn, stating that he didn’t think his
proposal for the development of
the pubs was going to be “the end”
and that “[n]ow no one gets anything”.
30 September 2020, Ms Richards replied to Mr Turner’s email, reiterating
the offer contained in Mr Scott’s email of
28 September 2020. The
following afternoon, Mr Turner replied, stating “[t]hanks but no
thanks” and “I’m
so over it let’s move on”.
is plain that there was no agreement by this date, “in principle” or
13 October 2020, Ms Richards sent an email to Mr Turner stating that she, Ms
Hooker and Ms Webb had decided that they wished to
sell the business of the
Heartland Motors Group, so that each individual family could “be in charge
of their own future”
and to avoid family disagreements.
Turner responded on the following day, apologising for his
“disrespectful” emails and stating that he also wanted to
“sell out of this business and do my own thing”. However, he went on
to state that:
“I recommend you accept my pub proposal but how about we make my
additional 10% group equity subject to the pubs being built,
not just da /
[Liquor & Gaming] approved. That’s probably 3-4 years away, if we are
lucky. Then I propose we trade for
2 solid years then sell the whole thing in
5-6 years.”
16 October 2020, Ms Richards replied as follows (emphasis added):
“To your plan re the pubs and business, we are all on board with going
ahead with the pubs and your exit strategy with selling
the entire empire in 5-6
years once the market has picked up and we have an agreement on the pubs.
So we would like to make one last offer and we will not move on this
we think it is fair and also an increase on what you agreed to during that
meeting at Nans in August.
We do not agree to extra group equity.
The offer, for this deal only, is an
extra 20% (instead of an extra 10%) of the pubs, as the extra value lies in the
hotels and not
the whole group
. The risk lies mainly with us being the
majority shareholders, and we are minimising our gain by rewarding you with
extra equity.
If you are unmoveable in this regard, we have no other option but
to start the sale process of the whole group.”
email made an offer for 30% of the equity in the pubs (“an extra
20%” on top of the previous offer of 10%), without
any interest in the
land on which they were located.
Turner responded on the same day, seeking
that his share in the pubs
be increased to 40%
that he receive “the 2 whole
properties [on which] they reside”. Accordingly, the parties were, at this
stage, still far
21 October 2020, Mr Turner sent an email to Ms Richards, Ms Hooker, and Ms
Turner, asking whether “we are doing or ditching”
his pub bonus
proposal. Ms Richards responded that they were “happy for [Mr Turner] to
go ahead” if he agreed with the
offer made in her email of 16 October
2020. Later that day, following some further emails, Mr Turner stated that he
would not accept
a deal for “less than 40% of the pubs
” (emphasis added).
22 October 2020, Ms Richards reiterated that she, Ms Hooker and Ms Webb
“were not going to move on our offer of 30% of the
pubs”. Mr Turner
replied on the following day, rejecting this offer.
15 November 2020, Mr Turner sent an email to Ms Richards, Ms Hooker and Ms
Turner, purporting to accept the “30% equity offer
in the 2 pubs
the whole properties they reside
subject to achieving DA and OLGA [Liquor
& Gaming] approval for such” (emphasis added).
such offer had been made. Instead, as set out above, Ms Richards, Ms Hooker and
Ms Webb had offered 30% of the equity in the proposed
pubs (and no property). Ms
Richards pointed this out in an email to Mr Turner on the following day, stating
as follows: (emphasis
“There seems to be some confusion with our offer.
Just to clarify,
our offer was 30% of the pubs only (no land included)
Our first offer was 10% of the pubs and the subdivided land that the pubs sat on
(which you agreed to at the meeting at mums). You
then informed us that the
subdividing would be detrimental for further development on the rest of the
land. We understood this, hence
our increased offer to 30% of the pubs only
At no point in our negotiations have we offered any equity
of the whole of the land that the pubs sit on. Our offer still stands at
Richards expressly stated, twice, that the offer is in respect of the
“pubs only” with “no land included”.
No reasonable
person reading this offer would understand that any offer was being made for the
whole (or any part of) the land on
which the pubs were located.
the evening of 16 November 2020, Mr Turner replied to Ms Richards, copied to Ms
Hooker, stating that the previous correspondence
was “absolutely
ridiculous” and that he had “agreed to 30% with the lands”.
Mr Turner’s response amounts
to a rejection of the offer made by Ms
Richards. There was, therefore, no agreement at this time, and no offer remained
was capable of acceptance.
months later, on 23 February 2021, Mr Turner sent an email to Ms Richards,
copied to Ms Hooker and Ms Turner, stating that he
had “lodged the 2 pub
da’s even though I didn’t get what I wanted” and that he
“will accept”
the offer of “30% of the pub business in terms
of dividends and sale proceeds etc”.
was no offer at this time that was capable of acceptance. Mr Turner’s
statement that he “will accept” the
offer previously made to him,
for “30% of the pub business in terms of dividends and sale
proceeds” (and without any
reference to land) is, in substance, an offer
by him along the lines previously made by Ms Richards, namely, a proposal for an
arrangement
whereby he will receive “30% of the pubs only (no
25 February 2021, Ms Richards replied, stating that she, Ms Hooker and Ms Webb
were pleased that Mr Turner was “happy to
proceed with their previous
offer of 30% of the pub businesses”. On 2 March 2021, Mr Turner
responded as follows:
“I definitely wouldn’t say I’m ‘happy to proceed’
on your 30% offer considering the massive workload...
but I’m putting the
company first.”
was the first time that there was a meeting of minds on the content of any
proposed pub bonus. Specifically, each of the shareholders
of BG Webb agreed
with a proposal that Mr Turner receive 30% of the pubs (that is, 30% of
dividends from the pubs and 30% of the
proceeds of any sale of the pubs), but no
interest in the properties on which the pubs were located.
it does not follow that there was a variation of Mr Turner’s employment
contract to include, from this point in time,
a term to that effect.
the course of being cross-examined regarding the negotiation of the pub bonus
proposal, Mr Turner gave evidence that: “When
a deal is agreed, we get the
lawyers in. That’s how we do it.” The indication from Ms Richards
that she, Ms Hooker and
Ms Webb were “happy to proceed” with a
proposal that Mr Turner receive 30% of the equity in the pubs (without any
should properly be read as an indication that they were happy to take
steps to formulate a binding agreement along the lines of this
However, there is no evidence that there was, at this point, any negotiations
between the parties’ lawyers regarding
how any such agreement would be
implemented. Nor was there subsequently any meeting between Mr Scott and
KPMG regarding the issues
which he had previously raised regarding the
implementation of Mr Turner’s proposal (which remained unresolved).
Nor was any
draft documentation prepared to give effect to this proposal.
those reasons, I am not satisfied that there was any “Hospitality Bonus
Term”, either along the terms pleaded or
TERMINATION OF MR ANTHONY TURNER’S
6 May 2025, Ms Richards sent a letter on behalf of Heartland Motors to Mr
Anthony Turner, which was headed “Termination of
your employment with
Heartland Motors Group (Company)”.
Termination Letter stated that the Board had decided to terminate Mr Anthony
Turner’s employment “in accordance with
clause 9.2 of your
employment contract dated 13 August 2020”, and that, in accordance with
clause 9.4 of this contract and
Fair Work Act 2009
would be “provided with payment in lieu of notice of five weeks’
pay”. That payment was subsequently deposited
into Mr Anthony
Turner’s bank account.
Termination Letter stated that the Board no longer had trust and confidence in
Mr Anthony Turner’s judgment or his ability
to perform his role as Chief
Operating Officer, in particular because of his role in purporting to remove
Boyded and appoint Heartland
One as Trustee of the RG Trust:
“you have purported to change the trusteeship of the trust which was
controlled by the Group and is integral to the continued
sustainability and commercial integrity of the Group’s business, without
any consultation, and which raises the
risk of occasioning significant financial
loss to the Group.”
the primary claim, Heartland Motors sought a declaration that Mr Anthony
Turner’s employment was terminated on 6 May 2025.
issue no longer arises for determination in the proceeding, as Mr Anthony Turner
does not contest the fact that his contract
of employment was terminated. He is
separately pursuing remedies under the
Fair Work Act
in a proceeding in
the Federal Court.
OPPRESSION CLAIM
Overview of Issues
the Cross-Claim, Mr Turner and Turnercorp seek relief in respect of alleged
oppression in the conduct of the affairs of the Heartland
Motors Group.
closing written submissions, the Cross-Claimants focussed their allegations of
oppressive conduct on:
(1) the appointment of Ms Hooker as a director of Heartland Group and the
Operating Entities in early May 2025, which was said to
be a step taken for the
purpose of enabling Ms Richards and Ms Hooker to vote together to remove Mr
Turner as CEO of the Heartland
Motors Group and as a director of every Operating
Entity within the Group; and
(2) the removal of Mr Turner from those roles on 6 May 2025.
Cross-Claimants submitted that this conduct was oppressive for a number of
reasons, which were relied upon individually and collectively,
(1) those actions were taken in pursuit of a strategy aimed at “injuring
and weakening a fellow owner and relative, for their
personal gain as
shareholders”, and in particular, were “aimed at persuading
Turnercorp to sell its shares so as to facilitate
their exit from the
(2) the manner of Mr Turner’s termination, and the intended and actual
purpose and effect of that manner of termination, were
oppressive;
(3) “aggravating all of the above matters”, Ms Richards and Ms
Hooker “together sought to use the assets of the
Group (including trust
assets) and information about those assets, for the purposes of attempting to
negotiate various deals with
McCarrolls in order to raise the very funds that
they thought they would need in order to achieve a purchase of
Turnercorp’s
shares if the above strategy worked and Kieran/Turnercorp
agreed to sell”;
(4) it was oppressive to remove Mr Turner as a director of the Operating
Entities in circumstances where, in particular, he had “so
accumulated knowledge and expertise in the industry” and “his
removal left the board of every operating company
... in the hands of two people
who had no knowledge, training, experience or skills necessary to discharge
their duties and exercise
their powers properly”; and
(5) the actions caused the dealership entities to commit events of default under
contracts with Manufacturers, who were “vital
business partners”,
and, in addition, those breaches were “deliberately caused” by
Ms Richards and Ms Hooker, in
circumstances where the consequences of those
breaches was unknown.
address each of these contentions below.
preliminary matters should be noted.
there was a vast range of factual issues covered in the cross-examination of Ms
Richards and Mr Turner, extending over a period
of more than eight years of the
Group’s operations and of their dealings with each other. In considering
the oppression claim,
I have not attempted to address or resolve any particular
factual dispute unless it is necessary (and only to the extent necessary)
resolve the particular grounds of oppression which are set out above.
as I have explained above, the Cross-Claimants did not, prior to the hearing,
complete their expert evidence on relief (and,
in particular, on the valuation
of shares in BG Webb). Neither party sought an adjournment of the hearing in
those circumstances.
Instead, it was common ground that the Court had power to,
and should, determine whether the oppression claim was established in
determining what (if any) relief should be ordered.
of the Act provides as follows:
The Court may make an order under
section 233
(a) the conduct of a company’s affairs; or
(b) an actual or proposed act or omission by or on behalf of a company;
(c) a resolution, or a proposed resolution, of members or a class of
members of a company;
(d) contrary to the interests of the members as a whole; or
(e) oppressive to, unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory
against, a member or members whether in that capacity or in
For the purposes of this Part, a person to whom a share in the company has been
transmitted by will or by operation of law is taken
to be a member of the
regard to the width of the definition of “affairs” in
Act, the affairs of a holding company include the affairs of each of its
subsidiaries:
Re Norvabron Pty Ltd (No 2)
(1986) 11 ACLR 279
(Derrington J);
Re Dernacourt Investments Pty Ltd
(1990) 20 NSWLR 588
615 (Powell J).
term “affairs” is also expressly defined as including the situation
where a company acts as a trustee: see
David & Ros Carr
Pty Ltd v Ritossa
[2025] NSWCA 108
[106]-[112] per Leeming JA (with whom Stern JA and Griffiths AJA
expressly contemplates that conduct may be oppressive where it affects the
member in their capacity as a member or in some other
capacity (for example, as
a director or employee). The claims of oppression here are brought by Turnercorp
as a member of BG Webb
and by Mr Turner as a contingent member of that entity
(pending distribution of the shares in BG Webb held by the estates of Ms Turner
and Ms Webb).
Cross-Claimants rely on each of
New South Wales Rugby League Ltd v Wayde
at 96, the Court of Appeal (Street CJ, Kirby P, Hope JA) observed, in
relation to the predecessor provision, that:
“it seems difficult to place any meaning on ‘the interests of
the members as a whole’ that differs from ‘the
benefit of the
company as a whole’. The only legitimate interests of the members
would be their interests as corporators. As
corporators, considered as a
whole, their legitimate interests must be circumscribed by, and found
within, the constituting documents
of the company.”
Honours cautioned (at 102) that:
“Whilst it is true that the Code should be given a beneficial construction
and not unduly narrowed by judicial decisions, the
must not lead
courts into assuming the management of corporations, substituting their
decisions and assessments for those of directors,
who can be expected to have
much greater knowledge and more time and expertise at their disposal to evaluate
the best interests of
the members of the corporation as a whole.”
Australian Institute of Fitness Pty Ltd v Australian Institute of Fitness
(Vic/Tas) Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2015] NSWSC 1639
, Sackar J observed
Goozee v Graphic World Group Holdings Pty Ltd
[2002] NSWSC 640
per Barrett J) that:
(1) the test whether conduct is contrary to the interests of members as a whole
is objective, and is to be determined by reference
to whether the conduct
adheres to accepted standards of corporate behaviour or is in accordance with
how reasonable directors would
act in attending to the affairs of the company;
(2) the decision of what is contrary to the interests of the members as a whole
directs attention not to the interests of the persons
who are, in fact, the
members for the time being, but rather to the interests of an individual
hypothetical member.
, the composite expression “oppressive to, unfairly
prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against, a member” extends
conduct involving “commercial unfairness”, or where the
conduct complained of involves a visible departure from the
standards of fair
dealing and a violation of the conditions of fair play, or where a decision has
been made so as to impose a disadvantage,
disability or burden on the plaintiff
that, according to ordinary standards of reasonableness and fair dealing, is
In the matter of Mobius Distilling Pty Ltd (in
[2025] NSWSC 539
at [172] per Black J, citing
(1986) 10 ACLR 692
at 704 (Young J) and
Wayde v New South
Wales Rugby League Ltd
[1985] HCA 68
(1985) 180 CLR 459
at 472-473;
HCA 68 (Brennan
at 704, Young J noted that whether oppression was
established was to be determined by reference to the nature of the business
on by the company and the nature of the relations between its
participants and “whether objectively in the eyes of a commercial
bystander, there has been unfairness, namely conduct that is so unfair that
reasonable directors who consider the matter would not
have thought the decision
v Backoffice Investments Pty Ltd
(2009) 238 CLR
[2009] HCA 25
, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon and Kiefel JJ observed that
it is not the case that the only conduct of a company’s affairs that is
be classified as “oppressive to, unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly
discriminatory against, a member” is conduct
of the company’s
affairs that is otherwise lawful. Their Honours added that it should not
“be supposed that there cannot
be oppression on the part of one who thinks
that he or she is acting rightly” (ibid).
v Managing Australia Destinations Pty Ltd
, the Full Court of the Federal Court (Siopis, Rares and Davies
JJ) referred to this passage from
in making the following
observations:
“The test of unfairness requires an objective assessment of the conduct in
question with regard to the particular context in
which the conduct occurs. The
question is whether objectively in the eyes of the commercial bystander there
has been unfairness,
namely conduct that is so unfair that reasonable directors
who consider the matter would not have thought the conduct or decision
the test is objective, whether or not the conduct is oppressive will not depend
upon the motives for what was done. It is
the effect of the acts that is
it is recognised that conduct may be oppressive if it is inconsistent with the
“legitimate expectations” of shareholders,
“it is important to
bear in mind that the parties’ understandings and ‘promises’
productive of equitable
qualifications upon legal rights are not
immutable” and that “[t]hey may change with time and with
circumstances”:
v Innovative Precasters Group Pty
[2009] NSWSC 342
Fexuto v Bosnjak
[2001] NSWCA
) at [90], Spigelman CJ said that:
“There will be circumstances in which the emergence of irreconcilable
differences will cause the court to conclude that an
understanding or
expectation as to participation in management should be taken to have ceased, in
a manner not entitling the person
excluded from such participation to relief
under the statutory provisions. That would be so where the court decides that it
person excluded who is responsible for the breakdown in the relationship.
the bare fact of an irretrievable breakdown in the relationship between the
individuals who own or manage a company does
not establish oppression. In
David & Ros Carr Holdings
at [119], Leeming JA said that:
“There is no reason to doubt what has been said on many occasions, namely,
that a mere 'deadlock' will not be oppression under
See, for instances
in this Court,
Fexuto Pty Ltd v Bosnjak Holdings Pty Ltd
[2001] NSWCA 97
37 ACSR 672
('Irreconcilable differences may establish a basis for
winding up, they do not of themselves constitute oppression or unfair
prejudice'),
approved in
Tomanovic v Global Mortgage Equity Corporation Pty
[2011] NSWCA 104
Campbell v BackOffice Investments
[2008] NSWCA 95
66 ACSR 359
where Giles JA observed at [137] that 'a breakdown
in relationship in a 50/50 entity is not the same as oppression'; see also at
[442]-[444]."
there is no overarching “clean hands” requirement, the conduct of
the member who is asserting oppression may
“render the impugned conduct
not unfair” or may “affect the nature of the relief”:
Services Pty Ltd v Goldstone Private Equity Pty Ltd
[2025] FCA 622
(Jackman J). In assessing the gravity of any allegation
of oppression, it is relevant to consider the extent to which the minority
shareholder has “baited” the majority shareholder to act in an
oppressive manner:
Fexuto Pty Ltd v Bosnjak Holdings Pty
[1998] NSWSC 413
(1998) 28 ACSR 688
[1998] NSWSC 413
(per Young J).
onus is on the plaintiff in an oppression suit to show that he or she has been
unfairly treated in the relevant sense, as opposed
to having been merely
“prejudiced” or “discriminated” against. Whether conduct
is fair or unfair requires
weighing conflicting interests of different groups
within the company; it is not assessed simply from one member’s point of
Strategy to persuade
Turnercorp to sell its shares?
have addressed this issue in the context of Mr Turner’s claim for breach
of contract. I have determined, for the reasons set
out at paragraphs [
] above, that
Ms Richards and Ms Hooker took the step of terminating Mr Turner’s
employment, not because they wanted to weaken
Mr Turner and persuade him to sell
Turnercorp’s shares, but because they had lost trust and confidence in Mr
Turner as a result
of his conduct over an extended period of time, culminating
in his attempt to transfer control of the RG Trust from the Heartland
Group to himself.
Manner, purpose and effect of termination of
Cross-Claimants contended that the manner, purpose and effect of Mr
Turner’s termination as CEO were oppressive, submitting
as follows:
“Kieran was afforded no opportunity to deal with and respond to the
so-called grounds of removal; no opportunity to continue
as CEO or director
under formal warning or direction; and no opportunity to take any step to
attempt to protect himself, including
exercising his right to approach this
Court for assistance.”
have already addressed, and rejected, the Cross-Claimants’ submission
that, having regard to the manner, purpose and effect
of Mr Turner’s
termination, Heartland One breached its implied obligations of good faith and
reasonableness in exercising its
right to terminate his employment on five
weeks’ notice. Those observations apply equally to the contention that the
purpose and effect of Mr Turner’s termination gave rise to
commercial unfairness such as to amount to oppression.
Cross-Claimants did not elaborate, in submissions, what steps Mr Turner
might have taken “to attempt to protect himself”
if he had been
given more notice of his termination.
as it is suggested that Mr Turner could have applied to this Court for some
interlocutory relief in respect of his termination,
there is no articulation of
what relief would have been sought or why Mr Turner would have been entitled to
that relief (and, as
noted above, he has abandoned any claim for specific
performance of his employment contract).
as it is suggested that Mr Turner might have taken some step, as a director, CEO
or shareholder, to prevent his termination,
that is precisely what he had been
seeking to do for a period of around three years prior to his termination.
During that period,
he had engaged in a series of corporate manoeuvres designed
to prevent his aunts from gaining control of the Operating Entities within
Group, in particular because he was concerned that they might then take steps to
remove him as CEO (see, for example, paragraphs
] above). Those
actions contributed to the breakdown of trust and confidence which resulted, as
at 6 May 2025, in his termination
I have determined that Heartland One was, by reason of Mr Turner’s
conduct prior to 6 May 2025, entitled to summarily
dismiss him (see paragraphs
regard to those matters, I reject the submission that there was any commercial
unfairness in the manner, purpose or effect
of Mr Turner’s
termination.
it is unclear whether the Cross-Claimants maintained their pleaded allegation
that one purpose of the termination of Mr Turner
as CEO was to deny him the
benefits that he contends were to accrue from the “Hospitality Bonus
Term”. The Cross-Claimants
did not, in closing written or oral
submissions, advance any contention to this effect. Nor was it put to
Ms Richards or Ms Hooker
in cross-examination that the purpose of
terminating Mr Turner was to deny him the benefits which he would otherwise have
by reason of the Hospitality Bonus Term. In any case, I have determined
that there was no such contractual term.
in around 2023 the “pub strategy” appears to have been put on hold.
June 2022, Boyded received DA approval for the development of a pub on the
Castle Hill site, and in May 2023, it received similar
approval in respect of
the Chullora site. However, by this time, Mr Turner’s views on the merits
of the “pub strategy”
had changed. In his CEO reports for July 2023
and November 2023, Mr Turner stated that this strategy was a “silly
investment,
especially because we have no experience in this business”. In
his CEO report for April 2024, Mr Turner made the following
statement in respect
of the pub strategy: “Pens are down on this matter due to the high build
costs of circa $30m per pub and
the ongoing scrutiny over the pokies”.
19 August 2024, Mr Turner stated, at a meeting of Heartland Group, that
“we now need to progress the pubs, because the car
dealerships are
struggling” and that it would “cost circa $40m each pub” to
“get 2 DA approved pubs going
at out Castle Hill and Chullora sites”
(that is, “total $80m” of expenditure), with “the payback
being “20-30 years”. However, I am not satisfied that
Mr Turner made those comments out of any genuine desire to pursue
strategy. Shortly after this meeting, on 5 September 2024, Mr Turner sent
an email to his father-in-law indicating that he
was “plotting” to
use the revival of the pub strategy as a means of persuading Mr Richards and
Ms Hooker to sell their
“I’m plotting to give them an easy way out by saying we want to
diversify out of auto and build the 2 pubs which will
cost 40m each (this is a
risk they won’t want) and I will say that if we go down that path then I
won’t be able to buy
them out for 20-30 years so if they want to sell now
is the time.”
18 December 2024, the solicitors for Ms Richards and Ms Hooker sent a
letter to Mr Turner requesting a business plan and an analysis
of the risks and
opportunities presented by the pub strategy. No such document was subsequently
provided by him (suggesting that
no such plan had been prepared or analysis had
been undertaken).
regard to those matters, even if I had found that the parties had agreed to the
“Hospitality Bonus Term” pleaded
by the Cross-Claimants, I would not
have been satisfied that the purpose, or effect, of the termination of Mr
Turner’s employment
as CEO was to frustrate his ability to obtain a bonus
pursuant to that term.
Removal of Mr Turner as director of
Operating Entities
Cross-Claimants contended that it was oppressive to remove Mr Turner as a
director of the Operating Entities.
the Cross-Claimants submitted that no intelligible reason had been given for the
decision to remove him as a director of the
Operating Entities, while leaving
him as a director of BG Webb, Bernley and Heartland Group. The suggestion
appeared to be that the
Court should reject the contention of Ms Richards
and Ms Hooker that they had any genuine reason for removing him as a director of
any company, as otherwise they would have removed him as a director of every
does not follow, from the fact Ms Richards and Ms Hooker have not taken steps to
remove Mr Turner as a director of the parent entities
of the Heartland Motors
Group, in circumstances where he has an interest of around 17.5% in the ultimate
holding company, BG Webb
(and the members of the Turner family have, between
them, an interest of around 40% in BG Webb), that Ms Richards and Ms Hooker did
not have any genuine reason for removing him as a director of the Operating
have determined, when dealing with the claim for breach of Mr Turner’s
employment contract, that Ms Richards and Ms Hooker
took the step of terminating
Mr Turner as CEO because they had lost trust and confidence in him. For similar
reasons, I am satisfied
that the decision to remove him as a director of the
Operating Entities was due to the loss of trust and confidence in him.
the Cross-Claimants submitted that the removal of Mr Turner as a director of the
Operating Entities was “inconsistent
with the legitimate expectation that
Turnercorp held, being a legitimate expectation induced by the other part-owners
of the business
at the very time Turnercorp acquired its shares, that Kieran
could participate in the management and conduct of the Group’s
a substantial way”. This legitimate expectation was said to arise from an
agreement between the shareholders that
Mr Turner “would obtain equity [in
BG Webb] on the basis that he would be able to commit and dedicate himself to
the business
for the long-term” (with reference being made in closing
submissions to Ms Richards’ acknowledgement, in cross-examination,
was on the basis of such a commitment by Mr Turner that she agreed to Turnercorp
having a 10% interest in BG Webb).
accept that, as at May 2009, Mr Turner was issued with equity in BG Webb on
the understanding that he would make a long-term commitment
to the business.
However, by May 2025, Ms Richards and Ms Hooker (who between them held 60% of
the Group) had lost trust and confidence
in Mr Turner by reason of his
conduct over a number of years, culminating in his attempt to seize control of
the RG Trust, such that
there had been an irretrievable breakdown in the
relationship between Mr Turner and his aunts. As a result, any previous
arrangement
or shared understanding that Mr Turner would have an ongoing role in
the management of the business had come to an end:
at [96] and [117].
the Cross-Claimants submitted that, as a result of Mr Turner’s removal as
a director of the Operating Entities, those
entities had lost his
“accumulated knowledge and expertise in the industry and with these
businesses”, and control of
those entities was left “in the hands of
two people [Ms Richards and Ms Hooker] who had no knowledge, training,
or skills necessary to discharge their duties and exercise their
powers properly”.
of Ms Richards and Ms Hooker acts as a non-executive director in circumstances
where each is a substantial shareholder of the
ultimate holding entity. The only
qualifications for a person to be appointed as a company director are that he or
she be over 18
years of age and not be the subject of a disqualification order:
s 201B of the Act.
Richards and Ms Hooker have appointed Mr Meyer as CEO. Mr Meyer has more
than twenty years’ experience in the automotive
industry. In addition,
Ms Richards and Ms Hooker have sought advice from MinterEllison as to legal
issues and from Dr Rumble as to
financial matters. There is no evidence that the
performance of the business has, to date, been adversely affected by the
of Mr Turner and his brother.
a person in a senior executive position, who has extensive experience in and
knowledge of the company’s business, acts
in such a way as to undermine
the trust and confidence necessary for him or her to continue in that role, it
does not follow, from
the fact that termination will lead to the loss of such
knowledge and experience, that such a step is contrary to the interests of
members as a whole or commercially unfair. For example, while it is the case
that Mr Turner has long-established relationships with
Manufacturers, the
evidence establishes that he has sought to use those relationships to undermine
the attempts of the majority shareholders
(his aunts) to change the composition
of the boards of the Operating Entities. It is difficult to see why, in those
circumstances,
it is commercially unfair for his aunts to remove him from his
role as an officer of the Operating Entities, even if it means that
relationships do not continue (particularly where another person has been
appointed who has experience in the industry).
the Cross-Claimants contended that, while Mr Turner has been left as a director
of the parent entities, he has not been informed
or consulted about significant
matters, such as the development of a “2025 Operating Strategy”
relating to Manufacturers
which is dated July 2025. However, there are no
pleaded issues that, since his removal as a director of the Operating Entities,
Turner has, as a director of the parent entities, been excluded from
decision-making by those entities. Such matters can therefore
be put to one
Dealings with McCarrolls
Cross-Claimants contended, by an amendment made after the Plaintiffs’
evidence had closed, that Ms Richards and Ms Hooker
have sought to use assets of
the Group, including trust assets and information about those assets, for the
purposes of attempting
to negotiate transactions with McCarrolls in order to
raise the funds needed to purchase Turnercorp’s shares in the event that
Mr Turner agreed to sell (see paragraph [71A] of Further Amended Cross-Claim
filed on 17 September 2025).
as this is an aspect of the Cross-Claimants’ contention that Ms Richards
and Ms Hooker were pursuing a strategy which
involved taking steps to
terminate Mr Turner as CEO for the purpose of weakening him and inducing
Turnercorp to sell its shares,
I have already addressed this issue at paragraphs
as this is a complaint that Ms Richards and Ms Hooker took steps in order to be
in a position to make an offer to purchase
Mr Turner’s shares (with such
an offer subsequently being made on 6 May 2025: see paragraph [
] above), it is
difficult to see how this could amount to oppressive conduct. No such sale could
occur without Mr Turner’s agreement,
and Mr Turner was himself taking
steps in around the same period to obtain a loan from ANZ in order to make an
offer to buy his aunts’
shares (see paragraph [
a timely, unconditional offer by the majority to purchase the minority’s
shares at fair value, supported by an independent
valuation, may negate
oppression, particularly in quasi-partnership cases where there has been a
breakdown in the parties’
at [159] (Jackman J),
O’Neill v Phillips
[1999] UKHL 24
[1999] 1 WLR 1092
1105–1107 per Lord Hoffmann, and
Tomanovic v Global Mortgage
Equity Corp Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 104
per Campbell JA (with
Macfarlan and Young JJA agreeing).
as this is a complaint about the provision of information to a third-party
pursuant to a confidentiality agreement, without
Mr Turner’s agreement or
consent, it is apparent that Mr Turner was himself providing information about
the Group’s assets
to ANZ (without his aunts’ knowledge or consent)
for the purposes of obtaining the finance to make an offer to buy-out his
aunts’ shares. The information, which was provided to ANZ, at Mr
Turner’s direction, for this purpose included:
“1 Corporate Structure including all entities and
ultimate beneficiaries / shareholders.
2. Latest available consolidated Audited Financial Statements
(ideally June 24); incorporating all obligor entities (dealerships,
propcos, guarantors, holdcos etc).
3. Latest available consolidated Management accounts (ideally
Sep 24) including P & L, Balance Sheet, Cashflow;
4. Forecast / Budget for at least FY25 and FY26 including
expected capex requirements (differentiating between growth and
retention/maintenance
5. Listing of current stock on hand & all finding
arrangements with bailment financiers;
6. List of available property security and estimated
valuations;
7. summary of all current and expected related party loans and
transaction[s];
8. Details of Key management including roles &
responsibilities across corporate governance, finance, dealerships etc.”
there was no detailed exploration in submissions as to the nature of the
information provided to McCarrolls, the extent (if
any) to which such material
was commercially sensitive, and whether this was such information which Ms
Richards and Ms Hooker had
received in their capacity as shareholders. (As noted
at paragraph [
above, the Confidentiality Agreement provided to McCarrolls expressly stated
that the information being provided was information
which they held in that
regard to those matters, I do not accept that the dealings with McCarrolls
constituted, either individually or in combination
with the other matters raised
by the Cross-Claimants, oppressive conduct.
Relationships with
Manufacturers
Cross-Claimants submitted that:
(1) the removal of Mr Turner as CEO and as a director of the Operating Entities
“caused the dealership entities to commit events
of default under
important contracts with vital business partners, namely the
manufacturers”;
(2) Ms Richards and Ms Hooker had known that the Manufacturers’ consent
was required for changes to management of the dealership
entities, and had
deliberately caused those entities to be in breach of their agreement; and
(3) the consequences of those breaches were unknown.
a starting point, it is important to note that the terms of the franchise
agreements varied as between Manufacturers, and only
some of those agreements
required the Manufacturers’ consent to some (but not all) changes to the
officers of the relevant
Operating Entity or its parent. In
particular:
(1) the dealership contracts with each of the following Manufacturers did not
contain any terms requiring the Manufacturer’s
consent to any changes to
the directors of either the relevant Operating Entity or the holding company:
Motor Australia Pty Ltd; and
(2) the dealership contracts with each of the following Manufacturers contained
terms requiring the Manufacturers’ consent
to changes to the officers of
the relevant Operating Entity, but not to changes to the directors of the
holding entity: Hyundai;
Australia Pty Ltd; ATECO
Automotive Pty Ltd (
Auto (Pickup) Pty Ltd. In
(a) the contract with
Automotive Australia Pty Ltd required
Mahindra’s consent to the removal of a director of the relevant Operating
Entity (but
not to the appointment of any additional or replacement director);
(b) the contract with Mitsubishi required Mitsubishi’s consent to any
change to the directors of the relevant Operating Entity,
and also to the
removal (but not appointment) of any director of the holding entity.
were also provisions in the Jeep dealership agreement requiring consent to any
change to the directors of the relevant Operating
Entity. However, this is of
little significance, as a non-renewal notice was issued in respect of this
agreement more than two years
ago, and the Heartland Motors Group has, in the
interim, ceased selling Jeep vehicles.
follows that none of the franchise agreements within paragraph [622(1)] above
has been breached by any changes to the directors
of the relevant Operating
Entity or any holding entity.
regards the franchise agreements within paragraph [622(2)] above, any breach of
those agreements occurred at the time when Mr Turner
was removed, and
Ms Hooker was appointed, as a director of the relevant Operating Entities
(that is, in early May 2025).
that time, none of the Manufacturers, other than Mitsubishi, has issued a breach
notice to the relevant Operating Entity.
Turner actively encouraged Mitsubishi to issue this notice and to assert a
breach by Heartland Motors of the relevant franchise
agreement. In
particular:
(1) an internal email between Mitsubishi staff on 7 May 2025 records that Mr
Turner called Mr Wood of Mitsubishi, stating that he
had been removed as a
director and that he and Mr Anthony Turner were no longer employees, and
“requested [that Mr Woods] contact
Joanne Richards by email to advise that
these actions are in breach of our FA [Franchise Agreement] etc.”;
(2) Mr Turner sent a follow-up email to Mr Wood the next day, 8 May 2025,
asking: “Have you emailed Jo on this breach yet?”;
(3) Mr Turner sent a text message to Mr Gannon of Mitsubishi on 13 May 2025
asking if “your legal team sent an email yet?”,
and another on
15 May 2025 asking “did you email Joanne yet?”; and
(4) on 15 May 2025, Mr Wood told Mr Turner that Mitsubishi intended to issue a
breach notice imminently, and Mr Turner was pleased
that one of the Heartland
Motors Group’s important trading partners would be taking this action
against the Group, responding:
“And rightfully so, thank you!!”
20 May 2025, Mitsubishi issued a breach notice to Heartland Motors pursuant to
its franchise agreement. In this notice, Mitsubishi
requested, inter alia,
justification for the appointment of Mr Meyer as CEO, details regarding
Ms Hooker’s credentials and
role as a director, and a meeting with
Ms Richards, Ms Hooker and Mr Meyer before 30 May 2025.
the same day, Mr Turner sent a text message to Mr Wood, stating that: “I
hope you stay strong on this and enforce your legal
rights which in turn
protects me and the businesses”. He also made disparaging remarks about
Ms Hooker and Mr Meyer. Mr Turner
followed this with a text message to
Mr Gannon on 23 May 2025, in which Mr Turner expressed the
“hope” that Mitsubishi
“enforce their legal rights”
under the franchise agreement, and again made disparaging comments about Ms
suitability as a director.
28 May 2025, a meeting took place between Mitsubishi, Mr Meyer, Ms Richards and
Ms Hooker. Mr Meyer subsequently sent an email
to Mitsubishi thanking them for
“the ability to explain the situation ... and the reasons behind actions
that were taken”,
and confirming the matters discussed at this meeting,
which included that:
(1) Mitsubishi expressed concern that its requirement for a new showroom
“has not progressed sufficiently speedily under the
ex-management
team” (namely, Mr Turner and Mr Anthony Turner);
(2) Mitsubishi was concerned about the approval of a development application for
a pub on the site of the dealership, which had been
organised by Mr Turner;
(3) Mitsubishi wanted to see the dealership “deliver a consistent
performance, as against the inconsistent results that have
been achieved over
the past five years”; and
(4) the breach notice would remain in place until the decision of the Mitsubishi
Executive Meeting.
31 July 2025, Mitsubishi confirmed that it agreed to the appointment of Ms
Hooker and the removal of Mr Turner as directors of
the relevant Operating
Entity; that it approved the appointment of Mr Meyer as Dealer Principal; and
that Ms Hooker and Ms Richards
would be regarded as “Control
Persons” under the franchise agreement from that point in time. Mitsubishi
has now entered
into a new franchise agreement which runs until 30 November
2026, with a further expiry date of 30 November 2030 that is conditional
certain performance criteria.
it is notable that breach notices have not been issued by any other
Manufacturer, despite Mr Turner taking steps to inform
those Manufacturers of
the changes to the directors of the relevant Operating Entities and urging the
Manufacturers to assert their
rights under their respective franchise agreements
(contrary to the interests of the Heartland Motors Group). The following
communications
are by way of example only.
(1) On 13 May 2025, Mr Turner sent a series of text messages to Mr Geoff Golden
of Hyundai, asking “has your legal team sent
an email yet?”, and
urging that such a letter “Needs to be sent before 9am tomorrow when in
court” and “Today
preferable though”.
(2) On 15 May 2025, Mr Turner sent a message to a Kia representative, asking
“did you email Joanne re her breaches?”
(3) On 23 May 2025, Mr Turner sent text messages to a Mahindra representative,
in which he stated that he hoped that Mahindra had
“engaged legal
advice”, referred to “breaches and misconduct”, and urged the
Mahindra representative to “enforce
the rights of your company and
Heartland”.
(4) On 23 May 2025, Mr Turner sent a text message to representatives of each of
Hyundai, LDV, Mahindra, SsangYong, Chery and JAC,
stating that he had commenced
proceedings in the Federal Court “seeking to expedite my reinstatement as
CEO and Director”
and to “remove Joanne and Bernice as
Directors”, and urging the Manufacturers to “enforce their legal
accordance with their respective [franchise agreements]”.
Meyer gave evidence regarding his conversations with representatives of the
Manufacturers since his appointment as CEO of the Heartland
Motors Group. In
particular, he gave evidence that a number of the Manufacturers have stated that
they accept, or have no issue with,
the changes to management of the Operating
Entities. The statements in Mr Meyer’s affidavit that were attributed to
third parties
were limited to evidence of the statements made, rather than the
truth of those statements.
the evidence before the Court, there is no basis to conclude that the removal of
Mr Turner as CEO and as director of the Operating
Entities, or the appointment
of Ms Hooker as a director of those entities, has had or will have any material
impact on the Group’s
arrangements with Manufacturers or on its business
more generally. For example, on 18 July 2025, Suzuki sent an email to Mr Meyer
congratulating him on his appointment as CEO of the Heartland Motors Group, and
acknowledging that Mr Meyer’s “industry
experience and the strength
of your operational team certainly bring a strong foundation for the
Group’s revitalisation”.
Suzuki subsequently sent a draft deed of
variation to Mr Meyer, updating the authorised signatory from Mr Turner to
Ms Hooker, and
updating the management structure to remove Mr Turner and Mr
Anthony Turner.
any case, if there were any adverse impact on the Group’s business (for
example, if one or more Manufacturers were to terminate
the applicable franchise
agreement, despite not having notified any breach to date), it would not follow
that Ms Richards and Ms
Hooker had engaged in oppressive conduct by terminating
Mr Turner’s employment as CEO and removing him as a director of the
Operating Entities without first obtaining the prior consent of the
Manufacturers. It was open to a reasonable director in the position
Ms Richards and Ms Hooker to make the commercial judgment that any risk to
the business from having moved swiftly to terminate
Mr Turner’s employment
without first obtaining the Manufacturers’ consent was outweighed by the
risk to the business
in permitting Mr Turner to remain as CEO and as a director
of the Operating Entities, particularly having regard to his attempt to
from the Group’s control the valuable real estate assets of the RG Trust
that were integral to the operation of the
Group’s car dealership
those reasons, I reject the Cross-Claimants submission that Ms Richards and Ms
Hooker engaged in oppressive conduct by taking
steps to remove Mr Turner
from his roles as CEO and as a director of the Operating Entities without first
obtaining the consent of
the Manufacturers.
Conclusion –
Oppression Claim
the reasons given above, I have determined that the matters upon which the
Cross-Claimants relied in support of their oppression
claim do not establish,
either separately or cumulatively, any oppressive conduct.
follows that there is no need to address the question of relief.
with the claim for breach of contract, the Cross-Claimants accepted that there
would be no utility, in the event that the Court
rejected the oppression claim,
in the Court proceeding to have a separate hearing in order to determine the
(hypothetical) question
of what orders for relief would have been made under s
233 of the Act in the event that oppression had been established.
is sufficient for present purposes to address, briefly, the
Cross-Claimants’ contention that the appropriate relief, in the
oppression had been established, would have been for the Court to make an order
enabling Turnercorp to buy out the shares
of Ms Richards and Ms Hooker.
Cross-Claimants acknowledged that, generally, a minority shareholder who is
oppressed does not obtain an order enabling them to
purchase the shares of the
majority shareholder(s).
nature of the remedy chosen by the Court under s 233 will be dependent upon the
conclusions drawn as to the type of oppression
with which the Court is dealing,
and the Court will choose the remedy which is the least intrusive:
Tzavaras & Sons Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 168
(Gleeson and Adamson
JJA, Griffiths AJA) quoting with approval
Munstermann v Rayward
(Stevenson J).
at [166], Spigelman CJ observed that:
“It is only a systematic course of improper conduct on the part of the
majority that would justify an order that the minority
acquire, by compulsion of
the Court, the shares of the majority.”
the same decision, Fitzgerald JA referred (at [704]) to the Chief
Justice’s observation, and indicated that he did not consider
was any rule to this effect, stating as follows:
“I do not accept that there is some special inhibition on the Court's
power to order shareholders engaged in oppression to
sell their shares because
they constitute a majority. What order is practically just will depend on the
particular circumstances
of each case. Majorities should not be encouraged to
think that oppression is unlikely to have any more adverse consequence than
obligation to purchase the oppressed minority's shares, which might well suit
the majority's purpose. Further, it might not be
practically just to force a
minority ‘partner’ who was oppressed and unfairly prejudiced by
majority ‘partners’
who breached fiduciary duties and acted against
the interests of the members as a whole and who no longer want to be members of
‘partnership’ either to sell his interest or remain in
‘partnership’ with a stranger.”
Ultimately,
the “‘direction’ of any buy-out [is] to be determined by what
the justice of the case requires on the
basis of all the circumstances of the
Millsave Holdings Pty Ltd v Connective Group Pty
(2023) 75 VR 239
[2023] VSCA 326
(McLeish, Macaulay and
Lyons JJA); and
at [170] (Jackman J).
is therefore difficult to express any view on what relief I would have ordered
in the event that the oppression claim was established,
since the appropriate
relief would depend on some alternative combination of factual findings and
there would be, given the number
of issues that have been raised in this
proceeding, multiple alternative combinations of such findings. Further, the
factual issues
which would be relevant to assessing the appropriate relief would
include not only those arising on the Cross-Claim, but also those
arising on the
Plaintiffs’ claim (including the allegations that Mr Turner had acted for
an improper purpose in taking steps
to change the trustee of the RG Trust).
those matters, I do not consider that there is any utility in expressing any
views on the relief I would have ordered if some
other combination of factual
findings had been made.
the reasons given above, I have determined that:
(1) the Plaintiffs have established their claim that Heartland One was not
validly appointed as trustee of the RG Trust, and that
Boyded remains the
trustee of that trust, and are entitled to declaratory and injunctive relief;
(2) the Cross-Claimants have failed to established their claims as to breach of
contract and oppression, and accordingly, the Cross-Claim
should be dismissed.
follows that the Plaintiffs/Cross-Defendants are entitled to their costs of the
proceeding.
parties should bring in short minutes of order to give effect to these reasons
for judgment. Insofar as there is a dispute about
the form of the orders
(including the terms of any declarations or injunction, or the form of the costs
order), I will give the parties
an opportunity to make submissions on those
matters and, unless any party requests an oral hearing, will deal with any such
on the papers.
Accordingly,
I make the following orders.
(1) Direct that the parties are to bring in short minutes of order by 5pm on 28
November 2025 to give effect to the reasons for judgment.
(2) Direct that, in the event the parties are unable to agree on orders to give
effect to the reasons for judgment, the parties are
to exchange and provide to
the Associate to Nixon J, by 5pm on 28 November 2025, the orders which each
party proposes and submissions
(limited to 5 pages) on those orders, indicating
whether, and if so why, an oral hearing is requested to deal with the matters in
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (8.69 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter