URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2021/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
J & D Stephens Pty Ltd v Stephens [2021] NSWWCCPD 4 (19 January 2021)
DETERMINATION OF AN APPLICATION TO STRIKE OUT
A PRE-FILING STATEMENT
J & D Stephens Pty Ltd v Stephens
[2021] NSWWCCPD 4
APPLICANT DEFENDANT:
J & D Stephens Pty Ltd
RESPONDENT CLAIMANT:
Darren John Stephens
FILE NUMBER:
DATE OF DECISION:
19 January 2021
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Application to Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement;
Workers Compensation Act 1987
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
President Judge Phillips
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant Defendant:
Mr C Michael, solicitor
EMP Michael Lawyers
Respondent Claimant:
Mr M Howard, solicitor
Stacks Law Firm
ORDERS MADE ON APPLICATION:
Application to strike out the respondent claimant’s pre-filing statement
is dismissed.
order as to costs.
INTRODUCTION
matter concerns an application filed by the applicant defendant employer seeking
an order pursuant to
Workers Compensation Act 1987
1987 Act) that the respondent claimant worker’s pre-filing statement be
struck out. For the following reasons, the application
is dismissed.
Stephens, the respondent claimant, has been shearing sheep since the age of
18 years. From July 1992, he was employed by J &
D Stephens Pty Ltd,
the applicant defendant, as a shearer. Mr Stephens, his father, John Stephens,
and mother, Patricia Stephens,
were directors of the applicant
around 1999 onwards, Mr Stephens began to experience pain in his left elbow. His
arm would “blow up” and the pain
was often “unbearable”,
however, he tried to “fob it off” and kept
The symptoms worsened
during mid to late 2001, and by February 2002, they had become too severe for Mr
Stephens to continue working.
He ceased work on 12 February 2002 and has
not worked since.
Employee’s Compensation Claim was completed on 3 April 2002, giving the
date of injury as 11 February 2002.
17 June 2002, the employer signed an “Employer’s Report of
Injury” form in respect of injury to Mr Stephens on
12 February
Stephens attended a general practitioner and physiotherapist. As his pain
continued, a scan was ordered, which Mr Stephens says
showed that he had
“torn a tendon and it was lo[o]se above [his]
Stephens underwent surgery in the form of left elbow ulna nerve neurolysis,
anterior transposition, at the hand of Dr Roberts,
orthopaedic surgeon, on 18
Stephens described the surgery as “an absolute failure” and stated
that he now has more pain in his arm than before
says he has since tried steroid injections, pain relief medication, attended
pain management clinics, and tried acupuncture and
other natural remedies, none
of which have helped.
Application to Resolve a Dispute was registered in the Commission on 13 October
2005, claiming lump sum compensation for permanent
impairment and pain and
suffering. A Reply was filed on 2 November 2005. The Registrar referred Mr
Stephens to Approved Medical Specialist,
Dr Alan Nicholls, for assessment. Dr
Nicholls issued a Medical Assessment Certificate dated 10 March 2006 in which he
assessed Mr
Stephens’ whole person impairment at 12%. Accordingly, on 7
June 2006, a s 66A Agreement was registered, the parties agreeing
compensation for 12% WPI and an amount for pain and suffering pursuant to the
Stephens served on the applicant defendant a Pre-Filing Statement dated
23 March 2010. The Pre-Filing Statement was subsequently
amended; however,
the amendment is undated. It appears that the amended Pre-Filing Statement was
served in May of 2010.
Stephens submits that “[o]n 10 May 2010 the workers compensation insurer
agreed to resolve the Respondent Claimant’s
claim for compensation
pursuant to sections 66 and 67 of ... the 1987 Act ... for 21% whole person
impairment in respect of an injury
to his left upper extremity.”
applicant defendant served its Pre-Filing Defence on Mr Stephens on 18 June
14 July 2010, Mr Stephens filed an Application for Mediation in the Commission.
The Application was discontinued on 4 August 2010.
20 October 2010, Mr Stephens served a Further Amended Pre-Filing Statement dated
20 October 2010.
29 November 2010, a further Application for Mediation was filed in the
Commission. A Response was filed on 16 December 2010.
conferences were held on 7 February 2011 and 21 March 2011. The parties were
unable to reach an agreement and a Certificate
of Mediation Outcome was issued
on 23 March 2011, concluding the pre-litigation phase.
around 2010, Mr Stephens began to experience symptoms in his right arm, which he
attributes to over reliance on the right arm due
to the ongoing left arm
symptoms. He consulted his GP who arranged for cortisone injections, however,
the right arm continued to
deteriorate.
2015 Mr Stephens was referred by his General Practitioner to Dr Tsai,
orthopaedic surgeon. Dr Tsai recommended surgery to the right
arm which Mr
Stephens was reluctant to undertake. In 2018 he re-attended on Dr Tsai, who
again recommended surgery. Mr Stephens states:
my anxiety and fear about the possibility that surgery to my right arm would
have the same outcome as the surgery to
my left arm, I have not yet had the
surgery done, but I know that I am going to need to have it done eventually.
The pain in my right arm continues to get worse as time goes on, and it will
get to the point where I will not be able to deal with
it anymore. It is then
that I will have the surgery.
I am not sure exactly when I will be having the surgery, it will depend on
how long I can deal with the pain.
Until I have the surgery, my injuries will not stabilise, and in fact, my
right arm condition will continue to
deteriorate.”
12 December 2019, the applicant defendant filed in the Commission an Application
to Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement (the Application).
17 December 2019, the Commission issued a Direction setting the timetable for
the filing and service of submissions. On the same
day, the applicant defendant
served the Application and annexures on Mr Stephens care of Stacks the Law Firm,
who had acted for him
in the mediation proceedings.
18 February 2020, the applicant defendant wrote to the Commission advising that
they had been informed on 14 February 2020 that
Stacks were no longer acting for
Mr Stephens. It says that on 18 February 2020, it was informed that Stacks were
not acting for Mr
Stephens at the time that the Application was served on
Stacks. The applicant defendant sought an extension of time to serve the
Application on Mr Stephens personally. On 20 February 2020, amongst other
things, the applicant defendant was directed by the Commission
to serve the
Application on Mr Stephens personally, which it did on 2 March 2020. The
Direction directed Mr Stephens file a Notice
of Opposition (Opposition) by 24
April 2020.
Stephens did not lodge a Notice of Opposition by 24 April 2020. On 29 and 30
April 2020, the Commission contacted Mr Stephens by
telephone to explain the
nature of the Application and to encourage him to seek legal advice, which he
did. On 6 May 2020, Stacks
the Law Firm advised the Commission that they had
received instructions to act for Mr Stephens in respect of the Application to
Out the Pre-Filing Statement.
7 May 2020, the Registrar issued a Direction setting a fresh timetable for the
lodgment and service of the Notice of Opposition
and submissions in reply.
Notice of Opposition was filed on 11 June 2020, and the applicant defendant
filed its submissions in reply on 22 June 2020.
correspondence sent from the Commission requesting signed statements, Stacks
lodged an Application to Admit Late Documents
on 9 July 2020 that contained a
statement of Mr Darren Stephens dated 29 June 2020 which contained some
amendments. In the covering
email, Mr Stephens’ solicitor
“Please see attached herewith for your information,
Application to Admit Late Documents (being Statement signed by the claimant
29 June 2020, together with correspondence identifying the amendments made to
the unsigned version), which we have emailed to
the registry for filing.
We confirm that the signed Statement of Darren Stephens dated 3 February 2011
has been previously served on the insurer’s representative
and filed with
the Workers Compensation Commission under Application to Admit Late Documents
dated 4 February 2011 filed in respect
of WCC proceedings 9826/10.
Unfortunately we have been unable to retrieve a copy of the signed Statement
from our archive.”
that day, the solicitors for the Applicant Defendant lodged a signed copy of the
statement of 3 February 2011. In this matter,
I have taken the AALD and signed
statement provided by the Applicant Defendant to be properly before me and to
the extent necessary,
I admit those documents into evidence.
Commission requested that if the applicant defendant wished to make any
submissions in respect of the amended statement, it was
to lodge and serve those
submissions by close of business on 15 July 2020. No submissions were received
by the Commission.
a number of occasions between July and September 2020, the parties requested the
decision on the Application to Strike Out the
Pre-Filing Statement be deferred,
as they were attempting to negotiate a settlement.
22 September 2020, Mr Stephens’ legal representative advised the
Commission that “this matter has not been able to
be resolved” and
requested that the Application proceed to determination.
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
(the 1998 Act) provides:
“(6) If the Commission is
satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection with
proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
regard to Practice Direction Number 1, the documents that are before me, and the
submissions by the parties that the matter
can proceed to be determined on the
basis of these documents, I am satisfied that I have sufficient information to
proceed ‘on
the papers’, without holding any conference or formal
hearing, and that this is the appropriate course in the circumstances.
LEGISLATION
151A of the 1987 Act provides:
151A Effect of recovery
of damages on compensation
(1) If a person recovers damages in respect of an injury from the employer
liable to pay compensation under this Act then (except
to the extent that
subsection (2), (3), (4) or (5) covers the case)—
(a) the person ceases to be entitled to any further compensation under this
Act in respect of the injury concerned (including compensation
claimed but not
yet paid), and
(b) the amount of any weekly payments of compensation already paid in respect
of the injury concerned is to be deducted from the damages
(awarded or otherwise
paid as a lump sum) and is to be paid to the person who paid the compensation,
(c) the person ceases to be entitled to participate in any injury management
program provided for under this Act or the 1998 Act.
(2) If damages in respect of an injury are recovered from the employer liable
to pay compensation under this Act, pursuant to a cause
of action that survives
for the benefit of the estate of a deceased worker under the
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1944
, the following amounts of compensation
are to be repaid out of the estate of the deceased worker to the person who paid
the compensation—
(a) the amount of any weekly payments of compensation already paid in respect
of the injury concerned,
(b) the amount of any permanent impairment compensation and pain and
suffering compensation already paid in respect of the injury
(3) If damages are recovered in an action under the
Compensation to
Relatives Act 1897
in respect of the death of a worker from the employer
liable to pay compensation under this Act in respect of the death—
(a) the amount of any compensation under Division 1 of
paid in respect
of the death is to be deducted from the damages (awarded or otherwise paid as a
lump sum) and is to be paid to the
person who paid the compensation, and
(b) a person recovering those damages ceases to be entitled to any further
compensation under this Act in respect of the death of
the worker.
(4) If a person recovers motor accident damages (other than damages to which
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2017
applies) from the employer
liable to pay compensation under this Act—
(a) the person ceases to be entitled to any further compensation under this
Act in respect of the injury concerned (including compensation
claimed but not
yet paid), and
(b) the amount of any compensation already paid in respect of the injury
concerned is to be deducted from the damages (awarded or
otherwise paid as a
lump sum) and is to be paid to the person who paid the compensation.
(5) If a person recovers damages to which
Motor Accident
Injuries Act 2017
applies from the employer liable to pay compensation under
(a) the person ceases to be entitled to any further compensation under this
Act in respect of the injury concerned (including compensation
claimed but not
yet paid), and
(b) the amount of any of the following compensation already paid in respect
of the injury concerned is to be deducted from the damages
(awarded or otherwise
paid as a lump sum) and is to be paid to the person who paid the
compensation—
(i) weekly payments of compensation,
(ii) permanent impairment compensation and pain and suffering compensation,
but limited to the amount of any damages recovered for
non-economic
151DA of the 1987 Act provides:
151DA Time not to run for
commencement of proceedings in certain cases
(1) Time does not run for the purposes of section 151D:
(a1) while the determination of the claim concerned is delayed as permitted
by section 281 of the 1998 Act, but not including delay
beyond 2 months
after the claimant has provided all relevant particulars about the claim as
required by section 281(2)(b) of that
Delay in determining a claim beyond 2 months is only permitted on the basis
that degree of permanent impairment is not fully ascertainable
and the insurer
has notified the claimant of this. In such a case, paragraph (a) of this
subsection can apply (if a dispute about
whether degree of permanent impairment
is fully ascertainable is the subject of medical assessment) to further prevent
time running
for the purposes of section 151D.
(a) while a medical dispute as to whether the degree of permanent impairment
of the injured worker is at least 15%, or whether the
degree of permanent
impairment of the injured worker is fully ascertainable, is the subject of a
referral for determination by the
Commission or a referral for assessment under
Part 7 of Chapter 7 of the 1998 Act (including any further assessment
under section
329 of that Act), or
(a2) during the period of 1 month after an offer of settlement is made to the
claimant pursuant to the determination of the claim
as and when required
by the 1998 Act, or
(a3) while an assessment under Part 7 of Chapter 7 of the 1998
Act in respect of a medical dispute referred to in paragraph (a) is
subject of a pending appeal under section 327 of the 1998 Act, or
(b) while a pre-filing statement served in accordance with section 315
of the 1998 Act in respect of the claim concerned remains
(2) A pre-filing statement remains current from the time it is served until
it is struck out under this section on the application
of the person (
) on whom it was served or it is withdrawn by the person who
served it, whichever happens first.
(3) The defendant may apply to the President to have the pre-filing statement
struck out by order of the President. Such an application
may not be made until
at least 6 months have elapsed after the defendant served on the claimant a
defence to the claim in accordance
with section 316 of the 1998 Act.
(4) The President may order that a pre-filing statement be struck out but
must not do so if satisfied that the degree of permanent
impairment of the
injured worker is not yet fully ascertainable and the matter is the subject of a
referral under Part 7 of Chapter
7 of the 1998 Act for assessment of
the degree of permanent impairment of the injured worker.
(5) A medical dispute is considered to be the subject of a referral for
assessment under Part 7 of Chapter 7 of the 1998 Act even
approved medical specialist has declined to make an assessment of the degree of
permanent impairment of the injured worker
until satisfied that the degree of
permanent impairment is fully ascertainable.
(6) The President may delegate to a Deputy President any function of the
President under this section (except this power of delegation),
but only if the
President is satisfied that the delegation is necessary to avoid a conflict of
interest or the appearance of bias.”
280B of the 1998 Act provides:
280B Lump sum compensation
to be paid before damages recovered
(1) An injured worker cannot recover damages in respect of an injury from the
employer liable to pay compensation under this Act in
respect of the injury
unless and until any permanent impairment compensation to which the worker is
entitled in respect of the injury
has been paid.
(2) This section does not prevent a claim for damages from being made before
any permanent impairment compensation to which the worker
is entitled in respect
of the injury has been paid.
This section ensures that an injured worker receives the compensation to
which the worker is entitled before damages are recovered
(because section 151A
of the 1987 Act would prevent the payment of compensation after damages are
recovered).”
SUBMISSIONS
Applicant defendant’s submissions
applicant defendant’s written submissions are quite brief. It notes the
Pre-Filing Statement was served on 23 March 2010
and was subsequently amended.
It submits an Election to Discontinue proceedings (Mediation) dated 4 August
2010 was served. The applicant
defendant recounts a Further Amended Pre-Filing
Statement of 20 October 2010 was served on that date and a Certificate of
Outcome was issued on 23 March 2011. It says that the pre-litigation
phase was concluded by the issuing of the Certificate of Mediation
March 2011.
applicant defendant submits that Mr Stephens has not commenced Court proceedings
or taken any other active steps to resolve the
applicant defendant submits there are policy reasons underpinning s 151DA(3) of
the 1987 Act “designed, inter alia, to provide
the parties with a degree
of certainty by not extending time indefinitely while the Pre-Filing Statement
remains current”,
Southwestern Sydney Area Health Service v
submits that the Application is made more than six months after the service of
its reply to the Pre-Filing Statement in accordance
with s 151DA(3) of the 1987
applicant defendant further submits Mr Stephens is not the subject of referral
under Pt 7 of Ch 7 of the 1998 Act for assessment
of the degree of permanent
impairment and the prohibition in s 151DA(4) does not apply.
applicant defendant argues there is no reason why costs should not follow the
Mr Stephens’ submissions
Stephens commences his submissions by noting that on 10 May 2010, “the
workers compensation insurer agreed to resolve”
his claim for compensation
pursuant to ss 66 and 67 of the 1987 Act for 21% whole person impairment. Mr
Stephens agrees with the
chronology in the applicant defendant’s
submissions at 2.3(1)–(4).
submits that shortly after his claim for compensation pursuant to ss 66 and 67
of the 1987 Act was resolved in respect of an injury
to his left upper
extremity, he became aware that he suffered a consequential injury to his right
upper extremity.
Stephens contends he has not been compensated pursuant to s 66 of the 1987 Act
in respect of his alleged consequential injury to
his right upper
Stephens recounts that as his previous claim pursuant to ss 66 and 67 was made
and resolved prior to the amendments to the
Workers Compensation Act
in 2012, he
“is entitled to make one further
‘top-up’ claim in
circumstances where his condition has
deteriorated”.
He argues that
the consequential injury to his right upper extremity has not yet stabilised. He
says he requires surgery to repair
the injury to the right upper extremity,
which he intends to undergo in the future.
Stephens submits that his injury to the right upper extremity cannot be assessed
until he has had the surgery and his condition
has stabilised. He argues that it
is his intention that after his condition has stabilised, he will be assessed by
an independent
medico-legal doctor in order to ascertain his entitlement to make
a further claim pursuant to s 66 of the 1987 Act.
Stephens refers to the decision of
Sydney South West Area Health Service v
and submits that he
should be afforded the opportunity to recover any lump sum compensation to which
he is entitled before pursuing
a work injury damages claim.
submits s 280B of the 1998 Act provides that the work injury damages claim
cannot proceed unless and until any permanent impairment
compensation which he
is entitled to has been paid. Reference to s 151A of the 1987 Act is made, where
Mr Stephens says the provision
operates such that he would be prevented from
recovering any additional compensation pursuant to s 66 after damages are
in a work injury damages claim. Mr Stephens argues that s 280B(2) of
the 1998 Act provides that he is not prevented from claiming
damages before the
question of permanent impairment compensation has been resolved and paid.
Stephens, relying on
at [40], contends that he should not
be prejudiced by striking out his Pre-Filing Statement for failing to prosecute
his work injury
damages claim with due diligence in circumstances where, by
virtue of s 280B of the 1998 Act, he is prohibited from resolving the
until the dispute in respect of any claim for additional whole person impairment
compensation is resolved and paid. He says
that for these reasons, the
Application should be dismissed.
support of the Opposition, Mr Stephens has attached two unsigned statements by
him dated 3 February 2011, and 26 May 2020 respectively
and two medical reports
from Dr Tsai, dated 25 March 2015 and 21 June 2018.
Applicant defendant’s submissions in reply
applicant defendant commences its submissions in reply acknowledging Mr
Stephens’ explanation for not commencing proceedings
upon completion of
the Pre-Filing process on conclusion of the mediation on 21 March 2011 is that
his alleged consequential right
arm condition has not been finally treated and
he has, therefore, been unable to submit a final claim for permanent impairment
compensation.
applicant defendant disagrees that s 280B of the 1998 Act precludes a worker
from recovering damages in respect of an injury unless
and until any permanent
impairment compensation to which the worker is entitled has been paid.
applicant defendant agrees there is nothing preventing Mr Stephens from
commencing Court proceedings and then finalising any permanent
entitlements prior to those proceedings being determined. It refers to Mr
Stephens’ statement that he began to experience
symptoms in his right
upper extremity “shortly after” he was assessed to have 21% whole
person impairment for his left
upper extremity on 10 May 2010. It says that the
matter was then allowed to progress to mediation on 21 March 2011. Following the
mediation, the applicant defendant notes Mr Stephens says that he sought
treatment from Dr Tsai in 2015 where surgery was recommended
years later he decided he needed to have the surgery. The applicant defendant
notes Mr Stephens’ re-attendance on
Dr Tsai in approximately 2018
where the doctor advised that Mr Stephens would need to undergo ulnar nerve
surgery. The applicant
defendant recounts Mr Stephens said he was anxious about
the surgery and he will need to have it done “eventually”, when
reaches the point where he cannot deal with the pain anymore.
applicant defendant relies upon
John Lacey Earthmoving Pty Limited v
Campbell-Willis
and submits
that it is well established that the Pre-Filing Statement is not intended to
extend time indefinitely and limitation
periods are in place to protect parties
from potential prejudice caused by the passage of time between the date of
injury and the
commencement of court proceedings. The applicant defendant
submits that it is now more than 18 years since the injury; more than
since the mediation on 21 March 2011; more than five years since Dr Tsai
indicated that Mr Stephens’ right upper
extremity would continue to
deteriorate, and approximately two years since Dr Tsai advised that Mr Stephens
would benefit from neurolysis
and transposition of the ulnar nerve.
“There is no evidence that qualified evidence has
been sought to ascertain whether the worker's left arm condition satisfies
definition of Maximum Medical Improvement and is thus capable of assessment for
the purposes of finalising permanent impairment
entitlements now rather than
awaiting surgery that may not be undertaken for many years, or may not be
undertaken at all.”
applicant defendant concludes that Mr Stephens is effectively seeking to extend
time indefinitely.
Relief sought
applicant defendant seeks that the Pre-Filing Statement dated 23 March 2010,
undated Amended Pre-Filing Statement and Further
Amended Pre-Filing Statement
dated 20 October 2010 be struck out.
Stephens seeks that the Application to Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement be
dismissed, and the applicant defendant pay his costs
Application.
claim for work injury damages must be brought within three years after the date
of injury, except with leave of the
However, time may be
suspended for one of the reasons set out in s 151DA of the 1987 Act. Section
151DA(1)(b) of the 1987 Act suspends
time for the purposes of s 151D while a
pre-filing statement in respect of the claim remains current. That is, until the
Statement is struck out on the application of J & D Stephens Pty
Ltd or withdrawn by Mr Stephens.
employer may apply to have the pre-filing statement struck out by order, once
six months have elapsed after it served the pre-filing
defence (s 151DA(3) of
the 1987 Act). A pre-filing statement may be struck out by order if the degree
of permanent impairment is
fully ascertainable (s 151DA(4) of the 1987
are no impediments presented by s 151DA(3) of the 1987 Act to the Application
being determined at this time. More than six months
have elapsed after J & D
Stephens Pty Ltd served the pre-filing defence.
are sound policy reasons for the inclusion of s 151DA(3) in the 1987 Act. The
provision ensures that the parties have sufficient
time to finalise the
pre-litigation phase of the
proceedings.
It also ensures
that there is a degree of certainty to the process and enables the parties to
explore resolution and/or mediation
of the claim before embarking on
litigation.
accept the Applicant Defendant’s submission that the dispute is not the
subject of a referral under Pt 7 of Ch 7 of the 1998
Act, which would prevent me
from striking the matter out under s 151DA(4).
Gardiner v Laing O’Rourke Australia Construction Pty
Leeming JA held s 280B
of the 1998 Act “is necessarily to be read with s 151A, not merely by
reason of s 2A(2) of the [1987]
Act, but also because of the note in s
In the same
decision, Emmett AJA added that s 151A of the 1987 Act must be considered in
light of s 280B of the 1998 Act.
His Honour continued:
“Section 280B relevantly provides that
an injured worker cannot recover damages in respect of an injury from the
employer liable
to pay compensation under the [1998] Act in respect of the
injury unless and until any permanent impairment compensation to which
worker is entitled in respect of the injury has been paid. Section 280B ensures
that an injured worker receives the compensation
to which the worker is entitled
before damages are recovered because s 151A of the [1987] Act would prevent the
payment of compensation
after damages are
recovered.”
Gower v State of New South
“35. A claim for work injury damages in respect of an
injury cannot be made unless a claim for lump sum compensation in respect
injury is made before or at the same time as the claim for work injury damages
([1998] Act, s 280A). A claim for damages can
be made before payment of
permanent impairment compensation, but damages cannot be recovered unless and
until any permanent impairment
compensation to which the worker is entitled has
been paid ([1998] Act, s 280B). A claim for permanent impairment compensation is
a claim for compensation as a lump sum under s 66 of the [1987] Act. (Definition
of ‘permanent impairment compensation’,
[1998] Act, s 4). From the
commencement of the
Workers Compensation Legislation Amendment Act 2012
(NSW) on 27 June 2012 and at all later times material to the present case, the
effect of s 66 was that to be entitled to lump sum
compensation, an injured
worker had to have suffered permanent impairment greater than 10 per cent.
Section 66(1A) (introduced by
the 2012 amending Act with effect from 27 June
2012) provides that only one claim can be made for permanent impairment
compensation
in respect of an injury.
to the 2012 amendments to s 66, lump sum compensation was payable under the
section on a sliding scale, depending upon whether
the degree of permanent
impairment was less than 10 per cent, between 10 per cent and 20 per cent,
between 20 per cent and 40 per
cent, between 40 per cent and 75 per cent or more
than 75 per cent.
is only if a person has made a claim for compensation or work injury damages
that that person is a ‘claimant’ whose
claim can give rise to a
medical dispute (
Izzard v Dunbier Marine Products (NSW) Pty Ltd
per Barrett JA). An injured worker who is in doubt as to
whether or not his or her injury gives rise to the requisite degree of permanent
impairment for the purpose of making either a claim for lump sum compensation
under s 66 of the [1987] Act or a claim for work injury
damages, or who is in
doubt as to whether his or her degree of permanent impairment can be
ascertained, is not entitled to an advisory
opinion by submitting such a
question as a medical dispute for determination under
proceedings for the recovery of work injury damages cannot be commenced until a
claim for the damages has been made ([1998]
Act, s 262). A claim for
compensation or work injury damages must be made in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the Workers
Compensation Guidelines (s 260(1)).
noted above at [35], s 280A of the [1998] Act provides that a claim for work
injury damages in respect of an injury cannot be made
unless a claim for lump
sum compensation in respect of the injury is made before or at the same time as
the claim for work injury
crux of Mr Stephens’ case is that whilst there has been a s 66A agreement,
he has developed a consequential condition in
his right elbow that has resulted
from favouring his left elbow. Given the poor result following surgery on his
left elbow, Mr Stephens
expresses some trepidation in undergoing surgery to his
right elbow and submits that he will undergo surgery to his right elbow when
pain is too much.
essence, he argues that until such time as he undergoes surgery the permanent
impairment is not able to be assessed. Mr Stephens
refers to the 2012 amendments
and submits that as a result of those, he can only make one further claim for
permanent impairment
compensation. He does not wish to make his further claim
until he has undergone surgery to his right elbow and when his permanent
impairment has stabilised.
support of his need for surgery to his right elbow, Mr Stephens relies upon the
reports of Dr Tsai dated 25 March 2015 and 21 June
the report of 25 March 2015, Dr Tsai recounts the surgery for ulnar nerve
decompression and anterior transposition under the hands
of Dr Roberts. Dr Tsai
notes Mr Stephens’ recovery was complicated by neuritis and he has
experienced problems with the left
ulnar nerve. Dr Tsai records that when Mr
Stephens began to experience problems with his right elbow, he elected to have
injections since 2010, having eight to ten injections and also notes
Mr Stephens takes Endone, Panadol and Tramadol for pain relief.
Doctor also records in the report of 25 March 2015:
of intrinsic muscles of the right hand as well as wasting of the hypothenar
eminence. He has decreased sensation over
the ulnar two digits. He also has
decreased sensation over the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve distribution.
Froment’s test
is negative. His ulnar nerve subluxes anteriorly when he
flexes up his elbow and the nerve is very irritable. Otherwise he does not
any tenderness over the lateral epicondyle.”
Tsai reports he has requested Mr Stephens undergo a nerve conduction study to
exclude double crush syndrome of his ulnar nerve.
The Doctor notes that with Mr
Stephens’ current situation, his ulnar nerve palsy probably will continue
to deteriorate. Dr
Tsai notes there is no guarantee that any surgical
intervention will prevent neuritis happening on the right elbow like the left
previously.
the report dated 21 June 2018, Dr Tsai notes it has been three years since he
last reviewed Mr Stephens. He says:
“It has been 3 years since
I last saw him. His pain is becoming worse and also the ulnar nerve is becoming
even more unstable
now. He will benefit from neurolysis and also transposition
of the ulnar nerve. As you are aware, [Mr Stephens] had bad complications
the same procedure on the left elbow a long time ago and he is still very
apprehensive. Unfortunately, at the end of the day,
he will need to make a final
I will write to his insurance company to request approval for the
procedure. In the meantime he will have another chat with his partner
” (emphasis in original)
note that it is not clear if Dr Tsai did write to the insurer in relation to
requesting approval for payment of medical expenses
under s 60 of the 1987
Stephens argues that in accordance with
, he should be afforded the
opportunity to recover any lump sum compensation to which is entitled before
pursuing a work injury damages
claim. I note that
was issued on 4
April 2012, prior to the introduction of the 2012 amendments.
, Keating P said at [39]–[41]:
“Section 280B
of the 1998 Act prohibits the worker from recovering damages in respect of an
injury from the employer liable
to pay compensation under this Act unless and
permanent impairment compensation
and pain and suffering compensation to which the worker is entitled in respect
of the injury has
been paid (my emphasis). As the ‘Note’ to s 280B
of the 1998 Act indicates, s 151A of the 1987 Act would prevent the
recovery of
any additional compensation to which Ms Palau is entitled after damages are
recovered. Subsection 280B(2) provides that
the worker is not prevented from
claiming damages before the question of permanent impairment compensation has
been resolved and
The defendant has made no response to the submission that, in the
circumstances of this case, s 280B of the 1998 Act provides a powerful
against striking out the pre-filing statement. It would be an anomalous result
indeed if Ms Palau’s pre-filing statement
was struck out for failing to
prosecute her work injury damages claim with due diligence in circumstances
where, by virtue of s 280B,
she is prohibited from resolving the claim until the
dispute in respect of her claim for additional whole person impairment
compensation
and pain and suffering compensation is resolved and paid. The fact
that the defendant has conceded that the permanent impairment
threshold for
claiming work injury damages has been reached is irrelevant.
I reject the submission that the worker has not sought to prosecute her claim
for work injury damages. There is a dispute in relation
to her entitlement to
additional compensation due to the alleged deterioration of her condition. So
much is clear from the terms
of the letter from Thompson Eslick, the
defendant’s solicitors, dated 20 July 2001. Although the dispute has not
been the subject
of a referral under Pt 7 of Ch 7 of the 1998 Act, which would
have prohibited me from striking the matter out under s 151DA(4), if
Palau’s medical evidence is accepted, her condition has deteriorated to a
significant extent and she should be afforded
the opportunity to recover any
lump sum compensation to which she is entitled before pursuing her work injury
damages claim.”
P’s interpretation of the interrelationship of s 280B and s 151A is
correct. This is confirmed by Leeming JA’s
Mr Stephens may commence proceedings in a work injury damages claim, those
proceedings cannot be resolved unless and until
any permanent compensation has
been paid to him. Implicit in this, is that any claim must be made, determined
and any such compensation
be paid before the work injury damages claim can
proceed to be determined. This is consistent with
, at [44] where it
was held that Court proceedings cannot commence unless a claim has been
was determined prior to the commencement of the
Workers Compensation Legislation Amendment Act 2012
, which introduced s
66(1A). Section 66(1A) of the 1987 Act provides “Only one claim can be
made under this Act for permanent
impairment compensation in respect of the
permanent impairment that results from an injury.”
11(1) of Sch 8 to the
Workers Compensation Regulation 2016
(the 2016 Regulation)
provides that a further lump sum compensation claim may be made in respect of an
existing impairment and subcl
(2) provides that only one further lump sum
compensation claim can be made in respect of the existing impairment. Clause 11
8 to the 2016 Regulation (cl 11) is applicable in Mr Stephens’
combination, s 66(1A) and cl 11 means that Mr Stephens is now limited to being
able to make one further claim for lump sum compensation.
A consequence of this
amendment is that workers will be inclined to delay making further lump sum
compensation until their permanent
impairment has settled. The present case is
such an example.
indicated by Dr Tsai, surgery to Mr Stephens’ right elbow may or may not
be effective, and his right elbow continues to deteriorate.
, if Dr Tsai’s and Mr Stephens’ evidence is accepted, Mr
Stephens may have suffered a consequential condition and he should
be afforded
the opportunity to seek to make a claim for and to recover any lump sum
compensation he may be entitled to before pursuing
his work injury damages
is apparent from White JA’s comments in
quoted above, that Mr
Stephens is unable to commence Court proceedings until such time as he makes a
claim for compensation. Whilst
there has been a claim in respect of the left
elbow, there has not been a claim made in relation to the alleged consequential
in his right elbow.
the applicant defendant has gone to some length to point out, Mr Stephens has
not yet made what may be his further claim. In my
view, in light of White
JA’s helpful analysis in
, Mr Stephens is somewhat
hamstrung in being able to commence proceedings in a work injury damages claim
in view of the fact that
Mr Stephens has indicated that in the future he will be
making a further claim for lump sum
compensation.
applicant defendant has made submissions with respect to the prejudice it faces
due to the effluxion of time since the injury.
It argues that it is well
established that a Pre-Filing Statement is not intended to extend time
indefinitely and that Limitation
periods exist to protect parties from potential
prejudice cause by the passage of time between the date of injury and
commencement
of Court proceedings, citing
Campbell-Willis
further argues that there is no certainty Mr Stephens will agree to undergo
surgery or indeed whether he will undergo surgery at
all. In this respect, Dr
Tsai opines that without the surgery, Mr Stephens’ right elbow will
continue to deteriorate. Regardless
of whether or not Mr Stephens undergoes
surgery, Dr Tsai opines that the right elbow condition may change.
further note the applicant defendant argues:
“There is no
evidence that qualified evidence has been sought to ascertain whether the
worker’s left arm condition satisfies
the definition of Maximum Medical
Improvement and is thus capable of assessment for the purposes of finalising
permanent impairment
entitlements now rather than awaiting surgery that may not
be undertaken for many years, or may not be undertaken at all.”
argument is not clear. I note that Mr Stephens’ left elbow was that elbow
which was the subject of the previous complying
agreements. In the event that
the reference to left elbow, is in fact meant to be the right elbow, I note my
above discussion in
relation to s 66(1A) and cl 11 of the 2016
Regulation.
relation to the assertion of prejudice and the issues raised in
Campbell-Willis
, I have indicated above following
until Mr Stephens has made a claim in respect of any alleged right elbow
consequential condition, it is not possible for him
to commence proceedings.
Consequently, as he is prohibited from commencing proceedings until he makes a
claim, the effluxion of time,
in reality has not commenced.
wish to make one further observation. Following the lodgment of the Pre-Filing
Strike Out Application, this matter was adjourned
for some time while the
parties explored settlement negotiations. Whilst a settlement ultimately did not
come to fruition, it is
demonstrative that there has been recent action by Mr
Stephens in relation to the prosecution of his claim.
is clear from
that Mr Stephens cannot commence proceedings until he
has made a claim. Whilst he has made a claim that has come to settlement in
respect of the left elbow, it is apparent that there may be a further claim made
in the future in relation to the alleged consequential
condition that Mr
Stephens asserts he has developed in his right elbow. Further, even if he could
commence Court proceedings, he
is unable to conclude those proceedings until
such times as his permanent impairment compensation has been resolved and paid.
view of the fact he is only entitled to one further claim which has not yet
been made and his reluctance to avoid undergoing surgery
to his right elbow,
which may be a further claim to be made, I am of the view that it is not
appropriate at this time to strike out
Mr Stephens’ Pre-Filing
Application to strike out the respondent claimant’s pre-filing statement
is dismissed.
order as to costs.
Judge Phillips
19 January 2021
Statement of John Stephens
dated 19 November 2003, Application to Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement
(Application), p 46.
Stephens’ statement dated 3 February 2011, [34]–[35], Notice of
Opposition to Strike Out a Pre-Filing Statement (Opposition),
Application, p
Mr Stephens’
statement dated 3 February 2011, [37], Opposition, p
Dr Roberts’ operation
report dated 18 June 2002, Application, p 348.
Mr Stephens’ statement
dated 3 February 2011, [39], Opposition, p
Mr Stephens’ statement
dated 26 May 2020, [40]–[43], Opposition, p
[2014] NSWWCCPD
Mr Stephens’
submissions, [5].
NSWWCCPD 20
[2007] NSWWCCPD 197
Campbell-Willis
Applicant defendant’s submissions in reply,
Section 151D of the
Pasminco Cockle
Creek Smelter Pty Ltd v Gardner
[2006] NSWWCCPD 108
; 298 IR 273
[2018] NSWCA 132
), [35]–[36], [40]–[41], [44].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.73 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter