URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/137.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Health Care Complaints Commission v Haloob [2025] NSWCATOD 137; (2 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Health Care Complaints Commission v Haloob
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 137
Hearing Date(s):
27, 28 May 2025; closing submissions 12 June 2025
Date of Orders:
2 October 2025
Decision Date:
2 October 2025
Occupational Division
E Bishop SC, Senior Member
A Aylott, Senior Member
P Sinclair, Senior
F Taylor, General Member
(1) Under s 149(C)(1) of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law, the Respondent’s registration is suspended for a
period of six months from the date of this decision.
(2) Under s 149A(1)(b) of the Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law the following conditions are imposed on the
Respondent’s
registration at the expiry of the period of suspension in
order (1) above:
(a) Not to practise as pharmacist in
(b) To practise under Category B supervision in
accordance with the Pharmacy Council of NSW’s Compliance Policy –
Supervision
(as varied from time to time) and as subsequently determined by the
appropriate review body.
(c) Pharmacy Council of New South
Wales is the appropriate review body.
(d) After a period of
six months of supervised practice, the Respondent is to undergo a performance
review conducted by a suitable
pharmacist appointed by the Pharmacy Council
after which the condition of Category B supervised practice is to be reviewed by
Pharmacy Council of NSW.
(3) The Respondent is to pay
the costs of the Commission as agreed or assessed.
Catchwords:
HEALTH — professional registration and discipline — pharmacist
— unauthorised repeat prescriptions — quantity
of drugs dispensed
— dispensing expired prescriptions — unsatisfactory professional
conduct — professional misconduct
Legislation Cited:
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law, ss 139B, 139E, 149,
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
(NSW), cll 40, 54, 86, Sch 4, Appendix D, Sch
Cases Cited:
Chen v Health Care Complaints Commission
(2017) 95 NSWLR 334
[2017] NSWCA
Health Care Complaints Commission v Amalakumar
[2019] NSWCATOD
Health Care Complaints Commission v Bolton
[2021] NSWCATOD 160
Care Complaints Commission v Dr Della Bruna
[2014] NSWCATOD 31
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Robinson
[2022] NSWCA 164
Qasim v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2015] NSWCA 282
Texts Cited:
Guide to the Poisons and Therapeutics Goods Legislation for Pharmacists, cl
Principal judgment
Health Care Complaints Commission (Applicant)
Doraid Haloob
(Respondent)
Representation:
K Sharma (Applicant)
(Respondent)
Solicitors:
Health Care Complaints Commission
(Applicant)
Meridian Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2024/00468568
Publication Restriction:
The Tribunal made an order pursuant to
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), prohibiting the disclosure to any person
or entity of the name, address or any other identifying information of the
identified as Patient A, Patient B, Patient C, Patient D, Patient E and
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
proceedings concern a complaint brought by the Health Care Complaints Commission
(“the Commission”) against the
respondent, Mr Doraid Haloob, a
registered pharmacist. In essence the complaints allege that Mr Haloob engaged
in unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct by issuing
unauthorised repeat prescriptions to six patients, dispensing drugs on
unauthorised repeat prescriptions to those patients, dispensing excessive
quantities of drugs and dispensing drugs on expired prescriptions.
Commission seeks findings as to Mr Haloob’s conduct, and a protective
order that his registration be cancelled with a 12
month non-review period under
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(“the National
Haloob has admitted each complaint in writing and the hearing was conducted as a
combined Stage 1 and Stage 2 hearing.
the reasons that follow we find that the complaints against Mr Haloob are
established. We have decided that Mr Haloob’s
registration be suspended
with a non-review period of 6 months with conditions on his registration in
accordance with the orders
we have made.
note that orders have been made prohibiting disclosure of the names and
addresses of the patients. Accordingly we will refer to
these patients as
Patient A, Patient B, Patient C, Patient D, Patient E and Patient
Factual background
Haloob received his Bachelor of Pharmacy in 2003 from the University of Otago,
New Zealand. He completed his internship in Australia,
working in various
pharmacies including at Tamworth and Wyoming, before being registered as a
pharmacist in New South Wales in December
Haloob purchased the Liverpool Day & Night Chemist (“the
pharmacy”) in July 2012. The events set out in the Complaint
(see below)
occurred during the time he was the proprietor at the pharmacy, working long
hours and primarily on his own.
29 April 2022, Mr Haloob’s registration was suspended by the Pharmacy
Council of New South Wales (“the Council”)
acting on a complaint
received from the Pharmaceutical Regulatory Unit (“the PRU”) on 11
April 2022. An investigation
was conducted into the dispensing and supply by Mr
Haloob of various drugs including in large quantities and without prescription;
and possible fraudulent conduct in obtaining benefits under the Pharmaceutical
Benefit Scheme (“PBS”) in respect of drugs
allegedly not supplied to
5 October 2022, Mr Haloob made an application under s 150A of the
Practitioner Regulation National Law
(“the National Law”) for a
review of the Council’s decision to suspend his registration. A hearing
took place on
31 October 2022, following which the suspension was lifted but
strict conditions were imposed on Mr Haloob’s registration.
These included
that Mr Haloob be prohibited from possessing, supplying or dispensing drugs
listed in Schedules 4 and 8 of the
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
(NSW) and practise under Category A supervision of the Pharmacy Council of
NSW’s Compliance Policy – Supervision (“Council
Policy”) and that he meet with an approved supervisor weekly who would
provide monthly reports to the Council. The
conditions on Mr Haloob’s
registration effectively rendered him unable to practise as a pharmacist.
January 2024, Mr Haloob made a further application for review under s 150A(4) of
the National Law on the basis there had been a
change in his circumstances that
justified the variation or setting aside of the decision.
21 February 2024, s 150A proceedings were held resulting in the conditions of Mr
Haloob’s registration being replaced. New
conditions were imposed on his
registration including that Mr Haloob not practise as the pharmacist in charge;
not possess any access
cards, keys or codes to the pharmacy; and to practise
under Category C supervision. The Panel who imposed the revised conditions
that Mr Haloob had “made a concerted effort to improve his knowledge of
the legislative, ethical and clinical aspects
of his practice. He has shown
insight into the issues and remorse for his actions and a willingness to
undertake any further supervision
and training that is required.” While
these conditions are more relaxed that the previous conditions, he has still
been unable
to practise as a pharmacist.
Haloob ceased working in the pharmacy in April 2022 after his registration was
suspended. He sold the pharmacy in September 2024
and is currently engaged to
assist in the operations of a warehouse that services major medical
Regulatory framework
the nature of the conduct complained of relates to the dispensing of certain
drugs in large quantities and the use of prescriptions,
it is useful to set out
the relevant framework for the regulation of pharmacists.
(1) Clause 4.4(d) of the
Guide to the Poisons and Therapeutic Goods
Legislation for Pharmacists
(“Poisons Guide”) relevantly
provides that, where a prescription contains no repeat instructions, nor clearly
the number of repeats ordered, it may be dispensed once only, then
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
PTGA”) proclaims the Poisons List, which contains nine schedules that
classify the substances listed. Three categories
of substances are relevant to
this proceeding: Schedule 4 drugs; Schedule 4D drugs; and Schedule 8 drugs.
(3) Schedule 4 drugs are substances which in the public interest should be
supplied only upon a written prescription: see the PTGA,
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Regulation 2008
(NSW), cl 40(1)(b) (“PTGR”)
provides that a pharmacist must not supply a restricted substance on
prescription if it has
already been supplied the maximum number of times
indicated by the prescription. The PTGR, cl 54 provides that a pharmacist must
not supply any restricted substance in a quantity, or for a purpose, that does
not accord with the recognised therapeutic standard
of what is appropriate in
the circumstances.
(4) Certain Schedule 4 drugs that are prescribed restricted substances are
identified in PTGR, Appendix D.
Section 16(2)
of the PTGA provides that
“[a] person shall not forge or fraudulently alter, or utter, knowing it to
be forged or fraudulently
altered, any prescription of a medical practitioner,
nurse practitioner, midwife practitioner, dentist, optometrist, podiatrist or
veterinary practitioner including any prescribed restricted substance”.
(5) Schedule 8 drugs: Schedule 8, Poisons List, provides a list of
“[S]ubstances which are addiction producing or potentially
producing”.
(6) In relation to the supply of prescribed restricted substances and drugs of
addiction, the PTGR relevantly provides:
(a) PTGR, cl 40(1)(g)(ii) a pharmacist must not supply a prescribed restricted
substance on prescription more than 6 months before
the date on which the supply
is requested; and
(b) PTGR, cl 86(1)(e) a pharmacist must not supply a drug of addiction on
prescription if the prescription is dated more than 6 months
before the date on
which the supply is being requested.
The complaint
is no dispute about the relevant background in the Amended Complaint filed by
the Commission on 15 April 2025, which sets out
the particulars of the Complaint
as it relates to Patients A to F by reference to drugs identified in Annexures A
to G to the Complaint
which are Schedules 4, 4D and 8 drugs.
noted above the Commission has two grounds of complaint against Mr Haloob.
Complaint One seeks findings of unsatisfactory professional
conduct under the
National Law, s 139B(1)(a) and/or s 139B(1)(l). The Commission relied on each of
the particulars 1, 3, 5, 7, 9,
11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27, 29, 31, 33
and 35 (as set out below) individually as constituting unsatisfactory
professional
conduct and alternatively the particulars to Complaint One in any
combination as constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct.
Two seeks a finding of professional misconduct under the National Law, s 139E on
the basis that Mr Haloob has engaged in
unsatisfactory professional conduct of a
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the his
registration
and/or engaged in more than one instance of unsatisfactory
professional conduct which would have the same result. Complaint Two
the particulars in Complaint One either individually or cumulatively.
particulars for Complaint One of the Amended Complaint (and as further amended
during the hearing) are as follows:
“PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT ONE
Unauthorised repeat prescriptions
1. Between 8 March 2020 and 25 February 2022 on the instances as set out in
Annexure A, the practitioner inappropriately issued unauthorised
prescriptions to Patient A:
a. for the following Schedule 4 drugs:
ii. on 20 instances between 22 March 2020 and 25 February 2022, Duloxetine 60mg
iii. on 12 instances between 22 March 2020 and 6 February 2022, Valproate EC
iv. on 64 instances between 13 March 2020 and 25 February 2022, Seretide
Accuhaler 500mcg/50mcg;
v. on 20 instances between 11 May 2020 and 22 January 2022, Nurofen Plus (200mg
ibuprofen and 12.6mg codeine);
b. for the following Schedule 4D drugs:
i. on 60 instances between 22 March 2020 and 25 February 2022, Pregabalin 150mg
ii. on 40 instances between 8 March 2020 and 25 February 2022, Pregabalin 75mg
iii. on 10 instances between 22 March 2020 and 22 January 2022, Seroquel
(quetiapine) 100mg.
2. The practitioner's conduct in issuing unauthorised repeat prescriptions to
Patient A on the instances as set out in particular
1 was not appropriate in
circumstances where the unauthorised repeat prescriptions had not been
authorised on the prescription by
the prescriber:
a. having regard to clause 4.4 of the NSW Health ‘Guide to the Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Legislation for Pharmacists’;
b. for particular 1(b), having regard to
section 16(2)
Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Act 1966
c. in circumstances where the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries
including with the prescribing practitioner, prior
to issuing the repeat
prescription;
d. otherwise in the circumstances.
3. Between 8 March 2020 and 25 February 2022 on the instances as set out in
Annexure A, the practitioner inappropriately dispensed
in PBS quantities
unauthorised repeat prescriptions, to Patient A:
a. for the following Schedule 4 drugs:
ii. on 10 instances between 22 March 2020 and 25 February 2022, Duloxetine 60mg
iii. on 10 instances between 22 March 2020 and 6 February 2022, Valproate EC
iv. on 43 instances between 13 March 2020 and 25 February 2022, Seretide
Accuhaler 500mcg/50mcg;
v. on 20 instances between 11 May 2020 and 22 January 2022, Nurofen Plus (200mg
ibuprofen and 12.6mg codeine);
b. for the following Schedule 4D drugs:
i. on 45 instances between 22 March 2020 and 25 February 2022, Pregabalin 150mg
ii. on 21 instances between 8 March 2020 and 25 February 2022, Pregabalin 75mg
iii. on 8 instances between 22 March 2020 and 22 January 2022, Seroquel
(quetiapine) 100mg.
4. The practitioner’s conduct in particular 3 was not appropriate:
a. in that the quantity of the drug dispensed, including the relevant period of
time and intervals in which it was dispensed was
inappropriate:
i. having regard to the usual dosage, the dosage and quantity prescribed, and/or
the maximum recommended dosage for each drug; and/or
ii. having regard to the potential for abuse, misuse or diversion, which the
practitioner knew or should have known;
b. for particular 3(a)(v), having regard to the concurrent prescribing and/or
dispensing history of Pregabalin, of which the practitioner
knew or should have
known; having regard to clause 40 of the PTGR;
c. in circumstances where the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries,
including with the prescribing practitioner, prior
to dispensing the drug;
d. otherwise in the circumstances.
5. On 13 June 2021, as set out in Annexure B, the practitioner inappropriately
issued five unauthorised repeat prescriptions to Patient
B for the Schedule 4D
drug, Seroquel XR 400mg tablets.
6. The practitioner's conduct in particular 5 was not appropriate in
circumstances where the repeat prescriptions had not been authorised
prescription by the prescriber and:
a. having regard to clause 4.4 of the NSW Health ‘Guide to the Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Legislation for Pharmacists’;
b. having regard to
section 16(2)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
c. in circumstances where the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries,
including with the prescribing practitioner, prior
to issuing the repeat
prescription;
d. otherwise in the circumstances.
7. Between 10 July 2021 and 23 October 2021 on five instances as set out in
Annexure B, the practitioner inappropriately dispensed
unauthorised repeat
prescriptions, to Patient B for the Schedule 4D drug Seroquel XR 400mg
8. The practitioner's conduct in particular 7 was not appropriate:
a. the quantity of the drug dispensed, and the relevant period of time and
intervals in which it was dispensed was inappropriate:
i. having regard to the usual dosage, the dosage and quantity prescribed, and/or
the maximum recommended dosage for each drug; and/or
ii. having regard to the potential for abuse, misuse or diversion, which the
practitioner knew or should have known;
b. having regard to clause 40 of the PTGR;
c. in that the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries, prior to
dispensing the drug;
d. otherwise in the circumstances.
9. Between 13 September 2021 and 1 November 2021, as set out in Annexure C, the
practitioner inappropriately issued 20 unauthorised
repeat prescriptions to
Patient C for the Schedule 4D drug, Pregabalin 75mg capsules.
10. The practitioner's conduct in particular 9 was not appropriate in
circumstances where the repeat prescriptions had not been authorised
prescription by the prescriber:
a. having regard to clause 4.4 of the NSW Health ‘Guide to the Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Legislation for Pharmacists’;
b. having regard to
section 16(2)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
c. in circumstances where the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries,
including with the prescribing practitioner, prior
to issuing the repeat
prescription;
d. otherwise in the circumstances.
11. Between 13 September 2021 and 1 November 2021 on 20 instances as set out in
Annexure C, the practitioner inappropriately dispensed
unauthorised repeat
prescriptions, to Patient C for the Schedule 4D drug, Pregabalin 75mg
12. The practitioner's conduct in particular 11 was not appropriate:
a. in that the quantity of the drug dispensed, including the relevant period of
time and intervals in which it was dispensed was
inappropriate:
i. having regard to the usual dosage, the dosage and quantity prescribed, and/or
the maximum recommended dosage for each drug; and/or
ii. having regard to the potential for abuse, misuse or diversion, which the
practitioner knew
or should have known;
b. having regard to clause 40 of the PTGR;
c. in that the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries including with
the prescribing practitioner, prior to dispensing
d. otherwise in the circumstances.
13. Between 6 July 2021 and 15 November 2021 on the instances set out in
Annexure D, the practitioner inappropriately issued unauthorised
prescriptions to Patient D for the following Schedule 4D drugs:
a. on 6 July 2021 on five instances, Seroquel (quetiapine) 200mg tablets;
b. on 11 October 2021 on five instances, Pregabalin 300mg tablets;
c. on 15 November 2021 on five instances, Pregabalin 150mg tablets.
14. The practitioner’s conduct in particular 13 was not appropriate in
circumstances where the repeat prescriptions had not
been authorised on the
prescription by the prescriber:
a. having regard to clause 4.4 of the NSW Health ‘Guide to the Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Legislation for Pharmacists’;
b. having regard to
section 16(2)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
c. in circumstances where the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries,
prior to issuing the repeat prescription;
d. otherwise in the circumstances.
15. Between 2 August 2021 and 2 January 2022, the practitioner inappropriately
dispensed unauthorised repeat prescriptions to Patient
D for the following
Schedule 4D drugs:
a. between 2 August 2021 and 29 November 2021 on five instances, Quetiapine
200mg tablets;
b. between 15 November 2021 and 2 January 2022 on two instances, Pregabalin
300mg tablets;
c. on 2 January 2022, Pregabalin 150mg tablets.
16. The practitioner’s conduct in particular 15 was not appropriate:
a. in that the quantity of the drug dispensed, including the relevant period of
time and intervals in which it was dispensed was
inappropriate:
i. having regard to the usual dosage, the dosage and quantity prescribed, and/or
the maximum recommended dosage for each drug; and/or
ii. having regard to the potential for abuse, misuse or diversion, which the
practitioner knew or should have known;
b. having regard to clause 40 of the PTGR;
c. in that the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries including with
the prescribing practitioner, prior to dispensing
d. otherwise in the circumstances.
17. Between [19 January 2021 and 20 August 2021] ... on 10 instances as set out
in Annexure E, the practitioner inappropriately issued
unauthorised repeat
prescriptions to Patient E for the Schedule 4D drug, Pregabalin 25mg
18. The practitioner's conduct in particular 17 was not appropriate in
circumstances where the repeat prescriptions had not been
authorized on the
prescription by the prescriber:
a. having regard to clause 4.4 of the NSW Health ‘Guide to the Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Legislation for Pharmacists’;
b. having regard to
section 16(2)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
c. in circumstances where the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries,
prior to issuing the repeat prescription;
d. otherwise in the circumstances.
19. Between 12 February 2021 and 4 December 2021, the practitioner
inappropriately dispensed 9 unauthorised repeat prescriptions
to Patient E for
the Schedule 40 drug, Pregabalin 25mg capsules.
20. The practitioner's conduct in particular 19 was not appropriate:
a. in that the quantity of the drug dispensed, including the relevant period of
time and intervals in which it was dispensed was
inappropriate:
i. having regard to the usual dosage, the dosage and quantity prescribed, and/or
the maximum recommended dosage for each drug; and/or
ii. having regard to the potential for abuse, misuse or diversion, which the
practitioner knew or should have known;
b. having regard to clause 40 of the PTGR;
c. in that the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries, prior to
dispensing the drug;
d. otherwise in the circumstances.
21. On 29 April 2021, on five instances as set out in Annexure F, the
practitioner inappropriately issued unauthorised repeat prescriptions
F for the Schedule 4D drug, Pregabalin 75mg capsules.
22. The practitioner’s conduct in particular 21 was not appropriate in
circumstances where the repeat prescriptions had not
been authorized on the
prescription by the prescriber:
a. having regard to clause 4.4 of the NSW Health ‘Guide to the Poisons and
Therapeutic Goods Legislation for Pharmacists’;
b. having regard to
section 16(2)
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Act
c. in circumstances where the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries,
prior to issuing the repeat prescription;
d. otherwise in the circumstances.
23. On each of 25 October 2021 and 14 December 2021 as set out in Annexure F,
the practitioner inappropriately dispensed unauthorised
repeat prescriptions to
Patient F for the Schedule 4D drug, Pregabalin 75mg capsules.
24. The practitioner's conduct in particular 23 was not appropriate:
a. in that the quantity of the drug dispensed, including the relevant period of
time and intervals in which it was dispensed was
inappropriate:
i. having regard to the usual dosage, the dosage and quantity prescribed, and/or
the maximum recommended dosage for each drug; and/or
ii. having regard to the potential for abuse, misuse or diversion, which the
practitioner knew or should have known;
b. having regard to clause 40 of the PTGR;
c. in that the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries, prior to
dispensing the drug;
d. otherwise in the circumstances.
Quantity of drugs dispensed
25. During the period between 8 March 2020 and 25 February 2022 in the
quantities and on the occasions as set out in Annexure A,
the practitioner
dispensed to Patient A:
a. the Schedule 4D drugs:
i. Pregabalin 150mg capsules;
ii. Pregabalin 75mg capsules;
iii. Seroquel (Quetiapine) 100mg tablets;
b. the Schedule 4 drugs:
i. Salbutamol 100mcg/dose inhaler;
ii. Duloxetine 60mg tablets;
iii. Venlafaxine 150mg capsules;
iv. Valproate EC 500mg tablets;
i. Seretide Accuhaler 500mcg/50mcg.
26. The practitioner's conduct in particular 25 was not appropriate:
a. in that the quantity of the drugs dispensed, including the relevant period of
time and intervals in which it was dispensed was
inappropriate:
i. having regard to the usual dosage, the dosage and quantity prescribed, and/or
the maximum recommended dosage for each drug;
ii. for particular 25(a), having regard to the potential for abuse, misuse or
diversion, which the practitioner knew or should have
iii. for particular 25(b)(ii), having regard to the concurrent prescribing
and/or dispensing history of Venlafaxine, of which the
practitioner knew or
should have known;
iv. for particular 25(b)(iii), having regard to the concurrent prescribing
and/or dispensing history of Duloxetine, of which the
practitioner knew or
should have known;
v. in that the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries, including to
the prescribing practitioner, prior to dispensing
vi. otherwise in the circumstances.
27. During the period between 2 April 2019 and 23 October 2021 in the quantities
and on the occasions as set out in Annexure B, the
practitioner dispensed to
a. the Schedule 4D drug, Seroquel (Quetiapine) 400mg tablets;
b. the Schedule 4 drug:
i. Lipitor (Atorvastatin) 20mg tablets;
ii. Lipitor (Atorvastatin) 40mg tablets;
iii. Lipitor (Atorvastatin) 80mg tablets.
28. The practitioner's conduct in particular 27 was not appropriate:
a. in that the quantity of the drugs dispensed, including the relevant period of
time and intervals in which it was dispensed was
inappropriate:
i. having regard to the usual dosage, the dosage and quantity prescribed, and/or
the maximum recommended dosage for each drug;
ii. for particular 27(a), having regard to the potential for abuse, misuse or
diversion, which the practitioner knew or should have
iii. in that the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries, including to
the prescribing practitioner, prior to dispensing
iv. otherwise in the circumstances.
29. During the period between 2 April 2019 and 23 October 2021 in the quantities
and on the occasions as set out in Annexure C, the
practitioner dispensed to
a. the Schedule 4D drug, Pregabalin 75mg tablets;
b. the Schedule 4 drug, Symbicort Rapihaler 120 doses.
30. The practitioner's conduct in particular 29 was not appropriate:
a. in that the quantity of the drugs dispensed, including the relevant period of
time and intervals in which it was dispensed was
inappropriate:
i. having regard to the usual dosage, the dosage and quantity prescribed, and/or
the maximum recommended dosage for each drug;
ii. for particular 29(a), having regard to the potential for abuse, misuse or
diversion, which the practitioner knew or should have
iii. in that the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries, including to
the prescribing practitioner, prior to dispensing
iv. otherwise in the circumstances.
31. On or around 1 November 2021, in the quantities and on the occasions as set
out in Annexure C, the practitioner dispensed and
supplied to Patient C:
a. 5 dispensings of Bion Tears Eye-Drop 3 units;
b. 24 dispensings of Systane Eye-Drops 15ml;
c. 6 dispensings of Celecoxib 100mg tablets 60;
d. 12 dispensings of Diaformin 500mg tablets 100;
e. 5 dispensings of Duodart (dutasteride 500mcg and tamsulosin 400mg) 30 and
Flomaxtra (tamsulosin 400mg);
f. 5 dispensings of Exforge-HCT (amlodipine 10mg, valsartan
320mg and hydrochlorothiazide 25mg) tablets 28 and 17 dispensings of
perindopril
10mg tablets 30;
g. 6 dispensings of Ezetimibe 10mg + simvastatin 80mg tablets 30;
h. 6 dispensings of paracetamol 665mg tablets 192;
i. 8 dispensings of aspirin 100mg tablets 112;
j. 31 dispensings of Symbicort Rapihaler 200mcg + 8mg 120 doses;
k. Schedule 4D drug Pregabalin 75mg capsules.
32. The practitioner's conduct in particular 31 was not appropriate:
a. in that the quantity of the drugs dispensed, including the relevant period of
time and intervals in which it was dispensed was
inappropriate:
i. having regard to the usual dosage, the dosage and quantity prescribed, and/or
the maximum recommended dosage for each drug;
ii. for particular 31(c), having regard to drug interaction with the drug
Exforge HCT, which the practitioner knew or should have
iii. for particular 31(f), having regard to drug interaction with the drug
Celecoxib, which the practitioner knew or should have
iv. having regard to the potential for abuse, misuse or diversion, which the
practitioner knew or should have known;
v. having regard to the potential for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(‘PBS’) fraud in that PBS subsidised drugs could
be diverted to
individuals other than the patient;
vi. in that the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries, including to
the prescribing practitioner, prior to dispensing
vii. otherwise in the circumstances.
33. On or around 24 January 2022, in the quantities and on the occasions as set
out in Annexure C, the practitioner dispensed and
supplied to Patient C:
a. the following Schedule 4 drugs:
i. Celecoxib 100mg (60 tablets);
ii. Flomaxtra (tamsulosin hydrochloride) 400mcg (30 tablets);
iii. Metformin AN 500mg (100 tablets);
iv. Prexum (perindopril) 10mg (30 tablets);
v. Symbicort Rapihaler 200+6mcg;
b. the Schedule 4D drug, Pregabalin 75mg (56 capsules).
34. The practitioner's conduct in particular 33 was not appropriate:
a. in that the quantity of the drugs dispensed, including the relevant period of
time and intervals in which it was dispensed was
inappropriate:
i. having regard the quantities of the drug previously supplied in or around
November 2021;
ii. for particulars 33(a)(iv) and (v), having regard to
section 16(2)
Poisons and Therapeutic
iii. having regard to the usual dosage, the dosage and quantity prescribed,
and/or the maximum recommended dosage for each drug;
iv. in that the practitioner failed to make appropriate enquiries, prior to
supplying the drug;
v. otherwise in the circumstances.
Dispensing expired prescriptions
35. Between approximately 20 August 2021 and 17 February 2022, in the quantities
and on the occasions as set out in Annexure G, the
practitioner inappropriately
dispensed to various patients, the following drugs:
a. the Schedule 8 drug, Endone (oxycodone hydrochloride);
b. the Schedule 4D drugs:
i. Diazepam;
ii. Lorazepam;
iii. Oxazepam;
iv. Pregabalin;
v. Quetiapine;
vi. Temazepam;
vii. Tramadol hydrochloride,
in circumstances where the drugs were dispensed on prescriptions that had passed
their 6-month expiry date.”
his amended reply to the application for disciplinary findings, Mr Haloob admits
the facts set out above, save that he clarified
that he would typically work
five days per week (Monday, Tuesday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday), not every day.
Mr Haloob also admits
that his conduct constituted unsatisfactory professional
conduct and professional misconduct.
Haloob did not admit to issuing and dispensing unauthorised repeat prescriptions
for drugs of addiction within the meaning of the
PTGA, being drugs contained
within Schedule 8 of the Poisons List proclaimed under the PTGA,
particular 35 above of the amended complaint). This was a result of the way the
issue was pleaded. During the course of the
hearing this issue was resolved and
the allegation made by the Commission in respect of the Schedule 8 drug Endone,
was limited to
one occasion “dispensing drugs on expired
prescriptions” which Mr Haloob admitted.
Evidence before
the Tribunal
Commission filed a two volume bundle of documents including: pharmacy dispensing
records for each of the patients; dispensing
records for expired prescriptions;
a report by the PRU dated 7 April 2022; correspondence between the Commissioner
and Mr Haloob,
a transcript of interview conducted under s 150; reasons for
decision by the Council; the monthly reports of Mr Cross and reflections
Haloob from the date the conditions were first imposed; and an expert report
from a senior lecturer in pharmacy practice, Dr
Helen Benson from the University
of Technology, Sydney. A supplementary bundle of material was filed which
included evidentiary certificates,
as well as an Amended Complaint. Opening and
closing written submissions were also provided.
Haloob filed some documents including a statement by him, his reply and opening
and closing written submissions.
Haloob was the only witness cross-examined at the hearing.
relevant legal principles
principles relevant to disciplinary proceedings under the National Law are
uncontroversial, with the overarching principles found
s 3A. Section 3A mandates that in determining proceedings the Tribunal has
as its paramount consideration, the protection
of the health and safety of the
Tribunal may exercise the disciplinary powers conferred by Subdiv 6 of Div 3 of
of the National Law if
(1) it finds the subject matter of the complaint to have been proven; or
(2) the practitioner admits to it in writing to the Tribunal: National Law, s
Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence in these proceedings (National
Law, cl 2 of Sch 5D) and the Commission bears the
onus of proving the complaints
against Mr Haloob on the balance of probabilities.
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct
139B of the National Law provides a detailed list of behaviours that are covered
by the term “unsatisfactory professional
conduct” in relation to
registered health practitioners in NSW.
139B(1)(a) and/or s 139B(1)(l); are the relevant paragraphs regarding the
complaint against Mr Haloob, which provide as follows:
139B Meaning of “unsatisfactory professional
conduct” of registered health practitioner generally [NSW]
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
of a registered
health practitioner includes each of the following—
(a) Conduct significantly below reasonable standard
Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of the
practitioner’s
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience.
(l) Other improper or unethical conduct
Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported
practice of the practitioner’s profession.
determination of whether conduct was significantly below the reasonable standard
under s 139B(1)(a) requires an evaluative process,
and was discussed by the
Tribunal in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Amalakumar
NSWCATOD 173
as follows:
“Determining whether the ‘knowledge, skill or judgment’
possessed by a practitioner, or the ‘care exercised’
practitioner is significantly below the standard reasonably expected, in order
for the elements of s 139B(1)(a) to be established,
requires the undertaking of
an evaluative process. A benchmark standard which is expected of practitioners
in the relevant field
must be ascertained, and then the conduct which has been
proven against the practitioner the subject of the disciplinary action,
assessed against that standard. If the conduct is considered to be below the
standard arrived at, then a further evaluation
must be made as to whether the
conduct is significantly below that standard. If that conduct is assessed to be
significantly below
the standard reasonably expected, then there is no
discretion as to whether that conduct is characterised as unsatisfactory
professional
conduct. The section designates it as such.”
the context of s 139B(1)(l) the Tribunal considered the meaning of improper and
unethical in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Bolton
[2021] NSWCATOD
, with which we agree and adopt here. The Tribunal stated:
“[86] The words ‘unethical or ‘improper’ are not defined
in the National Law. The
Macquarie Dictionary
‘improper’ relevantly as ‘not in accordance with propriety of
behaviour, manners etc’ or ‘abnormal
or irregular’ and
‘unethical’ as 1. ‘contrary to moral precept; immoral’
and 2. ‘in contravention
of some code of professional conduct.’
[87] Assistance in determining what is meant by ‘improper’ can also
be gained from what the High Court of Australia said
of the word
‘impropriety’ in
R v Byrnes & Hopwood
[1995] HCA 1.
conduct is not in conformity with standards of professional conduct and practice
it can be seen as improper.”
Health Care Complaints Commission v Nguyen
[2018] NSWCATOD 168
the Tribunal considered the scope of ‘improper conduct’ in s
139B(1)(l) stating at [47]-[49]:
‘The High Court has noted that “improper” is not a term of
The Queen v Byrnes
[1995] HCA 1
(1995) 183 CLR 501
at 514, citing
(1986) 43 SASR 410
at 514-5, Brennan,
Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ explained the concept of impropriety as follows:
“Impropriety does not depend on the alleged offender’s consciousness
of impropriety. Impropriety consists in a breach
of the standards of conduct
that would be expected of a person in the position of the alleged offender by
reasonable persons with
knowledge of the duties, powers and authority of the
position and the circumstances of the case.”
This approach to determining whether conduct is ‘improper’ has been
adopted in a disciplinary context in numerous cases,
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Liu
[2016] NSWCATOD 133
and [55] and the
cases there cited.’”
Professional
misconduct is defined in s 139E of the National Law as follows:
Meaning of “professional misconduct”
For the purposes of this Law,
professional misconduct
registered health practitioner means—
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration; or
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct
that, when the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the
practitioner’s registration.
term “professional misconduct” for the purposes of the National Law,
is thus a category of “unsatisfactory professional
conduct” which is
sufficiently serious to justify suspension or cancellation:
Chen v Health
Care Complaints Commission
(2017) 95 NSWLR 334
[2017] NSWCA 186
(Basten JA) (“
). The exercise involves an evaluative
judgment to be made by the Tribunal as to the nature and seriousness of the
Health Care Complaints Commission v Robinson
[2022] NSWCA 164
noted at [35] that the “seriousness of the conduct” concerns not
only acts or omissions, but also the circumstances
of their occurring.
Consideration
Complaint One
Mr Haloob has admitted Complaint One in writing, pursuant to s 149 of the
National Law, we find that he is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct
under ss 139B(1)(a) and 139B(1)(l) of the National Law. We would have made the
same findings on the evidence
before us, in any event, for the reasons that
Haloob gave evidence in a written statement and in cross-examination about the
circumstances surrounding the issue of unauthorised
repeat prescriptions and
dispensing drugs to patients as set out below.
A was a repeat customer at the pharmacy and a person of limited mobility.
Despite the ordinary practice of receiving prescriptions
with repeats already on
them, when Patient A presented with prescriptions without repeats, Mr Haloob
believed Patient A’s assertion
(on numerous occasions) that the treating
doctor must have forgotten to include the repeat. Mr Haloob said he felt
sympathy for
Patient A including because Patient A had difficulties physically
attending the pharmacy and the doctor. Mr Haloob said that he believed
was a “genuine patient in genuine clinical need”.
Consequently,
Mr Haloob generated repeat prescriptions for Patient A and dispensed a
significant quantity of drugs (often on the same
date). He did not make any
enquiries with Patient A’s general practitioner. The quantity of drugs
dispensed to Patient A is
unusually excessive.
Haloob also said that in respect of the issue of dispensing Schedule 4 and
Schedule 4D drugs in significant quantities, Patient
A told Mr Haloob in 2020
that he was going to Lebanon for several months to visit family and that he
would not have access to medication
but also, given the COVID-19 Pandemic, he
was concerned about being stuck there without medication. Mr Haloob said that it
this basis that he dispensed the significant quantity of Schedule 4D and
Schedule 4 drugs. However, this is inexplicable on the evidence
for this reason.
Having been told on one occasion that Patient A was going to Lebanon for six
months, Patient A continued to visit
the pharmacy on repeated occasions directly
afterwards. The inference from the records is that Patient A did not go to
Lebanon for
several months as he was continuously attending the pharmacy and
having the drugs dispensed. Even if Mr Haloob thought, on the first
when Patient A requested the drugs to be dispensed in bulk, that this was
because of pending travel, there is no explanation
for why that pattern
continued over the next two years.
cross-examination Mr Haloob could not remember why he did not contact Patient
A’s treating doctor about the prescriptions.
He also said that at that
time he did not understand that it was the doctor’s sole responsibility to
work out how much medication
a patient required and then prescribe that
medication. He said that at that time he should have been, but was not, privy to
the rules and regulations governing repeat prescriptions or that
dispensing of drugs in large quantities was abusable.
Mr Haloob’s written statement he said he could not recall any
circumstances or information provided by Patient B which caused
him to issue
unauthorised repeat prescriptions of Seroquel XR 400mg on 13 June 2021 and
dispensing them between 10 July 2020 and
23 October 2023.
explained it as follows:
“When a medicine to be dispensed was selected in the Pharmacy’s
dispensing software, ‘Aquarius’ by ‘Simple
Retail, the field
for the prescription’s number of repeats was automatically filled as
‘5’. If a prescription was
issued with less than 5 repeats, the
software required the pharmacist to manually change this automatically filled
field. If this
field is not manually changed, the prescription was recorded
and/or dispensed with 5 repeats.
I believe that, on 13 June 2021, I may have failed to manually change this
field, thereby creating 5 additional repeats, which were
then dispensed. This
error was then compounded in dispensing the medication each time after that. I
recognise that this was inappropriate,
both in the issuing of the repeat and the
dispensing of the medication on those unauthorized repeats. I was also unaware
at the time
that Seroquel was a schedule 4D drug.”
respect of the issue of significant quantities of drugs to Patient B, Mr Haloob
recalled that in relation to the drug Lipitor,
Patient B had different general
practitioners; was taking different dosages of Lipitor; was suffering some side
effects from Lipitor
80 but that Lipitor 20 was not enough to reduce cholesterol
so was alternating between dosages.
cross-examination Mr Haloob was initially equivocal about whether he knew the
procedure around the process issuing repeat scripts.
respect of Patient C, again Mr Haloob could not remember specific details about
how he dispensed unauthorised repeats of 20 prescriptions
on two occasions: 13
September 2021 and 1 November 2021. However, he did recall that Patient C was
travelling to Iraq and might not
have been returning to Australia which is why
early dispensing of medicine was required. The quantity dispensed to Patient C
two occasions was significant. On 1 November 2020 for example, 153
medications were issued to Patient C. Mr Haloob said he provided
quantities because Patient C needed them overseas. He said he did not know that
Pregabalin was a Schedule 4D drug; did not
know the effect stockpiling
medication might have on the PBS; and did not question the amounts of drugs
being requested – he
just dispensed them on the basis Patient C did not
know when he might return to Australia.
Haloob did not recall the specific circumstances of issuing unauthorised repeat
prescriptions on four occasions to Patient D nor
dispensing unauthorised repeats
between 22 August 2021 and 2 January 2022. He thought he might have
inadvertently dispensed inaccurately
or failed to manually change the field in
the software.
Haloob did recall however that he felt threatened and intimidated by Patient D
who behaved in a verbally loud and physically aggressive
manner. Patient D would
push ahead of others in line, accuse pharmacy staff of losing repeats and in
those circumstances Mr Haloob
would dispense half a packet or a few tables as an
“owing script” and ask the doctor to issue a script. Mr Haloob could
not recall if this was what caused the issue of the unauthorised repeats or
whether it was unrelated to the dates the subject of
the Complaint.
Mr Haloob could not recall the specific circumstances that led to him issuing
unauthorised prescriptions to Patient E or the
inappropriate dispensing of those
repeats, he recounted that Patient E was a person who presented in a very rushed
manner often talking
over Mr Haloob and not listening to him. Patient E would
frequently come in during “rush hour” and would be quite pushy
wanting to get out as quickly as possible. He felt this was a contributing
factor to him making mistakes.
his written statement, Mr Haloob surmised that he might have failed to manually
change the field in the dispensing software for
Patient E. However, in
cross-examination he could not recall exactly.
Mr Haloob had no recollection of the circumstances in which he issued
unauthorised repeats and dispensed drugs to Patient F.
He said he did little
thinking when he was dispensing and so was unaware.
respect of the issue of dispensing medications on expired prescriptions, Mr
Haloob acknowledged that most of the drugs were Pregabalin
or Seroquel which he
said he was unaware had become Schedule 4D drugs and so did not realise they
only had a six month expiry on
them. He otherwise stated he did not recall how
he came to dispense the other Schedule 4D drugs (such as the benzodiazepines)
than to say “it was an unacceptable mistake”. Similarly with
the dispensing of Endone on 19 September 2021 on a prescription
expired by seven days, he could not recall how that happened but said it must
have been an error or a computer error.
Unauthorised
pressed further in cross-examination and in particular in answering questions by
the Tribunal about the method of generating
unauthorised prescriptions from
escripts, Mr Haloob admitted that his signature was on the unauthorised scripts
and ultimately accepted
that the system does not change the prescription date
itself for escripts but that this has to be manually overridden and then the
script signed – in other words they are not the result of a computer
number of these signed scripts were put before him and he was asked a number of
questions about how the scripts came to be falsified.
Mr Haloob objected to
answering some questions on the basis it might incriminate him and he was
ultimately given a certificate under
Evidence Act 1995
in relation to evidence given by him about the falsification and dispensing of
repeat prescriptions.
Haloob then accepted the scripts had been manipulated and manually changed but
said either his employee had prepared them and put
them in front of him to sign
or the employee had forged his signature. He could not explain
Mr Haloob as a witness
cross-examination, Mr Haloob was repeatedly questioned about his inability to
remember the circumstances surrounding his conduct.
His answers on every
occasion were denials of knowledge or awareness about why he engaged in this
conduct or how it happened except
to say that he was very remorseful and
ashamed; that he was reckless, dangerous and stupid; that he was burnt out at
work getting
little sleep or food; that the disciplinary action had caused him
significant emotional pain; that he feels he has let himself and
down; he has learned that he is not the person he thought he was; that he would
never put himself in that situation again;
and that prior to his suspension, he
had a significant lack of competence, knowledge, understanding, including of the
legislation,
but that he has now become knowledgeable through all the hours
spent in professional development courses and time being supervised.
words, on most occasions when asked to explain events and pharmaceutical
practices engaged in at the relevant time, Mr Haloob’s
default position
was to express deep regret, indicate he was being as honest as he could but not
directly answer the question. On
more than one occasion we had to ask him to
answer the question he was asked rather than explain what he now knows and what
now do in the same situation.
circumstances where Mr Haloob has been a practitioner for over 18 years and the
PTGA and Poisons Guide have been in effect since
at least 1996, we find Mr
Haloob’s explanations lacked credibility. We do not accept that he had no
idea or did not appreciate
the regulations or rules at that time. We perceived
his evidence as being self-serving.
also consider, from the evidence Mr Haloob gave, that he was withholding
information relevant to the disposition of this matter.
That may have been as a
result of the fact that there are still ongoing investigations into his conduct
by the Australian Government
Solicitor (into issues around the PBS). It might
also have been, as Mr Haloob contended, because he lacked attention, education
awareness at the time of his conduct. We find that Mr Haloob being unable to
remember such significant shortfalls in pharmaceutical
practice is implausible
and we do not accept his evidence on this. Equally we do not accept his excuse
that he had no knowledge of
his professional obligations, or the regulations,
and was just not paying attention.
Commission submits that the issuing of unauthorised repeat prescriptions was
conduct which fell significantly below the expected
standard. This was supported
by the findings of Dr Benson that the conduct was significantly below the
expected standard of a dispensing
pharmacist and also that of a pharmacist
proprietor of an equivalent level of training and experience. Dr Benson’s
noted that the issuing of unauthorised repeats “puts the pharmacist
in the role of prescriber” which the PRGR legislation
does not allow; and
that Mr Haloob failed to make sufficient inquiries of the patients before he
issued Schedule 4 drugs in large
quantities. In addition, Dr Benson’s
evidence was to the effect that repeated instances of dispensing drugs on
expired prescriptions
over a period of six months was outside the scope of the
regulatory framework and was conduct significantly below the expected standard.
We note Mr Haloob also agreed his conduct was “well well below the
standard” expected of someone in his position.
our view, Mr Haloob’s conduct was improper, not inadvertent, showed
reckless disregard of his obligations and was significantly
below the standards
expected of pharmacists. We find that Mr Haloob engaged in unsatisfactory
professional conduct under the National
Law, s 139B(1)(a) and
Complaint Two
Two is that Mr Haloob engaged in professional misconduct under the National Law,
s 139E and relies on the particulars to
Complaint One.
while Mr Haloob has admitted Complaint Two, we find the particularised conduct
is established by the evidence.
find that Mr Haloob’s conduct involved unsatisfactory professional conduct
of a sufficiently serious nature to justify suspension
or cancellation of his
registration as:
(1) The conduct occurred over a number of years;
(2) It involved repeated breaches and multiple patients;
(3) The quantity of restricted substances which were dispensed by Mr Haloob to
various patients was significant: often multiple packs
of the same substances
were dispensed on the same day; multiple instances of the same substances were
dispensed in the same month;
and dispensing of substances within short intervals
of each other. In particular, Mr Haloob dispensed to Patient A:
(a) 1,064 capsules of duloxetine 60mg 38 units of 28 capsules over a 705 day
(b) 784 capsules of venlafaxine 150mg (28 units of 28 capsules) and 3,024
capsules of venlafaxine 75mg (108 units of 28 capsules)
over a 719 day
(c) 7,800 tablets of valproate 500mcg EC (78 units of 100 tablets) over a 687
day period;
(d) 86 units of Seretide 500mcg/50mcg Accuhaler over a 714 day period;
(e) 4,984 capsules of pregabalin 150 mg (89 units of 56 capsules) over a 705 day
(f) 2,968 capsules of pregabalin 75mg (53 units of 56 capsules) ovr a 719 day
(g) 2,070 tablets of quetiapine 100mg (23 boxes of 90 tablets) over a 671 day
is a core responsibility of a pharmacist to ensure that drugs (particularly
drugs on the Poisons List), are dispensed appropriately.
Mr Haloob did not so
do. Rather, he dispensed drugs on unauthorised prescriptions including in
circumstances where no contact was
made to the prescriber who issued the
prescriptions. Further, as submitted by the Commission, Mr Haloob’s
purported ignorance
of pregabalin and quetiapine being included in Schedule 4D
drugs, and his dispensing of these substances in excessive quantities
patients, demonstrated a serious lack of knowledge and care for substances that
are liable to be misused, abused and trafficked
with a disregard of the risk of
potential accidental overdose and misadventure.
noted above, in cross-examination, Mr Haloob was unable to adequately explain
why he engaged in the conduct. He gave various excuses
including a lack of
attention to what he was doing; unawareness of his responsibilities and
obligations under the various pharmaceutical
guidelines due to his inability to
keep up with continuing professional development; distraction in the form of his
phone and internet;
being overworked and overwhelmed as the only practitioner on
duty; and feeling sorry for patients who would otherwise have to go
doctor to have repeats issued and/or patients who were travelling overseas and
needed medication because of the extended
period of travel.
had difficulty accepting his evidence in this regard. He presented as a witness
who did not want to admit that he had any knowledge
of what he was doing.
Further, some of his excuses lack cogency. For example, Mr Haloob is an
experienced pharmacist of over 18 years.
Lack of knowledge of process and
procedure in conformity with pharmaceutical guidelines might be more readily
accepted in someone
with little experience but that was not the case here.
Further, his excuse that he dispensed large quantities to Patient A in
circumstances
where Patient A was leaving for overseas with an indefinite return
date was inexplicable given Mr Haloob continued to dispense large
quantities to
Patient A over the balance of the period.
our view, Mr Haloob showed a reckless disregard and gross dereliction of his
obligations.
find that Mr Haloob’s conduct, either considered individually or
considered cumulatively, constitutes professional misconduct.
Complaint Two is
established on the evidence.
What if any disciplinary orders
should be made?
established each of Complaints, the parties have requested the Tribunal to
determine what protective orders should be made.
disciplinary powers available to the Tribunal where a complaint is found proven
are contained in
, Div 3, Subdiv 6 of the National Law. They include the
power to caution, reprimand and counsel a practitioner and impose conditions
the practitioner’s registration. Where, as in this case, the Tribunal is
satisfied the practitioner is guilty of professional
misconduct, the Tribunal
may suspend the practitioner’s registration for a specified period or
cancel their registration: s
149C(1) of the National Law.
principles underlying the purpose of protective orders was summarised by
President Wright J in
Health Care Complaints Commission v Dr Della Bruna
[2014] NSWCATOD 31
as follows:
“[88] In determining the appropriate protective orders that it should make
in this matter, the Tribunal is guided by the following
considerations:
(1) In the exercise of its functions under Subdivision 6 of Division 3 of
of the National Law, the protection of the health and safety of the public must
be the Tribunal's paramount consideration - s 3A
of the National Law.
(2) Disciplinary proceedings against members of a profession are intended to
maintain proper ethical and professional standards,
primarily for the protection
of the public but also for the protection of the profession -
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Litchfield
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630 at 637,
(3) The public interests served by protective orders include, indirectly, the
standing of the medical profession and the maintenance
of public confidence in
the high standards of medical practitioners –
Prakash v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
(4) Protective orders also involve an element of deterrence or, to put it more
positively, encouragement to other practitioners to
recognise the importance of
complying with professional standards and the risks of failing to do so –
Prakash v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2006] NSWCA 153
(5) Although the specific purpose for which the Tribunal makes orders is
protective of the public interest and not punitive with
respect to the
practitioner, that is not to deny that such orders may be punitive in effect and
that punitive effect may be relevant
in formulating a protective order -
v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 80
Director General, Department of Ageing, Disability and Home Care v Lambert
[2009] NSWCA 102
(2009) 74 NSWLR 523
Commission seeks orders from the Tribunal under the National Law, s 149C(1)(b)
for the cancellation of Mr Haloob’s registration,
with a non-review period
of 12 months. Mr Haloob submitted that a combination of reprimands and
conditions would be appropriate protective
orders; or at the higher end, a
suspension.
Haloob submits that his diligence and level of knowledge, though clearly below
standard and not to be excused, was “not informed
by any moral
turpitude”. He asked that the Tribunal be cautious in the imposition of
protective orders, and to undertake a
consideration of the severity of the
conduct, but also “what informed or caused it and the capacity for that to
be remedied”.
Haloob asserts that his evidence demonstrates that he is aware of the
seriousness of his conduct and he does not attempt to evade
responsibility for
it. He submits that in addition to his written statement and oral evidence, his
accounts of his conduct and his
attitudes towards it were clear and remorseful
from the beginning of the investigation including on:
(1) 31 March 2022 at the interview with the PRU;
(2) 28 April 2022 at the
(3) 31 October 2022 at the s 150A hearing;
(4) 23 March 2023 at the s 34A interview with the Commission;
(5) 21 February 2024 at the second s 150A hearing;
(6) 25 April 2024 in Mr Haloob’s s 40 submissions to the Commission.
Haloob submits that his misconduct was caused by an “unfortunate mix of a
lack of professional development and professional
isolation”; and that he
did not fully understand the extent of his wrongdoing, nor the possible
consequences of it.
despite the Commission’s submissions to the contrary, Mr Haloob asserts
that he has provided an adequate explanation
for his conduct – it is
consistent with what he recalls and he has not attempted to make up a story to
also consistent with his responses in the hearings listed
Haloob submits that his conduct since first being suspended in April 2022 also
speaks to his remorse for his misconduct. After
six months’ suspension, Mr
Haloob was allowed to practise with conditions. Those conditions were eased and
replaced at a further
hearing on 21 February 2024.
Michael Cross, the approved supervisor for Mr Haloob, has written 20 supervision
reports since his appointment on 16 November 2022.
Those reports show that Mr
Haloob has made a significant effort to learn from his mistakes and
“reposition himself as a reliable,
educated and ethical health
practitioner”. Mr Haloob relies on the following comment from Mr Cross
(emphasis indicated by underlining),
dated 4 November 2024:
“[Mr Haloob] had done an amazing amount of work to prove to the HCCC that
he has total insight into what he did wrong and has
taken steps to ensure that
it cannot happen again.
Nevertheless, he will do everything he can to assure the NCAT panel that he is
not a danger to the public. Evidence of this is the
amount of CPD he has already
done this year.”
Haloob submits that Mr Cross’s comment above is supported by the evidence
before the Tribunal, including his completion of
964 units of continuing
professional development programs since 2022, and in his self-reflections,
evidenced by documents submitted
to the various hearings, the
and in Mr Haloob’s statement.
Haloob understands that the Tribunal must make orders to adequately reflect the
seriousness of his conduct, but submits that the
Tribunal does not need to be
concerned that there is any risk to the public in allowing him to practise in
the future.
Commission contended that Mr Haloob offered inadequate explanations in the
witness box for his conduct. While he has expressed
contrition, Mr
Haloob’s reflection and development do not address the concerns raised by
the deeper gaps in his skillset and
attitude demonstrated by the seriousness of
the conduct which occurred. The Commissioner submitted that the facts support a
cancellation
order and given the seriousness of the conduct it also attracts
considerations of general deterrence noting that pharmacists “have
significant gatekeeping function for the proper dispensation of drugs including
for the safety of patients to regulate the efficient
supply of drugs and to
maintain the integrity of the PBS which is publicly funded.” It was also
submitted by the Commission
that a 12 month non-review period is necessary for
the protection of the public and would send a clear message to the public, the
profession and Mr Haloob about the professional standards which are to be
maintained.
have weighed up the evidence and the submissions made.
our view Mr Haloob’s conduct was of a serious nature. It involved
undermining a system which safeguards patients and relies
on the integrity and
professionalism of pharmacists. Mr Haloob failed in this regard.
also consider that Mr Haloob has taken full responsibility for his conduct, is
remorseful and has shown a degree of insight into
his wrongdoing. The nature and
extent of the education and upskilling Mr Haloob has undertaken over the past
three years since suspension
is significant and shows that he has developed
mechanisms to deal both ethically or procedurally with difficult patients and
situations.
Mr Haloob has addressed his lack of education and awareness and his
reflections following continuing professional development sessions
demonstrate
knowledge gained and skills to be implemented. The ongoing supervision and
guidance that Mr Haloob has received from
Mr Cross, over an extensive period of
time, has been invaluable. Mr Haloob has demonstrated a level of insight and
development (as
Mr Cross has recorded) that gives us confidence that this
conduct will not be repeated.
have weighed these considerations against the seriousness of the conduct of Mr
Haloob and his inability to give answers, which,
as noted above, we considered
were guarded and self-serving. We also acknowledge and consider that any
protective orders need to
take into account both general and specific
deterrence. It is important that Mr Haloob’s conduct be denounced which
both through publication of these reasons and the imposition of the
orders and conditions we make.
have decided that the protective function is best served by ordering that Mr
Haloob be suspended for six months from the date of
this decision following
which several conditions will be imposed on Mr Haloob’s registration
including a period of Category
B supervision and additional review by the
reaching this decision we are influenced by the significant CPDs undertaken by
Mr Haloob and supervision by Mr Cross over a period
of three years. Mr
Haloob’s registration has been suspended for a considerable period already
and during that period he has
taken steps to reform himself and his approach to
practice. This process has opened his eyes as to the seriousness of his conduct
and produced a level of insight that did not previously exist:
Qasim v Health
Care Complaints Commission
[2015] NSWCA 282
per Meagher JA (McColl
JA at [1] and Ward JA at [91] agreeing. General deterrence however calls for a
clear message to the profession
and the public that this kind of behaviour is
unacceptable and is likely to have an adverse impact on registration. Further,
noting our impression of Mr Haloob in cross-examination, the conditions on
his registration after the period of suspension are to
further protect the
public from any remaining risk, even if minimal, from the conduct being
Commission seeks its costs as assessed or agreed. In exercising the power to
award costs conferred by cl 13, Sch 5D of the National
Law, the general rule is
that costs follow the event unless there has been some disentitling conduct by
the successful party.
have not identified any disentitling conduct of the Commission (nor has any been
contended). Costs should be awarded in the Commission's
(1) Under s 149(C)(1) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law, the
Respondent’s registration is suspended for a period
of six months from the
date of this decision.
(2) Under s 149A(1)(b) of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law the
following conditions are imposed on the Respondent’s
registration at the
expiry of the period of suspension in order (1) above:
(a) Not to practise as pharmacist in charge.
(b) To practise under Category B supervision in accordance with the Pharmacy
Council of NSW’s Compliance Policy – Supervision
(as varied from
time to time) and as subsequently determined by the appropriate review body.
(c) Pharmacy Council of New South Wales is the appropriate review body.
(d) After a period of six months of supervised practice, the Respondent is to
undergo a performance review conducted by a suitable
pharmacist appointed by the
Pharmacy Council after which the condition of Category B supervised practice is
to be reviewed by the
Pharmacy Council of NSW.
(3) The Respondent is to pay the costs of the Commission as agreed or
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
02 October 2025 - Coversheet: "(e)" amended to (3).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (391 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter