URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWRT/2002/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:11:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department of Housing v Quilla [2002] NSWRT 26 (22 February 2002)
Department of Housing v Quilla
[2002] NSWRT 26
(22 February
File No 01/39731
RESIDENTIAL TRIBUNAL
: NSW Department Of
Housing (Landlord)
: Quilla (Tenant)
APPLICATION
For termination and possession
APPEARANCES
: Catherine Quinn
for Department of Housing;
Mr Quilla appeared in person
: 22 October 2001; 12 November 2001; 15 January
Legislative Provisions:
Residential Tenancies
Residential Tribunal Act
‘illegal use’
[1938] HCA 34
[1938] 60 CLR 336
The Tribunal is not satisfied that the tenant
has used or caused or permitted the use of the residential premises for an
illegal purpose.
The notice of termination, in so far as it is based on a
breach of the obligation under the residential tenancy agreement not to
the premises is not valid.
The Tribunal is satisfied that the tenant was
more than 14 days in arrears of rent at the date of the service of the notice of
termination.
The notice of termination based on that ground is therefore valid.
The Tribunal further finds that the landlord and tenant have
arrangement for the repayment of arrears at a rate which is acceptable to both
On 15 January 2002 the following
orders were made.
As the Tribunal is satisfied that a breach of the
agreement has occurred namely, rent arrears:
1. The tenant, Mr
QUILLA, is to pay the landlord, NSW LAND & HOUSING CORPORATION, Level 9,
23-31 Moore Street, LIVERPOOL NSW 2170,
the sum of $277.62 for rent owed under
the terms of the residential tenancy agreement for the period from 30/11/2001 to
by instalments of $20.00 per fortnight next payment
NOTE: If the other party does not comply with the order
to pay money, a certified copy of the above money order may be obtained from
Tribunal for the purpose of enforcement action through the Local
2. Additionally, the tenant, Mr QUILLA, is to pay rebated
rent, presently $83.40 per fortnight, on the Thursday of each fortnight,
payment due 17/1/2002, and once the arrears are paid in full, to pay rent in
accordance with the residential tenancy agreement,
being one week in
3. If these orders are not complied with then at any time
before 12/4/2002 the landlord may request the re-listing of the application
determine whether the tenancy agreement should be terminated on the basis of
arrears only.
4. The total amount under orders 1 & 2 for rent
and arrears is payable by instalments of $103.40 per fortnight next payment
5. The application for termination and possession based
on illegal use is dismissed because the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to
the application because there is no evidence to support allegation of
using premises for illegal purpose.
REASONS FOR DECISION
2. APPLICATION
This was an application by the NSW
Department of Housing as landlord for termination of the lease and possession of
the premises on
the grounds that the tenant had used or permitted the use of the
premises for illegal purposes. Alternatively, that the tenant was
in arrears of
rent for a period in excess of 14
3. REPRESENTATION
Ms Catherine Quinn of the
Department of Housing appeared on behalf of the landlord; the tenant appeared in
4. PROCEEDINGS
On 22 October 2001 the matter came
before me and interim orders were made; on 12 November 2001 the matter came for
hearing before
another Member and further interim orders were made. On 15
January 2002 the matter was heard and a decision given orally to the
5. JURISDICTION
The landlord produced a
residential tenancy agreement dated 9 August 1995 in respect of these premises
and between the Department
of Housing as landlord and Mr Quilla as tenant. The
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine this
application.
6. APPLICANT’S EVIDENCE AND
SUBMISSIONS
Ms Quinn produced evidence that the rent was paid to 29
November 2001, with arrears of $277.62 [being 46 days] at the date of the
hearing. The tenant is currently paying rent on time and $20 per fortnight
towards the arrears. The landlord is willing to accept
this as a reasonable
repayment of the arrears and was not pursuing termination on the grounds of rent
The landlord produced documents provided by the NSW Police
Service as follows:
Facts Sheet H1252675 - indicating
that a Mr C was charged with various drug offences and receiving stolen property
in relation to
the relevant
COPS event reference no. E
12301648 in relation to the same event; and containing some admissions and
allegations by Mr C;
Facts sheet
H12886336 - indicating Mr Quilla was charged with various drug offences at
different premises
Charge Sheet Bench
copy, charge no. H 12886336 - indicating the charges laid against Mr Quilla,
being the same offences as in the
above Facts
Facts Sheet H13457350 -
indicating Mr Quilla was charged with failing to comply with bail
conditions;
COPS event reference no.
E32533295 - indicating the outcome of three search warrant
executions;
COPS event reference no.
E8305779 - with regard to complaints against Mr
Senior Constable Andrew Klotz gave evidence on behalf
of the landlord as follows:
He has had prior dealings with Mr Quilla, who
is known to Redfern Police for involvement with drugs. A search warrant was
for Mr Quilla’s premises which was executed on 22 August 2001.
The search warrant was obtained on the basis of information
received from a
number of sources that the premises were being used for the sale of
At the premises the police found a security grill, of a kind
stronger than usually to be found in the area. On the premises the police
one person and a large dog. Mr Quilla was not on the premises. The police
found a small amount of cannabis, some aluminium
foil, some white powder which
has not yet been analysed and quantity of cash.
The Police had been
investigating these premises and the tenant over a period of time, however the
operation was unsuccessful, and
the tenant has not been charged with supplying
drugs from these premises. There have been many complaints about this unit by
residents in the building. The complaints average about one per week,
sometimes, more sometimes less. Other tenants have said that
they have been
asked for drugs, and some of Mr Quilla’s visitors are said to be drug
Senior Constable Klotz said there have been a few calls from
other tenants stating that Mr Quilla has now moved his operations to
unit in the same building.
Ms Quinn sought to lead evidence that a caveat
has been placed on the title of a unit owned by Mr Quilla’s sister by the
Commission. However neither Ms Quinn nor Senior Constable Klotz was able
to provide any more information than the above.
Senior Constable Klotz
later gave evidence on the basis of information given to him over the telephone
that Mr C’s matter was
listed for mention on 29 January 2002.
Quinn sought to lead evidence from Senior Constable Klotz as to an interview
conducted with Mr C after his arrest. However that
interview was not conducted
by Senior Constable Klotz.
Mr Robert Holden, a team leader with the
Department of Housing in Waterloo gave evidence as follows:
He has been
working in social housing since 1986, he is in charge of 2,600 premises and has
14 people in his team, he is an experienced
officer. He knows both Mr Quilla
and his mother, and knows their premises, both on the 10
the same complex. He has received complaints about Mr Quilla’s visitors,
the complainants think he is selling drugs
from the premises. The situation has
deteriorated in the past 12 months.
Mr Holden stated that he had not
spoken to Mr Quilla about any complaints made against him in the last six
months. His staff have
been told to do so. He does not know if this has
happened. There have been fewer complaints recently. He feels an obligation to
other residents to protect their quiet enjoyment.
He stated that the
security door found by the Police at the time of the search of the premises has
been removed.
In answer to a question by Mr Quilla Mr Holden stated that
the complaints from other residents related directly to people visiting
Quilla’s unit, that his visitors broke windows, urinated in the lifts etc.
Mr Holden agreed that that these behaviours were
a problem in the complex and
the area, and not confined to Mr Quilla’s visitors.
Quinn’s submitted that I should be satisfied that the premises had been
used for illegal purposes relying on the following;
That there had been
complaints about Mr Quilla to the Department of Housing and the Police Service;
Mr Quilla was known to Redfern
Police; that the police had enough evidence to
obtain a search warrant; that Mr Quilla had installed an extra strong security
that Mr C was arrested and charged with supplying drugs from the premises.
Alternatively, I should be satisfied that Mr Quilla was using the
premises for illegal purposes because he had been charged with supplying
from other premises in the Waterloo area and I should look at evidence of a
propensity.
Further I should take into account the caveat placed on a
property belonging to Mr Quilla’s sister.
7. RESPONDENT’S
Mr Quilla gave evidence briefly as follows:
‘paraquad’ on 22 August 2001. He had never permitted anyone to use
his premises to supply drugs. He was unclear
as to why all the evidence about
Mr C had been lead by the Department, he thought this matter was about his use
of his premises.
He wanted to continue living where he was.
DISCUSSION AND
The landlord served a notice of termination based on
a breach of section 23(1)(a) of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1987
incorporated into the residential tenancy agreement) which reads as
23 (1) It is a term of every residential tenancy agreement
(a) the tenant shall not use the residential premises, or cause
or permit the premises to be used, for any illegal purpose.
contains several requirements, which the landlord must prove on the balance of
probabilities. I bear in mind Latham CJ’s
[1938] HCA 34
[[1938] 60 CLR 336
at 343-344] "the standard of proof
required by a cautious and responsible tribunal will naturally vary in
accordance with the seriousness
or importance of the issue". The allegation in
this case, that the tenant was using or allowing the premises to be used for an
purpose, to wit drug dealing, is a very serious one.
matter for the landlord to prove, at the requisite standard, is that the
premises were in fact being used for an illegal
purpose. The evidence for the
alleged illegal use was:
that of Snr Constable Klotz that police
had received a number of complaints about drugs being sold from the premises,
that there was
a stronger than usual security door on the premises, and that Mr
C had been charged with supplying prohibited drugs from the premises
possessing prohibited drugs at the premises and had made various admissions and
allegations in relation to that matter;
that of Mr Holden, that the Department
of Housing had received numerous complaints about drugs being sold from the
Complaints by neighbours that drugs are being sold
indicates that the neighbours are worried about what is happening in their
They are not, of themselves, proof that drugs are in fact being sold.
A stronger than usual security door may be an indication that the
premises are being used to supply drugs, but it is not without more
that fact. This is especially the case in an area where many premises would be
protected by security doors, and where crime
is an ongoing issue for the
residents. It would be fair to say that Waterloo is such an area.
has been charged with supplying prohibited drugs from the premises. At the date
that this matter was heard the criminal charges
had not yet been determined.
The Tribunal offered an adjournment to allow for the criminal matter to be
finalised, but this was
not accepted by the landlord – in my opinion
rightly. The police found 2 grams of cannabis, that is material which was
admitted by Mr C to be cannabis. The police also found a bag
containing a large quantity of a white powder. This substance has
analysed. The police further found numerous pieces of cut up aluminium foil.
Mr C allegedly admitted that he had been
supplying cocaine from the premises,
with the permission and at the instigation of Mr Quilla.
I note that Mr C
had not been found guilty on any of the charges relating to the premises at the
date of the hearing. There is no
evidence before the Tribunal that the white
powder was cocaine. Neither Mr C nor the police officer conducting the
interview with
him were present at the Tribunal hearing.
On the evidence
provided by the landlord directly related to the premises I can not be
satisfied, on the balance of probabilities,
that the premises had been used for
illegal purposes.
That being the case, the issue of ‘causing or
permitting’ the premises to be used for an illegal purpose does not arise.
However, as there was some evidence on that matter I will deal with it very
briefly. The landlord’s evidence that Mr Quilla
had ‘caused or
permitted’ the use of the premises for illegal purposes is the alleged
statement of Mr C at his record
of interview. I note that the Tribunal is not
bound by the rules of evidence,(see s 27(2),
Residential Tribunal Act
), however the rules of evidence are of assistance in deciding what
weight should be given to evidence provided to the Tribunal.
The statement of
Mr C, not given on oath, with neither Mr C nor even the officer to whom it was
given present at the hearing, does
not carry as much weight as the sworn
statement of Mr Quilla. Hence, even if I had been satisfied that the premises
had been used
for illegal purposes by Mr C, I could not have been satisfied that
Mr Quilla caused or permitted this use.
With respect to the
‘indirect evidence’ of the use of the premises for an illegal
purpose, I reject the argument that
because Mr Quilla has been charged with
supplying drugs from other premises on a different date I could be satisfied
that he had
used the subject premises for an illegal purpose. Indeed it appears
to me that it is ‘evidence’ of this nature that
Latham CJ warned
op.cit] when he stated ‘No court should act
upon mere suspicion, surmise or guesswork in any case’.
equally little reliance on the evidence provided showing that a caveat had been
placed on the title of premises belonging
to Mr Quilla’s sister. There is
no evidence that the purchase price was provided by Mr Quilla; no evidence that
the purchase
price came from illegal activities and no evidence that those
[unsubstantiated] illegal activities were carried on at the subject
I note that the breach of the residential tenancy agreement is
not illegal behaviour
but use of the premises for an illegal
purpose. Further, in relation to the ‘evidence’ regarding other
illegal behaviour,
I note that the notice of termination provides particulars as
follows ‘on
22 August 2001
the Police executed a search warrant at
the above premises and as result of that search warrant charges were laid in
relation to
supplying prohibited drugs from the premises’.
notice of termination to be valid must ‘specify and give particulars of
the ground on which the notice is given’ [s
Residential
Tenancies Act
]. No argument was lead as to whether I am bound by the
particulars in deciding whether the notice of termination is valid, as distinct
from looking at surrounding allegations of illegality as part of the
‘circumstances of the case’. However it appears
to me that I am so
bound, otherwise the giving of particulars would seem to be
8. FINDINGS
The Tribunal is not satisfied that the
tenant has used or caused or permitted the use of the residential premises for
an illegal purpose.
The notice of termination in so far as it is based on a
breach of the obligation under the residential tenancy agreement not to
the premises is not valid.
The Tribunal is satisfied that the tenant was
more than 14 days in arrears of rent at the date of the service of the notice of
termination.
The notice of termination based on that ground is therefore valid.
The Tribunal further finds that the landlord and tenant have
arrangement for the repayment of arrears at a rate which is acceptable to both
On 15 January 2002 the following orders
As the Tribunal is satisfied that a breach of the
agreement has occurred namely, rent arrears:
1. The tenant, Mr
QUILLA, is to pay the landlord, NSW LAND & HOUSING CORPORATION, Level 9,
23-31 Moore Street, LIVERPOOL NSW 2170,
the sum of $277.62 for rent owed under
the terms of the residential tenancy agreement for the period from 30/11/2001 to
by instalments of $20.00 per fortnight next payment
NOTE: If the other party does not comply with the order
to pay money, a certified copy of the above money order may be obtained from
Tribunal for the purpose of enforcement action through the Local
2. Additionally, the tenant, Mr QUILLA, is to pay rebated
rent, presently $83.40 per fortnight, on the Thursday of each fortnight,
payment due 17/1/2002, and once the arrears are paid in full, to pay rent in
accordance with the residential tenancy agreement,
being one week in
3. If these orders are not complied with then at any time
before 12/4/2002 the landlord may request the re-listing of the application
determine whether the tenancy agreement should be terminated on the basis of
arrears only.
4. The total amount under orders 1 & 2 for rent
and arrears is payable by instalments of $103.40 per fortnight next payment
5. The application for termination and possession based
on illegal use is dismissed because the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to
the application because:
there is no evidence to support
allegation of using premises for illegal
Agnes Borsody
Residential
22 February 2002
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (34.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter