URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATOD/2025/142.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:50:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Deputy Secretary, Local Government, under delegation from the Secretary, Department of Planning, Housing and Infrastructure v Thaler [2025] NSWCATOD 142; (21 October 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
Deputy Secretary, Local Government, under delegation from the Secretary,
Department of Planning, Housing and Infrastructure v Thaler
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATOD 142
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Date of Orders:
21 October 2025
Decision Date:
21 October 2025
Occupational Division
Seiden SC DCJ, Acting President
(1) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), a hearing is dispensed
(2) The request to refer questions of law to the
Supreme Court of New South Wales under
Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) is refused.
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – Question of law – Referral to the
Supreme Court – Principles
Legislation Cited:
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Criminal Appeal Act
Local Government Act 1993
Cases Cited:
Assadourian v Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales (Northern
[2011] NSWSC 1052
Director-General, Dept of Ageing, Disability and
[2009] NSWCA 102
Environment Protection Authority of NSW
v Goulburn Wool Scour Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWCCA 439
Jali Local Aboriginal Land
Council v Anderson
[2025] NSWCATOD 57
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v
Police Tribunal
(1986) 5 NSWLR 465
John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd v Ryde
Local Council
(2005) 62 NSWLR 512
[2005] NSWCA 101
Orr v Cobar Management
Pty Limited
(2020) 103 NSWLR 36
[2020] NSWCCA 220
Re referral by Deputy
Secretary, Local Government, under
Local Government Act 1993
concerning Mr Thaler, a Councillor
[2025] NSWCATOD 102
Registrar of Births,
Deaths and Marriages v FJG & FJH; Attorney General of New South Wales as
[2022] NSWCATAP 270
Thaler v Secretary, Department of Planning,
Housing and Infrastructure
[2025] NSWCATOD 88
Procedural rulings
Deputy Secretary, Local Government, under delegation from the Secretary,
Department of Planning, Housing and Infrastructure (Applicant)
Andrew Evan
Thaler (Respondent)
Representation:
M McAuliffe / O Bellhouse-Smith (Applicant)
Searle (Respondent)
Solicitors:
Department of Planning, Housing and
Infrastructure (Applicant)
XD Law & Advocacy (Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00303280
2025/00294190
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Thaler (the Councillor) requests, pursuant to
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (NCAT Act), that the Tribunal refer
certain questions, contended to be questions of law arising in the underlying
proceedings
(the Referral Proceedings), to the Supreme Court for the opinion of
Councillor was elected to the Snowy Monaro Regional Council in September 2024;
and has since, been the subject of three separate
disciplinary actions brought
against him by the applicant (the Secretary). The disciplinary actions include
two decisions to suspend
the Councillor from civic office under
s 440I(2)(g)
Local Government Act 1993
(NSW) (the Act), made on 5 May 2025 (the
Thaler v Secretary, Department of Planning, Housing and
Infrastructure
[2025] NSWCATOD 88)
and 28 July 2025 (the subject of other
proceedings in the Tribunal, referred to here as the External Appeal) and the
Referral Proceedings,
referred to the Tribunal under
concerning alleged contraventions of a performance improvement order (the
background is set out in
Re referral by Deputy Secretary, Local Government,
Local Government Act 1993
, concerning Mr Thaler, a
[2025] NSWCATOD 102).
A fourth disciplinary process, namely a
third suspension, has been foreshadowed by the Secretary.
Councillor asserts that each of the three disciplinary actions, and the
prospective fourth one, are premised on the same factual
matters. Accordingly,
so it is contended, the Secretary’s decision to bring multiple
disciplinary actions, rather than one
consolidated action, is attended by error.
The Councillor requests the referral of questions, which ask the Court to
provide an opinion
on whether the multiple reports and disciplinary processes:
constitute legal unreasonableness, oppressiveness or an abuse of process;
apprehended bias on the part of the Secretary; and whether issue or Anshun
estoppel arise (the Request).
Request is denied, in summary, on the ground that the questions sought to be
referred do not raise questions of law as contemplated
by s 54 of the NCAT Act.
Even if that is incorrect, it would not be in the interests of justice to refer
the questions, as, in summary,
the issues raised: do not concern unsettled
principles and the application of those principles are specific to the
Councillor; doing
so would fragment and delay the Referral Proceedings and the
External Appeal; and the Tribunal, itself, is well equipped to make
findings of
fact and determine the answers to relevant questions, and preserve the interests
of the parties by engaging its own processes,
including a stay of proceedings,
as necessary.
Determination of the application on the
provided by s 54 of the NCAT Act, the Tribunal may of its own motion, or at the
“request” of a party, refer a question
of law to the Supreme Court,
for the opinion of the Court. Whilst the starting position is that a hearing is
required for “proceedings”
in the Tribunal unless certain exceptions
apply (s 50 of the NCAT Act) and that unless otherwise ordered, a hearing is to
be in public
(s 49 of the NCAT Act), it is not settled that a request under s 54
is a proceeding that ordinarily requires a hearing; although
I note that in
Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages v FJG & FJH; Attorney General
of New South Wales as Intervenor
[2022] NSWCATAP 270
), a hearing
was indeed held.
principles relevant to dispensing with a hearing were identified in
Local Aboriginal Land Council v Anderson
[2025] NSWCATOD 57
the same factors are relevant here.
in favour of holding a hearing:
(1) The objects of the Tribunal include “to ensure that the Tribunal is
accountable and has processes that are open and transparent;
and to promote
public confidence in tribunal decision-making in the State and in the conduct of
tribunal members”: NCAT Act,
ss 3(f) and (g).
(2) The importance of open justice:
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd v Police
(1986) 5 NSWLR 465
John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd v
Ryde Local Council
(2005) 62 NSWLR 512
[2005] NSWCA 101
(3) The principles of open justice apply to the Tribunal:
[2022] NSWCATAP 188
(4) The starting position is that, unless excepted or otherwise ordered, there
is to be a hearing of proceedings and the hearing
is to be in public: NCAT Act,
ss 49 and 50.
following factors favour dispensing with a hearing:
(1) The issues to be determined concern whether the questions sought to be
referred are “questions of law” as contemplated
by s 54 of the NCAT
and, even if so, whether there are sound reasons not to refer the questions.
(2) This is not the occasion to form concluded views in relation to any
contested issues, particularly, the allegations of misconduct
or the defences to
the contentions.
(3) The Referral Proceedings will be the subject of a hearing and the contested
issues will be canvassed.
(4) No oral evidence is required; and nor is there any need for cross
examination.
(5) The parties provided comprehensive written submissions.
(6) This decision will be published and will expose the Tribunal's reasoning and
the submissions.
(7) Where, as here, the hearing would likely simply amount to a recitation of
the written submissions, there is a public interest
in conserving the Tribunal's
resources and the costs to the parties.
(8) The guiding principle of the NCAT Act is to facilitate the just, quick and
cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings
before the Tribunal: s
36(6) of the NCAT Act.
(9) Neither party sought an oral hearing; and no issue was raised as to
prejudice, if this decision is undertaken without a hearing.
is not necessary to finally determine whether a hearing is ordinarily required,
as I have concluded, after giving the parties an
opportunity to make
submissions, that the issues for determination can be adequately determined in
the absence of the parties.
to s 50(2) of the NCAT Act, I dispense with a hearing.
a referral to the Supreme Court may be made, there must be written consent by
the President. Consent, however, is not required
to refuse a request. For that
reason, decisions such as this are often considered by Tribunal members, other
than the President;
at least at the initial stage.
are several instances where requests for referral under s 54 of the NCAT Act
have been the subject of written reasons for decision;
and this is one case
where written reasons are appropriate. Here, the parties provided comprehensive
submissions and the Request
is considered, by the Councillor, as an
indispensable preliminary step in the efficient management of the proceedings.
It is therefore
expedient to explain my reasons for not referring the questions
to the Court. I do not mean, by taking this step, to suggest that
reasons are always required for requests such as this.
– referral of questions of law to the Supreme Court
54 of the NCAT Act
54 References of questions of law to Supreme Court
(1) The Tribunal (including when constituted as an Appeal
Panel) may, of its own motion or at the request of a party, refer a
question of
law arising in the proceedings to the Supreme Court for the opinion of the
(2) The Tribunal may refer a question of law under this
section only if the President has consented in writing to the question
Tribunal’s power to refer questions of law to the Supreme Court is not
unlimited. The purpose of the mechanism provided
for under s 54 must be borne in
mind when the Tribunal is considering whether to refer a question of law.
Environment Protection Authority of NSW v Goulburn Wool Scour Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWCCA 439
, the Court of Criminal Appeal considered the purpose of
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW), which is in similar terms to s 54
of the NCAT Act. At [36], Simpson J said (Bell and Buddin JJ
“... s 5AE is designed to facilitate the giving of advice by this Court to
a first instance judge in order to enable the proper
resolution of the issues in
the proceedings. It arises where proceedings are still on foot and enables the
proper and just determination
of those proceedings, according to law, and in the
correct application of the law. Section 5AE is expressed to apply to proceedings
that have not come to an end, and which may, therefore, themselves be resolved
by the determination of the questions of law ...”
Orr v Cobar Management Pty Limited
(2020) 103 NSWLR 36
[2020] NSWCCA 220
) at [108], the Court of Criminal Appeal endorsed that statement, and
“In keeping with the observations of Simpson J in
Goulburn Wool
the evident purpose of the procedure provided by s 5AE is to provide a facility
whereby, if there is a difficult or unsettled question
of law or a question of
law as to which there are conflicting authorities or no clear authority, the
judge hearing the matter may
or, if the Crown requires, must submit such
questions to the Court of Criminal Appeal.”
, an issue before the Court of Criminal Appeal was whether the
questions referred to it were questions of law for the purpose of
Criminal Appeal Act
. The Court said, at [47] – [48]:
“47 Where a statute affords a right of appeal on a
question of law, it will necessarily be the case that the court at first
instance will have found facts and applied the law to those facts to result in
final orders. Where, on the other hand, a question
of law may be referred to
another court ‘for determination’, that language suggests that the
question will not already
have been ‘determined’ by the Court seised
of the matter and, as such a reference may occur during or in the course of
hearing, facts will not (or will not usually) have been found by the court
referring the question of law for determination.
48 As was noted in
Bass v Permanent Trustee Company
[1999] HCA 9
(1999) 198 CLR 334
[1999] HCA 9
, some questions of
law can be decided without any reference to the facts, or may proceed by
reference to assumed facts. These are
sometimes described as ‘pure
questions of law’. This was the terminology used, for example, by Leeming
and White JJA
in strictly confining a grant of leave to appeal in
Chan & Naylor Parramatta Pty Ltd atf Chan & Naylor Parramatta Trust
[2020] NSWCA 62
Medical Council of New South Wales v
[2017] NSWCA 282
Violi v Commonwealth Bank of
[2015] NSWCA 152
and [125].”
Court also identified, in
, that a question of mixed fact and law
“is to be differentiated from, and is not, a ‘question of
[60]; and, to the same effect,
Assadourian v Roads and
Traffic Authority of New South Wales (Northern Region)
[2011] NSWSC 1052
the Court concluded (at [109]) that:
“Those questions of law should be, in our opinion, what are sometimes
described as ‘pure questions of law’. They
should not draw the Court
of Criminal Appeal into questions of fact. Moreover, they must be questions
whose character as a question
of law can be recognised on the face of the
question, and not depend upon the answer given to the question. This does not
a question which may ultimately disclose an error of law depending on an
analysis of the facts but where this cannot be known without
scrutiny of the
Criminal Appeal Act
and s 54 of the NCAT Act are in like
terms. Accordingly, what was said in
is apposite.
follows that questions sought to be referred under s 54 of the NCAT Act will,
generally, be referred at a time before the underlying
factual dispute has been
resolved; and will therefore be questions that do not depend on facts for their
answer, or that might be
determined on assumed or agreed facts. They will be
difficult or unsettled questions. They may therefore have some wider import.
They will be important to the resolution of the underlying proceedings. They
will be “pure” questions of law and not
mixed question of fact and
law. They will not require the Court to determine facts or resolve any factual
the questions sought to be referred are properly considered questions of law,
the Tribunal nevertheless must be satisfied that
it is appropriate to make a
referral to the Supreme Court.
factors the Tribunal may take into account in making a referral decision were
at [55]-[57], in which the Appeal Panel said:
“55 Factors in favour of referral may include:
(1) a situation where there is no existing authoritative
statement from an appellate court on the question of law:
CTS v NSW Trustee
and Guardian
[2017] NSWCATAD 119
) at [14] (although this cannot
be determinative:
Milner v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2017] NSWCATOD 37
(2) that the decision may have an impact broader than on the
immediate parties and where, regardless of the outcome, an appeal
(3) that a determination by the Supreme Court may truncate the
legal process by avoiding the possibility of an appeal after a
decision is made
by the Appeal Panel:
Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority v Auld
[2018] NSWCATAP 68
56 Factors weighing against making a referral may include:
(1) that NCAT and its Appeal Panel may resolve all the issues,
including the questions of fact, justly, quickly and cheaply:
[18]; also see NCAT Act, s 36;
(2) where the issues to be determined ‘are matters which
the Tribunal routinely determines’ and ‘are not particularly
nor do they raise matters of public interest which have not previously been
dealt with by the Tribunal’:
ALZ v WorkCover NSW
[2015] NSWCATAD
(3) where there is a remedy available, such as to appeal
against the Appeal Panel decision in the normal course:
(4) that NCAT has a clear view about its duty and role, and
the proper process is generally for questions of law to be determined
by this Tribunal. NCAT is as well-placed as anyone to determine matters of
public importance:
at [16], citing
Legal Services Commissioner
[2009] NSWADT 76.
This is particularly so where it is clear from
the enabling act that Parliament intended that disputes between the parties
preferably be determined by NCAT:
Kincumber Nautical Village Pty Ltd v
[2020] NSWCATAP 263
(5) that experience has shown that procedures that fragment
the hearing and disposition of proceedings have generally been found
difficulty and delay rather than speed and efficiency. There have been many
instances in which procedures of that kind
have produced unfortunate results, as
it is difficult to anticipate exactly what will be necessary for an efficient
referral of a
question. It is also to be borne in mind that referral of the
question of law to the Supreme Court would be removing the matter into
57 Ultimately, the exercise of NCAT’s discretion must be
guided by consideration of what the interests of justice, informed
guiding principle in s 36 of the NCAT Act, require.”
The questions of law sought to be referred
Councillor submits that the Secretary’s conduct in bringing multiple
disciplinary proceedings against him, when the Secretary
“knew of all of
the matters complained of against him” and there existed a departmental
report on most of those matters,
is legally unreasonable or oppressive or an
abuse of process. The Councillor contends that in having to answer the separate
disciplinary
proceedings, he has been exposed to consequences including the
possibility of being excluded from public office for up to five years,
to him and his family, additional expenses and time cost which “has
diverted him from being able to earn a living”.
He submits that having
certain questions referred to the Supreme Court will expedite the just
resolution of the proceedings.
some refinement, the questions the Councillor requests be referred to the
Supreme Court are those set out in the Councillor’s
submissions dated 14
October 2025 (the Questions). The Questions state:
“1. Is the way in which the following departmental reports regarding
Councillor Andrew Thaler’s conduct (subsequent to
the Departmental Report
of April 2025, which gave rise to the decision of the delegate of the
Departmental Chief Executive on 5 May
2025, upheld in Matter 2025/00182562)
• The Departmental Report of July 2025, giving rise to
the decision of the delegate of the Departmental Chief Executive on
2025, the subject of appeal in Matter 2025/00294190; and
• The Departmental Report of May 2025, giving rise to the
s438HA(9) referral to the Tribunal on 23 June 2025 by the delegate
Departmental Chief Executive, the subject of proceedings in Matter 2025/00303280
have been structured and acted upon, including their content and sequencing, had
the effect of being:
• Legally unreasonable; and/or
• Oppressive;
in relation to Clr Thaler, or otherwise an abuse of the processes under Chapter
13, Part 6 and Chapter 14, Part 1, Division 3, of
Local Government Act
2. Is the 28 July 2025 decision and/or the 23 June 2025
referral by
the delegate of the Departmental Chief Executive to the Tribunal affected by
apprehended bias?
3. Is the Departmental Report of May 2025, giving rise to the
to the Tribunal on 20 June 2025 by the delegate of the Departmental Chief
Executive, the subject of proceedings in Matter
2025/00303280, affected by issue
estoppel and/or Anshun estoppel, given the commonality of facts relied upon in
Matter 2025/00303280
and each of:
(i) the Departmental Report of April 2025, which gave rise to the decision of
the delegate of the Departmental Chief Executive on
5 May 2025, upheld in Matter
2025/00182562; and
(ii) The Departmental Report of July 2025, giving rise to the decision of the
delegate of the Departmental Chief Executive on 28
July 2025, the subject of
appeal in Matter 2025/00294140.
4. Are the Departmental Reports of:
(i) July 2025 and the decision of the delegate of the Departmental Chief
Executive on 28 July 2025, the subject of appeal in Matter
2025/00294190; and
(ii) May 2025, and the
referral to the Tribunal on 20 June 2025 by the
delegate of the Departmental Chief Executive, the subject of proceedings in
2025/00303280
affected by Anshun estoppel?”
Grant leave to rely on the Questions for the purposes of the
Secretary highlights that the questions for referral have changed since
initially mooted and submits that leave to rely on these
latest questions ought
not be granted. However, for the following reasons, I grant leave to amend the
request for referral under
s 54 of the NCAT Act to encompass the
(1) A request under s 54 of the NCAT Act must relate to pure questions of
(2) There should therefore be no need for a determination of disputed facts.
(3) The questions of law must be important to the underlying proceedings; and
therefore there is no utility in holding the Councillor
to the original
questions or progressing a request in relation to questions that are no longer
(4) The Secretary has had an opportunity to make submissions in relation to the
the Questions may be relied on for any other purpose, including the Referral
Proceedings themselves or the External Appeal
proceedings, is not the subject of
this decision.
Are the Questions, questions of law
first issue that arises for consideration is whether the Questions raise
questions of law. The starting premise is that a question
of law cannot involve
the determination of facts:
Councillor asserts that it is not necessary for any findings of fact to be made
and that the Questions can be determined by reference
to the record, from the
fact of the disciplinary processes and a description of the action taken by the
Secretary. The Councillor
maintains that it is not necessary to determine
whether the underlying conduct occurred or had the character contended for by
his outline of submissions, the Councillor relies on the following matters of
“(i) The decision of the Tribunal in Matter
2025/001825632, in
Thaler v Secretary, Department of Planning, Housing and
Infrastructure
[2025] NSWCATOD 88.
(ii) the four Departmental reports, including annexed
material, dated:
(a) April 2025
(b) May 2025
(c) July 2025
(d) October 2025
(iii) the two suspension decisions,
(a) 5 or 6 May 2025
(b) 28 July 2025
(iv) the various proceedings which are before the Tribunal:
(a) Matter 2025/00239261, including the referral letter from
the Deputy Secretary dated 20 June 2025 and the General application
form stamped
by the Tribunal Registry on 23 June 2025 (to the extent they are not annexed to
the May 2025 report, and
(b) Matter 2025/00294190.”
Secretary disputes that the Questions raise questions of law and highlights that
each requires “the Tribunal to make findings
of primary fact and
inferences from those facts to characterise the conduct of officers of the
Department of Planning, Housing and
Infrastructure”. The Secretary
emphasises that there is no proposed set of agreed facts “nor is it
conceded that the
primary allegations the subject of either proceedings should
be assumed as correct” for the purposes of the Request.
the absence of fully determined facts, it is difficult to accept that the
questions raise pure questions of law capable of being
referred to the Supreme
Court. The Questions each proceed on the underlying premise that the
Secretary’s conduct in preparing
two reports and taking disciplinary
action against the Councillor subsequent to the first report, where each of the
reports are said
to be in relation to the same conduct by the Councillor, was
unjustifiable. Underlying each aspect is whether the Secretary was
“justified”
in taking action against the Councillor on three
separate occasions, rather than consolidating the disciplinary processes into a
single proceeding. Whether the Secretary was so justified cannot be determined
from looking at a chronology of matters in the Tribunal.
is exemplified by the Councillor’s submissions that:
(1) there “appears no good reason why this matter was not referred to the
Tribunal instead of preparing the first report and/or
the taking of the first
suspension decision”; and
(2) as all of the matters in the first suspension matter, the second suspension
matter and the performance improvement matter were
known to the Department, they
“could, and ... should have been brought together in a single
order to determine whether the Secretary’s decision to take such steps was
vitiated in the way claimed, it will be necessary
to ascertain the rationale for
the approach. Taking into account the protective nature of the orders made by
the Secretary (
Director-General, Dept of Ageing, Disability and Home Care v
[2009] NSWCA 102
), it could not immediately be assumed,
merely from the fact that the same underlying conduct is relied on, that the way
the Secretary
has brought action against the Councillor was designed to be
punitive. For example, the referral of a matter takes time, whereas
a suspension
is immediate. Nor could it be immediately assumed that the decisions were
otherwise vitiated for jurisdictional error,
without understanding the
the starting premise of the Councillor’s arguments – that all three
disciplinary actions are based on the same
conduct – is also open to
question. The Councillor, himself, concedes (in his outline of submissions at
paragraph 36) that
the second proceeding contains “two, perhaps three
matters out of fifteen which are not part of either the first report-first
suspension and third report-second suspension matter, with either the same facts
or same conduct relied upon”.
reasoning applies to each of the Questions.
respect to oppression, it might readily be accepted that the Councillor is
exposed to hardship in readying himself for multiple
proceedings, but once
again, whether this amounts to oppression is something that is affected by
respect to apprehended bias, the Councillor submits that the combination of the
following matters suggests that the Secretary’s
decision to bring
subsequent disciplinary action against the Councillor was made other than on its
factual or legal merits:
(1) Requesting the preparation of a departmental report without an
investigation.
(2) Making a decision on the basis of the report, which he knew did not contain
all of the information then held by the Department
regarding the Councillor.
answering the relevant question would benefit from an appreciation of the
with respect to estoppel, this will require a nuanced analysis of the matters
the Tribunal must decide in each proceeding
and again, will benefit from a
comprehensive set of primary facts and the context.
Questions do not raise pure questions of law as comprehended by s 54 of the NCAT
Act and are therefore not suitable for referral
to the Supreme Court.
Discretion to refer
I am wrong in my conclusions, and the Questions posed by the Councillor indeed
raise questions of law, I am not satisfied that
it is appropriate to refer the
questions to the Supreme Court.
Secretary highlights that the drafting of the Questions is imprecise and not apt
to resolve “inter partes controversies”.
Precision, so it is
contended, is necessary to avoid asking the Court to resolve hypothetical
questions or to provide “advisory
opinions”. By way of example, the
Secretary points to the “foggy phrase” of asking “Is the way
in which ...
have been structured and acted upon, including their content and
sequencing... oppressive”. The vaguely articulated questions
Secretary into construing the Questions, which itself is conducive to further
the Secretary contends that the Questions are not dispositive of the underlying
issues. For example, even if the answer to
Question 2 which concerns the
apprehended bias of the original decision maker was answered in the affirmative,
it would have no effect
on the External Appeal. The same argument was
unsuccessfully raised in
Thaler v Secretary, Department of Planning, Housing
and Infrastructure
[2025] NSWCATOD 88
and following. A similar
submission is made with respect to the Referral Proceedings.
it is noted that the Request has already delayed the hearing of the External
Appeal. Similarly, the Councillor’s resistance
to the fixing of the
hearing date of the Referral Proceedings so that the Questions can be determined
disregards the High Court’s
warning that the attraction of separate
hearings on discrete issues is “often more chimerical than real”:
Tepko Pty Ltd v Water Board
(2001) 206 CLR 1
[2001] HCA 19
, Kirby and Callinan JJ said (at [168]):
“The attractions of trials of issues rather than of cases in their
totality, are often more chimerical than real. Common experience
demonstrates
that savings in time and expense are often illusory, particularly when the
parties have, as here, had the necessity
of making full preparation and the
factual matters relevant to one issue are relevant to others, and they all
Secretary submits that the guiding principle by which the Tribunal is bound has
already been undermined by the presentation of
the Questions and referral will
erode the probability of the “just, quick and cheap resolution of the real
the proceedings.
the other hand, the Councillor maintains that the opinion of the Court on the
Questions will indeed resolve issues in dispute and
potentially obviate the need
for multiple proceedings and multiple appeals.
is readily apparent that the factor that weighs in favour of referring the
Questions is that referring the Questions straight to
the Supreme Court could
avoid a layer of appeal.
against that, I give the following matters considerable weight:
(1) Referring the Questions to the Supreme Court would fragment the Referral
Proceedings and the External Appeal, which is not in
line with the just, quick
and cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings: NCAT Act, s 36(1).
(2) The Questions themselves, along with the underlying proceedings (i.e., the
Referral Proceedings) and the External Appeal, have
been listed to be heard and
determined together; and are listed for hearing in the Tribunal on 21 October
(3) The Tribunal is well placed to deal with alleged abuses of its own
(4) The Tribunal deals with disciplinary proceedings routinely.
(5) The Questions are best determined by a decision maker with the full context
and all of the evidence before them.
(6) The Questions rely on settled principles of law.
(7) As the Questions are context specific, the Questions raised relate only to
the Councillor and have no wider importance.
(8) The Tribunal has its own processes, including stay powers, for dealing with
proceedings that are said to be brought improperly.
In other words, an
appropriate remedy is available in this forum, as necessary. If the Tribunal
considers it appropriate to stay
any proceeding, after making all requisite
findings of fact, it can so order.
assuming the Questions were pure questions of law, it would not be in the
interests of justice to refer the proceedings to the
request to refer the Questions to the Supreme Court is
Tribunal orders:
(1) Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW), a hearing is dispensed with.
(2) The request to refer questions of law to the Supreme Court of New South
Wales under
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
is refused.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
21 October 2025 - Counsel added.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (285 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter