URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWWCCPD/2020/68.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:15:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ooi v NEC Business Solutions Ltd (No 2) [2020] NSWWCCPD 68 (25 November 2020)
RECONSIDERATION OF DETERMINATION OF APPEAL AGAINST A
DECISION OF THE COMMISSION CONSTITUTED BY AN ARBITRATOR
Ooi v NEC Business Solutions Ltd
[2020] NSWWCCPD 68
Leay Ceng Ooi
RESPONDENT:
NEC Business Solutions Ltd
AAI Ltd trading as GIO
FILE NUMBER:
ARBITRATOR:
DATE OF ARBITRATOR’S DECISION:
10 May 2005
DATE OF FIRST APPEAL DECISION:
26 June 2006
DATE OF RECONSIDERATION DECISION:
25 November 2020
SUBJECT MATTER OF DECISION:
Reconsideration pursuant to s 350(3) of the
Workplace Injury Management
and Workers Compensation Act 1998
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER:
Deputy President Michael Snell
On the papers
REPRESENTATION:
Self-represented
Respondent:
Mr B Quillan, solicitor
Gillis Delaney Lawyers
ORDERS MADE ON APPEAL:
appellant’s application pursuant to section 350(3) of the
Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
to reconsider the
Commission’s decision dated 26 June 2006 is refused.
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Ceng Ooi (Ms Ooi) worked as a senior administrative officer with NEC Business
Solutions Ltd (NEC) from 1990. She ceased work
with NEC in September 2003 and
did not work thereafter. She alleged injury in the nature of repetitive strain
to the neck and right
upper limb.
Ms Ooi made a claim for weekly compensation, medical expenses and lump sum
compensation which was disputed.
Ooi commenced Commission proceedings No 5574/04 against NEC (the 2004
proceedings). The issues disputed were whether Ms Ooi had
‘injury’, whether the requirements of
Compensation Act 1987
(the 1987 Act) were satisfied, whether Ms Ooi was
incapacitated for work, whether she was entitled to the recovery of medical
and the quantum of any entitlement to lump sum
compensation.
matter was listed for an arbitration hearing before Arbitrator Foggo on 19 April
2005. Both parties were represented by solicitors.
No oral evidence was called.
NEC’s solicitor handed up written submissions, both solicitors made oral
submissions and the Arbitrator
reserved his
The Commission issued a
Certificate of Determination dated 10 May 2005 accompanied by reasons. The
Arbitrator did not accept that
Ms Ooi had suffered injury in the course of or
arising out of her employment. There was an award in favour of NEC.
Ooi lodged an appeal against the arbitral decision, which came before me in my
then capacity as an Acting Deputy President. The
appeal was dealt with on the
papers and a decision was issued dated 26 June
The Arbitrator’s
decision in NEC’s favour was confirmed, subject to a technical variation
to the orders to substitute
an award in NEC’s favour, in place of three
separate awards in NEC’s favour, one on each of the three heads of
compensation
claimed. This variation is not material to issues that are raised
in the current matter.
Ooi appealed my decision dated 26 June 2006. A letter from NEC’s
solicitors indicates the appeal was dismissed with costs
by the Court of Appeal
on 22 March 2007.
The basis of this
is not apparent from that letter or the material before me. A “Summary of
Workers Compensation Claim”,
attached to Ms Ooi’s reconsideration
material that is now before the Commission, states that on 26 February 2007 the
was “dismissed by the Court of Appeal, represented by Walker Legal
(advised to pursue matter with the Commission)”.
Ooi commenced further proceedings against NEC in the Commission, No 9131/10 (the
2010 proceedings). The subject matter was generally
similar to that previously
litigated in the 2004 proceedings. Consent Orders dated 16 December 2010
provided that by consent the
2010 proceedings were discontinued with no order as
Ooi commenced further Commission proceedings, No 2434/12. These proceedings were
listed for telephone conference before Arbitrator
Wynyard on 27 April 2012. Ms
Ooi was self-represented and Mr Hodges, solicitor, appeared for NEC. Arbitrator
Wynyard, with the agreement
of the parties, dealt with the matter without
holding a conference or formal hearing. The Commission issued a Certificate of
Determination
dated 3 May 2012, accompanied by reasons. The Arbitrator described
the allegations of injury in those proceedings as:
“Repetitive Strain and Stress Injuries with permanent
impairment to right upper extremities (sic) and spine
Psychological Trauma Injury – severe anxiety, stress, depression
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder; all work
Wynyard expressed doubt regarding whether an allegation of psychological injury
was included in the injury allegations
in the 2004 proceedings. He said he was
satisfied the allegations relating to the upper extremities and spine had been
the subject
of “prior determinations”, although with the rider that
the reference in No 2434/12 to ‘spine’ meant the
(I note there is
specific reference in the decision of Arbitrator Foggo to a statement by Ms
Ooi’s solicitor, at the 2005 hearing,
that he did not assert psychological
Wynyard said the application before him in No 2434/12 (the 2012 proceedings)
although not pleaded as such, was “an
application for reconsideration of
earlier decisions of a case brought by [Ms Ooi] in matter no
5574/2004”.
He said that
he was bound by Presidential decisions, and thus lacked the power to consider
the merits of Arbitrator Foggo’s
decision, it having been affirmed in the
Presidential decision. He said the appropriate forum for the reconsideration was
a Presidential member.
The Arbitrator made an order striking out the application before him.
THE DECISION BEING RECONSIDERED
is no form provided for an application to reconsider pursuant to s 350(3) of the
Workplace Injury Management and Workers Compensation Act 1998
Act). Ms Ooi’s current application was commenced by way of a letter
to the President, Phillips DCJ, dated 8 July
2020. It seeks the
reconsideration of “my workers compensation claim of WCC 5574 of
2005” (sic, 2004). It refers to Ms
Ooi, in the 2012 proceedings, seeking
reconsideration and being advised by Arbitrator Wynyard that she should
“seek legal representation
to appeal to the President of WCC”. In
the reconsideration letter Ms Ooi refers to a “serious miscarriage of
justice” in the finding in favour of
I have previously confirmed
the arbitral decision in the 2004 proceedings, in the Presidential decision
dated 26 June 2006. Because
that decision involved an appeal from the
decision of Arbitrator Foggo, it needs to be understood in the context of that
Arbitrator Foggo’s decision
Foggo described the allegation of injury as relating to the neck, right shoulder
and right arm, as a result of repetitive
keyboard use in Ms Ooi’s
employment with NEC from 1990 to September
He described the evidence
before him. It was the practice in the Commission at the time that, where a
matter included a claim for
lump sum compensation, it would commonly be referred
for assessment by an Approved Medical Specialist (AMS) prior to liability issues
such as ‘injury’ being determined by an arbitrator.
with this there was a referral to an AMS, Dr Bodel, before the issue of
‘injury’ was determined. A MAC of Dr
Bodel dated 25 January 2005
certified there was 8 per cent permanent impairment of the neck and 4 per cent
loss of use of the right
arm at or above the elbow resulting from injury prior
to 1 January 2002. It certified 2 per cent whole person impairment as a result
of injury after 1 January 2002.
(The system for assessing and compensating permanent impairment and loss changed
as at 1 January 2002.)
Arbitrator made reference to this MAC. The Arbitrator referred to the
submissions. He noted Ms Ooi’s reliance on Dr Champion
to establish that
Ms Ooi’s injuries resulted from her employment. The Arbitrator noted Ms
Ooi’s reliance on Dr Bodel’s
opinion. There was an issue regarding
the significance of a motor vehicle accident (not work related) in which
Ms Ooi was involved
on 24 January 2001 (the motor vehicle accident). Ms
Ooi’s solicitor submitted Ms Ooi had disclosed this accident to Dr Bodel.
The Arbitrator noted Ms Ooi’s solicitor stated he did not assert
psychological injury, and NEC’s solicitor accordingly
said its report from
Dr Haralambous was no longer
The Arbitrator
referred to various histories regarding the motor vehicle accident, and Ms
Ooi’s solicitor’s submissions
that the accident was “a very
minor one”. He referred to Ms Ooi’s statement dated 15 June 2004
regarding housework
she had undertaken for a friend, Mr
activities that also
had become an issue.
Arbitrator referred to NEC’s submissions. NEC submitted those doctors who
supported Ms Ooi’s case, Drs Champion and
Kanduru, did so on the basis of
an incorrect history regarding the effects of the motor vehicle accident. It
submitted Ms Ooi only
revealed the motor vehicle accident when she knew NEC had
discovered its existence. She would have been aware of this from August
when her statement and that of Mr Johnstone, from material produced by the GIO,
was served. This explained why she told Dr
Bodel about the motor vehicle
accident when examined on 8 November 2004. NEC submitted Ms Ooi had sought to
mislead both the GIO
and Dr Bodel, to “make the best of each of her
submissions referred to Ms Ooi’s statement dated 19 March 2004, in which
she described difficulties with her housework.
It submitted that 12 weeks after
this she gave a statement, apparently to support Mr Johnstone’s third
party claim, in which
she said that she would sometimes spend up to 10 to 12
hours per week helping Mr Johnstone by doing his housework and shopping. She
said that other friends did lifting for Mr Johnstone. NEC submitted these
statements were “totally
inconsistent”.
Arbitrator said it was a matter for him (not the AMS) to deal with the issue
regarding whether Ms Ooi’s work duties caused
the medical conditions of
which she complained. In the absence of oral evidence, he needed to evaluate her
credibility on the documentary
material. He referred to Ms Ooi’s statement
dated 13 October 2003, made as part of the factual investigation of her workers
compensation claim. Ms Ooi stated: “I have not suffered from any similar
Arbitrator described the
“discrepancy between [Ms Ooi’s] statement of 15 June 2004 and 19
March 2004 [as] particularly
troubling” (see the paragraph immediately
above). He said the “two statements cannot stand together and there has
no adequate explanation from [Ms Ooi] that allows me to reconcile their
differences”.
Arbitrator referred to a history to the AMS that from October 2001 Ms Ooi
experienced the onset of employment related symptoms.
The Arbitrator said no
mention was made to the AMS of “concurrent symptoms” in the neck and
shoulders stemming from the
motor vehicle accident, recorded by Dr Sooy on 12
April 2002. The Arbitrator said that as a result of these conflicts of evidence
he was not persuaded that the histories and mechanism of injuries relied on by
the various doctors were “credible and accurate”.
persuaded that the impairments certified by Dr Bodel related to any employment
injury. He entered awards in favour of
NEC on the various heads of claim brought
The Presidential decision
grounds of appeal raised by Ms Ooi on the appeal pursuant to s 352 of the 1998
(a) The Arbitrator erred in that he failed in the finding
of fact and in arriving at the finding against the weight of evidence:
The appellant in fact suffered an injury arising from and in the course of
employment with the respondent.
(b) The Arbitrator erred in misinterpreting the law:
The fact as found by the AMS was not conclusively presumed;
The fact as found by the AMS which was conclusively presumed was incorrectly
rebutted by the Arbitrator without contrary evidence.
(c) The Arbitrator erred in failing to give adequate reasons according to
law, and failing in his statutory duty to determine the
matter according to
The Arbitrator did not consider or adequately consider ss 326 and 327 of the
relevant Act, and did not consider both ss 326 and 327
together as being an
integral part of the statutory scheme of presumption.
(d) The Arbitrator erred in making a decision by not taking into account
relevant considerations and/or by taking into account irrelevant
considerations:
There was a failure by the Arbitrator to consider what the appellant did
exactly (not in broad terms) in Mr Johnstone’s home.
The Arbitrator considered what the applicant [sic] did in broad terms in
Mr Johnstone’s home as relevant consideration when
it was not.
There was a failure by the Arbitrator to consider the content of
Dr Champion’s medical report as relevant information.
(e) The Arbitrator erred by not making enquiry of facts which are readily
available and centrally relevant:
The Arbitrator did not ask the appellant of what she did exactly in
Mr Johnstone’s home.
(f) The appellant was denied procedural fairness and natural justice:
There are issues relating to ‘contrary’ evidence adverse to the
appellant which were not flagged beforehand.
The appellant was not given sufficient or adequate opportunity to present
evidence in respect to the above-said issues.
Arbitrator’s relevant dispositive findings were
summarised:
“10. The arbitrator’s reasoning is to be
found at paragraphs 36 to 42 of his Reasons for Decision. He held that,
notwithstanding
the MAC, the issue of causation, being whether the
appellant’s condition resulted from her work activities with the
respondent,
fell to be determined by him. He reasoned an AMS cannot decide
issues of credibility or questions of fact, as opposed to clinical
findings and
opinions. He noted an evaluation of the appellant’s credibility had to be
done on the documentary material, the
appellant having given no oral evidence.
He then proceeded to consider contradictions in the documentary material,
particularly in
histories given by the appellant for different purposes. He
concluded that, as a result of conflicts of evidence which he identified,
persuaded the histories and mechanism of injury given by the appellant to
various doctors were not credible and accurate.
The word ‘not’ has
been omitted from the first sentence in paragraph 42 of the Reasons, but the
arbitrator’s meaning
is clear, in context. As a consequence of this
finding on credit, the arbitrator concluded he was not persuaded the impairments
by Dr Bodel related to injury arising out of or in the course of the
appellant’s employment with the respondent. In his summary
findings, at paragraph 43, he found the appellant did not receive injury arising
out of or in the course of her employment,
employment with the respondent was
not a substantial contributing factor, and the impairments found by Dr Bodel in
the MAC were due
to a motor vehicle accident in which the appellant had been
involved on 24 January 2001.”
rejected the arguments described at ‘(b)’ and ‘(c)’ of
[17] above.
Those issues, going
to decision making in the bifurcated system in the Commission, have since been
authoritatively decided in a manner
contrary to Ms Ooi’s arguments at that
The balance of the grounds
related to how the Arbitrator dealt with the lay evidence regarding Mr
Johnstone, and whether Ms Ooi was
denied procedural fairness in how the evidence
from the GIO file was dealt with. There was also an allegation that the
failed to take account of Dr Champion’s evidence.
lay statement of Mr Johnstone was
summarised.
Mr Johnstone’s
statement dated 17 June 2004 described his difficulty “doing things
around his house due to a back injury”.
This included laundry, hanging out
washing, vacuuming, ironing and general household chores. Mr Johnstone said Ms
Ooi often spent
her whole weekend helping him and stayed overnight in the spare
room. Ms Ooi also helped with weekly
were statements of Ms Ooi dated 19 March 2004 and 15 June 2004. The earlier of
these was used in the workers compensation proceedings
and described
difficulties experienced by Ms Ooi in performing her various household chores.
The second of these was put into evidence
by NEC, and came from material
produced by the GIO, the third party insurer involved in claims from both Ms Ooi
and Mr Johnstone
arising out of the motor vehicle accident (Ms Ooi was a
passenger in a vehicle driven by Mr
Johnstone).
The second of these
statements by Ms Ooi described her spending “sometimes up to 10 or
12 hours in a week” helping Mr
Johnstone, performing vacuuming,
hanging out washing, keeping the house tidy and
was a statement by Ms Ooi dated 13 October 2003, given to investigators engaged
by NEC to investigate the work injury. Ms Ooi
said that she had “not
suffered any other injuries that I recall and I have never submitted a claim
prior to this. I have not
suffered from any similar type injuries that I
presently have.” She said that at “the end of 2001 due to working on
computer all day except to put documents around, my right shoulder, right
arm, neck and back were very
statement dated 19 March 2004 said that she first noticed aches and pains in her
hands, arms and shoulders “around
end 2001”, and that “working
and typing at data entry became increasingly difficult and gradually my neck and
material produced by the GIO included a motor vehicle claim form by Ms Ooi (a
statutory declaration) dated 15 April 2002, relating
to the motor vehicle
accident. The injuries described in the motor vehicle claim form were
“Whiplash injuries Neck and Shoulder
pain Headaches Frequent neck and
shoulder muscular spasms Injury to left knee”. A question “Have you
had any other injuries
or illnesses – before or since the accident –
to the same parts of your body” is followed by the ticking of a box
“No”. A medical certificate dated 12 April 2002, part of the motor
vehicle claim form, described Ms Ooi as unfit
to work from 24 January 2001
and thereafter fit to resume normal
GIO file included a report of Dr Sooy dated 4 September 2002. It recited a
history from Ms Ooi of neck injury in the motor vehicle
accident. It referred to
examination of Ms Ooi on 12 April 2002, with all active neck movements
“somewhat limited”, and
radiating pain into both shoulders. Ms Ooi
described only temporary pain relief from acupuncture, massage and various pain
medications. Dr Sooy also recorded anxiety and left knee symptoms since
the motor vehicle accident. Dr Sooy’s report did not
record any resolution
of the symptoms from the motor accident prior to October 2001 (contrary to the
history given to the AMS, Dr
Bodel). It did not record any history of neck,
right shoulder and right arm symptoms in about October 2001, which Ms Ooi
with the nature and conditions of her
employment.
GIO file indicates a claim against the GIO was settled for a modest sum ($3,500)
by way of deed in about January
Arbitrator considered the discrepancies between the various statements and
histories (see [13] to [16] above) and concluded he
could not accept that Ms
Ooi’s histories of injury were “credible and accurate”. This
led to his rejection of those
doctors who supported Ms Ooi’s case on
‘injury’. The Arbitrator referred to
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v
described the statements dealing with activities at Mr Johnstone’s house
as, on their face, inconsistent. I agreed with the
Arbitrator’s conclusion
that they “cannot stand together”. I regarded the argument that
there was procedural unfairness
in how that material was used, and the
opportunity Ms Ooi had to respond to it, as lacking in
Regarding the alleged
failure to have proper regard to the reports of Dr Champion, I noted the case of
NEC that Dr Champion’s
opinion, like that of Dr Bodel, was deprived of
weight. Both doctors had proceeded on a factually incorrect understanding of the
history, regarding the motor vehicle accident and its medical consequences. I
regarded the Arbitrator’s approach as “well
open”, and the
challenge to the rejection of Ms Ooi’s case on ‘injury’
failed. I regarded the Arbitrator’s
reasoning as adequately
was a generally expressed ground that the Arbitrator’s finding on
‘injury’ was against the weight of the evidence.
I noted there was a
factual issue between the parties regarding Ms Ooi’s duties. On the
version in the statement of NEC’s
state manager (Mr Smoker)
Ms Ooi’s computer work amounted to about two hours per day, not
constant. There was no time Ms Ooi
was consistently inputting data into the
computer. I concluded Ms Ooi’s case on ‘injury’ was
“seriously compromised”
by the material relating to the motor
accident. The Arbitrator said he was not persuaded Ms Ooi’s histories and
descriptions
of the mechanism of injury were accurate. This deprived the medical
evidence on which Ms Ooi relied of weight, and she could not
discharge her onus
of proving ‘injury’. I was not persuaded the Arbitrator’s
decision on ‘injury’ was
against the weight of the
the reasons summarised above I concluded that Ms Ooi’s appeal failed. She
seeks a reconsideration of that decision.
THE NATURE OF THE RECONSIDERATION POWER
Section 350(3) of the 1998 Act provides:
“The Commission may
reconsider any matter that has been dealt with by the Commission and rescind,
alter or amend any decision
previously made or given by the
Commission.”
power is discretionary. There is a helpful summation of the principles governing
the reconsideration power in the decision of
Samuel v Sebel Furniture
, which has been repeatedly applied in the Commission. Following a
review of the authorities Acting Deputy President Roche
“Having regard to the above authorities and the
provisions and objectives of the 1998 Act I believe that the following
are applicable to reconsideration applications under section 350(3)
of the 1998 Act:
section gives the Commission a wide discretion to reconsider its previous
decisions (‘
the word ‘decision’ is not defined in section 350, it is defined for
the purposes of section 352 to include ‘an
award, order, determination,
ruling and direction’. In my view ‘decision’ in section 350(3)
includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, any award, order or determination
of the Commission;
the discretion is a wide one it must be exercised fairly with due regard to
relevant considerations including the reason for
and extent of any delay in
bringing the application for reconsideration (‘
of the factors to be weighed in deciding whether to exercise the discretion in
favour of the moving party is the public interest
that litigation should not
proceed indefinitely (‘
reconsideration
may be allowed if new evidence that could not with reasonable diligence have
been obtained at the first Arbitration
is later obtained and that new evidence,
if it had been put before an Arbitrator in the first hearing, would have been
lead to a different result (‘
the broad power of ‘review’ in section 352 (which was not
universally available in the Compensation Court of NSW)
the reconsideration
provision in section 350(3) will not usually be the preferred provision to be
used to correct errors of fact,
law or discretion made by Arbitrators;
on the facts of the particular case the principles enunciated by the High Court
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
’) may prevent a party from pursuing a claim
or defence in later reconsideration proceedings if it unreasonably refrained
pursuing that claim or defence in the original proceedings
mistake or oversight by a legal adviser will not give rise to a ground for
reconsideration (‘
Commission has a duty to do justice between the parties according to the
substantial merits of the case (‘
’ and section 354(3)
of the 1998
THE BASIS ON WHICH THE RECONSIDERATION APPLICATION IS
Ooi forwarded the reconsideration material to the Commission under cover of two
emails on 9 July 2020. These had attached a letter
to the President dated 8 July
2020 seeking reconsideration (the Reconsideration letter) and various documents,
including reports
of Dr Champion dated 29 July 2013 and 29 May 2018 and
some witness statements. The letter to the President
“During the appeal process in 2006, there was no
hearing or oral evidence given about my work duties, nature of work, working
long hours, the difficult work situation and the lack of duty of care at the
workplace for my safety and well-being. It was determined
that more evidence was
necessary to discharge the onus of proof of work-related injuries as the medical
evidence and expert opinions
insufficient.”
Ooi says that her work-related injuries occurred during her employment from 1990
to 2003. She alleges there is a “[d]eterioration
of pre-existing
work-related injuries manifesting in bilateral shoulder pain”. She says
x-rays of the left shoulder requested
in 2013 by Dr Browne, a
rheumatologist, reported tendonitis. She says that left shoulder pain
pre-existed at work and was “progressively
worsened with overcompensating
for right shoulder”. She refers to long hours, an “ever increasing
workload” and
“pressured, fast and intensive keyboard
applications”. She also refers to “ongoing long term stress and
on mind and body”. She says she regularly worked a “constant
60 hour week”.
Ooi addresses at some length on negligence and alleged failures by NEC to comply
with its occupational health and safety
obligations.
This is largely
irrelevant to the application to reconsider. She addresses on s 9A of the 1987
Act and whether there are ‘lifestyle
factors’ that could have
contributed to her injury.
is of little relevance to the reconsideration application. Ms Ooi’s
application failed on the issue of ‘injury’,
not on the basis of
whether s 9A was satisfied or not.
Ooi refers to two specific matters that were important in how the arbitral
proceedings and appeal were dealt with in the 2004 proceedings.
In respect of
the motor vehicle accident and her activities at Mr Johnstone’s house, she
(a) “The minor traffic accident in January 2001 is
not a contributing factor to my
pre-existing work related Repetitive Strain
Injury (RSI) or Occupational Overuse Syndrome
; which is typical of nature of
work and heavy reliance on keyboard work for an office worker at the workplace
over many years as
medically proven.” (emphasis in original)
(b) “Life situation in the real world – in 2004 I (the Applicant)
lend support in a life threatening medical situation
for a frail elderly person
(the late Mr Johnstone). As a short-term carer with a disability, I relied on
the existing automated domestic
system, with no heavy lifting or heavy manual
work required of me. I take great care of my own health and safety first. A
statement from Mr R Kelso (a close friend of the late Mr Johnstone,
as attached) confirms this life circumstance that did not cause
or serve to
aggravate my pre-existing work
Ooi refers to various aspects of her duties that she describes as “other
relevant considerations
” (emphasis in original). These include not
being allowed to take her son to a dentist in her lunch hour without taking
leave and not being allowed to leave work slightly early to take her son
to athletics training. She regards the division of work
between herself and
other workers as having been unfair. She says she managed her “chronic
pains and fatigue” with sick
leave, annual leave and her own expense. She
says she suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder and heart
palpitations.
Ooi says she seeks weekly compensation, medical and related expenses, permanent
impairment compensation, payment for pain and suffering,
psychological injury
and past and future economic
Ooi refers to various “Rules of Law” on which she relies. She refers
to the statutory objectives of the Commission
(s 3 of the 1998 Act) and to ss 4,
9, 9A, and 11A of the 1987 Act. She submits that on the probabilities her
work was the substantial
contributor to the aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation, and continued deterioration of her work-related injuries that
of and during her employment from the 1990s to 2003. She refers to
s 350(3) of the 1998 Act and submits reconsideration should be
there is new evidence that could not have been reasonably been obtained prior to
the decision, which would likely have
led to a different result. She refers to s
352(6) of the 1998 Act, which governs the admission of fresh or additional
evidence in
Presidential appeals. She submits s 352(7) permits a
Presidential member to revoke a decision and make a new decision in its place.
She refers to s 356(3) of the 1998 Act which permits the Commission to refuse a
right of legal representation to an insurer if a
unrepresented.
have read and taken into account the whole of the reconsideration letter,
including those parts that are not referred to in this
summation of Ms
Ooi’s description of the submissions and issues. Ms Ooi’s material
includes a document headed “LC
OOI MEDICAL FACTS SUMMARY”. It is
seven pages in length and sets out matters of history (things such as
Ms Ooi’s height,
weight, family history and the like). Much of its
content involves topics on which her opinion as a lay person would not carry
(for example matters such as the ergonomics of her work-station,
causation of various medical conditions and complaints, comments
failure to comply with work, health and safety guidelines, broad judgements on
the non-supportive nature of her work
situation).
Ooi also attaches a medical certificate of Dr Konduru dated 22 February 2020. It
nominates an injury date of 26 September 2003
and describes the work related
injury/disease as “Rt shoulder/ neck injury/ anxiety/ depression/ lower
back pain, chronic pain/
Ooi attaches a statement of Ronald Kelso dated 24 August 2019. Mr Kelso states
that his son and Ms Ooi’s son were “schoolmates”.
says he was a “mate” of Mr Johnstone for over 25 years, before Mr
Johnstone’s death in 2011. He states
that Mr Johnstone’s home was
“well equipped with modern domestic appliances”, there was “no
heavy lifting
or strenuous labour required for his domestic chores”. There
was “no messy cooking required”. His shopping trolley
“never anything over 5 kg or 10 kg to carry”. He said that Ms Ooi
only helped out when Mr Johnstone was “considered
unstable”, a “couple of weeks only”.
Ooi relies on two further reports of Dr Champion, dated 29 July 2013 and 29 May
2018, that are attached to her correspondence.
In the earlier of these Dr
Champion described the “overview” set out in his last previous
report dated 10 November 2009:
“I concluded that the right
cervicobrachial, right shoulder and thoracolumbar regional back pain disorders
had been substantially
causally influenced by the nature and conditions of her
employment. These were not primarily psychologically driven disorders but,
with all chronic pain syndromes, psychological factors had been caused by the
chronic pain disorder and in turn had no doubt contributed
to worsening of the
pain experience and disability. I had acknowledged that the motor vehicle
accident in January 2001 probably contributed
5 – 10% to the chronic neck
Champion said Ms Ooi underwent surgical decompression of the right shoulder with
patch repair of the supraspinatus tendon at the
hands of Dr Cass in November
2011. Dr Champion quoted from an MRI report on the right shoulder dated 23
November 2011, in which the
reporting doctor described “Full thickness
tear of the supraspinatus tendon with only mild tendon retraction of up to 1 cm.
Prominent acromial spurring.” Dr Champion referred to a report from the
Royal North Shore Hospital Pain Management Service
dated 14 May 2013. He said an
accompanying psychological report diagnosed an “adjustment disorder with
mixed anxiety and depression,
related to her pain disorder.” Dr Champion
referred to “thoracolumbar back pain” that was “less well
over the years”. He said there was “evidence that Ms Ooi
reported her back pain relatively early and concluded that there
substantial biomechanical causal influence related initially to the nature and
conditions of her employment”. The
doctor described Ms Ooi as
“permanently unfit for
Champion’s report dated 29 May 2018 referred to and quoted from a
statement of Ms Ooi in support of her reconsideration application.
said he understood that Ms Ooi wished to write to the President of the
Commission seeking reconsideration “based
on new evidence, or rather
evidence not previously presented”. Dr Champion said he “will
support her to the best of my
capacity, while endeavouring to remain realistic
and objective”.
Champion said “Her current symptoms are the same as they have been for
many years. The most important regions of chronic
pain are the shoulders, more
on the right side, right pectoral region, neck, upper back, right upper quadrant
of abdomen, lower back.
There has been a gradual worsening trend.” Dr
Champion set out a “long and somewhat repetitive” document from Ms
Ooi, which he said he had edited “mainly to change to third person
expression and to adjust
It is generally
consistent with the matters Ms Ooi put to the President in the reconsideration
letter. Dr Champion gave a diagnosis:
“... Ms Ooi’s
chronic multiregional work-related and post-traumatic pain disorders have
extended to be classifiable as a chronic widespread pain
disorder (while the
primary regions of trauma-related chronic pain are still evident over and above
the widely extended pain
). The validity of her pain reporting is strongly
supported by the somatosensory test findings, which provide good clinical
of central sensitisation, now widespread/generalised”. (emphasis
in original)
Ooi also relies on a joint statement by Jason Chung and Land Chung, her
siblings. The statement is generally laudatory of Ms Ooi’s
character, work
ethic and the like. It makes multiple assessments of the causes of matters such
as Ms Ooi’s divorce, mental
state, medical situation and injuries. It is
by and large impossible to know which of the siblings was responsible for which
views contained in the document. It is of little probative force, having
regard to the provisions of r 15.2 of the
Workers Compensation Commission Rules,
(the Rules).
material relied on also includes a 19 page document headed “Reasons for
Reconsideration of Work Injury Claim”. Although
more lengthy, its contents
are generally consistent with the submissions made in the Reconsideration
Reasons for Reconsideration also refer to the specific matters which assumed
significance in the Foggo reasons and the Presidential
decision. The motor
vehicle accident is described as “minor”, it is said that “all
medical evidence proved that
this incident cannot cause such an
pre-existing occupational overuse injuries
sustained and progressively
deteriorated from working as an office worker with NEC from 1990 till 2003
(injury manifested through
an extended period of many
(emphasis in
Ooi refers to her domestic services for Mr Johnstone as “short term
domestic help rendered (not by choice) to support the
late Mr Johnstone after
his plea for support with life threatening ailments”. She states this
“did not cause my
pre-existing
occupational overuse work-related
injuries” (emphasis in original). She says that Mr Johnstone’s home
equipped with fully automated appliances”. “There
was no need for heavy lifting or intensive manual labour”. She
submits the
medical evidence proves her injuries resulted from her performance of office
The Respondent’s Response
Response is contained in a letter from the respondent’s solicitors to the
Registrar dated 2 October 2020. It states that
the initial proceedings (5574/05
(sic 04)) resulted in an award for the respondent. It submits that since that
time two applications
for reconsideration were dismissed by the Commission
“as a consequence of [Ms Ooi’s] failure to adequately particularise
her claim and her failure to comply with the Commission’s
procedures”. The respondent submits the claim continues to
“deficient and misconceived”.
Ooi’s reconsideration letter, near its outset, states that reconsideration
is requested “under Sections 329(1A), 350(3)
and 378” of the 1998
Act. The respondent submits that, to the extent that the application relies on s
329(1A), the submissions
are misconceived. Section 329(1A) “is directed to
the procedure for reassessment of a medical dispute” and cannot qualify
the effect of a Certificate of Determination issued by the Registrar. The
respondent submits s 378 is directed towards correcting
uncontentious errors in
Medical Assessment Certificates issued in accordance with s 325. Reliance on s
378 is misconceived and to
the extent that the application has that basis it
should be dismissed.
respondent submits that, in the absence of an appeal, Ms Ooi cannot continue a
‘dispute’ by refusing to accept the
Commission’s
determination. The respondent quotes the passage from
[31] above. The respondent notes that 15 years have passed since Ms Ooi’s
claim was determined with an award for
the respondent. It is eight years since
Ms Ooi’s most recent application for reconsideration was dismissed by
Arbitrator Wynyard.
The respondent observes that Ms Ooi makes no attempt to
provide a reason for the extent of the delay. There are references to her
difficulties in obtaining “legal help”, but this does not account
for the extensive delay.
respondent refers to the two most recent reports of Dr Champion, 29 July 2013
and 29 May 2018. It submits there is no explanation
for why these have
“only recently surfaced”. Their issue, approximately 10 to 15 years
after the alleged injury “suggests
they would carry little, if any
evidentiary weight”. The respondent submits Ms Ooi did not appeal the
prior decisions which
she now seeks to challenge.
respondent submits it is prejudiced by the “significant time which has
elapsed since the initial decision”. It submits
the current application,
like those that preceded it, is “frivolous or vexatious or otherwise
misconceived or lacking in substance
[and] should be dismissed in accordance
with Section 354(7A) of the 1998 Act”.
ON THE PAPERS
354(6) of the 1998 Act provides:
“(6) If the Commission
is satisfied that sufficient information has been supplied to it in connection
with proceedings, the
Commission may exercise functions under this Act without
holding any conference or formal hearing.”
parties have not specifically addressed the topic of whether the matter can be
dealt with on the papers. Ms Ooi makes submissions
critical of the fact that the
2004 proceedings were dealt with in the absence of oral evidence. An application
to adduce oral evidence
in the current proceedings has not been presaged. Ms Ooi
has had ample opportunity to put on such statements and other material as
wishes and has lodged statements from her siblings and Mr Kelso in support of
this application. Having regard to Practice Directions
Nos 1 and 6 and the
documents that are before me, I am satisfied that I have sufficient information
to proceed ‘on the papers’
without holding any conference or formal
hearing and that this is the appropriate course in the circumstances.
CONSIDERATION
375 of the 1998 Act provides:
Constitution
Commission for particular proceedings
(1) For the purposes of any proceedings, the Commission is to be
constituted by an Arbitrator except as provided by this section.
(2) The Registrar may give directions as to which Arbitrator is to
constitute the Commission for the purposes of any particular proceedings
class of proceedings.
(3) For the purposes of any proceedings on an appeal against a decision
of the Commission constituted by an Arbitrator, the Commission
constituted by a Presidential member.
(4) The Registrar does not constitute, and does not exercise functions
as, the Commission (except when acting as an Arbitrator pursuant
Registrar’s power to exercise the functions of an Arbitrator).”
accept that I have power to deal with an application for reconsideration of an
appeal. Such an appeal is conducted in compliance
with s 352 of the 1998 Act. In
the circumstances, the various threshold requirements of s 352, such as time
(subs (4)) and the amount
at issue (subs (3)) have been satisfied when the
appeal, the subject of the reconsideration application, was brought in the 2004
proceedings. Section 352(5) of the 1998 Act has
application:
“(5) An appeal under this section is
limited to a determination of whether the decision appealed against was or was
not affected
by any error of fact, law or discretion, and to the correction of
any such error. The appeal is not a review or new hearing.”
It follows that decisions dealing with the conduct of appeals pursuant to s
352(5) have application.
Applications for the admission of fresh evidence are subject to s
Hilliger v Hilliger
Street CJ dealt with a provision, similarly worded to s 350(3) of the
1998 Act, in the
Landlord and Tenant Amendment Act 1948.
decision of
was applied by the Court of Appeal, to the exercise
of the reconsideration power (at the time s 36(2) of the
Compensation Act 1926
) by the then Workers Compensation Commission of New
South Wales, in
Hardaker v Wright & Bruce Pty Ltd
. Their Honours Owen
and Walsh JJ referred to “the width of the power” and
“It is important, naturally, to keep well in mind the
distinction between the existence of the power and the occasion of its
and courts should not lose sight of the general rule that public interest
requires that litigation should not proceed interminably.
A party who seeks or
opposes an order must produce all the available evidence at the original
hearing, and courts must be on their
guard to refuse to allow the same matter to
be litigated again and again. But at the same time it is clear that the
legislature intended
to leave with the prescribed courts the power of reviewing
any decision to see that justice is done between the
Maksoudian v J Robins & Sons Pty Ltd
Bishop J discussed the
principles in reconsideration applications (at that time governed by
Compensation Court Act 1984
“The legal basis for
a reconsideration for an award of the Court as laid down in
previous legislation and
of the present is well settled. There is no
doubt that the discretion of this Court to reconsider is wide and far reaching.
of the Court is to balance the policy requirement of finality of
litigation with the obligation to rectify any clear cut injustice.
The cases do
not comprehensively indicate how the Court is to approach this task, but it does
seem that two broad requirements are
laid down. The first of these is that the
material leading to an application for reconsideration must be what can broadly
be described
as ‘fresh evidence’, namely material that with
reasonable diligence could not have been put before the Court at the time
original proceedings and the application for reconsideration has to move with
appropriate speed and diligence to bring that
matter to the Court's attention.
The second point is that the fresh evidence must be of such a nature that if it
had been before
the Court when the original proceedings were heard it would more
likely than not have affected the outcome of the
proceedings.”
Galea v Ralph Symonds Pty Ltd
O’Meally J said there was “a
distinction between fresh evidence and more evidence”. His Honour
“Even if it could properly be said that fresh
evidence were now available the applicant must satisfy me that that evidence was
not discoverable by the exercise of reasonable diligence at the time of the
hearing before Williams J and that if believed would
be at least a determining
factor in the outcome of the
reconsideration power is a discretionary one. There are multiple factors that
militate against its exercise in the circumstances
of this case.
presence of unexplained delay, and the principle that litigation should not
proceed interminably, are important in the circumstances
of this case. Ms Ooi
worked with the respondent, performing duties that allegedly caused injury, from
1990 to 26 September 2003.
The decision of Arbitrator Foggo was dated 10 May
2005. My appeal decision was dated 26 June 2006. Ms Ooi’s appeal to
of Appeal was dismissed in early 2007 (both February and March are
suggested – see [4] above). That was the conclusion of the
formal appeals
process, over thirteen years ago.
document headed “Summary of Workers Compensation Claim (Amended)” is
attached to the reconsideration application. It
provides a brief chronology of
steps taken in the matter. The period from early 2007, when the appeal to the
Court of Appeal was
dismissed, to October 2010 (when an application was lodged
in the 2010 proceedings) consists of entries that Walker Legal “continued
to pursue matter with NEC”, that a threatening letter was received from
the respondent’s solicitors, and that “Walker
Legal could not pursue
chronology then refers to the 2010 proceedings which were dismissed by
Arbitrator Capel on 16 December 2010. The period from late
2010 to January 2012
is dealt with by a statement that the “Applicant diligently search for
legal representation and has no
luck”, together with reference to the
shoulder surgery undergone by Ms Ooi in November 2011. The chronology then
a letter to the respondent’s insurer in January 2012 seeking
reconsideration, followed by a denial of liability by the insurer
in February
2012, followed by the 2012 proceedings which were dismissed by Arbitrator
Wynyard on 3 May 2012.
period from “2012 – current” is dealt with in a single
“Applicant diligently search for legal help and
for their services with the persistent lack of accountability and transparency
by NEC (the Respondent) impacting on confidence
representatives.”
concluding entry is a reference to the giving of notice to the insurer of the
current reconsideration application. The respondent
submits it is prejudiced by
the delay, although does not proffer particulars of this.
the period of thirteen years, from early 2007 when the formal appeals process
finished to the commencement of the current proceedings
in mid-2020, the only
steps that sought to positively advance the matter were the reconsideration
applications in 2010 and 2012.
The period of eight years from 2012 to 2020 is
largely unexplained. The presence of very extensive delay, which is not
explained, militates heavily against exercise of the discretion in Ms
Ooi’s favour. The course that is being followed amounts
to effectively
litigating the same matter “again and again” (see the passage of
quoted at [59] above).
fundamental reason why Ms Ooi failed before the Arbitrator was because he made
an adverse credit finding (see [28] above and the
Foggo reasons,
[38]–[42]). There were two areas of the evidence that led to
(a) There was overlap between the symptoms Ms Ooi complained
of (neck and shoulders) as a result of the motor vehicle accident and
due to her employment duties.
On 12 April 2002 Ms Ooi attended a general practitioner, Dr Sooy, who she had
previously seen on 25 January 2001 and 27 March 2002
motor vehicle accident. Dr Sooy examined her and completed the “Medical
Certificate” which
formed part of a motor vehicle claim form dated 15
April 2002 submitted by Ms Ooi in the third party claim relating to the accident
that occurred in January 2001. Dr Sooy reported to the third party insurer on
4 September 2002. He reported that as at 12 April 2002
Ms Ooi complained of
limited neck movements, pain at the base of the neck radiating to the shoulders,
that she had been treated by
an acupuncturist and massage therapists, and had
taken various pain relief medication with some temporary relief. The history did
not suggest Dr Sooy was informed of any injury due to Ms Ooi’s work
duties, or that symptoms from the motor vehicle accident
had resolved by October
2001. In the motor vehicle claim form dated 15 April 2002 Ms Ooi responded
“No” to a question
“Have you had any other injuries or
illnesses – before or since the accident – to the same part(s) of
your body?”
The third party claim settled in about January
In her statement dated 13 October 2003, given to investigators investigating
the workers compensation claim, Ms Ooi did not mention
the motor vehicle
accident. She stated that she had not suffered any other injuries that she could
recall, and that she had not suffered
“any similar type injuries that I
presently have”. In her statement dated 19 March 2004, for the purposes of
the workers
compensation claim, she described symptoms commencing in late 2001
and made no mention of the motor vehicle accident. When assessed
by Dr Meares in
November 2003, in connection with the workers compensation claim, Ms Ooi gave
“no history of prior injury”,
the history was silent as regards the
motor vehicle accident. There was no indication, in the reports of Dr Champion,
Ooi’s case in the 2004 proceedings, that Dr Champion was at
that time aware of the motor vehicle accident. Dr Bodel examined
Ms Ooi on 8
November 2004. He recorded a history of the motor vehicle accident in January
2001 with injury to the neck, and that
the “neck resolved before the onset
at work in October 2001”.
It appears likely Ms Ooi and those acting for her were aware of the third
party material from about 27 August 2004 when NEC lodged
an Application to Admit
Late Documents attaching the
(b) The discrepancy between Ms Ooi’s statement dated 19 March 2004
statement dated 15 June 2004, in which she said she provided Mr Johnstone with
domestic assistance for 10 to 12 hours per
Ooi, in the material put on in support of the reconsideration application,
refers to the motor vehicle accident as “minor”
and states it did
not cause her condition. This does not solve the credit issue. Ms Ooi’s
claim failed because the Arbitrator
was not satisfied that her history of
injury, relied on by the doctors who supported her case, should be accepted.
There was significant
unexplained inconsistency, particularly prior to August
2004, between statements and medical histories involving the two injuries.
reasons given in the Presidential decision at [66] to [70], I concluded that the
Arbitrator’s decision was “well
open to him on the evidence”
and did not demonstrate appealable error.
fresh evidence on which Ms Ooi seeks to rely, most specifically relevant to
matters that led to the credit finding, is the statement
of Mr Kelso (see [35]
above). He essentially states that caring for Mr Johnstone would not have been
arduous as Mr Johnstone’s
house had modern, labour saving appliances and
his wants (for example meals) were not great. Ms Ooi’s submissions on
the reconsideration
support this. The prime significance of the evidence before
Arbitrator Foggo, about Mr Johnstone, was that it was difficult to reconcile
Ooi’s evidence of the difficulties she had with her own domestic duties,
with the proposition that she was doing up to 12
hours per week of another
person’s domestic care. If it were accepted that the activities at Mr
Johnstone’s house were
of a relatively undemanding nature, this could
lessen the impact of that apparent discrepancy.
is, however, a difficulty with the use of Mr Kelso’s evidence and the
associated material from Ms Ooi. The passage from
[60] above refers to the need for fresh evidence, relied on in a
reconsideration, to be “material that with reasonable
diligence could not
have been put before the Court at the time of the original proceedings and the
application for reconsideration
has to move with appropriate speed and diligence
to bring that matter to the Court’s attention”. There was no good
why Ms Ooi could not have sought to put on evidence, either in statement
form or orally, at the hearing before Arbitrator Foggo,
to deal with the nature
of the activities she carried out in caring for
Mr Johnstone.
after the commencement of the arbitration hearing, the Arbitrator asked the
legal representatives whether they wished for
Ms Ooi to give some evidence. No
application was made by either
To permit such evidence
to be relied on now, in the context of a reconsideration of the Presidential
decision, approximately 15 years
after the arbitration hearing before Arbitrator
Foggo, would be contrary to the principles that govern reconsiderations. The
would not satisfy the requirements to be admissible as fresh evidence
pursuant to s 352(6) of the 1998 Act, applying the decision
. It could not be said that Ms Ooi moved “with
appropriate speed and diligence” to rely on the further evidence.
Additionally,
the evidence regarding Ms Ooi’s activities looking after Mr Johnstone is
not of such a nature that it would, “if
admitted, ... more likely than not
have affected the outcome of the proceedings” (see the passage of
quoted at [60] above). The evidence may have lessened the
impact of the apparent discrepancy regarding Ms Ooi’s ability to
domestic activities. The difficulty with the inconsistent statements, regarding
the two potential causes of injury, remains,
and would justify the view formed
by the Arbitrator, and confirmed by me on the Presidential appeal, regarding
credit. It follows
that, applying the principles in
evidence of Mr Kelso would not satisfy the criteria for admission as fresh
evidence pursuant to s 352(6) of the 1998 Act. If
admitted, it would not
constitute “material that with reasonable diligence could not have been
put before the Court at the
time of the original proceedings”. It follows
that the material from Mr Kelso, and material from Ms Ooi to similar effect,
does not assist in Ms Ooi’s application for reconsideration.
Ooi relies on further reports of Dr Champion dated 29 July 2013 and 29 May 2018.
It has, throughout, been Dr Champion’s view
that Ms Ooi suffers from
repetitive strain injury as a result of her duties with NEC. In his most recent
report in evidence, dated
29 May 2018, Dr Champion said of the diagnosis:
“... it is better in her context to go with work-related and
trauma-related chronic multiregional pain disorders which have
extended to a
chronic widespread pain disorder.”
pick up the language of O’Meally J in
(see [61] above) the
further medical reports of Dr Champion constitute “more evidence”
rather than “fresh evidence”.
It does not lead to the conclusion
that reconsideration is appropriate.
accept the respondent’s submission that Ms Ooi’s reliance on ss
329(1A) and 378 is misconceived.
Ooi has not persuaded me that the Commission’s discretionary power of
reconsideration pursuant to s 350(3) of the 1998 Act
should be exercised in the
circumstances. The factors overall do not support that conclusion.
Ooi’s application pursuant to s 350(3) of the 1998 Act to reconsider the
Commission’s decision dated 26 June 2006 is
Michael Snell
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
25 November 2020
Claim form 8/10/03, referred to
in Presidential decision of Snell ADP (Presidential decision), [4], transcript
of arbitration hearing
19/4/05 (T), T
Reasons for
decision of Arbitrator Foggo dated 10/5/05 (Foggo reasons),
Foggo reasons,
Foggo reasons,
NSWWCCPD 131
5 DDCR 461 (Presidential
Letter from Gillis
Delaney 29/4/09, Reasons for decision of Arbitrator Wynyard dated 3 May 2012
(Wynyard reasons), [26].
Wynyard reasons, [2]–[3],
Wynyard reasons,
Foggo reasons,
Wynyard reasons,
Wynyard reasons,
Letter from Ms Ooi to
the President 8/7/20 (reconsideration letter), pp
Foggo reasons,
Foggo reasons,
Foggo reasons,
reasons, [28]–[29].
Foggo reasons, [31].
reasons, [33]–[34].
Foggo reasons,
reasons, [41]–[43].
Presidential decision, [32]–[45].
Bindah v Carter Holt
Harvey Woodproducts Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 264
13 DDCR 156
Emmett JA), [111], Jaffarie v Quality Castings Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWWCCPD
, [253] and the cases cited therein (reversed in the Court of Appeal, but
on a different issue).
Presidential decision,
Presidential decision, [23].
Presidential decision, [18],
Presidential decision,
Presidential decision,
Presidential decision,
Presidential decision,
Presidential decision,
Presidential decision, [31].
[2001] NSWCA 305
52 NSWLR 705
Presidential decision,
Presidential decision, [58].
Presidential decision,
NSWWCCPD 141
Reconsideration
letter, p 1.
Reconsideration
letter, pp 3–4.
Reconsideration letter, pp
Reconsideration
letter, p 6.
Reconsideration
letter, p 7.
Reconsideration
letter, pp 7–8.
Reconsideration letter, pp
Reconsideration
letter, pp 9–12.
Champion report 29/7/13, p
Dr Champion report
29/7/13, pp 5–7.
Champion report 29/5/18, pp 1,
Dr Champion report
29/5/18, pp 5–7.
Onesteel Reinforcing Pty Ltd v Sutton
[2012] NSWCA 282
, [3], [59].
for Reconsideration, [16.1].
Reasons for Reconsideration,
Toll Pty Ltd,
[2011] NSWWCCPD 25
10 DDCR 156
Northern NSW Local Health
Network v Heggie
[2013] NSWCA 255
Compensation Nominal Insurer v Hill
[2020] NSWCA 54
CHEP Australia
Ltd v Strickland
[2013] NSWCA 351
12 DDCR 501
(NSW) 105 (
Hardaker v Wright
& Bruce Pty Ltd
[1962] SR (NSW) 244
[1993] NSWCC 36
[1989] NSWCC 4
(1989) 5 NSWCCR 192
Presidential decision,
Presidential decision, [18]–[19], [21]–[22],
Presidential decision,
See the discussion in
the Presidential decision at
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.79 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter