URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/71.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workcover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Sharon Warner) v Premier Steel Technologies Pty Ltd [2006] NSWCIMC 71 (31 May 2006)
CHIEF INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
New South Wales
Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Sharon Warner)
Premier Steel Technologies Pty Ltd
20403528/05/2
Hearing Dates:
Date of Decision:
Legislation:
Occupational Health and Safety Act
Magistrate:
Representation:
Solicitor for the Prosecutor: Mr M Carrick,
Slater and Gordon Solicitors
Solicitor for the Defendant: Mr B
O’Donnell, K B O’Donnell and Associates
Reasons For Decision
1. The defendant pleads guilty to a breach of
Occupational
Health and Safety Act
. The prosecution arises out of an incident on 17
June 2004 at the Wetherill Park premises of the defendant where it conducts a
manufacturing steel products.
2. On that day an employee of the
defendant, Mr Li Xiao, suffered a severe injury to his left hand when the glove
he was wearing was
drawn into the moving parts of a 12 stand roll former machine
referred to at the site as machine number 6.
3. An agreed statement of
facts was provided to the Court by the parties and I do not propose to canvas in
full the contents of that
document. The facts are well known to the parties. For
the purposes of these reasons for decision it is sufficient to note the
At the time of the incident the injured worker was 36 years of age
and had been employed by the defendant for approximately 12 years.
At the time
of the incident he had, for approximately 7 years, held the position of Machine
Setter Leading Hand/Supervisor. The defendant
had a relatively small workforce
at its Wetherill Park premises employing approximately 12 people with
approximately half that number
engaged in management positions. The injured
worker had been trained on all of the machines at the defendant’s premises
was clearly a key person in the defendant’s manufacturing operation
and was the person looked to by the defendant’s machine
operators for
guidance, assistance and supervision in the setting up and operation of the
machines during the production process.
4. The agreed statement of facts
describes the incident itself in the following terms:-
“ASOF 11 :On 17
June 2004, at approximately 2.00pm, a fellow employee, Mr Nguyen was opening
machine number 6 and requested
the employee to check product quality and make
any necessary adjustments as required. It was switched to “Auto” and
at this time and was running.
ASOF 12: At approximately
2.00pm the employee opened the guard on machine number 6 to test the side roll
pressure of a roll set at
approximately the third stand from the guillotine end
of the machine.
ASOF13: As the employee tested the roll pressure his left
hand which was gloved, became caught between the top and bottom of the roll
ASOF 14: When his left hand became caught the employee reached the
on/off bar situated horizontally on the side of machine number
6 to stop the
5. As a consequence of the incident the injured worker
sustained a traumatic amputation injury to the left little finger above the
first joint as well as a crush injury to the left ring finger. Following
hospitalisation, treatment and rehabilitation the injured
worker was able to
without restriction.
6. The first task of the Court is to give
consideration to the objective seriousness of the offence. The machine in
question was guarded
however the guarding on the machine was not fitted with an
interlock device which would cause the machine to cease running in the
that the guarding was moved or lifted. In those circumstances it was a
relatively simple matter for an employee to bypass the
guarding simply by
lifting it and pushing it back which left the machine running without guarding.
It was possible for the machine
to run at full speed with the guarding removed.
In this respect the machine did not comply with Australian Standard 4024.1:1996
Safeguarding of Machinery. Further, the machine did not comply with clause
136(3) of the
Occupational Health and Safety Regulation
Plant – Registration Requirements and Particular Risk Control
7. The defendant was fully aware of the fact that the machine
could be run without the guards being in place. Further, the defendant
recognised the risk to safety associated with the lack of an interlocked device
on the machine. The defendant had sought to address
this risk to safety by
putting in place safe operating procedures which had been revised in February
2004 some four months prior
to the incident. Under the heading “Machine
Safety” the employees of the defendant operating machine number 6 were
“Never put hands in roll former or press when machine is
switched on.” The defendant asserts, and the Court accepts,
provision within the written safe operating procedures for machine number 6 had
been brought to the attention of the injured
worker and that the injured worker
had been fully trained in relation to each of the machines, including machine
number 6, and that
his knowledge and understanding of the working of the
machine, including safe working procedures were at a high level.
is clearly not a case where an inexperienced employee is asked to perform tasks
for which they have received insufficient
operational training. On the material
before the Court the injured worker was regarded as the in-house expert by the
defendant and
he was the person most likely to be given the task of training and
supervising others.
9. There can be no doubt that the use of a machine
that can be operated with the guards out of position constitutes a highly
foreseeable
risk to safety. It was not, in this case, a risk of which the
defendant was unaware. Further, there was a risk that any injury sustained
access to the moving parts of the machine could be of a very serious nature
given the capacity of the machine to run at full speed
10. The method adopted by the defendant to address the
foreseeable risk of injury was to issue an instruction to employees as part
the safe operating procedures to the effect that employees should never put
their hands in the roll former or press when the machine
is switched
11. In the view of the Court this did not constitute an adequate
response to the foreseeable risk to safety. The immediate risk could
addressed by installing an interlock device on the machine for the purpose of
ensuring that the removal of the guarding would
prevent the machine from running
in its normal mode. That step was clearly available to the defendant but was not
taken until after
the incident.
12. Whilst the issuing of a directive to
staff as part of the safe working procedure was an inadequate method when
compared to the
use of an interlock devise I am by no means satisfied that the
direction was enforced as a matter of ongoing policy by the defendant.
no evidence to suggest that this was an isolated incident and that the injured
worker had never previously acted in this
fashion before. It appears to the
Court that the injured worker was so highly respected for his expertise that he
was essentially
unsupervised in the manner in which he carried out his work and
that he had become so comfortable with the machines in question that
unnecessary risks in the manner in which he performed his duties.
13. This defendant comes before the Court with no prior convictions
under the occupational health and safety legislation. Further,
it has responded
appropriately to the incident by moving quickly to carry out appropriate risk
assessments and putting in place,
at some expense substantial modifications to
its machinery. However, the court notes that for a considerable period of time
the defendant
was content to operate with machinery which failed to meet the
standards required by the relevant Australian Standards and to use
which permitted employees to access machinery whilst the machinery was in
motion. This system clearly relied far to heavily
upon the employees of the
defendant, including the injured worker, complying with the direction contained
in the safe working procedures.
In the view of the court this was clearly an
inadequate response to the hazard created by the lack of an interlock system on
guarding to the number 6 machine. In those circumstances I am satisfied that
both a general and specific deterrence factor should
be included in any penalty
imposed by the court. There are subjective factors which mitigate in favour of
the defendant. As indicated
above the defendant comes before the court with no
prior convictions. Although the defendant has a relatively small workforce it
has been in operation for a considerable number of years using machinery of a
potential hazardous nature and in those circumstances
the defendant is entitled
to have it’s good industrial record acknowledged in the sentencing
process. Further, the defendant
has cooperated fully with WorkCover and has gone
to considerable trouble and expense to redesign the guarding on its machinery to
ensure that a similar incident could not reoccur. The court notes that the
defendant’s respect for and reliance upon the expertise
of the injured
worker was such that during the injured workers rehabilitation process the
defendant was anxious to obtain a medical
clearance from the injured workers
treating doctors so as to permit the injured worker to be involved in the
redesign of the defendant’s
machinery and to assist in the risk assessment
process. It is clear that the defendant has genuine contrition and remorse and
appropriate steps to assist the injured worker in relation to his treatment
and rehabilitation and in addition provided assistance
to the injured workers
family during the period that he was hospitalised following the
14. The legislation provides for a maximum penalty of
$550,000 where a defendant is incorporated and has no prior convictions under
the legislation. This court has a jurisdiction to impose a penalty not exceeding
$55,000. Having considered both the objective seriousness
of the offence as well
as the subjective matters in mitigation I find that an appropriate penalty in
this case is $36, 500.00. The
defendant is entitled to a discount in
circumstances where the plea of guilty was entered at the earliest practical
opportunity.
I propose to discount the penalty by 25% which reduces the fine to
$27, 375.00. There will be a moiety of the fine to the Prosecutor.
notes that on behalf of the defendant audited financial records where provided
which indicated that the defendant has not
traded profitable over recent years.
The court is satisfied however that the defendant is not in a position where any
doubt exists
as to its capacity to meet its financial obligations and pay any
fine imposed by the Court. In this regard the court notes in particular
directors report contained in the most recent financial accounts of the
defendant which records the fact that the foreign company
which has a
controlling share in the defendant is so placed as to ensure the financial
viability and solvency of the company in the
foreseeable future.
defendant is ordered to pay the prosecutors costs in the sum of $3,338.46. The
fine and the professional costs shall be paid
within 28 days at the Level 4
Registry of the Court, Downing Centre, 143-147 Liverpool Street, Sydney.
Chief Industrial Magistrate
31 May 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (41.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter