URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWNMT/2013/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:04:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION (HCCC) V SIMONSEN [2013] NSWNMT 21 (25 October 2013)
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL
Matter No: 048/ 2012
CITATION: HEALTH CARE COMPLAINTS COMMISSION (HCCC) V
[2013] NSWNMT 21
( 25 OCTOBER 2013)
INQUIRY INTO A
Complainant
: Health Care Complaints Commission
: Andrew Stuart Simonsen
Hon Jennifer Boland AM (Chairperson)
Mr Ronald Wilson (Nurse Member)
Ms Lynette Hopper (Nurse Member)
Ms Frances Taylor (Lay Member)
Date and place of hearing:
24 July 2013 at Sydney
NON PUBLICATION ORDERS APPLY
Orders and Reasons for Decision:
Representation
Complainant: Ms E Brus of counsel instructed by Ms J Dinihan for the Health
Care Complaints Commission
Respondent: Mr Simonsen appeared in person
Complaints against a nurse of unsatisfactory
professional conduct and professional misconduct. Where practitioner admits
the complaints (Complaints One, Two, Three and Five) asserted by the
Health Care Complaints Commission but denies other complaints
(Complaint Four,
Six, Seven and Eight). Whether or not appropriate to have a “two stage
hearing” to consider appropriate
protective orders. HELD – Where
allegations of unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct
are established
– where practitioner is unrepresented. HELD - appropriate
for there to be a “two stage” hearing.
Legislation
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (NSW)
Cases cited
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
104 CLR 186
HCCC v Davis (No 1) [2013]NSWNMT 17
Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWSC 70
Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 363
Lucire v Health
Care Complaints Commission [2011]NSWCA 99
Makita v Sprowles
32 NSWLR 705
Pillai v Messiter
(No 2) (1989) 16 NSWLR 19
Transport Authority of New South Wales v Nweiser
(1992) 28 NSWLR
REASONS FOR DECISION
What the Tribunal decided
25 October 2013 the Nursing and Midwifery Tribunal (“the Tribunal”)
published reasons in which it made findings that
Mr Andrew Stuart Simonsen (aka
O’Neill) (“the practitioner”) is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct and
professional misconduct. The Tribunal also found the
practitioner suffers an impairment, which is likely to detrimentally affect
capacity to practise nursing.
Tribunal ordered that the Health Care Complaints Commission (“the
HCCC”) and the practitioner have the opportunity
to provide to the
Tribunal any written submissions in respect of appropriate protective orders and
costs of the proceedings, and
if the practitioner wished to do so, to again
appear before the Tribunal (a second stage hearing) at a date and time to be
by the Coordinator of the Tribunal. At the second stage hearing, if
requested, the Tribunal will hear oral submissions about appropriate
orders and costs of the proceedings. Otherwise the Tribunal will, following
receipt of written submissions, determine
appropriate protective orders and
costs and publish separate reasons for its decision.
Tribunal also made a non-publication order. This order precludes publication of
the name of a person and the patients appearing
in the Schedule to the Complaint
other than in the Reasons for Decision as provided to the parties to the
proceedings.
Introduction
catalyst for these proceedings was the practitioner’s conduct at Chesalon
Aged Care, Richmond (“Chesalon”) on
the evening of 3 July 2011 and
in the early hours of the following morning. The practitioner was the registered
nurse in charge of
that facility on those days.
3 July 2011 the practitioner was a relatively recent nursing graduate, although
he had worked for the previous nine years initially
as an Assistant in Nursing,
and then as an Endorsed Enrolled Nurse. He had a troubled youth, spending
significant periods of time
in juvenile justice facilities, and in his early
adult years was incarcerated for a number of criminal offences. During his time
in gaol the practitioner says he used heroin, but denies he was, or is, addicted
to that or any other drug. He admits he has used
illicit drugs recreationally,
including in 2013, and has obtained prescriptions for other drugs by
“doctor shopping”
but says the drugs obtained were not for
the evening of 3 July 2011, whilst in charge at Chesalon, the practitioner
permitted his friend, Mr TA (Person A) entry to that
aged care facility. The
practitioner knew Person A was addicted to heroin, and described him as “a
junkie”. The practitioner
said he allowed Person A entry so that he could
provide him with clean syringes to “shoot up”.
significant events occurred on that night, or in the early hours of the morning.
The events surround the practitioner’s
proposed administration of morphine
to a Chesalon patient, Patient B. The practitioner says that he proposed to
administer morphine
to Patient B based on oral advice given to him at handover
by another registered nurse. But after checking the patient’s records,
and discovering no current order for morphine, he discarded the drugs he had
earlier drawn up, both from Chesalon stock, by mistake,
and subsequently the
patient’s own stock. He made entries reflecting the discarding of the
drug in two drug registers. Mr
Tonderai Mutasa (“Mr Mutasa”) an
Assistant in Nursing witnessed the practitioner’s signature. However, Mr
states he did not see the drug discarded. Early the following day Mr
Mutasa’s concerns about the practitioner’s conduct
on the evening
shift were reported to the Director of Nursing.
during the evening, Mr Mutasa and the other Assistant in Nursing on duty, Ms
Joanne Worrell (“Ms Worrell”), observed
the practitioner’s
behaviour to be unusual. The practitioner left a patient unattended on the
toilet, and then denied he had
taken the patient to the toilet. He later
questioned the patient and the patient’s neighbour asserting they were
in their belief (that he had taken the patient, who was unable to walk
unassisted, to the toilet and had forgotten to return to assist
her to return to
Worrell said, shortly after the toilet incident, she saw the practitioner in the
medication room and he appeared “spaced
out”. Mr Mutasa described
him appearing “weird”, that he was shaking “and appeared to be
Later, in the early morning hours on the shift, Ms Worrell
found a broken vial of morphine on the toilet floor. She also found smashed
glass on the floor and blood on the toilet seat and cistern as well as on the
sink in the toilet.
HCCC allege that practitioner self-administered morphine on 3-4 July 2011
(“the shift”).
the events which occurred during the shift the practitioner’s employment
at Chesalon was terminated. A hearing before
the Nursing and Midwifery Council
(“the Council”) resulted in conditions being placed on the
practitioner’s registration
in September 2011.
practitioner obtained employment at Sir Moses Montefiore Jewish Home, Hunters
Hill (“Montefiore”) commencing on 5
September 2011. He was aware of
the conditions placed on his registration by at least 27 September 2011.
However, he did not tell
his new employers about his conditions until 22
December 2011, nor did he comply with conditions imposed in respect of his
of Schedule 8 drugs (“ S8”) whilst employed at
Montefiore.
events led to the HCCC instituting proceedings by way of a Complaint dated 11
January 2013 in the Tribunal. The Complaint was
amended prior to the hearing to
add a further particular of impairment, namely that the practitioner suffers
depression.
The Amended Complaint
Amended Complaint, in summary, alleges that the practitioner:
was convicted of
a criminal offence in 2010;
disclose a relevant criminal offence to the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (“AHPRA”) when
lodging his application for renewal
of his registration in June 2011;
is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct for failing to disclose his criminal offence
and is further guilty of like conduct
because of the events which occurred on
the shift namely that the practitioner:
Person A to enter Chesalon;
authority, provided Person A with two syringes, the property of Chesalon;
- failed to
check Patient B’s medication chart prior to drawing up medication and drew
up two vials of morphine without a medication
- failed to
keep proper records about Patient B’s condition;
- discarded the
morphine without another practitioner being present;
- requested an
Assistant in Nursing to sign the drug register when that Assistant in Nursing
did not witness the drawing up, administration
and discarding of morphine;
vials of morphine for his personal use or purposes; and during the shift self
administered morphine;
failed to notify
Montefiore of conditions placed on his registration by the Council;
contrary to the
conditions on his registration checked or handled S8 drugs without the direct
supervision of a registered nurse;
is guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct in respect of his contravention of
conditions at his employment at Montefiore ;
is guilty of
professional misconduct; and
suffers from a
mental and physical impairment being substance abuse and depression that
detrimentally affects, or is likely to detrimentally
affect, his capacity to
practise nursing.
prior to the hearing the practitioner filed a document in which he conceded
Complaints One, Two, Three and Five of the Amended
Complaint document. For
convenience, a copy of the Amended Complaint is annexed to these reasons and
marked Annexure “A”.
documents relied on by the HCCC, and those relied on by the practitioner, were
admitted into evidence before us without objection.
Documents 1-107 (Volumes 1
and 2) were marked as Exhibit “A”, Documents 1-15 in Volume 3 and 4
were marked respectively
as Exhibit “B” and Exhibit “C”.
The practitioner’s statement (being an email addressed to the Coordinator
of the Tribunal and dated 21 July 2013) was marked as Exhibit
reasons explain the findings the Tribunal made in respect of the complaints,
which findings resulted in the conclusions and
orders summarised at the
commencement of these reasons.
Structure of these
these reasons the Tribunal sets out some relevant background to the
practitioner’s education and nursing experience, and
the facts relevant to
the particulars in the eight complaints. Having referred to the law applicable
to these proceedings, (the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(“the National Law”)) we briefly discuss and make our
independent findings about the conceded complaints. Thereafter,
we examine the
particulars asserted in support of Complaint Four. In determining that
complaint we refer to the documentary evidence,
and discuss and make findings
the complaint as particularised.
then consider whether the matters raised in the relevant complaints constitute
professional misconduct by consideration of the
seriousness or otherwise of the
complaints we find established. Finally, we consider and make findings in
respect of the evidence
relied on by the HCCC to support a claim that the
practitioner is impaired, and incompetent to carry on the practise of nursing.
In determining this final aspect of the Amended Complaint we will refer to and
make findings about the evidence of Dr Anthony Samuels,
psychiatrist, and the
practitioner’s treating doctors and
psychologists.
Concessions made by the practitioner
noted above, in a statement relied on by the practitioner dated 21 July 2013,
and confirmed orally before the Tribunal, the practitioner
conceded Complaints
One, Two, Three and Five. He did not address Complaint Six in his statement,
but orally confirmed he did not
concede this complaint which asserts he is
guilty of professional misconduct as defined in s139E of the National Law.
Whilst admitting
some particulars pleaded in Complaint Four, he denied Complaint
Four which is directed to the events at Chesalon during the shift,
and asserted
his conduct at that time was not unsatisfactory professional conduct. He also
disputed Complaint Seven (an impairment
complaint) and stated he does not have a
substance dependence or substance abuse disorder, nor does he suffer depression.
Consequently,
as these impairments are relied on to support Complaint 8, (the
unfit to practise complaint), he disputed that
noted by the Tribunal to be an assertion, the following facts were accepted as
established by us to the relevant civil standard.
practitioner was born in January 1980. He is accordingly aged 33 years. He
refers to his partner and/or his wife being involved
in proceedings both in the
NSW Children’s Court, and in proceedings in the Family Court of Australia
However, the Tribunal had no precise details of the
practitioner’s family or the court proceedings. He asserts he owns his
own home which is subject to a mortgage.
earlier noted, in 2010, the practitioner was admitted to the degree of Bachelor
of Nursing at the University of Technology, Sydney.
He was first registered as
a registered nurse on 4 November 2010. Prior to obtaining that qualification he
was enrolled at Wetherill
Park TAFE where he obtained a Certificate 1V in
Enrolled Nursing in 2006. In 2001 he obtained a Certificate 111 in Aged Care
obtaining his registration as a registered nurse the practitioner worked
initially for a nursing agency.
2001 and 2010 the practitioner worked at Quakers Hill Nursing Home. He was
employed in that facility between 2006 and 2010
as an Endorsed Enrolled
practitioner asserts he was admitted to Juvenile Justice institutions from about
age 14, and on attaining the age of 18, was incarcerated
in the adult prison
system. The practitioner used heroin whilst an inmate in the adult prison
system. The practitioner’s criminal
record between 1996 and 1998 discloses
convictions for possession of drugs, goods in custody, malicious damage, larceny
offences including unauthorised possession of a firearm.
K. Y. Wu (“Dr Wu”) is the practitioner’s longstanding general
practitioner. Dr Wu’s records disclose that
the practitioner overdosed in
1999 and was admitted to Mt Druitt Hospital.
September 1999 the practitioner was sentenced to two terms of imprisonment (nine
months and fifteen months). In April 2000 the
practitioner appealed his 1999
criminal convictions in the Penrith District Court. His convictions were
confirmed, but his sentence
was reduced to nine months imprisonment. He was
released from gaol, subject to probation and control conditions, on 17 September
2000 the practitioner consulted Dr Wu. The doctor’s records disclose that
the practitioner had been in gaol and involved
in drug use for three years.
During 2001 the practitioner obtained prescriptions from Dr Wu for
2001 the practitioner commenced a court ordered drug rehabilitation programme
conducted at William Booth Centre, Surry Hills.
The practitioner completed six
weeks (Stage 1) of this programme.
practitioner was again convicted of “possession of drugs, having goods
reasonably suspected of being stolen and attempt
to break, enter and
steal” in March 2001. He was convicted of further offences in September
2001 and again sentenced to a
18 June 2002 Dr Wu recorded in the practitioner’s clinical notes
“substance abuse suggested counselling”.
6 February 2003 Dr Wu recorded in the practitioner’s clinical notes
“Had discussion with his friend and himself about
drugs. Withdrawn from
Heroin. Has a baby. Restriction use of medication” On 29 July 2003, Dr Wu
recorded “Working –
chemical abuse, ....advised about
medications”.
25 October 2006 Dr Wu recorded “Smokes marijuana”. “Handling
medications in Nursing Home”.
February 2007 the practitioner was convicted of possessing a prohibited drug and
with cultivating a prohibited plant.
January 2008 the practitioner commenced consulting Dr John Nguyen (“Dr
Nguyen”) a general practitioner. The practitioner
asserts that Dr Nguyen
attended patients at the Quakers Hill Nursing Home, and from time to time, he
saw him at that facility. On
25 July 2008 Dr Nguyen recorded the practitioner
had seen a Dr Po who prescribed Endep for depression. The practitioner was
to be depressed after his partner left him in March 2008. He was again
prescribed Endep at the July consultation.
January 2009 the practitioner again consulted Dr Nguyen who recorded “has
tried various benzos, clonazepam only one that
works”. The doctor’s
records disclose that he discussed treatment options “and importance of
compliance to treatment
– in particular must use according to script
without escalating dose clonazepam 2mg”.
25 January 2010 Dr Nguyen referred the practitioner to Ms Sylvana Farrugia-Mizzi
for management of depression.
the first six months of June 2010 the practitioner consulted Dr Nguyen about
pain as a result of dental infection, and for
depression. He was prescribed
Oxycontin SR Tablets 40mg 1 b.d. He obtained a prescription for Oxycotin on 22
24 June 2010 the practitioner was prescribed Oxycontin by Dr Daryl Li. He
obtained a further Oxycontin prescription from Dr Nguyen
the following day
namely 25 June 2010. Three days later, on 28 June 2010, the practitioner
obtained a prescription for Oxycontin
from Dr Virginia Tamayo. (“Dr
27 July 2010 Dr Nguyen provided a medical certificate for the practitioner in
the name Andrew O’Neill (the practitioner concedes
he used both the name
Simonsen and O’Neill). The certificate states “This is to certify
that Andrew has been suffering
from Depression since March 2008 and was treated
with Endep”.
15 September 2010 the practitioner was charged with an attempt to obtain a
prescribed restricted substance. He was convicted on
9 December 2010, fined
$1,000, and although his appeal to the District Court on severity of sentence
was allowed on 11 February 2011,
his conviction was confirmed. The order that
he pay the fine was discharged.
2010 the practitioner’s brother is asserted to have died from a drug
the first six months of 2011 the practitioner consulted another general
practitioner, Dr Badir Qadri. Dr Badir Qadri died in June
2011. In January
2011 he obtained a prescription for Valium, and on 25 February 2011, 27 June
2011 and 30 June 2011 he obtained
scripts for Oxycontin 40mg. From time to time
thereafter he consulted Dr Badir Qadri’s son who is also a general
practitioner.
4 June 2011 the practitioner obtained an Oxycontin prescription from Dr
20 June 2011 the practitioner obtained employment at Chesalon. His employment
was terminated on 5 July 2011.
30 June 2011 the practitioner failed to notify AHPRA when renewing his
registration of his criminal conviction of 10 December 2010
in respect of the
forged prescription.
16 August 2011 the practitioner obtained a prescription for Oxycontin SR Tablet
40mg and Naprosyn from Dr Nguyen. Two days later,
on 18 August, he obtained a
further prescription for that drug from Dr Ramkrishna T Prabhu.
20 August 2011 the practitioner obtained a prescription for Temazepam from Dr
Tamayo, and on the same day, the practitioner attended
the practice of Dr Osman
Qadi and was prescribed Oxycontin SR Tablet 40mg and Naprosyn Tablets 500mg.
His Oxycontin medication was
reduced to 20mg at a subsequent visit on 26 August
5 September 2011 the practitioner obtained employment as a registered nurse at
Montefiore. He remained in that employment until
December 2011, and towards the
end of his employment, generally worked six shifts each week.
letter dated 19 September 2011 the practitioner was advised of conditions placed
on his registration under s150 of the National
Law by the Council on 1 September
2011. Among the conditions imposed were conditions requiring that he only
administer S8 drugs
under direct supervision, he notify any employer of the
conditions, and undergo random urine drug screens. The practitioner acknowledged
receipt of the letter in a telephone conversation with Dr Margaret Cooke,
(“Dr Cooke”) Executive Officer of the Council
on 27 September
14 November 2011 the practitioner was interviewed by the HCCC. The practitioner
told the HCCC representatives he was, at that
time, employed in his own
business, John’s Mowing.
5 February 2012 the Council determined to review the conditions imposed on the
practitioner’s registration. Different conditions
were imposed on the
practitioner’s registration on 2 March 2012 and those conditions were
noted on the practitioner’s
registration on 16 March 2012. Among the
conditions imposed at that time is a condition that the practitioner attend
random urine
drug testing. The practitioner failed to attend required urine
testing in February and March 2013. The practitioner has not undergone
urine testing since 26 April 2013.
the review of the conditions on the practitioner’s registration he
conceded to the Council that he did not inform officials
at Montefiore of the
conditions on his registration until 22 December 2011 when he resigned from that
14 June 2012 the practitioner wrote to the Council via email. He sought an
extension of time to resume urine drug screens. The
practitioner
Please I ask the Nursing Board to allow me to purchases my ID
and then directly travel to the UDT same day, Please I ask the
Nursing council to understand that if a person using drugs today for
over 1 year
UI. Don’t think they can just stop tomorrow. I want to attend UDT. I
believe this the only way to improve my depression,
I get many times rejected to
even a interview for nursing when I inform of my Conditions. Margret Please let
me attend UDT, This
is want. This will able to pay for next week and attend. I
promise you And the Nursing Board. [Original spelling and grammar]
drug screen conducted on 25 July 2012 recorded that the sample provided by the
practitioner was diluted.
30 July 2012 a psychologist, Fe Limjap, to whom the practitioner was referred by
Dr Tamayo, reported having seen the practitioner
that day for a second session.
The psychologist noted “[the practitioner] presented with symptomatology
of a Major Depressive
Disorder”. At the hearing the practitioner asserted
he was not clinically depressed, but stressed by proceedings in the Family
of Australia in which sexual abuse allegations in respect of one of his children
had been raised against him.
drug screen results of testing conducted on 27 September 2012 disclosed
Oxycodone, Methyl Amphetamine, Morphine, 6- Acetyl morphine
(from heroin). Drug
screen results from 2 October 2012 revealed Methyl
Amphetamine.
The matter in issue
have already noted that, very shortly prior the hearing, the practitioner
conceded Complaints One, Two Three and Five. We will
however, in accordance
with authority, address those complaints briefly. It is also necessary we do so
as these complaints are relied
on to found the complaint of professional
misconduct. Thus, the matters in issue which required determination by the
Tribunal were
essentially whether:
practitioner’s total conduct on the shift, or some aspects of his conduct
that evening/morning, either individually or in
combination, constituted
unsatisfactory professional conduct;
practitioner’s conduct in being convicted of a criminal offence, failing
to accurately report his criminal offence when
renewing his registration in
2011, together with his conduct on the evening shift, and his failure to comply
with conditions imposed
under s150 of the National Law (which is conceded) is
of such a serious nature that it justifies suspension or cancellation of his
registration and is professional misconduct;
the practitioner
suffers an impairment as defined in s 5 of the National Law because he has a
substance dependence or substance abuse
disorder, and/or suffers depression;
the practitioner
has sufficient mental and physical capacity to practise
Relevant Law – including impairment,
unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional misconduct
now to refer relevant provisions of the National Law, and a number of decided
cases, both under the National Law, or its predecessor
(a) the principles underpinning the National Law and
protective orders
3 of the National Law sets out the objectives and guiding principles of the law,
as they apply to the registration scheme.
Section 3A of the National Law sets
out the objective and guiding principle to be applied by a Tribunal in New South
Wales hearing
an inquiry and, if appropriate to do so, when making protective
orders. That provision which has particular relevance in the circumstances
this matter, provides as follows:
In the exercise of functions under
a NSW provision, the protection of the health and safety of the public must be
the paramount consideration.
is also relevant that the Tribunal records that protective orders if made at the
end of a hearing are not intended to punish the
practitioner, but to protect the
public (see
Clyne v NSW Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
(1980) 104 CLR
(b) the burden and standard of proof
is well established, due to the protective nature of the jurisdiction, and the
seriousness of the complaints, both for the practitioner
and the public, that
the standard of proof, is on the balance of probabilities but to the level of
satisfaction described by the
High Court in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
(c) Impairment
Seven asserts the practitioner has an impairment. Impairment is defined in s 5
of the National Law as follows:
"impairment"
, in relation to
a person, means the person has a physical or mental impairment, disability,
condition or disorder (including substance
abuse or dependence) that
detrimentally affects or is likely to detrimentally affect--
(a) for a registered health practitioner or an applicant for registration in
a health profession, the person's capacity to practise
the profession; or
(b) for a student, the student's capacity to undertake clinical training--
(i) as part of the approved program of study in which the student is
enrolled; or
(ii) arranged by an education provider.
(d) unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
is appropriate at this point in the Tribunal’s reasons we set out the
statutory definitions of unsatisfactory professional
conduct (s 139B (1) (a) (b)
(c) and (l)) and professional misconduct which is found in s 139E.
139B (1) (a) (b) (c) and (l) of the National Law are sub-sections of s139B,
which are relevant in this case. They provide
as follows:
Meaning of "unsatisfactory professional conduct" of registered health
practitioner generally [NSW]
"Unsatisfactory professional conduct"
of a registered health
practitioner includes each of the following--
(a) Conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or
care exercised, by the practitioner in the practice of
the practitioner's
profession is significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience.
(b) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of a
provision of this Law, or the regulations under this Law
or under the NSW
regulations, whether or not the practitioner has been prosecuted for or
convicted of an offence in respect of the
contravention.
(c) A contravention by the practitioner (whether by act or omission) of--
(i) a condition to which the practitioner's registration is subject; or
(ii) an undertaking given to a National Board.
............
(l) Any other improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or
purported practice of the practitioner's profession.
139E is in the following terms:
139E Meaning of "professional misconduct" [NSW]
For the purposes of this Law,
"professional misconduct"
registered health practitioner means--
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration; or
(b) more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when
the instances are considered together, amount to conduct
of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner's
registration.
to the introduction of the National Law the concept of professional misconduct
was discussed and its ramifications explained
by Kirby P (as his Honour then
Pillai v Messiter
1989 16 NSWLR 197.
In that case the NSW
Court of Appeal was dealing with an appeal from a decision of the Medical
Tribunal of NSW. The Medical Tribunal
had found a medical practitioner should
be removed from the register for “misconduct in a professional
sense” (the then
relevant statutory provision). At the time of the
hearing of the appeal against the Medical Tribunal’s decision a new
legislative
provision had been enacted dealing with “professional
misconduct”. The new provision was inapplicable to the appeal.
Honour explained, without deciding, that then new statutory test for
“professional misconduct” “may introduce
a wider class of
conduct than has hitherto been regarded as relevant”. Kirby P went on to
explain that the concept of “misconduct”
may include: “gross
negligence ....particularly if accompanied by indifference to, or lack of
concern for, the welfare of the
Honour further explained at 200:
Departures from elementary and
generally accepted standards, of which a medical practitioner could scarcely be
heard to say that he
or she was ignorant could amount to professional
misconduct. But the statutory test is not met by mere professional incompetence
or by deficiencies in the practice of the profession. Something more is
required. It includes a deliberate departure from accepted
standards or such
serious negligence as, although not deliberate, to portray indifference and an
abuse of the privileges which accompany
registration as a medical practitioner
[citations omitted]
recent cases discussing unsatisfactory professional conduct and professional
misconduct focus on the wording of the relevant statute
and have moved away from
“the language of moral obloquy” referred to in earlier decisions
with peers now expressing their
views “in terms of strong criticism rather
than ‘strong reprobation’”. (see
Lucire v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 99
; Donnelly v Health Care Complaints
Commission (NSW)
[2011] NSWSC 70
Complaints One, Two
complaints each have their genesis in the practitioner’s charge and
conviction for seeking to or obtaining a prescribed
restricted substance,
(Temazepam) using a forged prescription. It is convenient we deal with them
concurrently.
The evidence
The practitioner’s
statement and oral evidence
practitioner forwarded an email to the Tribunal’s Coordinator, which email
he adopted as his statement in these proceedings.
The statement traverses all
complaints, except Complaint Six. It is convenient to refer to it now in its
entirety, although the
matters raised go beyond the complaints now under
discussion. In summary the practitioner said that he:
had been charged
with an offence in relation to a prescription that was issued in his
aunty’s name, that he had no idea the
script was unlawfully obtained, and
thought he had been acquitted of the charge;
said there was
no documentation stating “I can’t let general public in the facility
[Chesalon]”;
stated it should
not matter if Person A is a “junkie” because he has noticed
“many person who may look jubious but
still entitled in nursing homes,
hospitals etc” [original spelling and grammar];
gave Person A
two syringes with the thought of his (Person A’s) personal health and that
of “the greater community health”;
had been given
verbal instructions at handover “to give morphine in the event that the
resident [Patient B] was in pain and
unsettled”;
had documented
Patient B’s progress and pain on a scrap of paper which he was supposed to
transfer to the computer system at
a later time;
did give pain
relief to Patient B, but forgot to sign the medication chart;
had discarded
morphine out of the syringe in the sink in the treatment room, and that he
discarded the morphine in front of Mr Mutasa;
had drawn up
medication without the supervision of another staff member;
denied taking
medication for his personal use. Rather he stated “Person A” would
have been the person who stole the open
morphine vial from yellow sharps bin,
and he believed Person A “lied to the commission when he said he only
injected valium”;
does not suffer
from an impairment. He is not addicted to drugs stating “I don’t
abuse drugs daily or 2-3 days in a row,
I may have used recreational drugs in
the past but never to the point where it controlled my
practitioner was cross-examined by Ms Brus, counsel for the HCCC, at the
hearing. The practitioner conceded he did not reveal
to the then Nursing and
Midwifery Board certain criminal offences when he made application for
registration in 2006. That failure
to disclose is not relevant to the present
complaints.
questioned about disclosing the 2010 offence (confirmed in February 2011 in the
District Court) the practitioner agreed that
the Certificate of Conviction
relied on by the HCCC is correct, but asserted he had only found out a few
months ago that his conviction
was confirmed in the District Court (transcript
23 July 2013 p50).
The evidence relied on by the HCCC
records produced under summons from the NSW Police (COPS records) disclose the
practitioner was convicted on 9 December 2010 in
the Local Court at Mt Druitt
with “obtain/attempt to obtain prescribed restricted substance”. He
was fined $1,000 and
the drugs ordered to be destroyed.
Certificate of Conviction produced by the HCCC discloses the practitioner
appealed the severity of the Magistrate’s sentence.
On appeal to the
District Court at Parramatta his conviction was confirmed by his Honour Judge
Colefax, SC but his obligation to
pay the fine was discharged.
Certificate of Conviction provides conclusive evidence to establish Complaint
Two, also conceded by the practitioner, is framed as a complaint of
unsatisfactory professional conduct. The particulars
relied on, in addition to
those pleaded in Complaint One, assert a failure by the practitioner to comply
with s130 (1) of the National
Law on his conviction on 9 December 2010, or
confirmation of that conviction on 11 February 2011.
noted above, the practitioner asserted that, until shortly prior to this
hearing, he understood the charge was dismissed. The
practitioner’s
evidence is that he was not represented before his Honour Judge Colefax, SC at
the hearing of his appeal. While
ignorance of the law is no excuse, we note
that while the practitioner’s conviction was upheld, the appeal, which was
on severity
of sentence, was allowed. This provides some basis for the
practitioner’s asserted confusion about this conviction. But Complaint
is agitated on the basis of failure to comply with s130(1) of the National
130 (1) of the National Law provides as follows:
130 Registered
health practitioner or student to give National Board notice of certain events
(1) A registered health practitioner or student must, within 7 days after
becoming aware that a relevant event has occurred in relation
practitioner or student, give the National Board that registered the
practitioner or student written notice of the event.
(2) A contravention of subsection (1) by a registered health practitioner or
student does not constitute an offence but may constitute
behaviour for which
health, conduct or performance action may be taken.
(3) In this section--
"relevant event"
(a) in relation to a registered health practitioner--
(i) the practitioner is charged, whether in a participating jurisdiction or
elsewhere, with an offence punishable by 12 months imprisonment
or more; or
(ii) the practitioner is convicted of or the subject of a finding of guilt
for an offence, whether in a participating jurisdiction
or elsewhere, punishable
by imprisonment; or .............
earlier noted, the COPS records disclose that the practitioner was charged with
obtain/attempt obtain prescribed restricted substance.
The practitioner’s
evidence is the drug in question was Temazepam. The relevant section of the
Crimes Act 1900
or any relevant NSW or Commonwealth legislation
dealing with prescribed restricted substances is not referred to in the COPS
the Certificate of Conviction or elsewhere in the documents relied on
by the HCCC. It is therefore not possible for us to be conclusively
that the charge heard by the Local Court on 9 December 2010 was a charge
relating to an offence carrying a penalty punishable
by 12 months imprisonment,
or whether the conviction or finding of guilt was for an offence punishable by
imprisonment.
these circumstances, while we accept the practitioner failed to notify AHPRA of
the charge and conviction in relation to the forged
prescription, we are not
independently satisfied that Complaint Two is established notwithstanding the
repeating of the particulars
in respect of Complaint One. This is because it
appears to us that pleadings relied on under
(1) of the National Law are
the foundation of this complaint. Those particulars are not established to the
requisite civil standard.
Three is also framed as a complaint of unsatisfactory professional conduct under
s139B. It asserts, in addition to the matters
relied on to establish Complaint
One and Two, that the practitioner failed to disclose in his application form
for renewal of registration
that he had been made subject of a criminal finding
for an offence on 11 February 2011 at the Parramatta District Court. This date
is, of course, the confirmation of his earlier conviction on 9 December
practitioner’s renewal of registration was made electronically to AHPRA.
He answered the question “Do you have a
criminal history”
“No”. The practitioner does not dispute that he did not advise the
National Board in June 2011
when renewing his registration of the charge or
conviction. Notwithstanding the practitioner may have been confused about the
of the outcome of the appeal, he was obliged to disclose this event when
renewing his registration (see
(definition of criminal history) and
of the National Law).
basis of unsatisfactory professional conduct under s139B relied on in respect of
this complaint is improper or unethical conduct
related to the practice of
nursing. While there is no evidence before us that the events in Complaint One
related to the practice of nursing or purported practice of
nursing, they reflect on the practitioner’s character. The finding
guilt in respect of this offence provides proof that the practitioner had the
requisite intent to obtain prescription drugs illegally.
That conduct is not
the type of conduct in which a person who professes to practise an honourable
profession associated with health
care of the public should engage. The
practitioner’s conduct in respect of his failure to notify a criminal
conviction when
renewing his registration was improper or unethical conduct.
We are satisfied that the complaint of unsatisfactory professional
asserted in Complaint Three is established.
matters set out in this complaint are the gravamen of the proceedings, and the
complaint which asserts failure to comply with
conditions imposed under
the National Law (Complaint Five), which is admitted, flows as a direct
consequence of this complaint.
The Peer Reviewer’s
turning to the eleven particulars relied on by the HCCC to establish this
complaint (which substantially sets out the incidents
which occurred on the
shift referred to at the commencement of these reasons) we refer to salient
portions of the Peer Reviewer’s
report relied on by the HCCC. This
report, which is undated, was prepared by Ms Andrea Jordan (“Ms
Jordan”) at the request
of the HCCC. The report was received by the HCCC
on 18 January 2012. The practitioner did not require Ms Jordan, or any other
relied on by the HCCC, to be available for cross-examination on his/her
evidence. The report therefore is unchallenged.
Jordan is a very experienced senior registered nurse with a clinical specialty
in aged care. Her expertise to provide the opinions
set out in her report is
not in doubt (see
Makita v Sprowles
(2001) 32 NSWLR 705).
commenting on the practitioner’s medication handling and compliance with
policies whilst on duty on the shift, including
drawing up the morphine for
Patient B when she had no current order for that drug, and asking Mr Mutasa to
sign the two drug registers,
she opined:
When all the above are
viewed collectively [the practitioner’s] conduct fell significantly below
the standard expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or
experience, applicable at the time of the conduct. This departure invites my
strong criticism.
commenting on the practitioner’s evidence in an interview with the HCCC
where he asserted he made a mistake when recording
in the drug register the time
and date of drawing up and discarding 10mg morphine from the Chesalon stock for
Patient B at 0135 on
4 July 2011 (having recorded discarding of 10 mg morphine
of the patient’s personal stock at 2145 on 3 July 2011), Ms Jordan
“it is plausible that a simple error was made”. She goes on to
explain that if the correct time was, as asserted
by the practitioner, 0145, a
ten minute time interval between drawing up the morphine from the Chesalon
stock, realising the error,
discarding the drug and redrawing up morphine from
the patient’s own supply is plausible given the practitioner’s level
of experience. She notes however a more experienced nurse would have used the
morphine first drawn up, written up an incident report,
and explained the
rationale to management for his/her action.
Significantly
however Ms Jordan points out that “what is not plausible” is:
the practitioner
identifying a patient he barely knows as being in such acute pain as to require
practitioner did not consult with his nursing colleagues about the
patient’s pain;
that he did not
document the patient’s pain or rationale for wanting to administer
that he did not
check the medication chart to see if the patient was prescribed morphine until
after he had drawn up the morphine
from the Chesalon stock and discarded it and
then drawn up the morphine from the second ampoule;
that there is no
evidence he endeavoured to manage the patient’s pain with more
conservative measures such as oral analgesia;
colleague in a difficult situation requesting he sign the drug
also observed:
the practitioner
knew the strict protocols around administering morphine (both from his recent
orientation but also from his previous
experience as an Endorsed Enrolled
Nurse); and
that he failed
to fill out an incident report, make a note in the resident’s notes or on
hand over to staff “let the day
staff know that the resident needed a
medical review to address her pain issues”.
Jordan refers to the relevant provisions of the National Competency Standards
for Registered Nurses, the ANMC Code of Professional
Conduct for Nurses in
Australia and Code of Ethics for Nurses in Australia and opines in respect of
the first code that:
Professional Practice is the most relevant when
reviewing [the practitioner’s] clinical practice. Professional practice
to the professional, legal, and ethical responsibilities which require
demonstration of a satisfactory knowledge base, accountability
for practice,
functioning in accordance with legislation affecting nursing and health care and
the protection of individual and group
Jordan then explained that the failure of the practitioner to make a progress
note in Patient B’s records in relation to
the morphine did fall below the
standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of equivalent level of training
or expertise, but
invite her strong criticism. (our emphasis).
But she went on to opine that, if the practitioner had taken the two vials of
and self-injected them whilst on duty, such conduct was below the
standard expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of training
experience and would invite her strong criticism. She commented if such
behaviour had occurred that “This is indefensible
and potentially criminal
Jordan was highly critical of the practitioner’s conduct in allowing
Person A into Chesalon noting such conduct breached
the security of every
resident who lived in the facility. She noted that the practitioner knew Person
A was “a junkie”
who intended to intravenously inject drugs and that
the practitioner was “willing to provide him with needles and syringes
order to do this”.
The statements of Mr Mutasa and Ms
witness statements of Mr Mutasa and Ms Worrell are important and relevant.
Their evidence varies in several material respects
to the evidence of the
practitioner. We again note that the practitioner did not require either Mr
Mutasa or Ms Worrell for cross-examination
and their evidence came before us
unimpeached.
Mutasa described the practitioner as “seeming weird” when observed
after a patient had been left on the toilet and
the practitioner was not with
her. Shortly afterwards he described observing the practitioner shaking and
that he seemed confused.
He described the practitioner questioning the patient
who had been left on the toilet, and also questioning the patient who had
for assistance for his neighbour.
Mutasa reported the practitioner returning to one of the nursing stations,
saying he had made a mistake and needed Mr Mutasa to
sign the drug register.
When asked by Mr Mutasa if he had given the drug to the patient the practitioner
said “No, I discarded
everything”. When questioned about the
morphine ampoules the practitioner said “I discarded
everything”.
Mutasa did sign the two drug registers at the request of the practitioner.
However he explained “I wasn’t happy signing
the book. But I did it
because he asked me to and he was the registered nurse”. Mr Mutasa very
shortly afterwards told Ms
Worrell what he had done, and she said she would make
a report to the Care Manager when she arrived in the morning. Mr Mutasa made
contemporaneous note of what the practitioner had asked him to do.
Worrell’s evidence corroborates that of Mr Mutasa. She records her
independent observations of the practitioner after the
incident with the patient
left on the toilet and said “he was completely different to when I spoke
to him in the medication
room. He seemed spaced out”.
Worrell also explained how she had gone to the toilet near the main entry and
found a broken vial of morphine and smashed glass
on the floor of the toilet.
She also observed blood on the floor, on the cistern the toilet seat and the
sink. She states she showed
Mr Mutasa the blood and cleaned it
Person A’s statement
A provided a statement to the HCCC on 2 December 2011. He explained that he had
accompanied the practitioner to work on one
occasion at the Quakers Hill Nursing
Cross. He explained
he was “not sober” when he was at Chesalon. He
stated that, after the practitioner gave him two syringes, he injected
which he had purchased at Blacktown station. He said he put the used syringe
into the sharps container and put the vial in
his pocket. He explained he did
use the male toilets at Chesalon but said “I do not think I injected in
that room but I may
The practitioner’s
practitioner wrote to Ms Maria Carmona Dawes (“Ms Carmona Dawes”) of
the HCCC on 3 September 2011. He explained he
had lied about not taking the
patient to the toilet and was embarrassed he had forgotten and left her there.
He conceded he had
let a male friend come to work with him and that person
“is a Drug user”. He said the drug user “is responsible
the matter that was found in the facility Including removing an empty vial of
morphine from the sharps container” [original
spelling and
punctuation].
practitioner was questioned by officers of the HCCC on 14 November 2011. At the
commencement of the interview he was asked where
he was working and he said in
his own business called John’s Mowing. He specifically denied working
“in any other nursing
Chesalon. We pause to note this answer was a deliberate untruth. The
practitioner
had commenced regular work at Montefiore in early September
described the shift as “nothing unusual”, “no different to any
other night”. He referred to his conviction
in respect of the false
prescription, but again incorrectly denied there was a guilty finding on that
charge when the matter was
appealed to the District Court.
relation to the administration of morphine to Patient A he said
think I heard this lady screaming that night, or calling out, you know,
“I’m uncomfortable”, and to see if she
had an order for
morphine, and then went and got somebody else to help me dispense it (transcript
14 November 2011 p23)
practitioner said he discarded the morphine by squirting it down the sink and
that he put both the vials in the sharps container
which was located in the
treatment room.
it was put to him that he had recorded drawing up and discarding the Chesalon
stock of morphine at 9.45pm (2145) in that facility’s
drug register, which
was prior to Mr Mutasa commencing work that evening, he said:
he shouldn’t have signed it. He was there. And so I think I’ve made
a mistake writing the time. It looks a bit
logical to me, yeah, I’ve used
this stock first, and then I realised I shouldn’t use additional stock, I
should use hers.
Then minutes late I have, but I’ve put
1.45.......
practitioner explained he had let Person A into Chesalon about 11.30 p.m. He
explained, when asked why he had admitted Person
A to Chesalon, as
He’s bugging me to hang out with me, and then he was
across the road when I went to leave work, and I didn’t plan it but
come with me before and he just wanted to come with me.
practitioner later asserted that Person A was his “really good
friend”, that he was a good person, and just needed
practitioner asserted to the HCCC representatives that the morphine vials found
in the nursing home had been taken by Person A,
but asserted he did not know
Person A had taken the morphine vials from the sharps container during the shift
(transcript 14 November
2011 p33-34). He readily conceded he had given syringes
to Person A but emphatically denied he had self-administered morphine.
practitioner described the events of the shift again in his evidence before the
Council at the s150 review hearing in March 2012.
He said that when Patient
was calling out, needing the medication. ......She was in
distress and so I went to help her. I went to see if I could give her something.
I thought I could give her some Morphine, a very small amount actually. I got
Tony, an AIN, to come with me and we went through the
drug cabinet looking for
the book. Then, I drew up the Morphine”(transcript 2 March 2012 p
asked “Where was Tony” [Mr Mutasa] the practitioner replied
“He was next to me”.
his evidence before the Tribunal, the practitioner explained his decision to
give Patient B morphine was based on an instruction
received at “verbal
handover”. He said: “I was instructed to or made aware that that
would be best practice for
her”. Later in his evidence he described the
handover given to him as “quick and vague”, that he was not told
patient was in pain rather “If she becomes unsettled and calling out and
destructive then she is charted morphine, give
her morphine” (transcript
24 July 2013 p107). The practitioner gave a somewhat different version of the
verbal instructions
in his email to Ms Carmona Dawes on 18 May 2012. There he
I state that either when I was on orientation to
night shift or from a hand over from the previous shift I was informed Mrs X may
call out in discomfort disturbing other residents and that she was charged
morphine and that would settle her.
practitioner described drawing up the morphine from both stocks with a needless
syringe (transcript 24 July 2013 p 109). He clarified,
when questioned by the
Tribunal, that what he meant by a needleless syringe was a “drawing up
conceded that Person A’s drug of choice was heroin, and that Person A did
not leave Chesalon after receiving syringes from
the practitioner.
questioned about the propriety of bringing Person A into Chesalon the
practitioner said “I didn’t see harm in letting
him come into the
practitioner conceded before us that when he drew up the morphine for Patient B
he did so without there being an order in place
to administer morphine.
asked to describe what he had done after he realised there was no order for
morphine for Patient B the practitioner said:
I tidied up, locked
the drug cabinet and what I had left to discard I left in the treatment room and
went and found somebody and go
them to witness me discarding the liquid.
(transcript 23 July 2012 p 57)
cross-examined about his care of Patient B the practitioner conceded he had not
written up notes for the patient (transcript
23 July 2013 p 45). Ms Brus
cross-examined the practitioner about the discrepancy in his evidence on this
topic. When answering
questions posed by the HCCC’s representatives in
November 2011 the practitioner said he should have recorded his treatment
patient on a scrap of paper before transcribing the notes into the computerised
system. He made an identical assertion in
his email to Ms Carmona Dawes on 18
May 2012 when he said “I look back now and state I should have been more
professional and
found some scrap paper to document my progress notes”.
However, in his statement relied on before the Tribunal the practitioner
response to Complaint Four particular (e) which asserts that he had failed to
document that Patient B was in pain: “Deny.
I documented the residents
[sic] progress and pain levels on scrap paper and I was supposed to transfer
this information to the sophisticated
computer notes at a later
practitioner also disputed Ms Worrell’s evidence. The practitioner
answered questions posed by Ms Brus about Ms Worrell’s
evidence as
Worrell reports that she observed that you seemed spaced out and you were
arguing with her that it was you who had left the patient
on the toilet.
wrong. I don’t know what expertise she has, but spaced out from that
little bit of morphine. Maybe the whole container.
No. ma’am, she got it
wrong. (Transcript 23 July 2013).
Discussion and
findings Complaint Four
Tribunal had the benefit of observing the practitioner, and assessing his
evidence during his extensive cross-examination by Ms
Brus. As discussed below,
the Tribunal did not find him to be a witness of truth, and found much of his
evidence lacked credibility.
His evidence also demonstrated a lack of insight
into the impropriety of bringing Person A into Chesalon when he was in charge of
reaching our findings in respect of Complaint Four we have taken into account
the discrepancies in the practitioner’s evidence
of his care of Patient B. The Tribunal found the practitioner’s evidence
on this topic inconsistent
and unreliable. We have already noted that the
practitioner lied to the HCCC in November 2011 about his then employment at
Mowing when he was working on a regular basis at
Montefiore.
are also discrepancies in the practitioner’s evidence about the drawing up
of the morphine. At his interview with the
HCCC in November 2011 (transcript 14
November 2011 p 26) the practitioner asserted Mr Mutasa was present when he drew
up the morphine.
Before the Tribunal in answer to a question posed to him in
cross-examination the practitioner stated Mr Mutasa had not seen him
draw up the
morphine but was only present when he discarded the drug (transcript 23 July
2013). Later the practitioner was unable
to say whether or not he had discarded
the morphine he asserted he had drawn up from the Chesalon stock (transcript 23
as there is a difference in the evidence of the practitioner and Mr Mutasa about
the drawing up and discarding of the morphine,
we accept and prefer the
unchallenged evidence of Mr Mutasa to that of the practitioner. The Tribunal is
satisfied that Mr Mutasa
did not witness these events, and the
practitioner’s evidence on this topic is false.
Tribunal also accepts and prefers the evidence of Ms Worrell to that of the
practitioner. We accept her observations of the practitioner’s
after he left the patient on the toilet, and his action in subsequently
questioning the patient and the neighbouring patient.
Tribunal is satisfied the practitioner took two morphine ampoules when there was
no medication order for Patient B for morphine
and did not discard the morphine
in the presence of Mr Mutasa. The practitioner’s behaviour as observed by
Ms Worrell and
Mr Mutasa at the relevant time is consistent with
self-administration of the drug or some part of it. We accept the evidence of
both Ms Worrell and Mr Mutasa and reject the evidence of the practitioner on
this topic.
Tribunal notes the practitioner did not dispute particulars (b) and (c) of
Complaint Four. We accept those particulars are satisfied
to the requisite
civil standard.
practitioner’s evidence about the administration of paracetamol to Patient
B is scant. He asserted, in answer to questions
posed by Ms Brus, that he had
administered paracetamol to Patient B immediately after he had discarded the
morphine, but had failed
to document so doing. The practitioner in an email to
Ms Caromna Dawes dated 18 May 2012 said in a response to a statement that
other pain relief was administered to Patient B that “I believe I would
have administered paracetamol if the timing was
right and if she was able to
swallow”. Certainly he did not record he had done so.
Tribunal notes Ms Jordan did not specifically comment on the assertion which now
appears in particular (f) that the practitioner
failed to administer any
analgesia to Patient B, rather her opinions are directed to the
practitioner’s failure to document
Patient B’s condition and any
medication administered.
practitioner’s evidence about the administration of paracetamol was only
raised by him in his statement in response to the
complaint shortly prior to the
hearing and framed as a generalised assertion. The Tribunal did not find the
practitioner’s
oral evidence (being his response to questions posed by Ms
Brus, and a professional member of the Tribunal) convincing. The Tribunal
the inference that the practitioner’s failure to document giving Patient B
paracetamol is because he did not do so.
Tribunal is somewhat perplexed about an apparent inconsistency between
particular (h) and particulars (k) and (l). The former
particular asserts that
the practitioner “drew up two vials of morphine for Patient B and
subsequently discarded it without
another practitioner being present” and
the latter particulars assert the practitioner took two vials of morphine for
his personal
use or purposes and that he self-administered morphine. As there
is no suggestion that morphine other than that drawn up from the
Chesalon stock
or Patient B’s stock is involved in this complaint, it follows the
practitioner could not have self-administered
the morphine if he had discarded
it as asserted in particular (h).
Tribunal perceives that what is intended by particular (h) is an assertion that,
having drawn up the morphine, the practitioner
failed to have another
practitioner witness him discard the drug and document that event in the drug
Tribunal is not satisfied this particular is established. However, we draw the
inference that the practitioner’s failure
to have Mr Mutasa witness the
discarding of the morphine which he drew up from the two different stocks was
because he did not discard
it, but rather self- administered all or some part of
that drug. Our findings in this respect are fortified by Ms Worrell and Mr
Mutasa’s observations of the practitioner’s demeanour and behaviour
at the relevant time. Thus we are satisfied that
particulars (g) (i), (j) (k)
and (l) are established to the requisite civil standard.
we have not found all the particulars pleaded in Complaint Four established,
those which we have found proved are, as Ms
Jordan opines, serious failures
which attract strong criticism. The practitioner’s failure to check
Patient B’s medication
chart, and to provide her with appropriate pain
relief as ordered, demonstrates that the practitioner’s skill or care
was significantly below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training and expertise. In
agree with and accept Ms Jordan’s opinion.
and of substantial concern to the Tribunal, was the practitioner’s conduct
in admitting his friend to Chesalon in complete
disregard to the safety and
security of all the residents of that facility. Person A was known to the
practitioner to be a drug
user. He knew that Person A would self-administer
drugs whilst present at Chesalon. He allowed Person A unfettered access without
consideration of where he may go or what he may do. On the practitioner’s
own version of events during the shift Person A
did not remain in the staff or
recreational room, but went to the treatment room and had access to the sharps
container. The practitioner’s
evidence before the Tribunal demonstrated
no insight into his conduct in this regard. It was, in the Tribunal’s
assessment,
highly improper conduct.
Tribunal also concludes that the practitioner’s conduct in involving Mr
Mutasa in his actions demonstrates a complete lack
of regard for his
professional colleague’s position and/or the consequences for him. Mr
Mutasa was unfortunately overborne
by his superior to witness the
practitioner’s signature in the two drug registers. But to his credit he
immediately reported
his concerns to Ms Worrell, and made a contemporaneous note
of the relevant event. The practitioner’s conduct in continuing
times including, during the hearing, to say that Mr Mutasa was lying in his
statement does the practitioner no credit.
to the self-administration of morphine, the Tribunal accepts and adopts Ms
Jordan’s opinion on this topic. We note she described
such behaviour as
“indefensible” conduct. We agree. The practitioner’s conduct
in this regard demonstrated a
complete lack of care in the practise of nursing.
He was not fit to attend his duties and to properly care for Patient B, or any
other patient who needed his assistance. The Tribunal notes the patients at
Chesalon at the time of the shift were vulnerable aged
patients and included
those in a dementia ward. While not in any way condoning or minimising the
practitioner’s unethical
and reprehensible conduct, the Tribunal notes it
is fortunate that the adverse consequences of the practitioner’s conduct
limited to the lack of proper care for Patient B, and forgetting he had
left a patient on the toilet which conduct no doubt caused
that patient
summary the Tribunal is satisfied that the conduct referred to in Complaint
Four, which we have found established, is unsatisfactory
professional conduct as
set out in s139B of the National Law.
Complaint Five
complaint, which is conceded by the practitioner, also asserts unsatisfactory
professional conduct and repeats the particulars
set out in respect of Complaint
Four. We repeat our findings in respect of that part of the complaint.
complaint also asserts that the practitioner, whilst employed at Montefiore,
breached the conditions imposed on his registration
by the Council on 1
September 2011 on various dates. It is not in dispute that the practitioner
commenced his employment at Montefiore
on 5 September 2011 and ceased working at
that facility on 22 December 2011. The conditions imposed in broad terms relate
to a requirement
that the practitioner work under the direct supervision of a
registered nurse who does not have conditions on his/her registration
dispensing S8 or S4D drugs, to advise any employer of the conditions on his
registration within a week of notification of the
conditions, and provide the
Council with a copy of the conditions signed by any employer.
practitioner readily conceded he did not tell management at Montefiore of the
conditions until 22 December 2012 following the
commencement of a new nursing
manager. The Tribunal is satisfied that the practitioner acknowledged in a
telephone conversation
with Dr Cooke, Executive Director of the Council on 27
September 2013 that he had received a letter notifying him of the
conditions.
1 and 2 of Complaint Five are drafted commencing with the phrase “Between
approximately 3 July 2011 and 3 December
2011” the practitioner
contravened practice condition 1 because he administered S8 drugs for the
patients identified by alphabet
number in schedule B and C to the complaint
document. It is unclear to us why the complaint specifies between 3 July 2011
December 2011 when the conditions were not imposed until 1 September that
year and notified to the practitioner by letter dated 19
September 2011.
Notwithstanding this anomaly, the Tribunal is satisfied, based on the
practitioner’s own evidence, that he
knowingly breached the conditions
imposed on his registration at least from 27 September 2011 until 2 December
2011 and probably
beyond that date noting he did not ceased work at Montefiore
until 22 December 2011. The Tribunal is independently satisfied that
particulars 3, 4 and 5 are established by the documents relied on by the HCCC
(documents 43-91) which were not challenged in any
practitioner.
Complaint Six – Professional
complaint alleges that the practitioner is guilty of professional misconduct in
accordance with the language employed s139E of
the National Law set out earlier
in these reasons. The Tribunal has also referred to authorities on this topic.
Those authorities
stress the need to be satisfied the conduct is serious and
fulfils the statutory requirements.
HCCC rely on the matters set out in Complaints Two, Three, Four and Five to
establish the claim of professional misconduct both
individually and
cumulatively.
is unnecessary we set out our earlier findings, rather we repeat those findings
in respect of each of those complaints, and in
particular our findings in
respect of Complaint Four.
we have found the practitioner’s failure to provide details of his
criminal charge on the renewal of his registration
to constitute unsatisfactory
professional conduct, we are not satisfied that conduct of itself is
sufficiently serious to warrant
a finding of professional misconduct.
our findings in respect of Complaints Four and Five are findings of serious
misconduct relating to patient safety, (admission
of an authorised person to
Chesalon failing to check and document Patient B’s medication, failure to
give appropriate medication
to Patient B, self administering morphine to the
potential detriment of all patients at Chesalon, improper conduct in relation to
a fellow professional, and lack candour with the HCCC, the Council and this
Tribunal). These are substantial matters. They are
compounded by the
practitioner’s conduct in failing to tell management at Montefiore of the
conditions on his registration
on and from at least 27 September 2011, and
acting in complete disregard of the conditions either because he thought they
were “unfair”
(as set out in his correspondence to the Council), or
would make it difficult to obtain/retain his employment. Such conduct is
consistent with the practitioner’s conduct in knowingly lying to the HCCC
in November 2011 about his employment at Montefiore
where he was working not
less than five shifts per week at the relevant time.
matters referred to in Complaint Four as established individually are of such a
serious nature as to constitute professional misconduct.
But when considered
with the matters found established in Complaint Five, the Tribunal has no
hesitation in finding the practitioner’s
conduct is of a sufficiently
serious nature to justify suspension or cancellation of his registration and
constitutes professional
misconduct.
Complaints Seven and
is convenient to consider the final two complaints contemporaneously as the
evidence in respect of one substantially overlaps the
other. Two conditions are
asserted to affect the practitioner’s competence to practise nursing (by
reference to s139(a) of
the National Law). The asserted conditions are
depression and substance dependence or substance abuse disorder. Section 139
of the National Law is in the following terms:
139 Competence
to practise health profession [NSW]
A person is
"competent"
to practise a health profession only if the
(a) has sufficient physical capacity, mental capacity, knowledge and skill to
practise the profession;
The evidence in the records produced under summons
documents relied on by the HCCC include documents produced under summons from
the practitioner’s various treating general
practitioners and
psychologists to whom he has been referred. The HCCC also rely on the
practitioner’s criminal convictions
associated with drug possession and
cultivation, and by inference to his criminal record in relation to goods
reasonably believed
to be stolen, and/or larceny offences.
salient parts of the practitioner’s general practitioners’ clinical
notes which we have found established to the requisite
evidentiary standard, are
summarised in these reasons under “background”.
practitioner was referred by one of his general practitioners, Dr Tamayo to
Wellness Plus Psychology Pty. Ltd. Fe Lijap, Psychologist,
from that firm wrote
to Dr Tamayo on 30 July 2012. The psychologist noted “[The practitioner]
presented today with symptomatology
of a Major Depressive Disorder ”. The
psychologist went on the report allegations made against the practitioner of
child sexual
abuse, were asserted by the practitioner to be a fabrication by the
child’s mother made in the context of a custody dispute.
practitioner explained he was stressed, not clinically depressed, and gave
evidence that he experienced a number of major stressors
in his life between
2010 until shortly prior to the hearing, being the suicide of his brother, and
proceedings in the NSW Children’s
Court and also in the Family Court of
Australia. He explained with the resolution of the latter proceedings he was no
longer stressed.
The expert report of Dr Anthony
Anthony Samuels assessed the practitioner at the request of the Council under s
145E of the National Law on 12 December 2012.
Under the heading
“Psychiatric Issues” Dr Samuels opined “At the present time I
would regard [the practitioner]
as being mildly depressed”. Later under
the same heading he said:
At the present time I would regard [the
practitioner] as suffering from an impairment in the form of a mild clinical
depression and
possible personality dysfunction with some anti-social features.
There is no current evidence of dependence on substances while he
does admit to
using marijuana and ecstasy on two occasions in the last year. The mark in his
antecubital fossa clearly raises some
questions about intravenous drug use but
he certainly has a number of other superficial injuries to both arms which are
with his explanation of having worked on a drain.
Tribunal notes that the practitioner explained he is now undertaking a plumbing
apprenticeship which employment is consistent
with his report of injury to Dr
note that Dr Samuels’ report was some six months old at the date of the
hearing and pre-dated the practitioner’s evidence
to us about the
resolution of his family law proceedings. Nevertheless, the Tribunal is
conscious that the practitioner has a long
documented history of depression
dating back over a decade. The Tribunal accepts that, as at December 2012, the
practitioner did
suffer an impairment based on the expert opinion of Dr
Tribunal did not seek to have Dr Samuels give evidence to us on the basis that
he had not seen the practitioner since his report.
While we cannot be satisfied
to the requisite civil standard that the practitioner
an impairment by reason of depression, as we will now discuss, we are satisfied
that he does suffer substance dependence or
substance abuse disorder.
practitioner was extensively cross-examined by Ms Brus about his urinalysis
results in 2012 and his cessation of attendance for
urine drug screens. The
practitioner denied he had used heroin. The following exchange occurred between
the practitioner and Ms
Brus relative to the drug screens:
it your evidence, sir, that you haven't used heroin since 2002?
no, I have not used heroin.
if a trace of heroin showed up in a urinalysis, sir, how would you explain
the Panadeine metabolises
the codeine metabolises maybe it's there, morphine.
have you had morphine in the last 12 or 18 months?
you wouldn't find any in me today and ecstasy maybe every six weeks I was having
ma'am, unless that's in my ecstasy.
don't believe so.
if I understand what you're saying is that if there was cannabis residue in your
urine sample it was there from recreational use?
yeah, definitely.
you don't recall there being anything other than ecstasy that you have taken
that might show up in a urinalysis test?
other medications unless there's some derivatory(as said) being
Phenergan or in the ecstasy, Benadryl, Panadeine.
2012 between August and October do you recall what drugs you were taking
recreationally?
would lie if I said I didn't have an ecstasy and probably Panadeine, I think I
was at the dentist.
you aware, sir, that your drug analysis reports for 27 September 2012
showed Oxycodone, methylamphetamine, morphine from heroin?
I'm not wouldn't be from heroin, ma'am.
not denying the presence of the other drugs or the likely presence of the other
would probably stem from ecstasy. That would stem from the
the methamphetamine?
probably Panadeine cause when it metabolises in the body that's what it turns
to, ma'am. That's what I was taught.
were aware, sir, that the drug analysis is able to identify specifically the
nature of the drug?
good for that. Can you tell that's come from ecstasy or the eccy I
got is not a real ecstasy. Ma'am, if you're on heroin
you can't be on heroin
today and not tomorrow then the next day, wouldn't work like
you recall, sir, that you were required to attend your urinalysis testing
throughout or at least on a regular basis, whether it
be once a week or twice a
week, it was as determined?
you haven't complied with the requirement to provide the urinalysis sample since
the beginning of May of this year?
there a reason for that, sir?
studying and the times that I was supposed to go there upset the lady that was
there and she would see me in my work clothes
from the study, TAFE, and after
having so many negative urines and paying $40 a test I just can't afford it,
ma'am. How many negative
tests before I'm going to go
the fact is they're not all negative, sir, are they? They are showing
methamphetamine, marihuana, morphine and acetyl morphine
from heroin.
you put dates to them, please?
date of this.
talking about September of last year.
the presence of acetyl morphine which is identified from heroin or derived from
that will be from I believe that would be from ecstasy and the next
positive one, please, ma'am?
you like to explain the presence of heroin on 27 September, sir?
that must be from the ecstasy tablet.
presence of morphine on 7 September?
Panadeine, it being the codeine.
were to tell you that there was a separate identification of codeine as well as
morphine what would you say that was the cause
you in any particular medical distress during the early part of September?
was the problem?
needed Panadeine.
was the medical condition?
was possibly for my teeth.
for your teeth?
don't want to lie to you, I know I've been at the dentist quite a
in cross-examination when taken to PBS records the practitioner conceded he had
“doctor shopped” to obtain prescriptions
for Oxycontin, but asserted
the prescribed drugs were not for him.
Discussion and
findings impairment and fitness to practice
Tribunal found, as with other aspects of the practitioner’s evidence, that
he was not an impressive witness, nor did we
find his evidence on this topic
truthful. We are satisfied that the practitioner has “doctor
shopped” to obtain Oxycontin
as shown in the PBS records. On his own
evidence he does not dispute using Cannabis, and Ecstacy.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manuel of Mental Disorders V
V”) at page 483 contains an expanded definition of the criteria for a
diagnosis of substance abuse disorders.
The pattern of behaviours exhibited by
the practitioner involving both prescription and illicit drugs over many years
fits within
the diagnostic criteria expounded in the DSM V. The Tribunal is
satisfied that the practitioner’s history does fulfil the
criteria of a
substance abuse disorder.
a finding that a practitioner suffers an impairment does not automatically lead
to a conclusion that a practitioner lacks the
competency to practise, we are
satisfied on the evidence before us that the practitioner’s long standing
use, and misuse, of
prescription and illicit drugs is likely to affect his
physical and mental capacity to practise nursing.
is a tragedy that the practitioner became involved with drugs and the criminal
justice system at such a young age, and despite
his very commendable behaviour
in obtaining his tertiary qualifications, that he has been unable to distance
himself from his early
peers and friends such as Person A and involvement with
effect of his substance abuse disorder on his capacity to practise is clearly
demonstrated by his conduct at Chesalon. Thus the
Tribunal is satisfied that
Complaints Seven and Eight are established.
noted at the commencement of these reasons, at the hearing the Tribunal agreed,
to afford procedural fairness to the practitioner,
it would conduct a “two
stage” hearing to permit the parties to provide written and/or oral
submissions on protective
orders and costs of the proceedings (see
Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 363
reaching this decision the Tribunal took into account that the practitioner has
faced many stresses in recent times including the
tragic death of his brother,
multiple court proceedings and difficulties in obtaining employment. The
Tribunal was acutely conscious
that the practitioner has not had the benefit of
legal advice, was unrepresented before us, and that it would be difficult for
to make submissions on the issue of protective orders and costs without the
benefit of our findings.
Post hearing correspondence from the
HCCC to the Tribunal and Practitioner
the conclusion of the hearing (Stage One) the Tribunal reserved its reasons for
decision in respect of the Complaint.
on 5 August 2013 the Chairperson of the Tribunal was provided with a copy letter
addressed to her (with a copy to the practitioner)
from the HCCC. Ms Jaimee
Dinihan (“Ms Dinihan”), Legal Officer, on behalf of the HCCC noted
it sought an interlocutory
order under s167E of the National Law in the
following terms:
From the date the Tribunal hands down its findings
and any relevant interlocutory order (stage 1 decision) the respondent must
immediately
provide a copy of the findings of the Tribunal and any
relevant interlocutory order (stage 1 decision) to any current or prospective
practitioner sent a text message on 8 August 2013 to Ms Dinihan in which he
stated “Yes I strongly oppose your application”.
167E of the National Law provides as follows:
167E Adjournments
and interlocutory orders [NSW]
(1) A Tribunal may adjourn proceedings for any reason it thinks fit.
(2) A Tribunal may, during any proceedings, exercise any power or combination
of powers conferred on the Tribunal by section 149A,
except the power to caution
or reprimand.
relevant is s149A of the National Law. The relevant powers vested in the
Tribunal under that provision includes s149A (1) (b).
It provides as
149A General powers to caution, reprimand, counsel etc
(1) The Tribunal may do any one or more of the following in relation to the
registered health practitioner—
(a) ........
(b) impose the conditions it considers appropriate on the practitioner's
registration;
additional condition on the practitioner’s
registration, would ordinarily
be a matter properly raised before the Tribunal at the conclusion of the Stage
One hearing in order
to afford procedural fairness to the respondent to the
application and also to afford the Tribunal the opportunity of due consideration
of the proposed order sought.
normal principles under the general law in respect of an application to re-open
after a decision is reserved are well known.
Generally such applications will
be permitted when there has been some change since the original hearing and the
interests of justice
are better served by allowing the application rather than
rejecting it (see
Urban Transport Authority of New South Wales v Nweiser
(1992) 28 NSWLR 471).
Those principles are well founded on natural justice
considerations and the obvious benefit to litigation being brought to a timely
end and avoiding unnecessary costs.
Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence (see Clause
2 of Schedule 5D) and
has a duty to determine inquiries expeditiously but subject to natural justice
considerations.
conditions presently imposed on the practitioner’s registration require
the practitioner, if he is to work as a registered
practitioner, to work under
either indirect supervision (or direct supervision if considered necessary by
supervisor). The conditions
which were in force until 16 March 2012 required
the practitioner to be directly supervised in the administration of Schedule 8
Schedule 4D drugs, and precluded him working for a nursing agency. Those
two conditions are no longer applicable to the practitioner.
order sought by the HCCC is, in our view, too widely drafted. It is not
directed to the practitioner’s role as a registered
nurse, but rather
requires he provides
employer with a copy of the Tribunal’s
reasons. The practitioner’s evidence before us is that he is now
undertaking
a plumbing apprenticeship. The Tribunal does not consider it would
be appropriate to make an order directed to any employer without
practitioner having the opportunity to be heard about such a widely drafted
order particularly when he is unrepresented.
manner in which this order is now sought is not identical with the circumstances
which occurred in
HCCC v Davis (No 1)
2013 NSWNMT 17.
There the Tribunal
determined at the conclusion of a Stage One hearing that conditions should be
imposed under s167E pending the
finalisation of the matter at Stage Two. The
parties each had the opportunity to make submissions to the Tribunal, and for
the Tribunal
itself to consider appropriate conditions to be imposed.
The procedure there adopted in our view is a proper and procedurally fair
appears to us that the proper way for this request of the HCCC to be agitated is
for the matter to be relisted before the Tribunal
immediately after publication
of these reasons with members of the Tribunal, if necessary, participating by
telephone. Both parties
can then have a proper opportunity to be heard and for
the Tribunal to consider the submissions.
HCCC shall within 7 days of the date of these orders lodge with the Tribunal and
serve on Mr Andrew Simonsen (aka O’Neill)
(“the practitioner”)
by pre-paid registered post at his home address written submissions in support
of protective orders
sought and costs of the proceedings.
practitioner shall within 7 days after receipt by of the submissions referred to
in Order 1 of these orders:
(a) serve on
the HCCC by email or by ordinary mail any submission on which he seeks to rely
in respect of protective orders and costs;
(b) notify the
Co-ordinator of the Tribunal by email or by ordinary mail whether or not he
wishes to have the opportunity to orally
address the Tribunal in response to the
HCCC’s submissions.
the event that the practitioner fails:
(a) to lodge
any submissions in respect of the protective orders sought, OR
(b) to notify
the Co-ordinator of the Tribunal in writing within 7 days of receipt of the
written submissions relied on by the HCCC
and referred to in Order 1 of these
orders that he wishes to have the opportunity to make oral submissions to the
the Tribunal shall, subject to Order 4, without
the necessity for a further oral hearing determine appropriate protective orders
the issue of costs on the written submissions received.
the event the practitioner or the HCCC wish to proceed to a Stage Two hearing to
make oral submissions to the Tribunal such hearing
shall be held at the
Tribunal’s premises Level 6, 477 Pitt Street Sydney at a date and time to
be notified to the parties by
the Tribunal’s Coordinator.
Dated 25 October 2013
___________________
The Hon Jennifer
Chairperson
_____________________
_____________________
Nurse Member
_____________________
ANNEXURE “A”
IN THE NURSING AND MIDWIFERY TRIBUNAL NO. Of
CONSTITUTED UNDER
165 OF THE HEALTH PRACTITIONER
REGULATION NATIONAL LAW
In the matter of Andrew Simonsen
registered under
Health Practitioner
National Law
Health Care Complaints Commission
of Level 13,
323 Castlereagh Street, Sydney NSW, having consulted with the
Nursing and
Midwifery Council of New South Wales
in accordance with
sections 39(2)
Health Care Complaints Act 1993
and section 145A of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
the National
HEREBY COMPLAINS THAT
Andrew Simonsen (“the practitioner”) of (address deleted)
registered nurse
National Law
COMPLAINT ONE
Has been the subject of a criminal finding for an offence.
Background to Complaint One
At all relevant times the
practitioner practised as a registered nurse in the state of NSW. He was first
registered as a registered
nurse on 4 November 2010.
September 2010, the practitioner was charged with one count of obtaining or
attempting to obtain a prescribed restricted substance.
He was convicted of the
charge on 9 December 2010 at Mt Druitt Local Court and fined $1000. The
practitioner appealed the conviction
and on 11 February 2011 at the Parramatta
District Court the criminal finding for the offence was confirmed. The sentence
on 9 December 2010 was vacated and a bond without conviction pursuant to
(1) (a) of the
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
PARTICULARS TO COMPLAINT ONE
11 February 2011, the practitioner was made the subject of a criminal finding
for an offence, namely that:
(a) on 15 September 2010, he obtained or attempted to obtain a prescribed
restricted substance.
COMPLAINT TWO
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B of
National Law
in that the practitioner has contravened the
Background to Complaint Two
The background for
Complaint One is repeated.
The practitioner lodged a form for renewal of
his nursing registration with the Australian Health Practitioners Regulation
(AHPRA) on 3 June 2011.
PARTICULARS TO COMPLAINT TWO
practitioner failed to disclose to the National Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Australia (“the National Board”) within
seven days his conviction on
9 December 2010 at Mt Druitt Local Court for the offence of obtaining or
attempting to obtain a prescribed
restricted substance in contravention of
section 130(1) of the
National Law
practitioner failed to disclose to the National Board within seven days of his
being made the subject of a criminal finding for
an offence on 11 February 2011
at Parramatta District Court for the offence of obtaining or attempting to
obtain a prescribed restricted
substance in contravention of section 130(1) of
National Law
COMPLAINT THREE
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B of
National Law
in that the practitioner has engaged in improper or
unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice of
Background to Complaint Three
The background for
Complaints One and Two is repeated.
PARTICULARS TO COMPLAINT THREE
3 June 2011, the practitioner failed to disclose in his application form for
renewal of his nursing registration to the National
Board, that he had been made
the subject of a criminal finding for an offence on 11 February 2011 at
Parramatta District Court for
obtaining or attempting to obtain a prescribed
restricted substance.
COMPLAINT FOUR
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B of
National Law
in that the practitioner has:
in conduct that demonstrates the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised, by the practitioner in the practice
of nursing is significantly below
the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an equivalent level of
training or experience;
in improper or unethical conduct relating to the practice or purported practice
of nursing.
Background to Complaint
Between 20 June and 5 July 2011 the practitioner was
employed as a registered nurse by the Chesalon Aged Care, Richmond
(“Chesalon”).
On 3 July 2011, the practitioner commenced
working on the night shift at Chesalon between the hours 21:00 and 07:00 hours 4
The practitioner was responsible for securing the facility,
overseeing the care and needs of the residents and for supervising two
Assistants in Nursing (“AIN”).
Between 10 March and 5 July
2011, Patient B was a resident of Chesalon. On 24 March 2011, Patient B was
prescribed Morphine Sulphate
ampoules 2 ½ mg before daily dressing of her
wound. The administration of morphine to Patient B was suspended on 25 May
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT FOUR
the practitioner was on duty as a registered nurse at Chesalon:
(b) Between 3 July 2011 and 4 July 2011, the practitioner assisted Person A to
enter the Chesalon premises, in circumstances where
Person A was not a patient
or a staff member of Chesalon or otherwise authorised to enter the premises;
(c) Between 3 July 20011 and 4 July 2011, the practitioner provided to Person A
two syringes, the property of Chesalon without authority
permission;
(d) Between 9pm and approximately 9:45 pm on 3 July 2011, the practitioner
failed to check Patient B’s medication chart prior
to drawing up
medication contrary to the
National Competency Standards for the Registered
Nurse 2006, 7.2
(e) Between 3 July 2011 and 4 July 2011, the practitioner failed to document
that Patient B was in pain contrary to the
National Competency Standards for
the Registered Nurse 2006, 6.4
(f) Between 3 July and 4 July 2011, the practitioner failed to administer any
analgesia to Patient B in circumstances where Patient
B had been charted to
receive Paracetamol 500mg x every four hours for pain, contrary to the Chesalon
Nurse Initiated Medication Policy
(g) Between 3 July and 4 July 2011, the practitioner drew up two vials of
morphine for Patient B when the patient had no current
(h) Between 3 July and 4 July 2011, the practitioner drew up two vials of
morphine for Patient B and subsequently discarded it without
practitioner being present contrary to
NSW Health Guide to Handling of
Medication in Nursing Homes – Information Bulletin 2003/10, 6.1.2;
(i) Between 3 July and 4 July 2011, the practitioner requested an Assistant in
Nursing (“AIN”) to sign the Drug Register
in circumstances where the
AIN had not witnessed the drawing up and/or administration of morphine to
Patient B, contrary to the
NSW Health Guide to Handling of Medication in
Nursing Homes – Information Bulletin 2003/10,
(j) Between 3 July and 4 July 20011, the practitioner failed to notify or
document the drawing up, and the subsequent discarding,
of the morphine,
contrary to: the
NSW Health Guide to handling of Medication in Nursing Homes
– Information Bulletin 2003/10, paragraph 10
– Policy Directive – Incident Management
PD2007_061 of July
2007, 6.22; and Value Statement 6 of the Australian Nursing and Midwifery
Code of Ethics for Nurses In
(k) Between 3 July and 4 July 2011, the practitioner took two vials of morphine
without permission or authority for his personal
(l) Between 3 July and 4 July 2011, the practitioner self administered
COMPLAINT FIVE
is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under section 139B of
National Law
in that the practitioner has contravened conditions to
which his registration is subject.
Background to Complaint
The Background to Complaint Four is repeated.
September 2011, the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW (“the
Council”) imposed conditions on the practitioner’s
registration
under section
150 (1) (b)
National Law
. The practitioner
was advised of the conditions via a letter of 19 September 2011. The conditions
Condition 1
The registrant must be under the direct supervision of a registered nurse
(Division 1) who does not have conditions on their practice
when checking,
administering, handling, dispensing any drug of addiction (schedule 8 drugs) or
any prescribed restricted substance
(substance 4D drug or schedule 4D
derivative).
Condition 3
The registrant must provide the name and contact details of all nursing
employers to the Nursing and Midwifery Council of NSW within
one (1) week of
receipt of the notice of these conditions if currently employed, and prior to
commencing any new employment as a
registered nurse (in division 1 or Division
Condition 4
The registrant must immediately advise all current nursing employers, and
future employers of the conditions of registration, and
within one (1) week of
receiving notice of the conditions, or prior to commencing employment as a
nurse, provide the Nursing and
Midwifery Council of NSW with a copy of the
conditions signed by the employer as acknowledgement of this notification.
Between 5 September and 22 December 2011, the practitioner was employed
as a registered nurse by the Sir Moses Montefiore Jewish Home
(“Montefiore”).
PARTICULARS TO COMPLAINT FIVE
approximately 3 July 2011 and 3 December 2011, the practitioner contravened
practice condition 1 in that he administered and/or
handled Schedule 8 drugs for
patients without being under the direct supervision of a registered nurse
(Division 1) on the occasions
listed in Schedule B.
approximately 3 July 2011 and 3 December 2011, the practitioner contravened
practice condition 1 in that he checked and/or
handled Schedule 8 drugs for
patients without being under the direct supervision of a registered nurse
(Division 1) on the occasions
listed in Schedule C.
approximately 10 October 2011 and 11 November 2011, the practitioner contravened
practice condition 1 in that he administered
Schedule 4D drugs to patients
without being under the direct supervision of a registered nurse (Division 1) on
the occasions listed
in Schedule D.
5 September 2011 and 12 September 2011, the practitioner contravened practice
condition 3 to which his registration was subject
in that he failed to advise
the Council that he had commenced work with Montefiore on 5 September 2011.
5 September 2011 and 12 September 2011, practitioner contravened practice
condition 4 to which his registration was subject
in that he failed to advise
his employer Montefiore of the conditions on his registration.
COMPLAINT SIX
is guilty of professional misconduct under section 139E of the
National Law
in that the practitioner has:
in unsatisfactory professional conduct of a sufficiently serious nature to
justify suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration,
in more than one instance of unsatisfactory professional conduct that, when the
instances are considered together, amount
to conduct of a sufficiently serious
nature to justify the suspension or cancellation of the practitioner’s
registration
Background to Complaint
The background for Complaints Two, Three, Four and Five are
PARTICULARS TO COMPLAINT SIX
particulars of complaint Two, Three, Four and Five are repeated and relied
upon, individually and cumulatively.
COMPLAINT SEVEN
The practitioner suffers from a physical or mental impairment,
disability, condition or disorder (including substance abuse or dependence)
detrimentally affects or is likely to detrimentally affect his capacity to
practise nursing.
Background to Complaint
The background to Complaints One and Four is
Between 1996 and 2007 the practitioner was found guilty and/or
convicted of criminal drug offences.
In September 2001, the practitioner
sought drug treatment for heroin dependence and on 26 May 2007, the practitioner
consulted a medical
practitioner to address his addiction to
On 17 September 2011, a medical practitioner carried out a
urine drug screen on the practitioner which tested positive for cannabinoids.
On 1 October 2011 a medical practitioner stated in a report that the
practitioner had behavioural problems in seeking medications
despite proper
advice being given to him about dependency and abuse.
PARTICULARS TO PARTICULAR SEVEN
practitioner suffers from substance dependence or substance abuse
2. Depression.
COMPLAINT EIGHT
The practitioner is not competent to practise nursing within the meaning
of the National Law
in that he does not have
sufficient physical or mental capacity to practise
Background to Complaint Eight
background to Complaint Seven is repeated.
PARTICULARS OF COMPLAINT EIGHT
practitioner suffers from substance dependence or substance abuse
Dated this ............. day of January
_______________________________
Director of Proceedings
Health Care Complaints
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (484 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter