URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCIMC/2006/73.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:52:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workcover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Peter Beacham). v Elegance Wedding Stationery Pty Ltd. [2006] NSWCIMC 73 (1 June 2006)
CHIEF INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE’S COURT
New South Wales
Workcover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Peter Beacham).
Elegance Wedding Stationery Pty Ltd.
Second Defendant:
Foilcraft Pty Ltd.
Third Defendant:
Printers Cards Pty
Fourth Defendant:
Printers Envelopes and Business Forms Pty
Fifth Defendant:
Specialty Tokens Pty Ltd
Rapier Envelopes Pty Ltd
20363896/05/2, 20364320/05/2, 20364338/05/2, 20364645/05/2,
20364661/05/2, 20364688/05/2.
Hearing Date:
2006, 15 March 2006.
Date of Decision:
Legislation:
Occupational Health and Safety Act
Partnership Act
Magistrate:
Representation:
Solicitor for the Prosecutor: Ms C. Pesman, Dibbs
Abbott Stillman, Solicitors.
Agent for the Defendant: Mr J Tamplin.
Reasons For Decision
1. The six defendants herein each enter a plea of guilty to
breaches of
Occupational Health and Safety Act
prosecutions all arise out of a single incident which occurred on 10 February
2004 at the defendant’s premises situated
at Minto in the State of New
South Wales.
2. At the site a substantial printing undertaking is
established. The undertaking has been in operation for some 43 years. The
commercial structure of the enterprise is unusual. Six separately registered
companies, namely the six defendants herein, have
formed a partnership or joint
venture which operates the printing operation at the site using the business
name “Cameron’s
Envelopes and Business Forms”. The six
corporations have jointly registered that name in accordance with the provisions
Business Names Act
. The business “Cameron’s
Envelopes and Business Forms” has an ABN number and has adopted the
practice of employing
staff at the premises and issuing group certificates and
other formal documents describing the employer of such employees as
Envelopes and Business Forms.
3. It is clear however that
notwithstanding the utilisation of an ABN number, the partnership or joint
venture is not a legal entity
in its own right and as a consequence the
Prosecutor has investigated an incident at the premises and brought before the
separate defendants each being charged with an offence under
the legislation as a consequence of the incident in question.
apparent from the evidence that it was not the practice for the workforce of
some 130 persons to be specifically allocated
to one or other of the six
companies. Each employee was apparently informed that they were employed by
Cameron’s Envelopes
and Business Forms, i.e. the partnership of companies.
In those circumstances the Prosecutor has proceeded on the basis that each
the six legal entities comprising the so-called partnership is jointly and
severally liable as each is a deemed employer by virtue
of their participation
in and ownership of the partnership entity.
5. The business conducted by
the six defendant companies is a highly specialised operation which uses highly
sophisticated and expensive
machinery to print envelopes of various types at
high speed. The defendant’s business owns and operates envelope machines
manufactured in Germany and costing up to $2,000,000 each. One of these
machines is known as the Winkler 627 machine which, in
full speed production can
produce from a paper reel approximately 800 to 850 envelopes per
6. This machine and other envelope making machines at the
defendant’s premises require a considerable period of time in the
up process before each production run begins. This setting up process can take
between 8 and 12 hours and requires meticulous
work by highly skilled tradesmen
who have received intensive training to ensure that all of the settings are
perfect before the print
run begins. Because of the high speed of the
production capacity of these machines any inaccuracy in the setting up process
rise to an enormous and expensive quantity of wasted
7. The Court was provided with an Agreed Statement of Facts
document setting out the background details concerning the incident which
occurred on 10 February 2004. The facts are well known to the parties and it
is unnecessary for all of the background facts and
circumstances to be set out
in the body of this decision.
8. It is sufficient to note that on 10
February 2004 an employee of the defendants, Mr Rakesh Chand, who was employed
as an envelope
machine operator was working on the 627 Winkler machine and was
endeavouring to rectify a print problem on Print Unit No 2 of that
machine. To
undertake this task Mr Chand accessed the rollers at that particular part of the
machine. To gain that access he
removed a stainless steel guard which formed
part of the guarding on the machine and prevented access to the rollers and also
the operator’s visibility. There were other machines at the
premises which had Perspex guards which permitted the operator
to observe the
rollers without removing the guard, but that was not the case with the Winkler
627 machine. When Mr Chand removed
the stainless steel guard he also removed
an interlock device which was welded to and formed part of the guard. With the
and the interlock device removed the machine was stationary. However the
designers and manufacturers of the machine had created
a system using a small
pin which permitted the operator to by-pass the interlock and permit the rollers
of the machine to move by
being inched or at dead slow speed but not at the high
speeds that were available when the machine was in full production
9. The system of work in place on 10 February 2004 permitted Mr
Chand to access the pin, known as the “make ready pin”
specific purpose. While observing the rollers of the machine Mr Chand had
accidentally pushed a button on the side of
the machine which caused the machine
to move at slow speed just as his hand was in a position behind one of the
rollers where a nip
point was formed by a roller and the frame of the machine
and as a consequence Mr Chand’s fingers on his right hand suffered
injuries. Both the middle and ring fingers were crushed and both fingernails
were removed. Further skin and flesh at the
end of his right ring finger was
removed in the accident and required subsequent surgery.
10. Mr Chand
was immediately hospitalised and had surgery on his hand before returning to
work on selected duties approximately 3
weeks following the incident. He was
able to return to work on normal duties approximately 8 weeks after the
11. The Prosecutor submits that in assessing the objective
seriousness of the offence the Court should find that in this case the
safety was clearly foreseeable. Whilst the defendants had in place machinery
which was guarded and interlocked, it also
had in place a system of work which
permitted a machine operator to bypass the interlocking mechanism by use of the
make ready pin
and this meant that an employee such as Mr Chand was provided
with a system of work and the necessary equipment to bypass the guard
interlocking mechanism and access moving parts of machinery.
behalf of the defendants it was submitted that the Court would not find that the
foreseeability of the risk to safety was high.
The practice adopted by Mr Chand
on the day was not in fact the system of work established at the workplace and
was in fact a breach
of the defendants’ established safe working
procedures. Following the incident the defendants had through their production
manager issued a warning to operators to reinforce the defendants’ safe
working procedures and to warn employees of possible
disciplinary action in the
future in the event of such conduct reoccurring.
13. Whilst the
defendants had entered guilty pleas in acknowledgement of the fact that their
system had been inadequate in that it
had failed to ensure the safety at work of
Mr Chand, the defendants submitted that the risk in this case was by no means
or foreseeable other than with the benefit of hindsight. The Court was
reminded that all of the operators at the premises, including
Mr Chand were
given intensive training on the use of this equipment for operational reasons
given the high cost to the business in
the event that these machines were not
set up to operate with the required high level of skill. This could only be
achieved by
rigorous and intensive training. Mr Chand had received the benefit
of that training and in those circumstances the defendants could
not have been
expected to view as a reasonable likelihood his particular conduct on this
occasion. Notwithstanding that submission
it was clear that the system in
place permitted such access to the machine when it was activated by the use of
the make ready pin.
14. I accept as reasonable the submission made on
behalf of the defendant in this regard. Whilst the risk to injury was
foreseeable
it was not obvious or highly foreseeable.
15. It is clear
that following the incident the machine in question was the subject of
investigation by the defendant who devised,
manufactured and installed new
guarding. The guarding that was selected was of a steel mesh type which
prevented physical access
but permitted visual access which is of assistance to
the operator and was in fact the motivation behind Mr Chand’s decision
remove the stainless steel guard on 10 February 2004. In addition, the
defendants have revised and altered the procedure concerning
the make ready pin.
It is no longer available for use by machine operators and if for any reason it
became necessary for the make
ready pin to be utilised for any reason this could
only be done by an approach to management and use of the pin could only occur
with specific approval and authority of the management team. However, the new
system put in place following the incident has been
designed to make use of the
pin unnecessary. As is common in such matters the defendant relies upon the
steps it has taken to demonstrate
its diligent approach to removing a hazard as
soon as it became aware of the hazard whilst the Prosecutor relies on the
steps to demonstrate that such steps were always available to the
defendants and could have been put in place prior to 10 February
avoiding the serious injury to Mr Chand. The Court accepts that these steps
were always available and that a risk assessment
of the machine conducted with
sufficient attention to detail would have identified this particular hazard.
Whilst the Court accepts
that this machine, and indeed the defendants’
entire operation had been the subject of risk assessments in the past, it is
clearly the case that the risk assessment on the Winkler 627 machine had not
been adequate to detect this particular hazard.
16. In this regard the
defendants placed some reliance upon the fact that the machine was designed and
manufactured in Germany and
German technicians came with the machine to install
it in 1999. The manufacturer’s warranty warns specifically against
with the designer’s product and even asserts that any
modifications to the machine may have the consequences of undermining
warranty itself. I agree with the Prosecutor who submits that the legislation
places an obligation upon an employer which cannot
be evaded by an assertion
that they relied upon the manufacturer to ensure that the machinery was safe and
in compliance with legislative
standards. Notwithstanding that finding the
Court can take into account the fact that these defendants purchased and
imported into
Australia at significant expense the machinery produced by the
world leaders in this particular field. It could hardly be said
defendants provided their employees with equipment of doubtful heritage or
without giving thought to whether they were
providing high quality machinery
which had been engineered to a superior level of quality.
frequently the case that when the Court examines crush injuries caused by access
to moving machinery there is a clear and
obvious risk of very serious injury
because of the reasonable likelihood that the injured worker could have been
drawn further and
further into the moving parts of the machinery and suffering
very severe and life threatening injuries. I am satisfied that in
particular case the machinery was so designed that the rollers had an unusual
level of sensitivity which caused the rollers
to stop almost immediately when
the injured worker’s fingers were caught. The equipment is apparently so
sensitive that it
will stop if it encounters two sheets of paper instead of the
single sheet which it is designed to accept. In those circumstances
that there was no significant likelihood that Mr Chand could have suffered
injuries more substantial than those he actually
necessary for the Court to give consideration to including general and specific
deterrence factors in any sentence. I
am satisfied that the danger to
employees associated with printing equipment is such that a general deterrence
factor must be included.
Prior to this incident the defendants and the Cameron
family who have conducted the business for some 43 years have achieved a
remarkable record in the field of occupational health and safety. In 43 years
there has been no prior conviction under the
Occupational Health and Safety
legislation. Notwithstanding major improvements in recent times for much
of those 43 years the printing and kindred industries were
notorious for finger
and hand injuries. For a printing business to have an unblemished record in
this regard is an extraordinary
achievement. The material placed before the
Court by Mr Tamplin, appearing for the defendants, establishes clearly that both
to the accident and following the accident these defendants have adopted a
vigilant and diligent approach to occupational health
and safety matters. The
authorities are clear that this must be recognised in the sentencing process.
Given the size and scope
of the defendants’ operations I cannot entirely
disregard the need for a specific deterrence factor to be included but the
defendants’ attitude to occupational health and safety matters is such
that I propose to treat the specific deterrence factor
as much less significant
than might otherwise be the case.
19. In addition to the objective
seriousness of the offence the Court notes the subjective features which weigh
heavily in favour
of the defendants. The excellent occupational health and
safety record of the defendants has already been mentioned. The Court
that Mr Chand was a valued employee who was afforded every possible assistance
following the incident and that management of
the defendants took steps to
facilitate his treatment, his family’s access to him whilst he was
hospitalised, assisted him
with his workers’ compensation claim, ensured
that his wages were continued at the normal level and assisted in his
rehabilitation
to the workplace when he was fit to return. The Court also
notes that the defendants cooperated with Workcover and took appropriate
to put in place appropriate remedial steps in relation to its
20. The Prosecutor has submitted that the Court should regard
the defendants’ remedial steps as having been taken without the
sense of urgency in that the task was completed after a six month period. I
regard this submission as somewhat unfair
to the defendants. It is clear that
following their first serious incident in 43 years the defendants focused
immediately upon
the Winkler 627 machine and concentrated on designing,
manufacturing and installing a new system of guarding and a new system of
in relation to that machine. It is to the defendants’ credit that they
did not stop the process at that point. They
then proceeded to conduct with a
new sense of thoroughness risk assessments on the rest of their machinery and
they put in place
a number of improvements during that six month period which
involved a methodical and sensible approach to the task. I can see
for criticism of the defendants in this regard.
21. In addition to the
above matters the defendants and the Cameron family express their contrition and
remorse at the injuries suffered
by Mr Chand and the Court is satisfied that
these emotions are sincerely expressed. The conduct of the defendants
following the
incident together with the early plea of guilty all point to the
sincerity and genuineness of the defendants’ remorse.
legislation provides for a maximum penalty of $550,000 for a defendant which is
incorporated and which has no prior convictions.
This Court has a jurisdiction
to impose a fine not exceeding $55,000 for any particular offence. This case
has the unusual quality
of bringing six defendants before the Court in relation
to a single incident in which each of the six defendants can properly be
described as the employer of the injured worker and guilty of an offence
pursuant to
of the legislation. Having heard the submissions of the
Prosecutor and of the defendants in this regard I am satisfied that six
have been committed rather than one offence being committed by six co-offenders.
However, for the purpose of the sentencing
process I accept the submissions of
the Prosecutor and of the defendants to the effect that an extraordinarily harsh
and unfair result
would flow if I were to impose the appropriate penalty on each
of the six defendants separately and order each of them to pay the
question. One approach suggested to the Court at the sentencing hearing was
that I should order Cameron’s Envelopes
and Business Forms to pay the fine
on behalf of the six defendants. The obvious difficulty with that approach is
that Cameron’s
Envelopes and Business Forms is not before the Court as a
defendant and is not in any event a legal entity capable of being fined
23. Another approach suggested in submissions was for the Court
to keep the offence as a single offence and then divide the penalty
order each of the six defendants to pay that sum. This would require the
Prosecutor to recover against each of the six
separately.
24. It was also submitted that it was open to the Court to
impose the full quantum of the fine on each of the six defendants herein
with a proviso to the effect that upon any one of the six defendants lodging the
fine with the registry the fine imposed on each
of the other five defendants
would be permanently stayed.
25. I am not satisfied that any of the
above proposals is entirely acceptable. In circumstances where the six
defendants are engaged
in a partnership or joint venture arrangement whereby
each is jointly and severally liable for the debts of the other participants
have decided to enter convictions against each of the six defendants but to
impose a penalty only on one entity namely the first
defendant herein, Elegance
Wedding Stationary Pty Ltd. In the event that, for any reason, the first
defendant was unable to pay
the fine at all or in full, the Prosecutor would be
free, in the view of the Court to recover against any of the other five
whose assets include all of the assets of the business which is
ultimately owned by the six defendant companies.
26. Whilst I accept the
submission of the Prosecutor that the offence is a mid range offence it is
regarded by the Court as being
very much at the lower end of the mid range. In
the view of the Court it is most unfortunate that the defendants’
outstanding
record has been blemished in this way after 43 years of
27. In the view of the Court the appropriate penalty in this
case is $21,500. The defendants are entitled to a discount in circumstances
where the plea of guilty was entered at the first available opportunity. I
propose to discount the penalty by 25%. The first
defendant is fined the sum
of $16,125. There will be a moiety of the fine to the
Prosecutor.
28. There was considerable debate between the parties in
relation to the issue of costs. The Prosecutor contends that there were
separate Court Attendance Notices before the Court relating to six separate
prosecutions of six separate defendants and that
on one view the Prosecutor was
entitled to claim the costs of such a proceeding according to the Workcover
Authority Guideline Schedule
in the sum of $2,891.52 in respect of each of the
six separate matters. That represents a total claim for costs and
disbursements
in the sum of $17,349.12. Alternatively, the Prosecutor has
submitted time costing sheets providing a total of 55.83 billable
total professional costs in the sum of $11,685.50. As I understand the
Prosecutor’s submissions it would be appropriate
for the Court to order
the defendants to pay the sum of $11,650.50 and to either apportion that amount
between the six defendants
or order each of the six defendants to pay the full
amount on the basis that upon one of them paying the costs into the registry
order for costs against the other five defendants would be
29. For the reasons discussed above in relation to the fine I
propose to make a single order for costs against the first defendant
basis that in the event of any failure on the part of the first defendant to pay
the costs ordered it would clearly be open
to the Prosecutor to recover costs
against any of the other five defendants or against the property of the
partnership.
30. The remaining issue for the Court is the issue of
quantum. The Court accepts that if there had been a single defendant the
Prosecutor’s
reasonable costs would be $2,891.52. The Court also accepts
that the fact that there are six defendants has put the Prosecutor
additional expense of increased paperwork and it has been necessary for the
Prosecutor to consider additional matters which
have arisen as a consequence of
the multiplicity of defendants. Normally, this matter would have been dealt
with on a single occasion.
The structure of the business enterprise with six
separate incorporated entities forming a partnership or joint venture caused
Court to require additional submissions to be made, particularly in relation to
the submission put on the first day on behalf
of the defendants to the effect
that the Court should treat Cameron’s Envelopes and Business Forms as the
defendant and impose
a fine on the partnership. The Court asked for and
received further submissions in relation to the
Partnership Act
required the matter to be listed for a separate
31. Notwithstanding the extra paperwork, which is essentially a
clerical task rather than a provision of legal services, and the requirement
the matter to be listed on a second occasion I am satisfied that both of the
amounts proposed by the Prosecutor are unreasonable
and excessive. In view of
the Court the additional work required and the second attendance that was
required by the parties warrants
a doubling of the costs that would have been
appropriate if there had been a single defendant. Consequently the first
is ordered to pay the Prosecutor’s costs in the sum of
32. The first defendant is ordered to pay the fine and the
costs within 28 days at the Level 4 Registry of the Court, Downing Centre,
143-147 Liverpool Street Sydney.
Chief Industrial Magistrate
1 June 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (54.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter