URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWCATAD/2025/280.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:47:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GXI v Children's Guardian [2025] NSWCATAD 280; (14 November 2025)
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
New South Wales
GXI v Children’s Guardian
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2025] NSWCATAD 280
Hearing Date(s):
11 September 2025
Date of Orders:
14 November 2025
Decision Date:
14 November 2025
Administrative and Equal Opportunity Division
K Mobbs, Senior Member
E Hayes, General Member
The application for an enabling order under s 28(1) of the Child Protection
(Working with Children) Act 2012 is refused.
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – child protection – working with children
– application for an enabling order –applicant
is a disqualified
person having been convicted of a disqualifying offence (act of
indecency)– whether applicant has displaced
the statutory presumption that
he poses a risk to the safety of children.
Legislation Cited:
Child Protection (Working with
Children) Act 2012
Child Protection
(Working with Children) and other Legislation Amendment Act 2025 (NSW)
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Crimes Act 1900
Domestic Violence Act 1986 (ACT)
Working with Vulnerable
People (Background Checking) Act 2011 (ACT)
Cases Cited:
BKE v Office of Children’s Guardian & Anor
[2015] NSWSC
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Commissioner for Children
and Young People v FZ
[2011] NSWCA 111
CXZ v Children’s Guardian
Ex parte Tziniolis; Re Medical Practitioners Act
(1996) 67 SR (NSW)
GVD v Children’s Guardian
[2025] NSWCATAD 251
Lee v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 80
(1988) 166 CLR 69
Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCA 174
Texts Cited:
Principal judgment
GXI (Applicant)
Children’s Guardian (Respondent)
Representation:
Solicitors:
Applicant (Self-represented)
Crown Solicitor
(Respondent)
File Number(s):
2025/00078957
Publication Restriction:
Pursuant to
Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
with the exception of expert witnesses and officers of government agencies, the
publication or broadcast of the name of any person
mentioned in these
proceedings or referred to in the documentary material lodged in these
proceedings is prohibited. Note: A reference
to the name of a person includes a
reference to any information, picture or other material that identifies the
person or is likely
to lead to the identification of the person.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Applicant in these proceedings is referred to as “GXI”. GXI is
the Applicant’s pseudonym used in accordance
with the order made by the
Tribunal pursuant to
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(NSW) (the NCAT Act).
Applicant was charged with contravening s 92K(2) of the
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) (repealed) in that on 20 August 1990 in the Australian Capital
Territory (ACT) he committed an act of indecency on a person
< 16 years. On
12 February 1991 at the ACT Magistrates Court, the Applicant received a
conditional release order in relation to
that offence pursuant to s 556B of the
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) upon giving a recognizance for the sum of $2000 and
subject to the Applicant being of good behaviour for 12 months (the 1990
17 April 2019, the Applicant applied to the Respondent for a working with
children’s check clearance (Clearance) under the
Child Protection
(Working with
Children) Act 2012
(NSW) (the Act). The Applicant applied
for the Clearance on the basis that he was a volunteer with a sporting
organisation and that
whilst the work was not child related the organisation
had requested the “
22 May 2019, the Respondent sent the Applicant a Notice to Disqualified Person
notifying him that it must not grant him a Clearance,
because he was a
disqualified person as the 1990 offence was a disqualifying offence.
the expiry of the five-year bar on the Applicant reapplying for a Clearance, the
Applicant again applied on 29 January 2025.
The Applicant applied for a
volunteer clearance, nominating “
Parent Volunteer-
10 February 2025, the Respondent sent the Applicant a letter notifying him that
it must not grant him a Clearance, because the
Applicant is a disqualified
person due to the 1990 offence.
27 February 2025, the Applicant filed an application with the Tribunal. By
consent, this application is treated by the Tribunal
as a general application
for an enabling order under s 28 of the Act (the Application). The effect of
this is that the Applicant
seeks a finding by the Tribunal
that he does not pose a risk to children and that
he be granted an enabling order pursuant to s 28
Respondent opposes the Application.
Non-publication order
to s 64(1)(a) of the NCAT Act, the Tribunal made an order that, with the
exception of expert witnesses and officers of government
agencies, the
publication or broadcast of the name of any person mentioned in these
proceedings or referred to in the documentary
material lodged in these
proceedings is prohibited.
Tribunal is satisfied that in the circumstances of this case, it is desirable
to make this order because if the order is not made,
the identify of a
victim or an alleged victim could be disclosed
is noted that for the purposes of s 64 of the NCAT Act, a reference to
the name of a person includes a reference to any information,
picture or other
material that identifies the person or is likely to lead to the identification
of the person.
Amendment Act
these proceedings commenced, the Act has been amended by
Child Protection (Working with Children) and other Legislation
Amendment Act 2025
(NSW) (Amendment Act). The Amendment Act
removes the provisions enabling individuals to apply to the Tribunal for
administrative
review of the Respondent’s decisions in respect of a
Clearance. The relevant sections of the Amendment Act commenced on 23
September 2025.
a result, clause 27(1) of Schedule 3 of the Act now provides that clause 27
applies to an application for review made to the Tribunal
but not finally
determined before the commencement date (namely 23 September 2025). Clause 27(2)
provides that an application for
an enabling order made before the
introduction date, which means the date on which the Bill for the Amendment Act
was first introduced
into Parliament (namely 5 August 2025), must be
determined by the Tribunal as if the Amendment Act had not commenced.
this case the Application was made to the Tribunal on 27 February 2025 and
had not been finally determined before 23 September
2025. Therefore, the
Tribunal is satisfied that it had jurisdiction in the matter prior to 23
September 2025 and that it retains
if the Amendment Act had not commenced.
Accordingly,
the provisions of the Act referred to elsewhere in these Reasons for Decision
are the provisions of the Act in force
prior to 23 September
Legislation
object of the Act is to protect children by requiring people to hold
a Clearance if they engage in child-related work: see ss
3 and 28(1) of the Act. The safety, welfare, and
well-being of children and, in particular, protecting them from abuse, is
the paramount
consideration under the Act: s 4.
8(1) of the Act prohibits a person from engaging in child-related work
unless the person holds the relevant clearance or there
is a current
application by the person to the Respondent for the relevant
clearance. A breach of s 8(1) is an offence.
18(1)(a) of the Act provides the Respondent must not grant a
Clearance to “
disqualified persons
term is relevantly defined to include:
(a) a person convicted before, on or after the commencement of
this section of an offence specified in Schedule 2, if the offence
was committed
as an adult
” is defined at s 5 of the Act to include a
finding that the charge for an offence is proven, or that a person is guilty of
an offence, even though the court does not proceed to a conviction.
1(1)(e) of Schedule 2 to the Act specifies offences under the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) and cl 1(1)(z) of Schedule 2 includes an offence under a law of
another State or a Territory, that if committed in New South
Wales, would
constitute an offence of a kind listed in the clause. Clause 1(2) provides that
the clause applies to convictions or
proceedings for offences whether occurring
before, on or after the commencement of the clause.
28 of the Act permits the Tribunal to make an enabling
order and relevantly provides:
(1) The Tribunal may, on the application of a disqualified person, make an
order declaring that the person is not to be treated
as a disqualified person
for the purposes of this Act in respect of an offence specified in the order
enabling order
). Any such order has effect according to
(3) A disqualified person may make an application under this section only
(a) the person has been refused a working with children check
clearance, or
(b) the person’s clearance has been cancelled under section 23,
because the person is a disqualified person.
(4) The Children’s Guardian is to be a party to any proceedings for
an order under this section and may make submissions in
opposition to or support
of the making of the order.
(5) An applicant must fully disclose to the Tribunal any matters relevant
to the application.
(6) If the Tribunal makes an enabling order, the Tribunal may order the
Children’s Guardian to revoke an interim bar or to
grant the person a
(6A) To avoid doubt, Division 5 of Part 3 applies to any clearance granted
by the Children’s Guardian in accordance with the
(7) In any proceedings where an enabling order is sought, it is to be
presumed, unless the applicant proves to the contrary, that
the applicant poses
a risk to the safety of children.
(8) An enabling order may not be made subject to conditions.
30(1) of the Act sets out the considerations the Tribunal
must take into account when deciding whether to grant an
30(1A) prohibits the Tribunal from making an enabling order
unless satisfied that:
(a) a reasonable person would allow his or her child to have direct
person while the affected person was engaged in any child-related work, and
(b) it is in the public interest to make the order.
The hearing
matter was heard by the Tribunal on 11 September 2025. The Applicant appeared by
audio visual link and was self-represented.
Mr Poberezny, the solicitor for the
Respondent, appeared in person.
Applicant’s
support of the Application, the Applicant relied on his letter dated 26 May 2025
(May letter) (exhibit A1), a document headed Final
Submission dated 11 August
2025 (August submission) (exhibit A2) and two character references (exhibit A3).
The Applicant gave evidence
and was cross-examined by Mr Poberezny. The
Applicant made oral submissions to the Tribunal.
documentary material relied upon by the Applicant included both evidence and
submissions. The Tribunal has given appropriate weight
to both the evidence and
the submissions in the consideration of this
Respondent’s material
Respondent relied upon four separate bundles of documentary material in these
proceedings as follows:
(i) Respondent’s Evidence (exhibit R1);
(ii) Respondent’s Supplementary Bundle of Documents (exhibit R2);
(iii) Respondent’s Bundle of Additional Documents (exhibit R3); and
(iv) Respondent’s Bundle of Further Documents (exhibit R4).
Respondent also relied on written submissions that were filed with the Tribunal
on 8 September 2025 and Mr Poberezny made oral
submissions at the
Objections to Respondent’s material
Respondent’s Supplementary Bundle of Documents consisted of various
documents, including documents relating to various allegations
of criminal
conduct and the bringing of criminal charges against the Applicant (the
1997/1998 allegations). The Applicant was charged
in 1998 with four counts of
committing an act of indecency on person < 16 years old. The
Applicant’s first trial for these
charges (first trial) ended in a
mistrial. The Applicant was subsequently found not guilty at a second trial of
all four counts by
a jury in 2000 and acquitted (second trial).
Applicant objected to the admission of material relating to the 1997/1998
allegations on the basis that he had been found “
a jury of his peers and accordingly that it was not appropriate for these
matters to be taken into account in relation
to the Application, some 30 years
Tribunal had regard to the submissions made by the Applicant and also to those
made by Mr Poberezny. It was the Respondent’s
position that this material
was clearly relevant to these proceedings in relation to the issue of whether
the Applicant had discharged
the statutory presumption that he posed a risk to
the safety of children, even though the Respondent was not seeking that the
make a finding that the alleged conduct referred to in the material was
proved to the civil standard.
the circumstances of this matter and given the protective nature of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction under Part 4 of the Act:
Commissioner for
Children and Young People v FZ
[2011] NSWCA 111
), per Young
JA at [61], and the Tribunal’s approach to fact finding:
Children’s Guardian
[2015] NSWSC 523
), the Tribunal
accepted that the material contained in the Respondent’s Supplementary
Bundle of Documents was relevant to its
consideration of this matter.
Accordingly, the material was admitted into evidence (exhibit R2), subject to
further consideration.
The Applicant’s position
Applicant’s position was that the 1990 offence took place approximately 35
years ago, and that he continued to remain shameful
for his actions in relation
to that matter. He has no other criminal record and denied the further matters
relied upon by the Respondent
and contained in the Respondent’s
Supplementary Bundle of Documents and Respondent’s Bundle of Further
documents. The
Applicant relied on his work history, his good character and the
character references that he had provided to the Tribunal and submitted
given the time that had elapsed since the 1990 offence, he did not pose a risk
to children and that the enabling order should
be granted.
Respondent’s position
Respondent submitted that the Tribunal should conclude that the Applicant has
not displaced the statutory presumption that he
poses a real and appreciable
risk to the safety of children, and the Application should be dismissed.
Additionally,
it was submitted on behalf of the Respondent that the Tribunal should not grant
the Applicant a Clearance as the Tribunal
would not be satisfied that a
reasonable person would allow the Applicant to have unsupervised access to their
children in a work
setting, and that granting the Clearance would be in the
public interest. Accordingly, it was submitted by the Respondent that the
Tribunal should dismiss the Application.
Consideration
Applicant is currently aged 62 years old, with two children and a stepdaughter
from a previous marriage. The Applicant has been
in a relationship with his
current wife since 1999 and had been married to her for over 24 years. He is a
retired public servant
with over 44 years of work experience, including in
senior positions managing teams of over 100 staff. He has represented the
internationally as well as working in remote communities within
Australia. The Applicant continues to carry out paid work for a government
agency in a part time capacity.
Applicant has been a volunteer official in a sporting organisation since 2000,
including as a senior official. It is now a requirement
of that organisation
that the Applicant obtains a Clearance to continue his volunteer work with them
and to possibly expand his volunteering
to other parts of Australia. The
Applicant has never previously been required to supervise or train other
volunteers of the sporting
organisation under the age of 18 and has never held a
Clearance under the Act.
Applicant accepted that the 1990 offence is a disqualifying offence under the
Act as specified in Schedule 2. The Applicant advised
the Respondent that he had
pleaded guilty to the 1990 offence at the first possible opportunity and he
accepted that he is a disqualified
person under the Act. Accordingly, the
Tribunal is satisfied that the 1990 offence (Disqualifying Offence) is a
disqualifying offence
for the purpose of the Act and that the Applicant is a
disqualified person. The Respondent has refused the Applicant’s request
for a Clearance, and we find that the provisions in s 28(3)(a) of the Act are
Circumstances of the Disqualifying Offence
material before the Tribunal included a copy of the Information for the
Disqualifying Offence, the Statement of Facts and the
police brief of evidence,
including the statement of the victim and her mother, together with a copy of
the record of conversation
between the Applicant and police that took place on
27 August 1990.
Documentary evidence
Background to offending
documentary material indicated that at the time of the offending on 20 August
1990, the Applicant was aged 27. The victim was
aged 13 and according to her
statement was a school student, then in Year 7, and was a neighbour of the
Applicant and his family
and had previously babysat the Applicant’s
children. On the day of the offending, the victim had gone to the
Applicant’s
Applicant’s daughters, who were then aged 4 and 6. The Applicant’s
was interstate for a family funeral and whilst the Applicant had taken time
off from his day job, he still needed to work at night.
At about 5.20 pm, the
Applicant placed his daughters into the bath and then went to the family room of
the house where the victim
was seated and sat down in a chair. The Applicant did
not dispute any of these matters and the Tribunal is satisfied in relation
Criminal proceedings
was also not in dispute that the Applicant subsequently pleaded guilty in
relation to the incident, namely to the offence of commit
an act of indecency
upon a person, namely the 13-year-old victim. The Applicant accepted that he
received a conditional release order
for the Disqualifying Offence pursuant to s
556B of the
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) upon giving a recognizance for the sum
of $2000 and subject to being of good behaviour for 12 months.
were some matters referred to in the Statement of Facts that the Applicant
either did not admit or could not recall. The Respondent
fairly conceded that it
was not clear from the available material that the Applicant had pleaded guilty
to the Disqualifying Offence
on the basis of the Statement of Facts that was
before the Tribunal.
Issues as to Applicant’s conduct
relating to the Disqualifying Offence
Statement of Facts records that after the Applicant sat in the chair in the
family room, he then called the victim over and she
initially declined. The
Applicant then took hold of the victim’s right hand and pulled her towards
him, and she sat across
his legs. The victim says in her statement that the
Applicant “
” her hand and “
her, so that she had to stand up and take at least one step towards him and that
” her onto his lap.
Applicant then placed his left hand on the inside of the t-shirt the victim was
wearing and rubbed and squeezed her left breast.
The victim stated that the
Applicant’s touching of her breast did not hurt her, but she thought that
she had to find some way
to get away and she was
Applicant then took his hand away from her breast and moved it to the area of
her right thigh on top of her jeans. The Applicant
then rubbed his hand on the
victim’s thigh and also in the area of her vagina. The victim said in her
statement that she did
not like what he was doing and wanted to get out and go.
The Statement of Facts and the victim’s statement record that the
Applicant then said words similar to “
I should put the kids in the bath
” before kissing the victim on her cheek. She then got up
after she heard one of the girls in the bath screaming out. After
the girls had
been bathed, the victim stayed for dinner with them and then returned to her
her mother of the specific details
of what had happened. Police were subsequently notified and statements obtained
from the victim
and her mother.
Applicant was interviewed by police on 27 August 1990 and made partial
admissions in relation to the offending. He was asked about
the allegation and
his alleged involvement in the matter and said, “
I was involved, I
didn’t use any force, I don’t know why it happened
Applicant admitted to police that he had said to the victim something like
Why don’t you come over here
” and that the victim had
.” He said that he kept his “
” and said something like “
’Go on’ then she
put her hand in mine
”. He said he “
wasn’t forcing her
or anything and then she came and sat on my knee
.” He admitted to
” her left breast and putting his hand under her
bra. The Applicant told police that “
I then moved my hand down and
started rubbing her right thigh. I don’t think I touched her vagina but I
would’ve been
close and she was wearing jeans
asked by police if he could give a reason for rubbing his hand on the
victim’s breast or crotch area, the Applicant replied
I’ve already seen a Psychiatrist about that
.” When asked if he
had taken hold of the victim’s hand and pulled her towards him, he said
that this was not correct.
He said that he had asked her to come over and may
have wiggled his finger when he had his hand out but that he “
.” The Applicant told police that he could not recall saying,
I should put the kids in the bath more often
acknowledged that he had given her a kiss but that he could not recall the
conversation “
if there was any
.” He said that he knew as soon
it happened he became frightened and “
asked her not to tell anybody
knowing what the circumstances would be
Applicant’s evidence
cross-examination, the Applicant indicated that he could not now recall exactly
what had happened on the day of the offending but
said that he believed what he
had said to police in the record of interview to be the truth. He gave evidence
that there was “
” that he would have used force during
the offending and that he had held out his hand to the victim as a form of
and not force. He stated that that it was such a long time since the
incident occurred and that he did not have any recollection
of saying to the
I should put the kids in the bath more often
Applicant’s evidence before the Tribunal was that he had pleaded guilty to
the Disqualifying Offence at the first opportunity
but did not know what
information was relied upon for sentencing. The Applicant gave evidence that his
offence was a very serious
matter and that the penalty imposed was appropriate
when compared to other matters.
his written material, the Applicant indicated that he was
” of his actions and considered himself to have
a very foolish mistake
” many years ago. He said that he
hoped that the incident did not cause the victim “
long term mental
health issues
” and that she “
has been able to have a
fulfilled life
.” He reiterated such sentiments in his oral
Consideration
Disqualifying Offence occurred some 35 years ago, and the Tribunal accepts the
Applicant’s evidence that he cannot now recall
many of the details of the
offending conduct, including the conversations that took place during the
incident. As conceded by the
Respondent, it is not clear whether the Applicant
was sentenced on the basis of the Statement of Facts that was in evidence before
the Tribunal.
Tribunal had the benefit of the police brief of evidence which included the
victim’s statement that was made four days after
the Disqualifying Offence
together with the record of conversation between police and the Applicant which
was conducted seven days
after the offence was committed. The Tribunal also had
regard to the documentary material which indicates that the Applicant was
charged with common assault pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
arising out of the same facts as the Disqualifying Offence and that the police
offered no evidence to the court in relation
to that charge and it was
Tribunal is satisfied that the Applicant committed the Disqualifying Offence
and accepts his evidence that he did not use force
against the victim. However
having regard to the victim’s statement, we are satisfied that even though
the Applicant did not
use force, the victim believed that she was being
compelled by the Applicant to sit on his lap; that she was thinking that she
find some way to get away from him; that she was scared; and that she did
not like what he was doing.
Applicant did not deny saying to the victim, “
I should put the kids in
the bath more often
” but rather said in the record of conversation
with police and in his evidence before the Tribunal that he did not recall
that, and that whilst he knew that he gave her a kiss, he could not
recall the conversation if there was any
”. In light of the
victim’s statement made only four days after the Disqualifying Offence, we
are satisfied that the Applicant
did use those words to her. We are also
satisfied from the record of conversation with police that the Applicant told
not to tell anybody about the incident.
matters relied upon by the Respondent
Protection Order pursuant to the Domestic Violence Act 1986 (ACT) (the
Domestic Violence matters)
Respondent relied on documentary material (exhibit R4) indicating that on 19
August 1998 the Applicant’s then wife applied
for a protection order
against the Applicant pursuant to the
Domestic Violence Act 1986
An interim protection order was made on that date until 26 August 1998 when the
matter was heard in the Magistrate’s
annexure to the application for the protective orders in those matters sets out
the facts preceding the application. It was not
disputed by the Applicant that
he had separated from his then wife in April 1997 and continued residing under
the same roof with
her until he left the family home in January 1998. The
annexure sets out an incident on 18 August 1998 in which it was alleged by
Applicant’s then wife, that when attending the family home to pick up the
three children, there was an argument between
her and the Applicant, which was
witnessed by the children, who were becoming upset.
documentary evidence indicates that on 26 August 1998, the ACT Magistrates Court
made a two-year protection order against the
Applicant. The Court also ordered
that any firearms licence held by the Applicant be suspended. It appears from
the documentary material
that the Applicant did not attend that hearing and
subsequently an application was made to revoke that order. Further interim
orders were then made against the Applicant, and the documentary
evidence indicates that on 23 February 1999, a one-year protection
made by the Magistrates Court against the Applicant by consent and without
admissions.
Applicant’s evidence
his May letter, the Applicant said that throughout 1997, he had been involved in
a bitter separation from his then wife and they
had subsequently divorced. He
stated that he strongly believes to this day that his ex-wife would have said
anything in an attempt
to have him in trouble with the law.
cross-examination, the Applicant said that he did not receive material relating
to the Domestic Violence matters and as a result
did not attend the hearings. He
said that he received the protective order at his home. He stated that he then
spoke to the Registrar
as he wanted to put up a case and defend himself and was
told not to waste his time. He stated that at the time he was quite tired
situation and the divorce proceedings and basically “
in relation to both. When it was noted by Mr Poberezny, that it appeared that
the Applicant was legally represented in relation
to the protection order made
on 23 February 1999, the Applicant said that he could have been but could not
Consideration
Tribunal accepts from the documentary evidence that a number of interim
protection orders and protection orders were made against
the Applicant in
respect of his now ex-wife in the period from August 1998 to February 1999. The
Tribunal is not satisfied that the
Applicant attended the court proceedings on
26 August 1998 at which time the initial protection order was made or any
previous proceedings.
The Tribunal is satisfied that a revocation of that order
was subsequently sought and that on 23 February 1999, a varied protection
was made against the Applicant in relation to his ex-wife. The Tribunal accepts
from the documentary evidence that the Applicant
was legally represented at that
time and that whilst a protection order made on that date, it was made by
consent and “
without admissions
the Tribunal is satisfied that a number of protection orders, both interim and
final, were made against him, it appears from
the evidence that these orders
were all made following the separation of the Applicant and his then wife. The
only incidents involving
children were said to have occurred on 18 August 1998
and involved the children being present during verbal arguments between their
parents and during which they were described as “
Tribunal accepts that the Applicant was not present during the initial hearings,
including the hearing at which the first protection
order was made on 26 August
1998. The Applicant did attend subsequent hearings, and an amended protection
order was made on 23 February
1999, at which time it appears that both parties
were legally represented. The Tribunal accepts that this order was made by
and without admissions.
oral submissions, the Respondent submitted that the Tribunal should have regard
to this conduct as it demonstrates that the Applicant
failed to act protectively
in front of children. In the circumstances of this matter, particularly where
the Applicant was not present
at the initial hearings relating to the orders,
and where the final protection order was made by consent and without admissions,
the Tribunal cannot be satisfied to the relevant standard that given the
Applicant’s initial absences, that the evidence was
sufficiently tested to
establish on the balance of probabilities that the Applicant did in fact fail to
act protectively in front
of his children. Accordingly, whilst it is accepted
that protection orders were made in relation to the Domestic Violence matters,
the Tribunal has no further regard to the Applicant’s alleged conduct in
those matters in its consideration of this
Application.
Allegations from 1997 and 1998
referred to previously, the Respondent also relied upon a number of allegations
that were said to have occurred in 1997 and 1998
(the 1997/1998 allegations)
which it submitted were similar in nature to the Disqualifying Offence. The
documentary material includes
the police brief of evidence (part exhibit R2)
which indicates that the Applicant’s then stepdaughter (the complainant)
participated
in a taped record of conversation with police on 10 September 1998,
at which time she was aged 13. The complainant reported a number
of instances of
having been touched by the Applicant between about November 1997 and the
beginning of 1998 at which time she was
aged 12, and when the Applicant was
still living at the family home.
transcript of the complainant’s interview with the police was included in
the police brief of evidence. The complainant told
police that after the first
time the touching occurred, the Applicant had said to her “
This is our
little secret
” and that she was scared of him. The complainant said
that after the first incident, which she said had occurred during the
holidays, the Applicant started touching her breasts under her clothing
most nights...about four times a week
Applicant participated in a taped record of interview with police on 13 October
1998 and a copy of the transcript of that interview
is included in the police
brief of evidence. In the course of the interview, the Applicant denied the
allegations and said that he
did not understand why the complainant would have
made them. He said that after he and his then wife had legally separated in 1997
, they had begun largely sleeping in separate bedrooms for about six months
before the Applicant moved out of the family home in
January 1998. He referred
to mediation relating to his property settlement having failed and to
restraining orders which prevented
him from seeing the children.
this interview with police, the Applicant was charged with four counts of commit
act of indecency on person < 16 years,
By the time of the second trial, the
date ranges for the alleged offences had been narrowed and it was alleged that
on separate days
between December 1997 and January 1998, the Applicant had:
(i) entered the complainant’s bedroom, guided her towards the wall, and
cupped her breasts with his hands. The complainant
stated that at the time of
the alleged incident she was not wearing clothing on her upper body.
(ii) entered the complainant’s bedroom whilst she was lying in bed, took
the blankets off her and placed both his hands up
her top. The Applicant was
then alleged to have cupped and stroked both of the complainant’s
(iii) entered the complainant’s bedroom sometime during the evening or
nighttime, guided her towards the wall, placed both
his hands up her top and
stroked and cupped her breasts.
(iv) entered the complainant’s bedroom, placed his hands up her skirt and
insider her underpants. He then stroked her vagina
from side to side.
Applicant pleaded not guilty to each of the four counts. The Respondent relied
upon a transcript of the second trial (part exhibit
R2). This transcript
includes reference to a committal hearing and to the first trial. Also included
in the transcript as a discussion
between counsel and the trial judge which
refers to the committal and the first trial. There is also discussion about the
complainant
having already been examined and cross-examined twice in previous
proceedings. The complainant was referred to in the transcript
as being aged 15
at the time of the second trial.
would seem from the correspondence produced by the Respondent (part exhibit R3)
that the first trial was conducted in May 2000
and resulted in a mistrial. No
reasons were provided for the mistrial and no transcript of either the committal
proceedings or the
first trial was before the Tribunal.
the transcript of the second trial, the trial judge notes that the complainant
was a person who was obliged to give her evidence
in the matter by way of
closed-circuit television, unless she consented otherwise and the court so
ordered. The Crown sought an order,
which was granted by the trial judge, for
the complainant to give her evidence in court, and noted that the complainant
her evidence in open court on the last occasion
The transcript indicates that the second trial proceeded over two days and that
both the complainant and the Applicant gave
evidence and were cross-examined.
Their evidence is set out in the transcript. It was not in dispute that the jury
ultimately delivered
verdicts of not guilty in relation to each of the four
counts and that the Applicant was discharged.
his evidence before the Tribunal and in his submissions, the Applicant continued
to deny the 1997/1998 allegations and stated that
his position was supported by
a jury of his peers. The Applicant said in his August submission document that
the entire period of
his life with his “
ex-wife on reflection, was one
of the worst
”. He went on to say that he has always strongly denied
these allegations “
and found these allegations were being used to
support a divorce application from [his] ex-wife
Respondent acknowledged that the Applicant had been acquitted of each of the
four counts at the second trial.
1997/1998 allegations will be further considered in relation to the criteria set
out in s 30(1) of the Act.
Does the Applicant pose a risk to the
safety of children?
28 of the Act does not specify the test to be applied in determining
whether to make an enabling order. As previously referred
to, in cases where an
enabling order is sought, s 28(7) of the Act provides that
the Tribunal must presume (unless proven to the
contrary) that the applicant
poses a risk to the safety of children. The Applicant therefore has the burden
of satisfying the Tribunal
that he does not pose a risk to the safety of
children. Section 5B of the Act defines risk to the safety of
children to be
“a real and appreciable
”. If the Applicant does not discharge his onus,
the Tribunal cannot grant an enabling order.
standard to which the Tribunal must be satisfied before making a positive
finding in relation to an allegation is the civil standard,
that is, on the
balance of probabilities, and not the criminal standard:
Office of the
Children’s Guardian v CFW
[2016] NSWSC
at [14]-[17], subject to the need to have regard to
the principles in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
principle can broadly be
described as a standard of satisfaction to be reached where serious allegations
are concerned. Put simply,
serious allegations with serious consequences require
more compelling evidence for the decision maker to reach the necessary state
reasonable satisfaction that the facts in dispute are more likely than not to
enabling order cannot be subject to conditions and the grant
of such an order would permit the Applicant
to potentially engage
in a range of child related work. As a
consequence, the assessment of risk the Tribunal is to perform is
to be considered in the
context of all relevant child related work.
Tribunal’s approach to fact finding was set
, after discussing
, as follows (at [33]):
Thus in such cases it may be that NCAT can be satisfied that an allegation
of sexual abuse against an applicant is established. Equally,
NCAT may be
affirmatively satisfied that the relevant incident did not occur, in which case
it can be put aside. However, in a context
where the welfare of the child is
paramount and the question being posed concerns the risk of harm to children,
NCAT may not be satisfied
that an allegation of abuse has been made out, but
nevertheless conclude that the circumstances surrounding a particular incident
or course of conduct means that there is a risk to a child or, more correctly,
that the existence of a risk has not been disproven.
approach was confirmed by the Court of Appeal in
Children’s Guardian
[2017] NSWCA 174
v Children’s Guardian
[2020] NSWCA 338
at [7(a)-(d)],
[28] and [57]. The Tribunal agrees with the analysis set out by the Tribunal in
GVD v Children’s Guardian
[2025] NSWCATAD 251
56. Thus, relying upon the analysis in
[51], many cases will not lend themselves to definitive factual determination.
Where an allegation is neither “well founded”
“groundless”, the Tribunal must decide whether, on the evidence
before it, the possibility that the conduct did occur
justifies a finding that
the applicant poses a risk to the safety of children:
[52]. The assessment and the weight to be assigned to allegations will depend
upon the seriousness of the allegations, the strength
of any evidentiary support
for those allegations, and the relevance of the conduct which is the
subject of the allegations to the
risk to the safety of children if a clearance
is granted to the applicant:
57. A positive finding by the Tribunal that alleged conduct has
taken place will generally be determinative of an application:
at [14]-[15], per Justice Harrison:
“The first proposition is that, in assessing whether there is a risk to
the safety of children, the court or tribunal should
first consider whether (a)
positive findings can be made as to any alleged act(s) of wrongdoing on the
balance of probabilities,
or (b) whether the court or tribunal has “no
hesitation in rejecting the allegation as groundless”. A positive finding
on the balance of probabilities
that relevant conduct has taken
place, if such a finding can be made, will generally have a “decisive
impact” on the outcome
of the application.
The second proposition is that, even if no such “positive finding”
can be made, the court or tribunal is still obliged
to consider questions of
risk that may be indicated by all of the facts, unless it is determined that the
allegation is “groundless”.”
58. In determining the application, the Tribunal is required to
consider “the totality of the evidence”:
[28] citing
The Commissioner for Children and Young People v
[2005] NSWSC 1136
. The Tribunal is to make a decision
based on the “cumulative effect” of the matters before
at [69]-[71].
Consideration of s 30(1) criteria
(a) The seriousness of the offences with respect to which the person is a
disqualified person or any matters that caused a refusal
of a clearance or
imposition of an interim bar
set out above, we have found that the Applicant pleaded guilty and was sentenced
in relation to the Disqualifying Offence. We have
also made findings in relation
to the Applicant’s conduct in relation to that offending.
are satisfied that the Disqualifying Offence is serious as it involved the
Applicant touching a 13-year-old female child’s
breast underneath her bra
and then touching her thigh and around her vagina, as well as kissing her on the
cheek. The Applicant told
the victim that he should “
put the kids in
the bath more often
” and later said that the victim should not tell
anyone about what had happened. Whilst the Tribunal accepts that the Applicant
did not use physical force against the victim, we are satisfied that she was
harmed by the Applicant’s conduct, insofar as
she was scared, thinking
that she had to find some way of getting away and that she did not like what he
(b) The period of time since those offences
or matters occurred and the conduct of the person since they occurred
Disqualifying Offence occurred on 20 August 1990, some 35 years ago. It was not
in dispute that the Applicant has not been found
guilty of any other criminal
offences since that time.
Respondent also sought to rely upon the Applicant’s conduct relating to
the 1997/1998 allegations which were said to have
taken place some 27 to 28
(c) The age of the person at the time the
offences or matters occurred
Applicant was aged 27 at the time of the Disqualifying Offence and 34 at the
time of the 1997/1998 allegations.
(d) The age of each
victim of any relevant offence or conduct at the time they occurred and any
matters relating to the vulnerability
of the victim: and
(e) The difference in age between the victim and the person and the
relationship (if any) between the victim and the person
victim in the Disqualifying Offence was aged 13 at that time and the Applicant
was some 14 years older. The Tribunal accepts the
Respondent’s submission
that the victim was vulnerable, not only because of her age but also because she
was alone with the
Applicant in the family room of his home, whilst his two
daughters, then aged 4 and 6, were in the bathroom having a bath. The victim
been engaged by the Applicant and his then wife to babysit the children as the
Applicant’s then wife was interstate.
Tribunal accepts that the victim was working for the Applicant as a babysitter
at the time of the offence and as a consequence,
there was a substantial power
imbalance between them, and that this coupled with the victim’s inherent
vulnerability given
her age and isolation at the Applicant’s home,
increases the seriousness of the Disqualifying Offence.
Applicant was approximately 22 years older than the complainant in the 1997/1998
allegations and we are satisfied that she would
be considered vulnerable at this
time as she was aged 12 and the Applicant was her stepfather.
(f) whether the person knew, or could reasonably have
known, that the victim was a child
regard to all of the material before the Tribunal, we are satisfied that the
Applicant knew that both the victim in the Disqualifying
Offence and the
complainant in the 1997/1998 allegations were children at the relevant
(g) the person’s present age,
the time of the hearing, the Applicant was aged 62.
seriousness of the person’s criminal history and the conduct of the
person since the matters occurred,
Tribunal has already made findings that the Disqualifying Offence was serious
and that the Applicant has not been found guilty
or convicted of any further
criminal matters.
1997/1998 allegations will be further considered below.
likelihood of any repetition by the person of the offences or conduct and the
impact on children of any such repetition
evidence before the Tribunal did not disclose any explanation from the Applicant
for his conduct in relation to the Disqualifying
Offence, nor did he provide the
Tribunal with any medical expert evidence in relation to the risk he poses to
the safety of children.
response to a question during the record of conversation with police on 27
August 1990, the Applicant was asked if he could give
any reasons as to why he
had rubbed his hand on the victim’s breast or crotch area and said
No, I’ve already seen a Psychiatrist about that
appears that the Applicant told police the name of the psychiatrist at the time,
but the name has been redacted from the
transcript before the Tribunal.
Following a request for information from the Respondent on 19 May 2025, the
Applicant responded that
“[u]nfortunately due to the period of time
that has lapsed since the incident occurred, I do recall any name of a
psychiatrist
or knowledge of the content of any meetings”
apologised that he could not be of assistance.
In his evidence, the
Applicant clarified that there was an error in his response, and it was meant to
say that he did not recall the
name of the psychiatrist.
response to questions from the Tribunal, the Applicant stated that he could not
now recall seeing the psychiatrist or how he had
come to see him but thought
that his ex-wife may have arranged it. He could not recall how many times he had
seen the psychiatrist
and whether it was one or two times. The Applicant said
that he had not seen a psychiatrist or psychologist after that time.
was consistent with his documentary evidence in which the Applicant said that
he had not sought any consultations from mental
health professionals in support
of the Application to assess his mental capacity as he strongly believes that
his actions and behaviours
over the last 35 years can be “
[his] peers as normal and acceptable to the community at large
oral submissions, the Applicant said that if he had not met everything that was
required of him in the Application, he could not
see how he could, given that
the Disqualifying Offence occurred more than 35 years ago.
turn, it was submitted for the Respondent that the Applicant’s response to
police in the record of conversation that he could
not provide a reason for his
conduct was important in relation to the assessment of future risk to children.
It was submitted that
if the Applicant could not provide an explanation for his
offending conduct, how could an assessment be made as to whether such
might happen again. It was submitted that there were things that the Applicant
could have done in relation to the Application,
such as explaining the reasons
for his offending or providing medical evidence in relation to the risk he posed
to children. It was
submitted that such evidence might have given insight into
the Applicant’s conduct but that no such material had been provided.
his submissions in reply, the Applicant again submitted that he did not know why
the offending conduct had occurred but referred
to the high level of interest
rates and his work load at the time. The Applicant went on to submit that this
was not an explanation
that was acceptable and that he did not blame anyone else
but himself. He acknowledged that he understood the legislation and the
him and that it was up to the Tribunal to decide the matter.
the Tribunal accepts that the Applicant made reference in his documentary
evidence to issues such as the high interest rates
and to having worked multiple
jobs during his previous marriage, he did not link these to his offending
conduct in his evidence or
indicate that they contributed to his offending.
Having regard to the available evidence, the Tribunal accepts that in the period
of some seven days between the Disqualifying Offence and his participation in
the record of conversation with police, the Applicant
had seen a psychiatrist on
at least one occasion but was unable to provide any reason for his offending
conduct, even shortly afterwards.
the course of this Application, no medical evidence of any kind was adduced by
the Applicant and he gave evidence that he had not
further consulted a
psychiatrist or psychologist and moreover had not consulted any mental health
practitioner in support of the
Application. Other than having seen a
psychiatrist shortly after his offending, there was no evidence that the
Applicant had received
treatment or undertaken counselling or courses in
relation to his offending. There was no evidence that following his record of
conversation
with police some 35 years ago, that the Applicant had given any
consideration whatsoever to the reasons for his offending. Whilst
the Tribunal
accepts that the Applicant is remorseful for his conduct, he did not demonstrate
any insight as to why an explanation
for his conduct might be of assistance in
ensuring that the offending conduct would not reoccur.
Tribunal is concerned that given the sexualised nature of his offending against
a 13-year-old babysitter, that the Applicant has
never provided an explanation
for his offending conduct and in his evidence before the Tribunal, he had no
recollection of his consultation
with the psychiatrist that he saw shortly after
the Disqualifying Offence. The Applicant was unable to provide any reasons or
into his offending conduct and merely relied on the passage of time
since the Disqualifying Offence. Whilst there is no requirement
Applicant to adduce expert evidence for the Application, such evidence may have
been of assistance to the Tribunal, especially
given that the Applicant had no
explanation for his conduct in relation to the Disqualifying Offence.
Tribunal is satisfied that if the Applicant’s offending conduct was to be
repeated, particularly in relation to a child,
it would have a very significant
impact on that child.
(i1) any order of a court or tribunal that
is in force in relation to the person
was no evidence before this Tribunal of any court or tribunal orders presently
in force in relation to the Applicant.
information given by the applicant in, or in relation to, the
application
Tribunal has had regard to the documentary material provided by the
Applicant, together with his evidence in the proceedings.
The Applicant relied
upon two character references from colleagues from his sporting organisation who
hold senior positions in that
organisation and with who he has volunteered with
for numerous years. The Applicant submitted that these references are
recognition
of his attitude and skills when acting as a volunteer in that
sporting organisation
first character references indicates that the author was aware that the
reference was to be relied upon in support of the Application
and speaks highly
of the Applicant, both in relation to his involvement with the sporting
organisation and in a personal capacity.
The author indicates having full
confidence in the Applicant’s ability to undertake any role involving
children in a safe and
appropriate manner. Whilst the second character reference
is addressed to the Tribunal, it makes no reference to the nature of the
Application or to the Applicant working with children. Neither of the authors of
the character references gave evidence before the
Tribunal and there is no
indication on the face of the references that the authors were aware of the
Disqualifying Offence or the
1997/1998 allegations and had been provided with
the full details of either matter.
the circumstances, whilst the Tribunal accepts the character references insofar
as they relate to the Applicant’s skills
in his volunteer work, we give no
weight to the references in our consideration of whether the Applicant poses a
real and appreciable
risk to the safety of children.
there was no evidence from the Applicant’s current wife, the Tribunal
accepts the Applicant’s evidence that he
and his wife have been in a
relationship for some 26 years and married for 24 years and that he believes
that it has been a wonderful
and loving life for them both. The Tribunal also
accepts that the Applicant has an excellent family relationship with his mother
and two brothers and has held a number of senior positions as a public
Tribunal also accepts that the Applicant has worked as a volunteer in a sporting
organisation for over 20 years and is viewed
positively by senior members of
that organisation. We accept the Applicant’s contention that he finds this
volunteer work to
be a healthy exercise for him, given that he has retired from
full time employment and that it permits him to continually engage
with people
of similar interest and provides him with a purpose and supports his health.
(j1) any relevant information in relation to the person that was
obtained in accordance with s 36A,
Tribunal has had regard to the material produced pursuant to s 36A and accepts
that the Applicant has been issued a negative notice
Working with
Vulnerable People (Background Checking) Act 2011
(ACT) as a consequence of
the Disqualifying Offence.
(k) any other matters that the
Children’s Guardian considers necessary
Domestic Violence matters
the reasons outlined above, the Tribunal has determined to give no further
consideration to the Domestic Violence matters in this
Application.
The 1997/1998 allegations
referred to previously, the Respondent acknowledged that the Applicant denies
the 1997/1998 allegations and that he was acquitted
of the criminal charges
following a trial by jury in 2000. Mr Poberezny confirmed that the Respondent
was not seeking a finding
by the Tribunal that the allegations were made out on
the civil standard. Instead, the Respondent submitted that the Tribunal would
take into account the “
possibility
” of the truth of the
1997/1998 allegations when considering whether the Applicant has rebutted the
presumption of risk.
is the Applicant’s view that the allegations are not true and that they
arose in the context of a bitter separation and subsequent
divorce from ex-wife.
Consideration of 1997/1998 allegations
it is acknowledged that the Respondent did not seek a finding that these
allegations were made out, for the sake of completeness,
we are not satisfied
on the basis of the available evidence that the 1997/1998 allegations have been
made out on the civil standard.
referred to above, the Respondent submitted that the Tribunal would take into
account the possibility of the truth of the 1997/1998
allegations when
considering whether the Applicant has rebutted the presumption of risk. In
considering this issue, the Tribunal
has regard to the Applicant’s
evidence that his ex-wife would have said “
attempt to have him in trouble with the law. However, the complainant in the
1997/1998 allegations was not the Applicant’s
ex-wife but his
stepdaughter, albeit the daughter of his ex-wife.
are satisfied that the complainant participated in a recorded conversation with
police in relation to the allegations in September
1999, at which time she was
aged 13 and statements were also obtained from her ex-boyfriend and from her
mother in relation to disclosures
made to them. As previously referred to, the
transcript of the second trial establishes that whilst she was not obliged to do
the complainant had given her evidence and been cross-examined in person on
two previous occasions, apparently at the committal hearing
and at the first
trial. She did so again at the second trial, at which time she was aged 15.
regard to the documentary material, the Tribunal accepts the following
submissions made on behalf of the Respondent:
(i) That there were similarities between the Applicant’s admitted conduct
in the Disqualifying Offence and those in the 1997/1998
allegations, including
that the victim and the complainant in those matters were both females aged 13
and 12 respectively and the
conduct and alleged conduct in both matters included
sexualised touching of a similar nature in a domestic environment.
(ii) The prosecuting authority had considered that there was sufficient evidence
to prosecute four counts relating to the 1887/1998
allegations and that
following a committal hearing, the Applicant was committed for trial, and after
the first trial which resulted
in a mistrial, the prosecuting authority
initiated a second trial.
(iii) The complaint was relatively consistent in her allegations that the
Applicant had sexually touched her on multiple occasions,
including in her
dealings with police and in her evidence at the second trial. The transcript of
the second trial records that the
complainant denied during cross-examination
that the various allegations did not happen.
the circumstances, the Tribunal is unable to be affirmatively satisfied that the
1997/1998 allegations, or at least some of those
allegations, did not occur.
Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that given the circumstances surrounding
these allegations, they
are relevant to our consideration of the Application,
and whether the existence of a risk to children by the Applicant has been
Passage of time
Applicant strongly relies on the passage of time since the Disqualifying Offence
and said that he appreciated the need for matters
such as his to be carefully
considered by the Respondent. He went on to say in his August letter,
I also consider with the time that has elapsed, evidence of my
character over the past 35 years is a true reflection of myself that
trusted and poses no risk to any other person regardless of their
Tribunal accepts that all of the conduct relied upon by the Respondent relates
to the period from 1990 to 1998, which is at least
27 years ago. We accept that
the Applicant has not been found guilty of any offences other than the
Disqualifying Offence and that
this was 35 years ago. However, the Tribunal has
had regard to the decisions of
Lee v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2012] NSWCA 80
Ex parte Tziniolis; Re Medical Practitioners Act
(1996) 67 SR (NSW) 448
that were referred to in the Respondent’s written
submissions. Whilst these decisions were in relation to disciplinary matters,
the Tribunal is satisfied that the principles are applicable to this Application
and that the mere passing of time does not it itself
demonstrate that the
Applicant does not currently pose a risk to the safety of children.
Application might be considered somewhat unusual in that the Disqualifying
Offence took place in 1990 and other than the 1997/1998
allegations of which he
was acquitted, the Applicant has not faced or been found guilty of any other
criminal offences. However,
as previously found, the Disqualifying Offence was a
serious offence involving the sexualised touching of a 13-year-old child who
babysitting his children at the time and which caused harm to her.
1997/1999 allegations similarly related to the sexualised touching of a 12 year
old child by the Applicant and whilst the Tribunal
has not found the allegations
to have been proved, we are satisfied that in the context of the Application
that the circumstances
surrounding these allegations are matters to be taken
into account when considering whether the Applicant has rebutted the presumption
that he poses a risk to children.
particular concern, whilst it has been 35 years since the commission of the
Disqualifying Offence, during which it is accepted
that the Applicant has held
senior public sector positions, volunteering roles and been happily married to
his current wife for over
24 years, the Applicant is still unable to provide the
Tribunal with the reason for this offending conduct.
the Applicant saw a psychiatrist very shortly after the commission of the
offence, he was unable to tell police even within
a week, or even less, after
that consultation why he had committed the Disqualifying Offence. In his
evidence before the Tribunal,
he was unable to recall anything about his
engagement with that psychiatrist and other than a reference in his final oral
submissions
to his workload and high interest rates, he was not able to provide
any explanation for his offending conduct.
Applicant gave evidence that he had not consulted with any mental health
practitioners in the intervening period and there was
no evidence before the
Tribunal that he had participated in any counselling or therapy in relation to
his offending. The Applicant
did not adduce any expert medical evidence in
relation to the risk that he may currently pose to the safety of children.
28(7) of the Act provides that it is presumed, unless the Applicant proves to
the contrary, that he poses a risk to children.
Having regard to the s 30
criteria and all the available evidence and material,
the Tribunal is not satisfied that the Applicant
has displaced that
presumption. Accordingly, it follows that the Applicant does pose a risk to the
safety of children and the Tribunal
is satisfied that such risk is real and
appreciable. This would be the position, even if the Tribunal only had regard to
the Disqualifying
Offence and had no regard to the 1997/1998 allegations.
light of this finding, it is not necessary for the Tribunal to
consider the matters in s 30(1A) of the
Act. However, it is noted
that that even if the
Tribunal had been satisfied that the Applicant had displaced
the statutory presumption and had made a positive
finding that
he did not currently pose a risk to the safety of children, the
Tribunal would not have been satisfied of the matters
in s 30(1A) of
a position would have been reached having regard to the circumstances of
the Disqualifying Offence, in particular the sexual
nature of the offending
and the Applicant’s failure to provide an explanation for this conduct or
to produce any expert evidence
in relation to his risk. On this basis,
notwithstanding the passage of time, the Tribunal would not have
been satisfied that a reasonable
person would allow his or her child to
have direct contact with the Applicant that was not directly supervised by
another person
while the Applicant was engaged in any child-related work.
Tribunal has had regard to the Applicant’s evidence that in his work as a
volunteer official he has never been required
to supervise or train an official
under 18 and is unlikely to do so in the future. However, as previously referred
to, an enabling
order cannot be subject to
conditions and the grant of such an order would permit
the Applicant to potentially engage in a range
of child related
work. Accordingly, the assessment of risk in this matter has been
considered in the context of all relevant child
related work.
Tribunal accepts the positive benefits to the Applicant in his work as a
volunteer official and that whilst he is unlikely to
supervise or train
children, that it is a requirement of that sporting organisation that he has a
Clearance. The exercise with which
the Tribunal is concerned is
protective not punitive and the Tribunal has had primary regard to the paramount
consideration in the
operation of the Act, being the safety, welfare and
well-being of children and, in particular, protecting them from child
the reasons set out above, it follows that the Application must be
application for an enabling order under s 28(1) of the Act is
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate record of the reasons for
decision of the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (363 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter