URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWGT/2013/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:57:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
XAD [2013] NSWGT 10 (12 July 2013)
GUARDIANSHIP TRIBUNAL
NEW SOUTH WALES
[2013] NSWGT 10
(12 JULY 2013)
END OF TERM REVIEW OF A GUARDIANSHIP ORDER
Review Concerning:
Guardian at time of hearing:
The Public Guardian
Date and place of hearing:
12 July 2013 at Balmain
Tribunal Member
Mr Malcolm Schyvens (President)
Guardianship –
Guardianship Act 1987
– End of term review of a guardian order – subject
person did not participate in the hearing – issue of practicability
services provided to persons subject of the application without the need for
continuing the order – Order lapsed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Date of order
: 12 July 2013
What the Tribunal decided
Tribunal reviewed the previous guardianship order concerning Mr XAD made on 27
April 2012 and decided the order should lapse.
XAD is a 49 year old man who is currently residing in a unit in inner-city
Sydney that is rented privately by his brother, Mr FAD.
Prior to this, he was
evicted from a Housing NSW property in inner-west Sydney. It is understood that
he has a history of alcohol
and drug abuse and assault.
XAD has variable contact with his mother, Mrs HAD, who lives in another suburb
inner-west Sydney, and has three brothers, Mr IAD,
Mr NAD and Mr FAD. Mrs HAD
has advised that she has an Apprehended Violence Order against Mr XAD due to his
previous violent conduct
towards her and others.
is reported that Mr XAD was admitted to a Western Sydney Hospital involuntarily
in March 2013, and was discharged around 31 May
2013, from which time he was
accommodation.
27 April 2012, the Tribunal made a guardianship order in respect of Mr XAD,
appointing the Public Guardian for a period of 12 months,
with decision-making
authority for accommodation, and services.
30 April 2013, the hearing to review this order was adjourned by the Tribunal
for a period of three months.
matter before the Tribunal is the adjourned review.
it makes a decision the Tribunal must try to bring the parties to a settlement
if this is possible and appropriate. There was
dispute in this matter, primarily
between the Public Guardian, Mr XAD’s guardian, and the NSW Trustee and
Guardian (“the
NSW Trustee”), his financial manager. The nature of
the dispute, the efficacy and practicality of a continuing order, was not
matter appropriate for settlement by the Tribunal.
XAD did not attend the hearing. His case manager from a Community Health Centre,
Mr Z, provided the Tribunal with a statement of
service of the notice of hearing
and confirmed that he spoken to Mr XAD about the hearing on 2 July 2013. Mr Z
advised the Tribunal
that Mr XAD was “
indifferent
” about the
Tribunal proceedings. He noted that he had known Mr XAD for approximately eight
years and throughout that time rarely
attended meetings or “
,” that he rejected authority, and that it was highly unlikely
that he would attend a Tribunal hearing at any time. The representatives
Public Guardian and the NSW Trustee concurred with this view.
Tribunal records indicate that Mr XAD did not participate in either of the
previous guardianship hearings conducted in relation
to him on 27 April 2012 and
30 April 2013. The Tribunal’s case officer had been unsuccessful in
the hearing. The Tribunal concluded that it was
highly unlikely that it would be able to obtain the views of Mr XAD towards the
proceedings
if it was minded to adjourn the proceedings. The Tribunal determined
to proceed to determine the matter in Mr XAD’s absence.
XAD’s mother, Mrs HAD, was not in attendance at the commencement of the
hearing despite indicating to the Tribunal’s
case officer prior to the
hearing, and the other participants to the proceedings, that she intended to
participate. Mrs HAD did in
fact join the hearing approximately half an hour
after the hearing commenced and the Tribunal provided Mrs HAD with a summary of
the evidence received prior to her arrival.
What did Tribunal
have to decide?
questions which have to be decided by the Tribunal are:
XAD someone for whom the Tribunal could make an order because he continues to
have a disability which prevents him from being
able to make important life
the Tribunal make a further guardianship order and if so, what order should be
should be the guardian?
long should the order last?
Is Mr XAD someone for whom
the Tribunal could make a further order because he continues to have a
disability which prevents him from
being able to make important life
the Tribunal is to renew the guardianship order currently in place for Mr XAD,
it must be satisfied that he remains a “
person in need of a
” that is, that he remains a person who, because of a
disability, is totally or partially incapable of managing his own
the time the guardianship order was made by the Tribunal on 27 April 2012, the
Tribunal determined that
Mr XAD has multiple disabilities, the combined effect of which is
to significantly impair his executive function, and in particular,
his impulse
control, his ability to put plans into effect, and to understand the
consequences of his actions.”
was no additional professional evidence before the Tribunal in respect of Mr
XAD’s decision-making capacity. The participants’
summaries of
events which had transpired in Mr XAD’s life since the time of the last
hearing, both in written and oral evidence
to the Tribunal, suggested there had
been no change in Mr XAD’s inability to “
control his
” which had been the Tribunal’s major concern in respect
of his capacity to make decisions when the order was first made.
participants to the hearing agreed that Mr XAD remained a person for whom the
Tribunal could continue to find was a “
person in need of a
being no evidence before the Tribunal suggesting there had been any change in Mr
XAD’s decision-making capacity since
the previous hearing, the Tribunal
concluded that Mr XAD remained a person for whom it could proceed to renew the
guardianship order.
Should the Tribunal make a further
guardianship order and what order should be made?
was the primary issue for determination by the Tribunal in this matter and on
which there were significantly varying views.
Guardianship Act 1987
(“the Act”) requires the
Tribunal to review a guardianship order at the expiration of the period for
which the order
has effect. Upon such a review, pursuant to
the Tribunal
may renew, or renew and vary the order, or may determine that the order is to
lapse. The Act does not otherwise provide
any guidance to the Tribunal as to the
matters to be determined upon review. The Tribunal has appropriately concluded
that its role
in such matters is to determine whether the original test for the
appointment of a guardian provided in Division 3 of the Act continues
satisfied on the evidence available.
that the Tribunal concluded that Mr XAD remains a person in need of a guardian
” requirement before the Tribunal may consider
whether it should make an order), the Tribunal needs to evaluate the factors
provided in s14(2) of the Act as follows:
In considering whether or not to make a guardianship order in
respect of a person, the Tribunal shall have regard to:
views (if any) of:
person; and
(ii) the person’s spouse, if
any, if the relationship between the person and the spouse is close and
continuing; and
(iii) the person, if any, who has care of the person;
the importance of preserving the person’s existing family relationships;
importance of preserving the person’s particular cultural and linguistic
environments; and
practicability of services being provided to the person without the need for the
making of such an order. “
Tribunal was unable to assess the views of Mr XAD. There is not currently any
person who would fulfil the statutory definition
of a spouse or carer to Mr XAD
to the knowledge of the Tribunal, or the participants at the hearing. There was
no suggestion that
the appointment of a guardian to date had impacted, either
positively or negatively, upon the preservation of Mr XAD’s family
relationships or his cultural or linguistic environments. Accordingly the
Tribunal suggested to the participants that the primary
focus for the Tribunal
was to determine the practicability of services being provided to Mr XAD without
the need for continuing the
order. In assessing the evidence on this point, the
Tribunal noted that it must also be cognisant of the principles enunciated in
of the Act. The participants agreed with the Tribunal’s suggested focus
and proceeded to provide evidence in support of
their respective
The NSW Trustee and Guardian
NSW Trustee was appointed as financial manager for Mr XAD by an order of the
Mental Health Review Tribunal on 24 February 1995.
The NSW Trustee was the
original applicant for the appointment of a guardian for Mr XAD in
not a party to the proceedings, the NSW Trustee was an interested party in the
proceedings and elected to take an active role
in this statutory review of
guardianship. The NSW Trustee submitted a written report to the Tribunal dated
19 April 2013 which provides:
“The experience of this office is that Mr XAD remains a very
vulnerable person who currently is homeless. He demonstrates little
insight into
his illness or his current circumstances. He appears to be in continuing need of
a substitute decision maker in regard
to lifestyle decisions.”
Ms S and Ms N participated in the hearing on behalf of the NSW Trustee. Ms S
noted that she had submitted a further written report
to the Tribunal dated 3
July 2013. This report was not amongst the papers available to the Tribunal and
accordingly Ms S read her
report for the benefit of all participants. In that
report Ms S expressed the view that Mr XAD remained a “
very vulnerable
” and outlined recent accommodation matters. She advised that Mr
XAD had been evicted from a Housing NSW property located in
inner-west Sydney by
an order of the Consumer Trade and Tenancy Tribunal issued in January 2013.
Following this he was admitted to
an inner-west Sydney Mental Health Unit but
absconded on several occasions. Ms S understood that on several occasions since
his eviction
Mr XAD had “
slept rough
” and that crisis
accommodation providers were not prepared to accommodate Mr XAD due his past
S outlined her knowledge of Mr XAD’s current accommodation arrangements.
She understood that Mr XAD’s brother had rented
a private rental property
which he was now informally subletting to Mr XAD. She opined that the
accommodation was too expensive ($520
per fortnight) and that rental assistance
was not available to Mr XAD has he did not have any legal arrangement to be
residing in
the leased property. Ms S stated that there were no strategies in
place to assist Mr XAD remaining in the property and that he was
expressing concern regarding financial hardship. The rental arrangement was put
in place without the consent of the NSW Trustee
and Guardian and Ms S advised
that concerns had been expressed to Mr XAD’s family about the arrangement,
but similarly understood
the arrangement had been put in place out of
desperation to avoid ongoing homelessness for Mr XAD.
Ms S and Ms N strongly expressed the view that a guardianship order can make a
difference for persons in Mr XAD’s position,
particularly in relation to
obtaining housing. In relation to ongoing practicability of an order, Ms S
expressed the belief that
Mr XAD would again be homeless soon due to his cycle
of behaviour, and most likely hospitalized at some point. She took the view
a guardian would assist Mr XAD in having an advocate for further accommodation
options, or assist in developing appropriate
discharge planning from
much of their submissions, Ms S and Ms N drew upon their experiences in
assisting managed clients generally that have challenging
behaviours and complex
needs. In summation, they advanced the point that any and all services that can
be provided to Mr XAD must
enhance his potential for improving his quality of
life, and included an ongoing guardianship order as part of this service
to Mrs HAD’s involvement in the hearing, the Tribunal noted that it was
reported that Mrs HAD had advised the Tribunal’s
case officer prior to the
hearing that she no longer supported the guardian being appointed as
it is a waste of time
” and that her son “
listen to the Public Guardian
.” Ms S of the NSW Trustee and Guardian
expressed her surprise at this reported conversation as Mrs HAD had indicated to
only the day prior to the hearing that she was keen for the order to
continue. Mr Z commented that he had known Mrs HAD for approximately
years, that she wanted the best for her son, but that it was not uncommon for
her to express alternate views on matters in
a short space of
involved in the hearing, Mrs HAD provided a detailed account of her son’s
troubled history. The Tribunal sought Mrs HAD’s
views on the matters of
relevance to the Tribunal’s determination. It was clear that Mrs HAD cares
deeply for her son, but
was dismayed at how he had “
got involved in
” how she only sees him “
when he wants my
”, and that she is often very afraid of her son due to the
threats and violent acts he perpetrates on her and others.
HAD told the Tribunal that she wanted the order to continue “
pressure on the mental health system.....a guardian is needed to put him in
.” When asked by the Tribunal as to what events she believed
the guardian had been responsible which had improved her son’s
life, Mrs HAD pointed to the guardian’s role in involving a Legal Centre
in Sydney’s southwest at the time
her son was facing eviction
proceedings.
Z made it clear to the Tribunal that he, and his organisation, did not support
the original appointment of a guardian, and retained
this view. He described Mr
anything but vulnerable,
” but instead “
street smart – he knows what he wants
Z expressed the view to the Tribunal, supported by eight years of professional
involvement with Mr XAD, that he is someone who
will not yield to authority of
any kind, and will not be accepting or compliant in terms of the provision of
services. He noted examples
of several accommodation arrangements that had been
made for Mr XAD when he was, or on the verge of, homelessness, which were not
taken up. Mr Z opined that “
no amount of advocacy would prevent him
from refusing future accommodation options
” and that “
Public Guardian cannot make a difference
Public Guardian
Tribunal received a comprehensive written report from the representative of the
Public Guardian, Mr F, dated 30 April 2013, together
with Mr F’s oral
evidence. Mr F advanced the proposition that the Tribunal should lapse the order
as the order serves “
no real purpose
his report, Mr F submits:
“the Public Guardian considers that there is no utility in the
Tribunal making a further guardianship order. Mr XAD does not
recognize any
legal authority in either the criminal or civil jurisdictions, and will
disregard any directions given to him.”
F provided a detailed summary of accommodation issues arising in relation to Mr
XAD since the order was made. These can be summarized
as Mr XAD consistently
having a pattern of being evicted or leaving accommodation due to his extreme
behaviours. This results in
temporary accommodation support which is predominantly ignored by Mr XAD.
relation to Mrs HAD’s view that the order had assisted her son through the
involvement of a Legal Centre in Sydney’s
southwest, Mr F noted that such
service could have been arranged without the need for an order, and that in any
event, such service
only prolonged the inevitable, an eviction
relation to services generally, Mr F told the Tribunal that whilst he agreed
with the NSW Trustee’s comments that Mr XAD
has a mental illness and
significant needs, the fact was that “
he votes with his
he will do what he wants when he wants
and that given his propensity towards violence and assaults, there were major
safety issues for anyone attempting to provide
F noted that Mr XAD only responds to “
coercive powers
have been placed upon him in the past pursuant to mental health legislation. He
submitted there was no role for a guardian
for Mr XAD with coercive powers, a
notion to which all participants agreed.
response to the Tribunal’s enquiry as to whether he believed there were
any services which Mr XAD could require into the
future which could only be
secured by a guardian, Mr F advised there was none.
Tribunal’s determination
Tribunal notes that in its reasons for decision of 27 April 2012, the Tribunal
was persuaded that there was a need for a guardianship
order to be made for Mr
XAD. This was primarily on the basis that he was facing termination of his
placement with Housing NSW due
to an ongoing cycle of property damage and of
threatening and harassing neighbours. This was an appropriate decision at that
in time. Over a year has now passed since the order was put in place and
the Tribunal now has the benefit of analysing the effect
of the implementation
of the order.
were differing views on the success or otherwise of the guardianship order and
its impact on Mr XAD’s life.
Tribunal concluded that whilst the Public Guardian had indeed played a role, it
was not satisfied that this had resulted in any
significant improvement in Mr
XAD’s circumstances. Certainly not significant enough for the Tribunal, in
consideration of the
principles in S.4 of the Act, to determine that an ongoing
order for Mr XAD was an appropriate, on balance, “
least restrictive
Tribunal accepted the evidence of both Mr Z and Mr F as to the efficacy of the
order to date and its likely future efficacy if
renewed. The Tribunal was not
satisfied that there was evidence to support the conclusion that services Mr XAD
currently receives,
or might need in the future, could not continue or be
arranged without a guardianship order. The majority of likely services Mr XAD
will require in the immediate future, based on past experience, will be
investigation of accommodation options, and ensuring, if
hospitalised, that he
receives adequate discharge planning, points validly made by the NSW Trustee.
However, these tasks can best
be described as “
” matters and not exclusively the domain of a substitute
decision maker. In any event, the Tribunal was satisfied on the evidence
XAD simply will not accept or comply with accommodation or service options
arranged for him. Accordingly, without coercive
powers of guardianship (not
promoted nor supported by any participant to the hearing), the Tribunal
concurred with the view of the
Public Guardian that an ongoing order would be
Tribunal notes the compassionate and empathetic submissions made by the
representatives of the NSW Trustee. The Tribunal does
not necessarily disagree
with the view taken by Ms S and Ms N which was effectively an argument that for
someone with the attributes
of Mr XAD, “
the more services and advocates
the better.
” However, this is not the legislative test for the
appointment or continuation of a substitute decision maker. It is not a
that could be supported when evaluating the evidence in relation to Mr XAD and
applying the principles provided in S.4 of
the Tribunal to have continued the order, the Tribunal needed to be satisfied
that a further order would so improve his ongoing
welfare, enhance his ability
to live a normal life in the community, or otherwise so protect him from
neglect, abuse and exploitation,
that such considerations would outweigh the
requirement of the Tribunal to restrict Mr XAD’s freedom of decision and
of action “
as little as possible
.” The Tribunal was
not so satisfied and determined that the guardianship order should
Who should be the guardian?
the Tribunal concluded that the guardianship order should lapse, there was no
need for the Tribunal to determine who should be
his guardian for a further
term. The Tribunal notes that in any event, there was no private person seeking
appointment to the role.
How long should the order
the Tribunal concluded that the guardianship order should lapse, there was no
need for the Tribunal to determine the term of a
renewed guardianship
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (208 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter