URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/nsw/NSWADT/2013/288.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:45:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AOR v Department of Family and Community Services (No 2) [2013] NSWADT 288 (13 December 2013)
Administrative Decisions Tribunal
New South Wales
Case Title:
AOR v Department of Family and Community Services (No 2)
Medium Neutral Citation:
[2013] NSWADT 288
Hearing Date(s):
On the papers
Decision Date:
13 December 2013
Community Services Division
S Higgins, Deputy President
The Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear and determine the applicant's
application for review of the respondent's decision to refuse
to pay her back
pay of a Carer Allowance.
Catchwords:
Reviewable decision - whether a decision to refuse payment of a carer
allowance is a reviewable decision
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
Children and Young Person
(Care and Protection) Act 1998
Children and Young Person (Care and
Protection) Regulations 2012
Community Services (Complaints, Monitoring and
Review) Act 1993
Cases Cited:
IO v Department of Family and Community Services
[2012] NSWADTAP 42
v Department of Family and Community Services, Community Services
[2012] NSWADT
IO v Director-General Department of Community Services
[2008] NSWADT 267
The Mutual Life and Citizens' Assurance Company Ltd v Attorney General (Qld)
[1961] HCA 51
(1961) 106 CLR 48
Principal judgment
AOR (applicant)
Department of Family and Community Services
(respondent)
Representation
- Solicitors:
C Orr for the applicant
L Spencer for the respondent
File Number(s):
Publication Restriction:
Administrative Decisions Tribunal Act 1997
REASONS FOR
Introduction
29 January 2013, the applicant, AOR, lodged an application seeking review of 9
matters listed in her letter, dated 12 December
2012, to the respondent, the
Department of Family and Community Services. These matters included the
'cancellation/suspension' of
her 'authorisation' as a carer, the 'removal' of
three girls (siblings) placed into her care and the payment of outstanding
out-of-home
care allowances (back pay) she alleged to be owed to her for the
care of the young siblings.
the same day, the applicant made an application for an urgent stay of the
decision of the respondent to 'cancel my authorisation
as a Carer' and to
rescind her status as the 'authorised' out-of-home care carer of three girls who
had been placed into her care.
applicant's application for an urgent stay was heard on 13 February 2013. In
written submissions, filed before the hearing, the
respondent contended that the
decision for which the applicant sought review was a decision to refuse the
applicant's application
for authorisation as an out-of-home care carer and not a
decision to cancel an authorisation. And on this basis, the respondent went
to argue that the tribunal did not have jurisdiction to make an order for a
applicant, on the other hand, submitted that she had been authorised as a carer
and pressed her application for a stay order.
the conclusion of the hearing I made a number of orders and gave oral reasons
for decision. My findings included the following:
..., [on] the basis of the material before the tribunal, I am satisfied that
the applicant has at not time been an 'authorised carer',
or approved to be
authorised to provide out-of-home support or statutory care for the girls under
the relevant provisions of the
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act
and I accept the respondent's argument that the decision
made by the respondent, on 16 November 2012, was not a reviewable decision
concerning 'removal' of the girls from the daily care of the applicant as an
authorised carer. However, I am satisfied that it is
a decision (a) not
authorise the applicant as an authorised carer and (b) not to grant the
applicant the responsibility for the daily
care and control of the girls. The
second decision is of course dependent on the first. But in any event, both
decisions are reviewable
decisions under subs 245(1)(a) and (c) of the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
On the basis of my findings, I also agree with the respondent that the
tribunal has no jurisdiction to make an interim order as staying
the decision of
the respondent would not alter the position of the applicant. She would remain
unapproved as the authorised support
carer of the girls.
Accordingly, the appropriate order is to dismiss the applicant's interim
order application for want of jurisdiction.
Otherwise, it is a matter for the applicant to decide whether she still
wishes to pursue a review of the respondent's decision. ...
I made the following orders:
1. The applicant's interim order application is dismissed.
2.On or before 1 March 2013, the applicant to inform, in writing, the
tribunal and the respondent if she wishes to proceed with her
application in
light of the pending Children's court proceedings in regard to the three girls
the subject of these proceedings.
3. In the event the applicant presses her application for review of the
decision of the respondent, on or before 15 March 2013 the
respondent to file
and serve any further written submissions in regard to the progress of these
proceedings.
4. Application is set down for further directions on 28 March 2013 at 12
a number of further directions hearings, on 1 August 2013, the applicant's
solicitor advised that the applicant did not
wish to pursue her application for
review of the decision of the respondent in regard to her authorisation as a
carer and the removal
of the three girls from her care. However, the applicant
did press her application for back pay as outlined in her letter of 12 December
respondent submitted that the tribunal did not have jurisdiction to deal with
such an application. As the solicitor for the applicant
pressed that
application, I made orders for the filing and serving of evidence and
submissions in regard to this issue.
have now considered all the material filed and for the reasons set out below, I
find that the tribunal does not have any jurisdiction
to hear and determine this
her affidavit, sworn on 16 June 2013, the applicant set out the factual
background to the circumstances giving rise to her caring
for the three girls
the subject of her application for review. To the extent they are relevant to
the applicant's application for
back pay, the factual background is as
(a) in February 2012, the mother of the three girls placed the children into the
applicant's care;
(b) when the girls were placed into the applicant's care, the applicant made an
application, to the respondent, for the payment of
the 'Supported Care
Allowance' in regard to her care of the girls;
(c) on 14 May 2012, the respondent wrote to the applicant noting that she was
continuing to care for the girls without financial
assistance as the respondent
was 'unable' to assess her 'eligibility for the Supported Care Allowance'. In
that letter the respondent
noted that 'payment of this allowance is not
automatic and a risk assessment is required ...'. The applicant was requested to
the respondent so that it could progress her
application;
(d) in May 2012, the respondent provided the applicant with a 'Certificate of
Eligibility for Exemption from Commonwealth Welfare
to Work Reforms'. The
Certificate was valid for 12 months, from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013, on the
basis of the applicant being
a person 'currently a recognised foster or
relative/kinship carer with' the respondent;
(e) in June 2012, the applicant wrote to the Minister, complaining about the
refusal of the respondent to process her application
for 'the out-of-home care
allowance' in regard to her care of the three girls. A similar complaint appears
to have been made to the
(f) on 8 October 2012, the applicant met with officers of the respondent. The
respondent wrote to the applicant on 16 October, providing
responses to
questions raised by the applicant, at the meeting. This included the payment of
the Support Care Allowance. In the letter
to the applicant, the respondent noted
that arrangements were being made with the applicant for the purpose of
assessing her for
the payment of the Allowance;
(g) on 16 October 2012, Ms Wheeler (as delegate for the Director-General of the
respondent) made a temporary care arrangement in
regard to the girls under
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection)
(h) on 26 October 2012, Ms D Howard, Manager, Enquiry, Feedback and Complaints
Unit of the respondent, wrote to the applicant. In
that letter, Ms Howard noted
that the applicant had been advised the previous day that she would 'receive 12
weeks back-pay, which
is equivalent to 6 fortnight payments;'
(i) on 7 November 2012, the applicant made a formal 'application', to the
respondent, for 41 weeks back-pay in respect of each of
the three girls. The
applicant said that her application was made 'under the terms of the Out of Home
Care Payment Policy and Guidelines
section 3.2
section 161
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection)
.' The applicant
ended her letter saying the respondent had 14 days to
(j) on 9 November 2012, Ms Wheeler wrote to the applicant informing her that she
would be paid a carer allowance from 16 October
2012, being the date on which
the girls became subject to the above temporary care agreement. Ms Wheeler also
advised that the applicant's
eligibility for further back payment was awaiting
the completion of her carer assessment and the placement assessment for the
(k) on 16 November 2012, Ms Wheeler wrote to the applicant informing her that
she would not be authorised as the carer of the girls.
Ms Wheeler noted that the
applicant was receiving a care allowance, which would cease when the temporary
care agreement ended. Ms
Wheeler also confirmed that the applicant was not
eligible for any additional back pay. As I have already indicated, on 12
2012, the applicant wrote to the respondent seeking review of a number
of decisions made by the respondent, including this decision
concerning back pay
from early February to 16 October 2012. Ms Sabellico, the respondent's Acting
Deputy Chief Executive, Operations,
wrote a reply to the applicant on 22 January
2013. In that reply, Ms Sabellico, confirmed the decision of Ms Wheeler and it
decision for which the applicant seeks review.
Submissions and consideration
essence of the applicant's argument is that, from the time the three girls were
placed into her care, the respondent had 'characterised'
her as the girls
'authorised carer' under the
Children and Young Person (Care and Protection)
1998. She asserts that the placement of the girls into her care was, at
all times, known to and supported by the respondent. That
support being in the
form of Coles Vouchers, payment of canteen bills and then the payment of a Carer
Allowance in October 2012.
That allowance, the applicant contends should have
been back dated to February 2012, when the three girls were placed into her care
and when she lodged an application for a Carer's Support Allowance.
applicant contends that the tribunal's jurisdiction to review the decision of
the respondent to refuse her application for the
backdated Carers Allowance
arises under s 28 of the
Community Services (Complaints, Monitoring and
Review) Act
1993, para 245(1)(a) of the
Children and Young Person (Care
and Protection) Act
1998 and a number of other provisions.
respondent contends that these provisions and the other provisions, cited by the
applicant in her submissions, do not give the
tribunal jurisdiction to review a
decision of the respondent in regard the payment of a Carer
is well established that the tribunal has no power 'to inquire at large into
matters that take its interest but over which it has
no jurisdiction': see
The Mutual Life and Citizens' Assurance Company Ltd v Attorney General (Qld)
[1961] HCA 51
(1961) 106 CLR 48.
tribunal has also previously held that it has no jurisdiction to hear and
determine decisions about payments to authorised carers
and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
IO v Director-General
Department of Community Services
[2008] NSWADT 267
IO v Department of
Family and Community Services, Community Services
[2012] NSWADT 158
IO v Department of Family and Community Services
[2012] NSWADTAP 42.
my view, the decision for which the applicant now seeks review clearly falls
within the terms of these decisions.
is made clear by the express words in para 38(1) of the
Administrative
Decisions Tribunal Act
(ADT Act), the decisions the tribunal has
ADT Act) and which are prescribed under that Act as being reviewable by
the tribunal: see also s 8 and para 36(1)(b) of the ADT Act.
Community Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act
1993 sets out those decisions, of administrators, made under community
welfare legislation, which the tribunal has power to review.
That section
relevantly provides:
28 Applications to Administrative Decisions Tribunal for reviews of
(1) A person may apply to the Tribunal for a review of any of the following
(a) a decision that is a reviewable decision under
section 193
Adoption Act
Adoption Information Act
Disability Services Act 1993
section 245
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
(a1) a decision that is a reviewable decision for external review under
section 192 of the National Law Alignment Provisions (within
the meaning of the
Children (Education and Care Services) Supplementary Provisions Act
(b) a decision made by a person or body under the community welfare
legislation where the legislation expressly provides that the
decision is a
reviewable decision for the purposes of this section,
(c) a decision that was made by a relevant decision maker and is of a class
prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this
(d) a decision made by any State Minister, any Commonwealth Minister or any
public authority, not being a relevant decision maker,
if it is within a class
of decisions that, with the consent of the Minister or public authority, is
prescribed by the regulations
for the purposes of this section.
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
relevantly provides:
245 Decisions that are reviewable by Administrative Decisions
(1) For the purposes of
(1) (a) of the
Community Services
(Complaints, Reviews and Monitoring) Act 1993
, any of the following decisions
made under or for the purposes of this Act or the regulations are reviewable by
the Administrative
Decisions Tribunal:
(a) a decision of the relevant decision-maker to authorise or not to
authorise a person as an authorised carer, to impose conditions
authorisation, or to cancel or suspend a person's authorisation as an authorised
(c) a decision of a relevant decision-maker to grant to, or to remove from,
an authorised carer the responsibility for the daily care
and control of the
child or young person ...
can be seen from the terms of para 245(1)(a) and (b) above, these do not include
any reference to decisions about the payment of
a Carer Allowance. Nor, in my
view can it be inferred, from the express words that are used, that a decision
is a reviewable decision by the tribunal.
decisions that are expressly reviewable under these paragraphs, includes a
decision to not authorise a person as an authorised
carer, a decision to suspend
or cancel a person's authorisation as a carer and a decision to remove from, an
authorised carer, the
responsibility for the daily care and control of a child
or young person. Decisions in regard to authorisation of a person as a carer
suspension/cancellation of a person's authorisation as a carer are made under cl
30 to 32 and cl 42 of the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection)
2012 (previously cl 20 to 20B and cl 31 of the
Children and
Young Persons (Care and Protection) Regulation 2000
(repealed) - see also s
137 of the of the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection)
which deals with 'authorised carers' generally and contains the regulations
making power in this regard). As I have explained, the
respondent's decision to
not authorise the applicant as an authorised carer of the three girls, is a
reviewable decision. However,
the applicant does not press this aspect of her
application.
do I accept the applicant's argument that the respondent had 'characterised' her
as the authorised carer of the three girls. The
correspondence of the respondent
is expressly to the contrary in that it states that the applicant was being
assessed as to whether
she was to be the authorised day-to-day carer of the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection)
'out-of-home care'
). This term is defined in
It relevantly
provides as follows:
135 Definition and types of "out-of-home care"
(1) For the purposes of this Act,
out-of-home care
means residential
care and control of a child or young person that is provided:
(a) by a person other than a parent of the child or young person, and
(b) at a place other than the usual home of the child or young person,
whether or not for fee, gain or reward.
(2) There are 3 types of out-of-home care for the purposes of this Act, as
statutory out-of-home care
-see section 135A,
supported out-of-home care
-see section 135B,
voluntary out-of-home care
-see section 135C.
note the relevant provisions provide that statutory, or supported out-of-home
care is to be provided by an authorised carer. I also
note that the word
'parent' is defined in
Children and Young Persons (Care and
Protection) Act
to mean the person having 'parental responsibility' for the
child or young person. At no time during the period for which the applicant
seeks payment of the Carer's Allowance, did the applicant have parental
responsibility for the three girls. Nor did the respondent.
Indeed, the
respondent did not commence care proceedings, in the Children's Court, until
after the applicant's application for a
stay was heard (Chapter 5 of the
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
makes provision for
care proceedings)
I am informed, the applicant has become a party to the
care proceedings initiated by the respondent in regard to the three
the relevant period, the only action taken by the respondent in regard to the
girls was that of Ms Wheeler, who on 16 October
2012, made a temporary care
arrangement for the three girls under
Children and Young Persons
(Care and Protection) Act
. That arrangement is administrative in nature and
is made between the respondent and the girls' mother (their 'parent' at the
as the respondent had formed the view that the girls were in need of care
and protection. A decision to make such an arrangement
is not a decision falling
within the terms of
and hence not reviewable by the tribunal.
same applies to
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection)
. That section is in the following terms:
161 Financial assistance for children and young persons in out-of-home
(1) The Director-General may, in respect of any child or young person in
out-of-home care, grant financial assistance to any person
having the care of
the child or young person for any period during which the child or young person
is in that person's care.
(1A) Without limiting subsection (1), financial assistance may take the form
of a grant, an allowance or a refund of expenditure,
or any other form of
financial assistance that the Director-General may approve generally, or in a
particular case or class of cases.
(2) (Repealed)
(3) If financial assistance under this section was being provided in respect
of a person immediately before the person attained the
age of 18 years, the
Director-General may:
(a) for the purpose of securing education or vocational training on a
full-time basis for the person, and
(b) subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the regulations and to
such additional conditions as the Director-General may
from time to time, and until the person reaches the age of 25 years, continue
to provide financial assistance in respect of the person
for any period during
which the person is residing in the home of the person to whom the financial
assistance is provided.
(4) For the purposes of this section,
out-of-home care
is taken to
include residential care and control of a child or young person that is
(a) by a relative of the child or young person who has, pursuant to an order
of the Children's Court, parental responsibility for
the child or young person
at a place other than the usual home of the child or young person, or
(b) by a person in accordance with an emergency care and protection order
section 46.
pointed out by the respondent,
gives the respondent a wide discretion in
regard to providing financial assistance to persons who care for a child or
young person
placed in out-of-home care.
Nevertheless,
for the purpose of this application, the question is whether a decision of the
respondent to grant or refuse to provide
financial assistance to a person, under
, is a decision that is reviewable by the tribunal. As I have already
indicated, a decision under this section clearly does not fall
within the terms
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
as a consequence is not a reviewable decision under s 28 of the
Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act
1993. Nor has the
applicant identified any other provision, which prescribes a decision made under
s 161 as being a decision that
is reviewable by the tribunal.
Conclusion and orders
the reasons set out above, I find that a decision of the respondent to refuse to
pay, or back pay, a Carer Allowance to a person
is not a decision prescribed to
be a reviewable decision by the tribunal. Accordingly, the tribunal has no
determine an application for review of such a decision.
And in light of this finding the appropriate order is:
The tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear and determine the applicant's
application for review of the respondent's decision to refuse
to pay her back
pay of a Carer Allowance.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (167 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter